THE FOUNDATION OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION: Comprehended in three godly and learned
Treatises. 1. Faith. 2. Hope. 3. Charity.


And now abides Faith, Hope, and Love, even these three; but the chief of
these is Love.

1. Cor. 13.13. AT LONDON, Printed by Tho: Purfoot, for John Royston, and
William Bladon, and are to be sold at their shop at the great North door of
Paul's, at the sign of the Bible. An. Dom. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Sir James Lancaster Knight, S. Veghelman wishes all
happiness external, internal, and eternal.
SIR;
IT IS A VSVal thing, when men have any work to be published, to dedicate it
unto some worthy personage, like your self, under whose patronage it may be
sheltered: But although this small volume be not originally my own, only the
translation thereof, yet I present it to a farther end unto your worship; not
so much to protect, which is a thing as easy as common, as to affect the
matter therein contained; to wit, Faith, Hope, and Charity, as the principal
foundation of christian Religion. They are three points which I doubt not but
you (as many other) have often heard of, and therefore are not only well
acquainted with them, but know how to put them in practice, according to that
measure of grace, wherewith God (the fountain of all goodness) has
plentifully endued you. Beseeching your worship not to mistake, for I present
it not to instruct you, who (thanks be to God) are well known to be a daily
exerciser of these virtues, and therefore have now no need to learn: But;
partly to refresh your memory, to continue in such blessed practices, the
perseverance wherein (not the beginning) shall be crowned with an everlasting
reward, and partly to manifest my love and duty. You may well marvel at my
presumption, in presenting so small a gift as is this Translation, unto one
that deserves so much, but the matter being so heavenly that I hope not
only your self, if you vouchsafe the reading thereof, but many others of
Gods children shall receive comfort thereby. I presume you will not have so
much regard to the brevity, as to the excellency of it. And, if I find that
this my little labor shall prove acceptable, I shall not only think it
well bestowed, but be encouraged to go on in greater of the same quallitie,
and to do your Worship any other service my best endeavors can extend unto,
so I humbly take my leave, desiring the Almighty to grant you in all felicity
the scope and accomplishment of your hearts fair desires.

In London this 4. of October. 1611. Your Worships ever to be commanded, S.
VEGHELMAN.

A TREATISE of FAITH; Which is the foundation of Christian Religion.
CHAP. I. What ought to make us to esteem and seek after Faith above all
things.
THere is nothing ordinarily that has more power and efficacy to stir up
the desires and appetites of the will of man, then the profit which he knows
to be in the thing that he pursues: As to the contrary there is nothing that
diswadeth him more from an enterprise, than the inconveniences, losses, and
damages which he foresees and fears may happen unto him in the pursuit
thereof; Because that naturally men are inclined to desire and seek after
their profit and advantage in all things. Now in all that man can think on or
jmagine in this world, there is nothing that is more, nor so profitable nor
healthful unto him, as is the true Faith, for many reasons; of the which, to
avoyde prolixity, I will only touch three.

The first shall be, that without faith (as says the Apostle) it is jmpossible
to please God; Heb. 11.
as to the contrary, with faith it is not possible to displease him. It
remains then to consider what the favor and grace of God is, toward those
unto whom it pleases him to jmpart them, and what are the profits, gains,
and advantages, that we may hope for from them, and receive as well in this
life, Romans 1.
as herafter; for from the grace of God first comes a peace, that is to say,
Psalm. 119.
an universal prosperity, which spreads it self over us, and universally over
all things that may appertain or happen unto us. For those things which we
think are evil in themselves, Mat. 5.
as poverty, sickness, war, famine, banishment, prison, and other such like
jncommodities, are turned unto us, into as many fortunes and blessings, when we
are in the grace of God; who by his jnfinite wisdom, for the love which he
bears us, can so well acco^modate and apply all things that happen to us, of
what nature or condition so ever they be, that they always help us to our
salvation, and cannot be noisome or hurtful unto us, Romans 11.
although we should think they did, through a false and vain oppinion that we
have thereof; Afterward being favorites and well-beloved of God (according to
the common proverb, which says, that amongst friends all things are common)
there is a communalty of all good things between God and us; Mat. 25.
In so much that not only Heaven, Earth, and all that is in them, do
appertain unto us, but also the kingdom of Heaven, Life everlasting, that
jntire perfect felicity that is in God, 1. Cor. 1.
and even his power, his wisdom, his goodness, his justice, his truth, his
clemency, and mercy, (which are the true and proper goods of our God, and in
the contemplation and possession of the which he takes his delight) are ours,
by title of marriage, and of the alliance which he has contracted with us by
his grace. So that this day we are applied thereunto, by the gift which he
has given us of them, as says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 1.
All things are yours, and you are Jesus Christ's, and Christ is Gods; from
whence we may jnfer, that being in the grace of God, we are consequently in the
grace of the Angels, Archangels, Cherubines, Seraphines, Thrones Powers,
Governments, and other spiritual creatures that are in Heaven. Also the
Heavens, the Son, the Moon, the Stars; the four Elements, to wit, the
Fire, the Air, the Water, the Earth; and in general all creatures compounded
of them, are for us; that is to say, to keep, preserve, and defend us, to
accommodate every one according to his faculties, means and power, and to
oppose themselves with all their might, against whomsoever should go about to
annoy or offend us: yea that we may also put in this rank the Devils
themselves, Genesis 3. John. 11.
the which (although they be the cappitall enemies of mankind, and murderers of
many from the beginning) are nevertheles maugre them, constrained to procvre
our salvation, without minding it, or desiring to do it, being thereunto
compelled by the almighty power of God; the which he does jmploy in the favor
and friendship which he bears us, to turn the counsels and purposes of the
Devil, to the contrary of that which he desires, and thinks; causing that
his temptations by the which he assayes to ruinate us, are exercises to humble
us, to try our faith and patience, Ioh. 1. and 3. Luke ^2. 2. Cor. 12.
and to jllustrate the glory of God in the showing forth of the virtues which
he has put into us: The which we see in Job, Peter, Paul, and other Apostles,
and in all the Saints that ever were: The which by how much they have been more
tempted, they have by so much the more profited in the knowledge and fear of
God; as says the Prophet speaking of the faithful man. Unto the righteous
arises light in darkness; Psalm. 112.4
he is merciful and full of compassion and righteousness. This grace brings
us also a sufficiency, as Jesus Christ says to to the Apostle: That his grace
ought to suffice him. 1. Cor. 12. 1. Tim. 6.
And elsewhere, that godliness is always joined with sufficiency and
contentment. As also God contracting alliance with Abraham said unto him; Genesis
17.
I am the Lord thy God, thy sufficiency and thy defense; whereunto also agrees
that which the Prophet says. Psalm. 16.6.
The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup, thou shall
maintain my lot. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, I have a
fair heritage. And elsewhere. O Lord that art my portion, Ps. 119.57.
I have determined to keep thy word. Seeing then that faith puts us in
possession of our GOD, Romans 11. John. 3.
(in whom, and by whom are all things), It brings unto us a beatitude, and
perfect contentme^t, which is the end and purpose whereunto we aspire, and
wherein we trust when we have attained it. And for this cause Faith ought to be
more precious and recommendable unto us then any thing else whatsoever.

Now to assure us yet farther of that which is spoken, Ephe. 3. 1. Tim. 2.
by faith Jesus Christ dwells in our hearts, who is the warrant of the
alliance that we have made with God; and therefore is he called Emanuell, that
is to say, God with us; Mat. 21.
it is the second reason the which ought greatly to make us esteem of and
seek after Faith; because it unites us with Jesus Christ, and is the means by
the which eating his flesh, Ioh. 6.17.
and drinking his blood, we dwell in him and he in us for ever; so we cannot
choose but we must be very happy, having the grace of God with all his
blessings; Item, the Justice, Romans 8.
the Life, the Light of his Son, and in sum all things, that he gives us
in his favor, as says the Apostle; Romans 5.
for even as by sin, and the disobedience of our forefathers, we lost in
them the grace of God, and consequently all felicity; also by the second Adam,
which is Jesus Christ, and his obidience, we recover better then that which we
have lost, for we are now assured that we cannot perish, as says the Prophet
speaking of the Church. Psalm. 48.7.
As we have heard so have we seen in the City of the Lord of Hosts, in the
City of our God, God will stablish it for ever. Psalm. 46.
God is in the midst thereof, therefore shall it not be moved: Psalm. 65.4.
God shall help it very early. Blessed is he whom thou choosest and causest
to come to thee, he shall dwell in thy courts, and we shall be satisfied with
the pleasures of thine house, even of thine holy Temple. John. 10.
And in S. John, My sheep hear my voice, I know them, and they follow me,
and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any pluck them out of my hand: and in Osee, Ose. 2.
I will marry thee in justice and in Faith etc. Then as all the jnfidels by
their jnfidelity are deprived of Jesus Christ, and by consequent of God his
Father, unto whom we cannot come near but by him, they are for this reason
accursed and miserable for ever; And to the contrary the faithful
everlastingly happy, by reason that Faith does join and unite them
jndissolubly with the one and the other.

The third reason which ought greatly to recommend faith unto us, is that, as
we cannot be agreeable to God without it, as we have showed; Romans 14.
also nothing of all that proceeds from us, can be pleasing unto him without
it, neither praye^s, nor thanksgivings, nor confessions, nor any work that we
can do; nor likewise any virtue that is in us; for without Faith all the show
and appearance that is in us and in our virtues is but hypocrisy. There were
in old time some Philosophers and Lawmakers, who although they were jnfidels,
they seemed nevertheles to be adorned with many laudable virtues; as Socrates,
Licurgus, Epaminondas, Aristides, Phocian, both the Catoes, and diverse others,
and nevertheless all that which seemed resplendant in them, was but a mask
and false visard of virtue. For even as a flower painted upon a wall, has the
form and color of a flower, but not the life, the beauty, and the sweetness;
Like also as a fire painted on a board has the form thereof, but not the light
nor the heat; also all the virtues that were in these great jllustrious
personages, were all but shadows and shows of virtue. And as no meat how
exquisite soever it be, has any taste or savor if it be not seasoned with some
salt; also the patience of Socrates, the justice of Aristides, the piety of
Epaminondas, the constancy of Phocion, being not seasoned with Faith, was but
unsavory. And such personages says S. Austin did resemble a lively horse,
that trots well and uses his joints nimbly, but is out of his way; for the
more he goes forward, the more he loses himself; So such people being not
in the way which God has appoyn^ed and taught in his Law, although they may
seem to run and gallop well: nevertheless, to be short, they did nothing
but stray and go far from their duty, having not chosen the way that they
must follow, nor the end whereto they must tend, which is the cause for the
which that good Father said in many places, that the virtues that were in them
(being destitute of Faith) were reputed for sins before God, grounding his
speech upon that which the Apostle writes to the Romans. All that is done
without Faith, Romans 14.
is sin. To the end then that we, our works, and our virtues may be
pleasing to God, true Faith is necessary for us.

CHAP. II. A division of the kinds of Faith, whereof mention is made in the
Scripture.
THis word of Faith in the scripture is not always to be taken in one sense,
nor in one signification; which must be noted, to the end that those that read
the word of God be not deceaved by the antiquity and equivocation of this
word, the which is found to be alleged in six sundry sorts, whereof five are
vain, and the last only is true. Now the first kind is the Faith which some
men call historical, the which is nothing else but the simple knowledge of the
things spoken of in the Scriptures, as well of the old as of the new Testament.
The which knowledge only is not sufficient to make a man faithful, for we see
that the Rabbines among the Jews have great knowledge in texts of the
Scripture, and some true jntelligence of many places thereof, the which
nevertheless are not reputed faithful for all that. In the Papistry likewise
we see many Monckes and Doctors of Sorbonne, and of other Universities, that
can well allege and compare diverse places of holy Scripture in their sermons
and writings, the which most an end they pull (as it is said) by the hairs, to
make them to serve for proof and confirmation of their errors and lies.
Nevertheles they are so far from being faithful, that there are no people
more contrary nor more enemies to the true Faith of Jesus Christ, nor that do
resist and fight with greater fury and courage against the Evangelicall
verity, then they. It is not then jnough to read the holy Scriptures, to
remember that which is therein spoken of, for to ground a firm Faith, by the
which we may be justified in the judgment of God, and be agreeable unto him.

The second kind is of those that have a faith like unto that of Devils; James.
2.
who by reason of the subtilty of their spirits, and of the long time since
their creation, are not jgnorant of the holy scriptures, which we see in the
history of the Evangelists, which say, that Satan addressing himself to Jesus
Christ, Mat. 4.
to try if he could make him turn, and to snatch from him the faith and
persuasion that he had, that he was the son of God; alleges places of
scripture unto him, to wit, of the 91. Psalm, wherein he showed that he had
some knowledge thereof; but he was not faithful though, being destitute of
the fear of God, of the hope of Salvation, and of a true confidence in his
promises. All which things are necessarily and essentially of the nature of
true faith. So that if these things are not joined unto it; it cannot in any
wise subsist. We see also that many heretics, as Arius, Macedonius,
Valentine, Marcion, Apollinaris, Nestorius, Eutiches, and diverse others, had
the Scriptures in hand, which they did pervert and corrupt, being jnduced
thereunto by the evil spirit, who urged them, and made them obstinate, the
which although they were in the Church, marked with the Baptism of Jesus
Christ, exercised in the texts of the Bible it self, provided with
Ecclesiastical charge. Nevertheles let not to be wicked and unbelievers, as
also the Apostle calls them Apostates, and straglers from the faith.

1. Tim. 1.
This second kind may seem to some to be like unto the former; but there is
great difference between those two, the which may clearly be perceived by the
collation of their effects, for historical faith does not rejoice, trouble,
nor assure the consciences of those that have it, the which reading the
histories and other texts of the Bible, are no more moved in their hearts with
the reading there of, the^ if they read some profane history, or other treatise
of Philosophy, because they did not apply the reading thereof to the end and
true use, whereto it ought to be applied, which is to rule and ordain the
estate of the affections, passions, desires, and all humane actions, but do
content themselves that they have well remembered what they have read, to set it
before them as occasion is offered, in such company as they shall be in, and
show thereby that they are not ignorant of Theology; but the faith of Devils
and the reprobate represents unto them, the threatenings, judgments, and
dreadful face of God, which does sometimes so astonish and fright them, that
they tremble and quake, seeking every where for rest and remedy to their
torment, which they cannot find, so that of some them that cannot undergo it,
sincke under the burden, and fall into despair, as we may see by the examples
of Caine, Sem, and Judas.

The third is the faith of Miracles, whereof mention is made in S. Matthew, Mat.
7.
where it is said, that many shall say unto Jesus Christ at the day of
judgment, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied through thy name, and through
thy name have cast out Devils, and done many great worker through thy name, and
then I will confess openly unto them, depart from me ye that that work
jniquity. By the which words Jesus Christ rejects the^, which he would never
have done had they been provided with a true faith, with the which it is
impossible to displease God; It is also spoken of in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 13. John. 1. 1. Cor. 5. Ephe. 2.
where the Apostle speaks in this manner, If I have all faith, so that I can
remove Mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. Which he would not say
of a true faith, the which makes a man the child of God, and a member of the
body of Jesus Christ, and Citizens of heavenly City; It is also spoken of in
the 2. Epistle to the Thessalonians, 2. These. 2.
where the Apostle says, Then shall the wicked be revealed whom the Lord
shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the
brightness of his coming: Even him whose coming is after the working of
Satan, in all power and signs and woonders of lying, and in all deceauablenes
of unrighteousness, in them that perish, because they received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved, which shows jnough that faith and the
faculty to do miracles, is not always jnoyned with the Spirit of
regeneration and sanctification; for Judas who was of the number of the
Apostles, had that power to do miracles, although that Jesus Christ says of
him that he was a Devil.

The fourth kind of Fith, whereof is spoken in the Scripture is a Temporal
faith, wherewith those men were provided for a while, of whom mention is made
in St. Luke, Luke 8.
where it is spoken of those, upon whom the seed fell, who received it for a
time even with joye, but having not taken root in their hearts, withdrew
themselves in time of temptation. Simon the Sorcerer was of this number, of
whom it is spoken in the Acts, That he believed and was baptized; Act. 8. Heb.
6.
Also were those whereof mentions is made by the Apostle, who having tasted the
word of God, and the powers of ths Age to come, finally fell back and returned
to their vomit, like unto the Dog; and to wallow themselves in their filthiness,
like unto the Sow; 2. Pet. 2.
Such men for some time have believed the promises of God, and continued in the
faith, and an jndifferent persuasion of the truth of them, with some joye and
rest that they felt, (as is very likely) in their hearts; And nevertheless
their Apostasy and falling from the Church and the doctrine thereof, did show at
last that in them there was no true faith.

James. 2.
The fifth kind of Faith, is that which is called dead by S. James, by reason of
the likeness it has to a dead body, for as after the separation of the soul,
the body which remains being dead, has neither mooving nor feeling; also a
dead faith has no feeling of the benefits and graces of God, to poyse and
esteem them according to their value, wherein they are like unto Hogs, that
eat up the Mast which falls from the Oak, and never look up, whence it
comes. Those people are profane who think neither on God, nor Jesus Christ,
nor upon his word, nor upon his Sacraments, the which he has ordained in his
Church, for the exercising, nourishing, and jncreasing of the faith of his
children, despise public exhortations, prayers, thanksgivings, and
confessions. Brief they show themselves in all their behaviors to be
Libertines, and disordinate, never having before their eyes, nor in their
memory the great debt which they owe unto God; for so many graces and favors
by them received, and which they daily receive at his hands, and as they are
without feeling of the aboue-said things so are they unprovided of all good
motions. For there is no man amongst the^, that jmployeth him self to do
well, nor confirm himself to the will of God, but are rather contemners of
all the admonitions and advertisments which are given them; people altogether
given to the world, slaves to their flesh, and to the lusts thereof, who neither
serve God, nor make show of it. If these people think they have faith, they
deceive themselves, as do those that call a carkas, or a dead body, a man.

CHAP. III. Of true Faith by the which Christians are justified, which is the
sixth and last kind of Faith.
BEfore we enter into the diffinition of the true Faith, which justifies him
that has it, we must take our subject a little higher, and declare what is the
office and duty of a christian man; which is to know what he ought to wayt
for from God, and what God requires of him. That which the faithful wayt for
from God, is their salvation and everlasting life. That God which requires of
him, is a trust in his goodness, a fear of his Majesty, and an obedience to
his will. The which three things are taught him by the word of God, the which
being divided into three parts, that is to say, the promises, the
commandments, and the threatenings; by the promises, it teaches the Christian
man to trust in God, and upon him to set all his hope, and to wayt from him
all comfort, aid, and blessing in all his affairs and necessities; and by the
commandments teaches him, what obedience he ought to render to God, and the
readiness and great care which he ought to show therein; and by the
threatenings, the fear which he should have to offend him, and to do or commit
any thing that may displease him. Now Faith sets before it self these three
kinds of words. And even as the object of the sight is the color, and the
sound is the object to the hearing, also the object of Faith is the word of
God, the which it looks upon continually, aiming at it as at a mark, and
thereto bending her whole sight, and her jntention, from the which word she
can never so little stray, but she must loose her self, because that to be
sure, she must of necessity rest upon a word that is certain, and such a one
as is the only word of God. Therefore is it that honest folks do with good
right condemn the faith of Papists, who depend altogether of the Pope, and
believe jndifferently all that he says unto them and all that he teaches
them. Because that being a lying and variable man, filled with jgnorance, as
are others, it cannot be but his word and his doctrine must be doubtful and
subject to warranties. But the Christian Faith which is assailed in so many
sorts, and which has so many assaults to withstand, and so many devises to
prevent, has great need to be vpheld by a word that is firm, and which
cannot be easily shook with all the temptations wherewith it is assailed.
Then for to know what Christian Faith is, it is needful to give a brief and
succinct definition thereof.

CHAP. IIII. A definition of Faith.
THe Christian Faith is a certain knowledge and firm persuasion, which the
elect by the virtue of the holy Ghost, have every one in themselves, of the
undoubted verity of all the things contained in the word of God, as well in the
old as in the new Testament, joined with a true and perfect trust of their
salvarion, propounded unto them in the Evangelicall promise by the grace of
God, and ratyfied by the satisfaction made for their sins unto his justice,
by the death and obedience of his son, in their name; whereupon follows in
their hearts a perpetual joye and consolation, and an assurance against all
dangers and temptations, and a resolved will to walk before his face, and to
acknowledge toward him all their life time so great a benefit, by a love,
fear, and obedience which they vow unto him, and do strive to render him for
ever. The which definition we must now declare in particulars.

We say first, that Faith is a certain knowledge of the word of God, Psalm.
102. Romans 3. 2. Cor. 1. Psalm. 100. Psalm. 138.
because there is no other word, whereupon it may be well grounded to be
assured and certain; seeing that God alone is jmmoueable, and permanent for
ever, and true everlastingly; so that in him there is never yea, and no, and it
is one of the reasons for the which the Hebrews named him Iehoua, because it
is his property to be true, and to maintain his truth for ever, always to
effect whatsoever he says, and promises at the time by him appointed. All men
then to be well jnformed and assured thereof, ought to have an express and
clear knowledge of the word of God, which teaches it unto us; whereby we may
perceive, the great error and abuse of the Pope, and of his Cardinals,
Archbishops, Bishops, Curats, and other Pastors of papistry, who to deceue the
simple people, make the^ believe that to be faithful, it is not required that
they should have a clear and distinct knowledge of the word of God; and that it
is sufficient that for that matter they refer themselves to their Pastors,
who shall answer for them before God: But this surety is not sufficient, for
being their guides, as blind or more blind then they are, they cannot miss, in
following the^, but they must both fall together, according to the saying of
Jesus Christ: whereto may be joined that which Esaias faith, Mat. 15. Esaie. 29.
What can a Book profit a man if it be shut, or if it be open, and be in an
unknown tongue, and not vndestood? It cannot profit him no more then the light
of the Sun at noone day does to a blind man, and to a man that has no eyes, to
apprehend it. Wherefore the elect must be very curious in searching, hearing,
reading, and meditating of the word of God, which are the means to have the
knowledge thereof. Jesus Christ also exhorts every one of us thereunto, when
he says, John. 5.
Search the Scriptures which makes sufficient testimony of me. And S. Paul
conformably, where he says in the Epistle to the Romans, Romans 15.
That all that which is written is written for our comfort. And in the 2.
Epistle to Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.
That all Scripture divinely inspired, is profitable to teach, to exhort,
counsel and reprove, and to make a man perfect in good works. Wherefore God
did also command every one in times past, Deuteronomy. 6.
That he should write his Law upon the posts of his house, and in all places,
where it might continually show it self before their eyes, to the end that
contemplating it assidually they should by that means have a desire to love
it, and to shut it up in their hearts, and in their understandings. Whereof we
see a good example in David, who speaking of the Law and word of God, said
thus; Psalm. 119.
Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are the joy of
mine heart. Thy word is a Lantern unto my feet and a light unto my paths.
It follows in the definition, that it is a firm persuasion of that which is
contained in Scriptures: Because that to believe, it is not jnough that we
know the things contained in the holy Scripture, but we must also approone it
without any doubting; and not resemble the Accademiques, who are jrresolute of
all the things which they read or which are read unto them, and yet less to
the Atheists, who do openly mock at the word of God, whereof they make yet
less account, then of the other Sciences, the which they think are grounded
upon some humane reason. It follows.

That the Elect, etc.

Express mention is made of the Elect in the definition, because it is only
they and no other that are capable of Faith, as it is written in the first
chapter which the Apostle Paul writ to his Disciple Titus, where it is said.
Paul the servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith
of the Elect of God, and the knowledge of the turth which is according to
godliness. Whereby it appears that Faith does only appertain to those that
from all eternity have been elected and chosen of God, and since by him
separated from the world, to be brought unto the Church, and by degrees to
attain to the possession of glory and everlasting life, the which God from the
beginning has promised and prepared for his children. The which may also
appear by that which is written in the Acts of the Apostles, where it is said,
that S. Paul having preached in Antioch of Pisidie, Act. 13.3.
those that were predestinate to eternal life, did believe the word of the
Lord, which he had spoken unto them. For to show that in this great multitude
of people that were come thither, and had assembled themselves to hear: there
were but the Elect only that received the word by him pronounced, and profited
thereby. Jesus Christ also when he said, that his sheep hear his voice, and
that all that his Father has given him, John. 10.
come unto him; shows thereby, that those only hear and believe the
Gospel, who have been predestined, and since created and called to this
end. S. John also in his Catholic chapter 4. confirms it saying That those
only believe the word of God that are of God, that is to say, whom he has
ordained and destinate to that end. When also Jesus Christ speaking to Pylate
of his kingdom, of the which he was examined, said, That his kingdom was not
of this world, John. 18.
and that all that were of the truth were his, and heard his voice, gives
sufficiently to understand thereby, that unto all grace is not jndifferently
given to yield themselves docible and attentive to hear, believe and follow
the truth, but only to those that God the Father has disposed thereunto; and
the reason for the which Jesus Christ said, That he was come into the world not
to be served, Mat. 20.
but to serve, and to deliver up his life to pay the ransom of many: shows
that sufficiently, for when he says many, he shows thereby that his death is
not for all, which it should be nevertheless, if by Faith every one could
apprehend it. Luke 1.
As much says Zachary thereof in his Canticle, Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel for he has visited and redeemed his people. Whereupon is to be noted
that he speaks specially of his people; that is to say, of those whom he
has elected, and reserved to himself particularly, and not of all in
general. Considering what has been said, that there are none but the Elect
that are capeable of Faith, we must not wonder if we see so many despisers of
the word of God, which is the word of life, and Science of Salvation, others
that hate and abhor it as a savor of death; others that blaspheme and
persecute it cruelly with fire and water, and all the cruellest and most
horrible torments that they can jnvent or jmagine. Also on the other side we
must not marvel, if we see the Elect, after they have received and believed
the word of God, the which has taken deep root in them, to be firm and
constant against all temptations, and jnvincible against all the sleights,
threatenings, and promises that can be made them, to divert and turn them from
the Faith, which God by his spirit has jnspired and continued in their hearts.
It follows in the definition.

Every one in themselves, which have been jnsorted to give to understand that
every one ought to have his Faith proper and particular, for to apprehend Jesus
Christ with all his graces and blessings, and to enjoye the effect and
accomplishment of the gracious and Evangelicall promises, as writes the
Prophet. That the just shall live by his faith, Abac. 2.
that is to say, by a Faith not borrowed, but which is resident in him. For
even as it is requisite for every one to have his particular soul to animate
and quicken his body, the which cannot live by the soul of an other: Also it
is requisite for all men generally, that every one of them have particularly a
proper Faith jnfused in his heart by the grace of God, to quicken it; from
whence it follows, that those that do not hear, nor meditate, nor confer
any whit of the word of God, to have the jntelligence thereof, cannot have
Faith; of the which the word Faith is as the soul, without the which Faith is
dead. And as the fire kindled in a Lamp cannot be long entertained, but it must
go out, if care be not had to power fresh oil into it to preserve it; also
without the word of God, Faith cannot subsist, nor be long unprovided for of
this nouriture, but it must be in prison, and become as it were sluggish, and
finally it must dye, and be altogether extinguished; for we see it happens
ordinarily to those that are negligent in exercising themselves in the
meditation of the word of God, as it does to the water, the which although it
be of cold nature, is nevertheless subceptible of the heat when it is set
near the fire; but when it is taken from it, first it cools by little and
little, and at length comes to it former coldness, and so returning to it
first nature, the heat quenches, and dies all together. It follows in the
definition: That Faith is an jndubitable knowledge of all things contained in
the word of God, as well in the old as in the new Testament. Which is added to
reprove the errors of the Manicheans of Marcion, and of other heretics,
which did not receive nor approve none of the books of the Bible, but those
only, which did not seem contrary to their heresies. Also for to reject the
errors of the Jews, who do not approve the Books of the new Testament, and
likewise of the Libertines, who say that men must not abide in the earth, which
is but for children, and such as be yet in their rudiments, but that men must
suffer themselves to be conducted by I know not what fantastical spirit, the
which can bring forth nothing but prodigious railyngs, and such monsters as
those that have been seen in our time in the city of Munster in West-phalia,
and elsewhere, where these Organs and Instruments of of Satan have been able to
gather disciples together. Now we must above all things take heed to that, and
altogether approve all the books, in the which the spirit of God has pleased
to reveal and discover his will, and to esteem that there is not any
superfluous or unprofitable word therein; and that there is never a portion
(what a one soever it be) in the scripture, that it is dry or barren, which we
experiment when after we have prayed to God, we apply our selves attentively
to meditate therevppon; and that to contemplate the secrets and mysteries of
God which are therein covered and wrapped up, we will unfold them like unto a
Tapistry, that we may see therein discovered the great singularity and art of
the workman who did make and weaue it. It follows in the definition that the
same Faith is joined with a true and perfect trust of their salvation,
propounded unto them in the Evangelicall promise, and by the grace of God,
which ought diligently to be observed in the nature and essence of Faith; for
it suffices not to believe in God, and in Jesus Christ, that we know them in
their works, to admire and adore them; but this knowledge which we have of
them, and to depend of them in all our affairs and necessities, to have our
recourse unto them to be succored and aided in all dangers. And finally when
we have experimented their favor and care, which they have had to help us, we
must give them thanks and glorify their holy name, which S. Paul teaches us
plainly in the 3. chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians, the 12. verse, where
he says, By which Jesus Christ we have boldness and and entrance in with
confidence by Faith unto him. Also in the Epistle to Hebrews chap. 4. All the
faithful are exhorted to go with boldness unto the throne of grace, that we
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need. Jesus Christ
also in S. John exhorting the Apostle to believe in him, John. 14.
and in God his Father, does not mean to exhort them only to know the
essence, or the will of the one or the other, but also to put their whole trust
in them. And when in Esaias chap. 28. it is said, That who so ever believes in
God shall never be confounded. It ought not to be understood only of the
knowledge which we ought to have of the certainty and verity of the doctrine
and word pronounced and preached; but also of the trust unto the which such a
knowledge does conduct us, to refer our selves with all our affairs, to God,
and to his providence. Which David teaches us in many places, as in the 2.
Psalm, where he exhorts the Princes and great Lords to do homage to Jesus
Christ, saying, Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling, Kiss the
Son least he be angry, and ye perish in the way, when his wrath shall
suddenly burn. Blessed are all they that trust in him. And in the 3. Psalm
at the end thereof, Salvation belongs unto the Lord, and thy blessing is upon
thy people. And in the 5. Psalm, And let all them that trust in thee rejoice
and triumph for ever, and cover thou them. And in the 32 Psalm, Many sorrows
shall come to the wicked: but he that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall
compass him. And in the 25 Psalm, Let me not be confounded. I trust in thee:
but let them be confounded that trangresse without cause. And in the 34 Psalm,
The Lord redeemeth the souls of his Servants: and none that trust in him shall
perish. We may see by these percels and jnfinite others which are in the
Scripture, that this term of Faith is not simply taken only for the knowledge
of the truth of the word of God; but principally for the trust, hope, and
assurance which we have of the effect of the promises of God, of his grace and
favor, of the love and affection which he bears us, and of his care of us,
and of all our affairs to conduct them happily, according as our good and
salvation requires. It follows that this Faith is propounded unto them in
the Evangelicall promise by the grace of God.

Whereupon we must note two things; first that the subject and principal
foundation, upon the which Faith is built, is not the Law, nor the
commandments which propound nothing else but a curse upon those that
transgress them, nor yet the threatenings which propound nothing but the wrath
of God to those that withstand them, which may rather affright and astonish,
then comfort and assure, wherefore the faithful man must not have a regard to
the Law, or to threatenings of God, to assure himself of his grace, and by
consequent of his salvation, which depends thereon; but he must keep his
eyes fixed upon the promise of God, which is the ground and the foundation
whereupon the whole building and edifies of his Faith may rest, and be well
vpheld, which is the cause that the Apostle says in Romans the 10. That
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: to wit the word of
Faith, the which was preached by the Apostles. And in the 4. he says it more
expressly. Therefore by Faith is the Inheritance given, that it might be by
grace, that the promise might be sure to all the seed, not to that only which
is of the Law, but to that also which is the Faith of Abraham, which is the
father of us all. These two percels evidently show that Faith regards
principally the promise of the grace, which God offers in his Son Jesus
Christ, to all those that shall acknowledge him for their Savior, and
Mediator, and we must not seek any other means whereupon to ground the hope
of our salvation; for there is no other name under Heaven by the which we can
be saved. The other point that we must observe, is that, the grace of God,
that is to say, his good will and affection toward us, is the only cause that
has jnduced him, as well to make us a promise of life, as to jmpart the gift
of Faith, by the which we embrace him. For that he has taken out of our hearts
the natural hardness and obstinacy which was therein, and has mollyfied
them, to the end that being tender and soft, they might be capable to receive
their promise to be there printed and jngraven; this proceeds not, nor comes
of any thing else than of his only grace and favor, which it has pleased him
to do us, as it is written in the Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephc. 2.
That Faith is a gift of God: and in the Epistle to the Philippians, Philip. 1.
It has been given unto you to believe, said the Apostle unto them. Also the
spirit of God is called the spirit of Faith, in the 2. Epistle to the
Corinthians, 2. Cor. 4.
to give us to understand, that he is the only author of Faith, as he is of
counsel, of fear, of understanding, of prudence, of wisdom; all which gifts
are attributed unto him in the scripture, as to him who is the only author and
cause of them; Which may yet appear in considering the two members of Faith:
which are the knowledge of the word of God, Cor. 2. Mat. 6. John. 1.
which is in the understanding, and the trust which is in the heart. For as for
the understanding of it self, it is but darkness, and is altogether incapable
to understand the things that are of God, and spiritual. And as for the heart,
being naturally obstinate and rebellious, it cannot in any wise submit and
subject it self to the will of God, to trust in him and to call upon him,
whereof follows, Genesis 6.
that man being by nature inclined to jgnorance in his understanding part, and
to rebellion and obstinacy in his heart, he cannot be for these reasons
susceptible nor capable of Faith. If God by his spirit does not take away these
too lets, which are in him by nature, to render him pliable to hear, and to
trust to that which he promises him. It follows in the definition, that this
faith is ratified by the satisfaction made to the justice of God, by the death
and obedience of his Son. Whereupon we must note, that the promise of grace and
salvation could not be accomplished toward us, but that first the justice of
God must be fully and jntirely satisfied. For as God for his glory was willing
by his promise to lay open unto us the riches of his mercy, and to demonstrate
it unto us by the pity and compassion which he has had of us, to the end that
he might therein be glorified; also was it his will that his justice should be
satisfied, and that man should be acquitted toward it of that which he ought.
Now the debts are that he should suffer everlasting death, for disobaying to
the will of God, and that he should yield a perfect and jntire obedience to his
Majesty, whereof he was a creature and a servant, which was impossible unto
him. By means whereof the Son of God was feign to effect the everlasting
decree of his father, who had determined and ordained to save the men which he
had chosen and reserved amongst the rest, to come into the world and take our
nature upon him, and by that means make himself mortal, to render a perfect
and entire obedience unto the will of God, unto the death, yea the death of the
cross, the which was joined with a curse, wherewith he charged himself to
discharge us, and to pay by that means that which he ought not; and to render
(as says the Prophet) that which he had not taken. Psalm. 69.
In the obedience then of Jesus Christ we ought to consider, first that it was
in our name, and for our sakes, that it was rendered to God, and that this
death which he has suffered was not because he had deserved it. Heb. 7.
For (as says the Apostle) he was jnnocent, jmpoluted, and separeted from
sinners, who only are bound unto death, because that the reward of sin, is
death. Romans 6.
That then which he has rendered unto the just judgment of God, and which
has delivered him into the hands of them which condemned him, was not for his
amiss, but for ours, and that of all the elect whose pledge and warranty he
was. And we must note, that this death which Jesus Christ did once suffer, as
perfect God and perfect man, was of an jnfinite force and virtue, to purge
sins which were jnfinite, because they were committed against the Majesty of
God, who is everlasting, jmmence and jnfinite; and also that it is sufficient
to acquit all his children of the judgment of God, and of all their sins,
without any exception, how great and how many so ever they be, and in what time
and age soever they were committed.

The other point which we must note in the obedience of Jesus Christ, is the
perfect and jntire observation of all the commandments of God his father, in
the which he has not left out one only point, but all has been accomplished
by him. The which he has likewise done in the name of the elect, who by
reason of the natural corruption and vice rayning in them, were altogether
incapable, whiles they live in this world, to observe the Law of God, and to
render him a perfect justice, the which consists in a perfect love, which
they ought to bear him; but they cannot not knowing him perfectly; by reason
^lso of the desires of the flesh which are in them, which turn them from
loving God and their neighbor perfectly, as they are bound.

The third point or reason which is to be considered in the perfect obedience
of Jesus Christ, is the ordinary remission of sins, which we commit every
day, the which are covered by his obedience; in such sort, that they come not
in account in his judgeme^t. For even so as Phyloctetes covered the
stinckingnes of his lothso^e and infectious ulcers, with the perfumed robes
wherewith he clothed himself; also the elect being by Faith clothed with the
odoriferous justice of Jesus Christ, although they were stinking in
themselves, they are nevertheless a good savor unto God. And even as in the
time of the ancient people, when walking by the horrible deserts of Arabia, it
happened that some one of them were bitten by Serpents, to the end that of the
poisoned byt death should not follow, Nom. 21.
he lifted up his eyes to behold the brazen Serpent that was set up in the
middle of the field, and by the beholding of it was preserved from the danger:
John. 3.
so we walking through the deserts of the world, where happening that our
desires sting us with their venom, and give us some mortal wound to be
preserved from it, the only remedy is, to lift up the eyes of our Faith in the
contemplation of Jesus Christ, who is raised above the heavens, and to ask of
God his Father in his name, that he would quitte our debts as we quitte our
debitours.

Of this obedience, virtue, and effect thereof is spoken in the Epistle to the
Romans, chap. 5. verse 19. As by the disobedience of one man many have been
made sinners, also by the obedience of one many are made righteous. Also in the
2. Epistle to the Corinthians chap. 1. God was in Christ reconciling the world
to himself, not jmputing their sins unto them. Also in the Epistle to the
Phillipians chapter 2. verse. 7. He made himself of no reputation, taking upon
him the form of a servant, and made himself in the likeness of men, and
found in figure as a man, he humbled himself, made obedient to death, even the
death of the cross. And in the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 6. verse. 11.
Christ being become an high Priest of good things that should be, by a greater
and more perfect Tabernacle not made with hands, that is to say, not of his
building. Neither by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood, he
entered once into the holy place and found eternal redemption. And in the 10.
chap. verse. 8. having said before, that sacrifice and offering, and burnt
offerings, and offerings for sin thou would not, neither had pleasure
therein, (which are offered by the Law.) Then says he, Lo I come to do thy
will O God, he takes then the first away, to the end to establish the second.
By the which Will we are sanctified. To wit, by the obligation once done by the
body of Jesus Christ.

It follows in the definiton, that of this Faith there comes forth of the
hearts of those that are justified, a perpetual peace, joye, and consolation.
Which is easy to be understood; for it is not possible that we can be
assured and persuaded of the grace of God, and of the remission of our sins,
of our salvation, and of the everlasting blessing, which Jesus Christ has
purchased for us, also of the justice, and of the life, and of a certain hope
of the Kingdom of Heaven, and of that perfect and entire felicity, which there
waytes for us for ever, that we may feel in our hearts and in our consciences,
a peace, a joye, a rest, a comfort and contentment inseperable, which is the
cause that S. Paul in the Epistle to the Romans chap. 5. verse 1. said,
Therefore being justified by Faith, we are at peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, and in the 14. chap. and 17. verse, The kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. And
Jesus Christ in S. John chap. 16. verse 20. Verily, verily I say unto you, that
ye shall weep and lament, the world shall rejoice; ye shall sorrow, but your
sorrow shall be turned into joy. A woman when she trauaileth has sorrow
because her hour is come, but so soon as she is delivered of the child, she
remembers no more the anguish, for ^oye that a man is borne into the world.
And ye now therefore have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your hearts
shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you. David also to this purpose
in the 126. Psalm sung, They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. They went
weeping and carried precious seed: but they shall return with joy and bring
their sheaues. And in Esaias chap. 51. Everlasting gladness shall be powered on
your heads. And S. John in his Apocalips chap. 21. verse 4. And God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former
things are gone, And David in the 36. Psalm, How excellent is thy mercy, O
God? therefore the children of men trust under the shadow of thy wings. They
shall be satisfied with the fatnes of thine house, and thou shall give them
drink out of thy pleasures. It follows in the definition, that this Faith is
accompanied with assurance against all dangers and tentations. The which is
added to jnstruct the faithful man, that when by faith he is united with God,
and received his protection and safeguard, Romans 8.
nothing can mishappen unto him; but all matters and accidents, of what nature
and quality soever they can be, further him to salvation; as says S. Peter, 1.
Pet. 3.
Who is it shall hinder you, if you follow that which is good? And S. Paul,
Romans 8.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
justifies? who is he that condemns? it is Christ which dyed, yea rather
which is risen again, which is also on the right hand of God, and makes
intercession for us, who shall separate us from the love of Christ; shall
tribulation, or anguish, or persecution; either hunger, either nakedness,
either peril, either Sword? (As it is written, for thy sake are we killed all
the day long, and are counted as sheep to the slaughter) Nevertheless, in all
these things we overcome through him that loved us, for I am sure that neither
death, nor life, neither Angels, nor rule, neither power, neither things
present, neither things to come, neither height nor depth, neither any other
creature, shall be able to s^parate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. David also in the 27. Psalm says. The Lord is my light and my
salvation, whom shall I fear. The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be affraide. Though an host be pitched against me, I will not be
affrayd: though war be raised against me, I will trust in God. For in my
trouble he shall me hyde in his tabernacle: in the secret place of his
pauillion shall he hide me, and set me up upon a rock. Therefore will I offer
in his Tabernacle sacrifices of joy: I will sing and praise the Lord. And in
the 46. Psalm, God is our hope and strength, and help in troubles is ready to
be found. Therefore will we not fear though the earth be moved, and though
the mountains fall into the midst of the Sea. Though the waters thereof rage
and be troubled, and the mountains shake at the surges of the same. And in
the 121. Psalm, The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall keep
thy soul. The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in from
henceforth, and for ever. It follows in the definition, that this Faith is
followed with a resolute will to walk before his face, which is the end of
reconciliation with God, the which is brought to pass by the Faith which we
have in Jesus Christ, as it appears by that which is written in the Epistle of
S. Paul to Titus, Tit. 2.11.
chapt. 2. verse 11. There has appeared the grace of God which is healthful
to all men; teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for
that blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the great God and our Savior
Jesus Christ. And in Zacharies Canticle, Luke 1. That he would perform the
oath which he swear to our Father Abraham for give to us. That we being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our Life. And in the
12. to the Romans. I beseech you therefore brethren by the mercifulnes of
God, that ye give up your bodies a quick sacrifice holy and acceptable unto
God, which is your reasonable service; And be not ye fashioned like unto this
world, but be ye changed in your shapes by the renewing of your minds, that ye
may prove what is the good, and the acceptable and perfect will of God. And
David in the 130. Psalm. But mercy is in thee that thou may be feared. All
which passages, and jnfinite more that are in the holy Scripture, show unto us
that the end of our redemption is not to give us leave and license to do
evil, abusing of the grace of God. But that it is to make our light shine
before men, by good works, that they may be jnduced by our example, and by
the doctrine of our life, to glorify God.

CHAP. V.
HAving defined Faith and declared by particulars all the parts thereof, it now
remains to know the causes that do produce it.

All effects have ordinarily four causes: the efficient, the material, the
formal, and the final. As for the efficient of Faith, it is produced and
jngendered of the grace of God; as it is written in the Epistle to the
Ephesians chap. 2. verse. 8. By grace ye are made safe through faith, and that
not of your selves: it is the gift of God. The which grace by the Spirit of God
disposes the hearts and the understandings of men jnteriourly, and secretly,
taking away the natural obscurity and darkness of the understanding, to make
it capable of the knowledge of the word of promise, and the hardness and
obstinacy of heart, that it may be prepared with more alacrity and good will
to follow that which the jlluminated understanding does set before it. And even
as for the ptoducement of all the fruits of the earth; it is first requisite
that the earth be good, and well tilled; secondly, that the husbandman be
skillful in his art, to wit, to stir the earth and give it all necessaries;
thirdly, that the seed which is cast upon it be good, and well covered, and
watered with the dew of Heaven; so must man be prepared to receive the
jncorruptible seed of the word of God by the spirit of God, who does regenerate
and change his heart of stone into a heart of flesh. Afterward that the
Minister, which is the husbandman, be fit for to sow it with a grain that is
pure and entire, and which is mingled neither with Darnell, nor any other evil
seed. So by the concurrence of these three things, that is to say, the Spirit
of God, which regenerates man, and prepares it self for his salvation, the
good and faithful Minister, who does faithfully dispense the mysteries of God;
and the jncorruptible seed of the word which is purely and sincerely
administered. Faith is produced in the heart of a faithful man; the which is
not done but at Gods appointed time, for men are called to the knowledge of
their salvation diversely, and at diverse times, some sooner, some later. And
before Gods prefixed time be past, we see that the elect, as well as the
reprobate, are rebellious and contrary to the word of God, whereof we have a
notable example in the Scripture of S. Paul, who before the time of his
vocation, was not only an enemy, but also a blasph^mer, and furious persecutor
of the Church of God. But when the time which God had appointed to call him,
and to bring him jnto the Church, was come, then in a moment he was transformed
from a Wolf (which he was before) to a Lamb. It is even like unto a piece of
wood which is laid upon a harth, being green one cannot kindle it, but if it
be dry, so soon as it is put jnto the fire, and that it is blowed, it
conceaues a flame, and so kindles. The^ to the producing of Faith, two things
are required; the preparation of the heart, which is made by the spirit of God,
and the word, the which does jnflame the heart of man as soon as it is
disposed to receive it. And even as to see bodily, it is requisite first that
the air be jnlightened (for by night men cannot see though they have eyes) and
secondly that both men and beasts have a lively faculty (for otherwise they
could not see, were it even at noone day) so for to see and contemplate
spiritual things, the air must first be jnlightened by the preaching of the
word of God; and secondly, that men have eyes that are capable to receive this
light. As for the material cause, they are those things which Jesus Christ
has done and suffered for us, as the obedience which he has rendered to God
his father, and the accomplishment of the law, the satisfaction and payment
which he has made to Gods justice for our debts, the death, the curse, the
wrath and judgment of God which he has sustained, and the hell, that is to
say, the abisme or bottomless pit of all the misery, whe^rein he has been
plunged for us, and for this only end, to free us from them. It is the only
matter, substance, subject, and argument of our Faith. The fruits also that do
arise of it, as the establishme^t of the church, the communion of Saints, the
remission of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting, are
the principal parties, and as it were matter wherewith our faith is builded. But
because the word of God written in the Bible touching these matters, in the
books of the Prophets and Apostles, is of a large extent, and of difficult
apprehension, the Apostles and the successors being assembled have promised for
it, and comprehended in a short sommary all that we ought to believe for our
salvation. And have contained in twelve little articles, all the things which
Jesus Christ has done or suffered for us: And in general all that is needful
for us to believe, and whereupon we ought to ground and settle the hope of the
everlasting life and happiness. Whereupon may be jnfered, that the doctrine of
the Pope, and of all his Pastors and Muncks of Papistry, cannot avail any
thing to edify our Faith, the which is not settled upon the jnventions, foolish
traditions, and vain jmaginations of men, But upon the pure word of God, the
which ought to be laid open in the church to the people purely and simply,
without any mingling of dreams, and ravenings of men; As says the Prophet
Jeremy, Ierm. 14.
You must not mingle the chafe among the good grain, nor the dross among the
fine Silver, nor the water with the good wine. Peter also wills that if any
one speak in the assembly, 1. Pet. 4.
let him speak like the words of God. S. Paul exhorts his Disciple to preach
the word of God without adding or changing, 2. Tim. 4.
for as it written by the Prophet. Psalm. 12.
The words of the Lord are pure words: even as the silver which from the earth
is tried and purified seven times in the fire; for which cause nothing may be
mingled with it, but it must needs corrupt it.

The third cause, to wit, the formal of Faith is Jesus Christ, for as much as
he is our Christ, that is to say, our Mediator and jntercessor. For in this
quality he is as it were the form of our Faith, the which he quickneth and
gives a being thereunto, as does the shape to the matter which it shapeth, and
unto the which it is applied. Now as we see all things take their being and
denomination of their form, as the fire is named by it form, the fishes, the
beasts, the birds, and all things in general are called according to the form
which ^hey bear. Also so is Faith, and calls it self Christian, because
that Jesus Christ who is the form thereof, and we are also for this reason
called Christians, because that we are provided therewith, which causes that
through Jesus Christ ^e are regenerate to be new creatures. Moreover, it is he
that has kept the commandment of God. It is he who undergoing the wrath and
the malediction of the threatenings of God, has delivered us from them.
Finally, it is he that obtayneth the blessing set down in the promise made to
Abraham, and to his posterity; and who, in doing so, has been a means that
the law, the threatenings, and the promises, which are the three principal
parts of the scripture were accomplished in his person, and by consequent the
Faith thereof healthful to all belieuers. Whereby we may say of Jesus Christ,
that he is ths form Faith, the which cannot subsist without the efficacy of
the word, nor the word have her efficacy without him. Therefore is it that we
may say that Jesus Christ contaynes all the causes and par^s of Faith in
himself, for diverse respects. First the efficient, because that as God he
produces it in us by his spirit. As he did in Paul, when going jnto Damascus
he called him, and in his mercy did change him in an jnstant, and made him of a
furious persecutor of the Church, a faithful servant unto him and it.
Afterward, that he is also the matter of our Faith, by reason of those things
which he has suffered for us, and by the which (paying our ra^some) he has
fully satisfied to the justice of God for all our jniquities. Again, that he
is the form of our Faith, in as much as he is the Mediator and jntercessour,
who by his merit keeps us perpetually in the grace of God his Father, in the
which rests all our life, salvation, and beatitude. And to conclude, that he
is also the end thereof, because it is he unto whom we ought wholly to refer
and attribute the praise and glory of our salvation, which are the reasons for
the which it is said, John. 1.
that in him consists all fullness of gifts and graces of God. Also, that God
the Father has given us all things with him, that is to say, not only life,
but also the means whereby we may attain thereunto. And that in him are all
treasures of the knowledge, wisdom, and other graces and blessings of our
God. Which considering, S. Augustine says, That in our selves we are nothing,
and that in him we are all things. And the Apostle to the Hebrews. Who is the
chief and the accomplisher of our Faith, who instead of the joy which he had
in hand, has endured the cross, having despised the shame, and is set at the
right hand of the throne of God.

The final cause, which is the fourth and last of Faith, is the glory of God
and the salvation of men, for the mercy of God manifesting it self in the
remission of our sins; and his virtue in the execution, and in the
accomplishment of his promises; and his justice in the pain which Jesus Christ
did endure upon the cross for us; and his power in the discomfiting of our
enemies; and his wisdom by the which he has by death brought life, by sin
justice, by jnfirmitie force, by darkness light, by wounds healing, by
lowliness exaltation; and by hell whither Jesus Christ did descend, Paradise
and the kingdom of Heaven; being (I say) all the virtues of God manifested and
laid open in Jesus Christ, all christian men apprehending them by Faith, have
matter and cause to praise and glorify God; for God doing that which is said,
has showed how glorious and wonderful his name was. Men then believing these
things in their hearts, and publishing them with their mouths, cannot better
magnify the works, virtues, and miracles of our God, then in doing it.

CHAP. VI. Of the effects of Faith, whereof the first is the reconciliation
between God and man.
HAving spoken of the causes of Faith, it is also needful to declare the
effects thereof, which are great and admirable; the first is the reconciliation
between GOD and us. For when we were as far from GOD as the East might be
from the West; and that there was no creature upon earth more miserable then
man in this estate; Esaias. 58.
to draw us out of it, and to set us again in the hope of his grace, and of
our salvation, from the beginning after that our first parents (out of whose
loins we came) were departed from God through their rebellion and
disobedience; God to prevent their ruin, which was all apparent and very
near, pleased to raise them again being so fallen; That of them should come
the seed which should bruise the head of the Serpent. Genesis 3.
The which promise he repeated since to Abraham, Genesis 12.
promising that of him a child should be borne, that should bring an universal
blessing upon all the Nations of the earth; and again, since has likewise
repeated it to David, assuring him that from him should descend a King, whose
reign should be everlasting and permanent for ever. 2. Sam. 7.
Now this promise was occasion to Adam, Abraham, and David, and to all their
posterity, to believe and conceive a certain and assured hope of salvation;
persuading themselves, that God offering himself so benignely unto them, did
show that he was not willing to destroy the^, although that by their rebellion
they had well deserved it; but was content again to gather to love, and to
embrace them, and even to bind himself as straightly unto them, as by marriage
we see man and wife joined and united together. Genesis 17.
It is that which the Scripture says, speaking so often of the alliance
between God and his Church; the which has been brought to pass by the
mutual promises which are made between God and it; God promising it that he
will be her God, and it promising to God that it will be his people, the which
alliance is the greatest and happiest that ever was treated or brought to pass
in the world, for therein wholly consists the assurance of our beatitude, as
says the Prophet. Psalm. 33.
Blessed is that Nation whose God is the Lord, even the people that he has
chosen for his inheritance. Psalm. 89.
Blessed is the people, that can rejoice in thee, they shall walk in the light
of thy countenance, O Lord, They shall rejoice continually in thy name, and in
thy righteousness shall they exalt themselves. Blessed are the people that be
so: Psalm. 144.
yea, blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord. For as the body lives,
and is happy whiles the soul remains in it, of which it receaveth mooving,
feeling, and all the force and vigor, which is in it; also, and more happy is
the Church, that is joined with God, of whom as of it soul it receaueth all
the good and the happiness that it can have, desire, and hope for. And to the
contrary, as the soul separated from the body, that body is no more any thing
but a stinking and jnfectious rottonnes; also that Church which is sequestered
from her God, is nothing else but all misery and vanity. Now the greatness of
the felicity which falls unto us by the alliance which we have with God, may
be yet better known by the comparison of the alliance which the jdolaters
have with their jdols, Psalm. 115.
Who have eyes but see not, mouths but speak not, ears but hear not, hands
but feel not, and feet but go not. The trust in which jdols is altogether
vain, as says the Prophet. Psalm. 135.
They that make them are like to them, so are all that trust in them. But we
being united with God, he (by his jnfinite wisdom) has the care of us and
of our affairs, and by his providence does provide for all our necessities,
and preserves us from all dangers. And by his charity and the love which he
bears us, can never forsake us; so that having once contracted alliance with
us, we are assured that it shall be permanent for ever, and shall continue
toward us without any jnterruption for ever and ever, as it ^s written by the
Prophet. Psalm. 23.
Doubtless kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and
shall remain a long season in the house of the Lord. Psalm. 30.
In his favor is life. My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, Psalm. 89.
and my covenant shall stand fast with him. And that which ought yet to make
this alliance more recommendable unto us, is that God with whom we are allied
is always present to know and to provide for all our affairs, as it is
written. The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shadow at thy right hand. The
Sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moon by night. Also, Psalm. 33.
Behold the eyes of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that
trust in his mercy.

CHAP. VII. The second effect of Faith, is the remission of sins.
THe second effect of Faith is the resion of sins, by the which the
hinderance that men could not be reconciled with God, was taken away. For God
being perfectly just, and we to the contrary most sinful and unjust in every
fashion; there was no means to unite us unto him, but that the sin and
injustice which was in us, must first be abolished. 2. Cor. 6.
And as says the Apostle, What fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness; or what communion has light with darkness; or what concord
has Christ with Beliall; either what part has he that belieueth, with an
Infidel; or what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols; for (as the
Philosophers say) two things that are quite contrary, cannot agree in one and
the same subject. It was then needful that the sin which was in us, should
be abolished, before we could be capable to come near unto God, and to be
joined with him. Now this abolishment was done for the remission of our sins,
the which God gave us by his grace, and by the means of the satisfaction which
Jesus Christ made for it by his death; the which satisfaction is allowed and
jmputed unto us by the faith which we have in him. And it is the article of
Faith which we protest to believe in the end of our confession, saying, I
believe the remission of sins. Whereupon we must note one thing which S.
Bernard says, that is to say, Even as the grace of God continues toward us
for ever, and that the efficacy and virtue of the death of Jesus Christ is
perpetual; also is the remission and abolition of all our jniquities which
come thereof, perpetual, without being any whit jnterrupted. So that as it is
written in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 9.10.
That we are continually sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ, the which
is never clutterd, but is always fresh to be powered upon us, to wash us and
to cleanse us from all our filthiness. And we may say of this blood, and of the
remission of sinnaes, which is therein established, that it is the Asile and
the freedom of Christians, whither they must always have their recourse, to be
warranted, and to save their life, when they have chanced to commit any
criminal cause.

And that may be very well fitted to this purpose, which S. Augustine says in
his book of the City of God; making a comparison between the Church and
Room in this point, that is to say, that as to people and edify the City of
Room in her beginning, by the advice of Romulus, the first building that was
there set up, was the place of Liberty and Freedom, after the framing whereof,
he caused a Proclamation to be made in all the places thereabouts, that who
so ever found himself to have committed any capital crime, retyring himself
into this pace of Freedom, he should obtain his favor, and should be
received into the place of Citizen, and defended by the Inhabitants against all
those that should do him any violence. Also in the Church of God, the first
thing that was published was the remission of sins, which is as it were a
place of freedom, into the which those malefactors that have deserved death
and the halter, may retire themselves; to the end to be assured of their life,
and from the sentence and condemnation, which the judge might give against
them, if he were not hindered from it, by reason of their refuge thither, and
that they are received into the protection and safeguard of the King, who is the
Protector and warrant of the Church. As then the City of Room in her
beginning was peopled but with thieves, robbers, murderers, and people
abandoned to all kinds of vices, by the means of the place of Freedom, which
had been opened for them, by the founder of Rome; so is the Church assembled
and compounded of jdolaters, blasphemers, prophaners, drunkards, rebels,
thieves, adulterers, murderers, evil speakers, detractours, covetous,
ambitious, and voluptuous persons, ravishers, robbers, and other such like
persons, by the means of the remission of sins, which has been opened unto
them, as a place of Freedom to retire themselves in safty. The which did Adam,
Abell, Enoc, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Samuel, Gedeon, Iephte, Sampson,
David, the Prophets, the faithful, and all the Saints that ever were. Now this
remission of sins is the ground of the hope of a christian man, and of all
consolation. For seeing we offend so many ways, and that we cannot live a
moment and minute of an bower, without having evil thoughts in our
understandings, evil affections in our hearts, evil words in our mouths,
evil actions in our hands, and in all the members of our bodies, and a great
vanity in all our senses. What should we do? how should we escape? whereupon
should we assure our salvation, withot-the faith which we have of the
remissiuon of our sins? which is as it were a plaster and a tent, which we
apply every day upon this moist and corrupted wound of our nature, and which
festured does always drop, without stenching, drying, clea^sing or healing, by
other means but by this only remedy, the which is altogether necessary for the
conversation of our life, and to hinder that the rottenesse, spreading it
self, and ramping over all the parts thereof, in the end should not cause us
to dye. It is it which rayseth us when we are fallen, as says David, Psalm. 37.
Though he fall he shall not be cut off: for the Lord puts under his hand. I
have waited on the Lord: Psalm. 130.
my soul has waited, and I have trusted in his word. My soul waits on the
Lord more then the morning watch waits for the morning. Let Israel wayt on
the Lord: for with the Lord is mercy, and with him is great redemption. And he
shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities. Psalm. 65.3.
Wicked deeds have prevailed against me, but thou will be merciful unto our
transgression. This remission causes that the faithful do not sin to the
death, for this seed of the grace of God, of his promise, and of his spirit,
wherewith he has sealed our hearts, causes, although that we be sinners,
that we assure assure our selves (notwitstanding our sin and the corruption
that is in us) that God who is jnfinite in goodness and mercy, makes his grace
to abound where sin abounds.

Romans 5.
In this only gift of the remission of our sins, we have matter and
argument to admyre and exalt the jmmense and jncomprehensible mercy of God,
which is never weary of giving us grace for so many sins which we have
committed every day. If a King had given half a dozen or a dozen of remissions
to a murderer, or other malefactor, he would wax weary at the last, and
although he were the most benign and pitiful of the world, yet would he put
him to death, seeing his perseverance in dojng evil. But our God does not
quitte us 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. tallents, parcels, and debts which we owe him,
but 10. Thousand, yea 10. Millions; provided only, that we confess we owe
them unto him, and that we make it appear that we are sorry to be so much
jndebted unto him. The which we see in the parable of the bad servant, whereof
mention is made in S. Matthew chap. 18. and in the example of David who
wondering at the greatness of the goodness and mercy of God, said in his
praise. Psalm. 32.
Then I acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquity: for ^o I
thught, I will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou
forgauest the punishment of my sin. Therefore shall every one that is godly,
make his prayer unto thee in time, when thou may be found: surely in the
flood of great waters they shall not come near him. Conclusion, this remission
of sins is as a quittance unto us, and a general abolition of all that we
may owe, and of whatsoever we may be sought after for in the Chamber of
Accounts of our God. So that being furnished with it, we ought not to fear
any whit, to present our selves before the judgment of God with all assurance.
For there is no conde^natio^ for those that are in Jesus Christ, as says the
Apostle, Romans 8.1.

CHAP. VIII. Of Justification, the third effect of Faith.
IT is time then to enter into the deduction of the third effect of Faith,
which is our justification; the which is plainly declared in the Epistle to
the Romans, chap. 3. verse. 22. The righteousness of God comes by the Faith
of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe. There is no
difference; for all have sinned and have need of the glory of God, but are
justified freely by his grace, through their redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness, by forgiving the sins that are past,
which God does suffer; to show at this time, his righteousness, that he might
be just, and the justifier of him that believes on Jesus; Which he
confirms in the fowrth alleging that which David says towching the
beatitude of man, unto who^e God allows justice without works, saying,
Psalm. 32.
Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not sin, and in whose spirit
there is no guile; Whereupon we must note that this term of justifying
signifies to absolve in the holy Scripture, and that man is justified before
God, when appearing before his throne and Judgment seat he is absolved of all
his crimes and sins, which the law, the Devil, and his own conscience may
set before him, to cause him to be condemned, which is done in the favor of
Jesus Christ; Romans 4.
who clothing us with his righteousness, is cause that our sins hidden
under his cloak, Psalm. 32.
do not appear before God, but to the contrary, that being cleansed and washed
in his blood, we become as clean and as white as snow, having neither spot,
nor wrinckle, nor any thing else to be reproved and condemned.

Now this Justice by whose covering we escape the Judgment of God, is allowed
unto us, and applied by the Faith of Jesus Christ; which is the cause that in
Saint John it is said that whosoever believes in him, Ioh. 35.
comes not into Judgment. And for the which the Apostle to the Romans,
speaking with great assurance says, Romans 8.
who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ which died, yea rather
which is risen again, which is also on the right hand of God, and makes
intercession for us, Who shall separate us from the love of Jesus Christ? shall
tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, either hunger, either nakedness,
either peril, either Sword. As it is written, for thy sake are we killed all
the day long, and are counted as sheep for the slaughter, nevertheless in all
these things we overcome through him that loved us; For I am sure that neither
death, neither Life, neither Angels, nor rules, neither Power, neither things
present, neithings to come; Neither height nor depth, neither any other
creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. If by Faith we are assured to be justified before him, and that
this consuming fire, which makes all the creatures of the world to shake when
it is once enflamed, can neither annoy nor consume us; That when we consider it
narrowly, ought quickly to take that fear from us, that we may have of all
dangers, for that which is the fearefullest of all, to wit, the wrath and anger
of God, can neither offend nor make us afraid; following then the exhortation
and example of the Apostle, we ought not only to be resolved against the fear
of Death, but also insult over it as he did in saying O death, where is thy
victory? 1. Cor. 15.
O Sepulcre where is thy Sting? Now the sting of Death, is sin; and the power
of sin, is the Law. But thanks be to God who gives us victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Then when we shall see the day of Judgment approach, the
which is fearful to the Devils and reprobates; we to the contrary ought to
lift up our heads, being joyful of his coming; being well assured, that it
shall be the day of our full and entire redemption, and deliverance; in the
which we shall enjoy all the goods which Jesus Christ has purchased for us,
and the fruit of our hope, that is to say of the permanent and perfect
happiness, which God has reserved for his Children. And if the children of
Israel after they had passed the River Jordan, beginning to take possession of
the Land which God had promised them, had great occasion to rejoice and to
comfort themselves, so shall we have, when we shall see Jesus Christ appear in
his glory the second time, and when we shall hear this pleasant and happy
voice. Math. 5.
Come ye Blessed of my Father, and possess the Kingdom which has been
prepared for you from the beginning of the world.

The fowrth effect of Faith, Mortification.
FAith also begets in us mortification of the flesh, and true repentance
purifying our hearts (as says Saint Peter) of disordinate passions, Act. 10.
lusts and ^ffections, foolish love, avarice, ambition, and other like
vanities. Breife, it ^s the means which God uses to regenerate us, and to
make us new crea^ures, and by consequent to cteate in us ^ew thoughts, new
affections, new ^peaches, new actions, and a new life; Because it is
accompanied with the Spirit of God (as it is written in Esaias) who ^eeing holy,
Esaias. 59.
sanctifies all those that ^re furnished therewith; That is, attributed to
Faith, because it is the Instrument wherewith he serves himself ^o
regenerate man, which we see in all those that are faithful, who in a mo^ent
having been called, and believed ^e word which was preached unto them, have
been changed from carnal, ^o spiritual; and even as a tree, after ^ has been
ingraffed, brings other ^ind of fruit then it bare while it was wild; Romans 6.
also by Faith ingraffed into Jesus Christ, we bring forth fruits through
grace, of an other kind then we did, when ^ee walked in our own ways, which
we ^e in Zacheus, Example. Zacheus.
who being an insaciable ^ublican to heap goods upon goods, and to gather
riches upon Riches by hook or by crook, without having any respect unto
Justice, and without bejng moved to pity the poverty of those which he
ransomed, cared for nothing, so he might increase and gather riches at any
price. Nevertheless Jesus Christ having looked upon him with his good eye,
and having vouchsafed to be his guest, changed and transformed him jnto an
other man, so that of a covetous and lustful man as he was, he became
liberal and charitable; and of one that was pitiless and barbarous toward
the poor and needy, and those that had need of him, he became gracious,
humane, and tractable. God did even change his heart in such sort, that he did
not content himself to restore four fold to those that he had ransommed, but
would give and distribute the half of his goods to the poor. We see that eve^
in S. Matthew, Matthew.
who bejng active and attentive to gain, and to his profit, when Jesus Christ
had called him, forgetting, at the very jnstant that he heard his voice, all
his desires, and avarice, forsook his bancke, his Apron, his house, and all
his temporal commodities, to follow him. The Harlot likewise, The harlot. Luke
7.
whereof mention is made in S. Luke, although she were given over to all
dissolution, and steeped in all worldly and filthy pleasures; nevertheless
bejng called to the Faith of the gospel, she was presently so changed, that
one would have said that her eyes had been fountains, by reason of the
abundance of tears that ran from them. S. Peter also, who was a great
sinner, as he himself confessed, and who only amongst all his fellows
denied Jesus Christ three several times, was in the end so strengthened by
Faith, that by reason of his constancy and firm jmmooueablenes, he was
surnamed by the name of Peter. S. Paul also, who was a cruel blasphemer and
persecutor, and furious, and like a wild Bore, Act. 9. Psalm. 80.
who was broke jnto the Lords Vineyard to spoil it, and to devour up all the
branches, having been called by Jesus Christ when he went jnto Damascus, there
for to dissipate the Church wholly, was so changed by Faith, which God of his
grace did jnspire in his heart that of a Wolf, that he was, he became the
greatest Pastor of his time in the Church and flock of the Lord.

Whereby we see what is the power and force of Faith, the which does
altogether change those persons unto whom it is given. And although that this
changing be not perfect all at once; nevertheless it advances every day by
little and little in those that are truly faithful, 1. Cor 5. Ioh. 15.
and who are curious altogether to purge the old Leuin which remains yet in
them, and to wash their feet (as says Jesus Christ) and to take the leeze out
of the vessel, until that it be quite empty and made clean, as we see that
the Apostle did, 1. Cor. 9.
whom (as he writes to the Corinthians) did run in the listes, to bear
away the price, and brought his body into slavery, to the end that in some
fashion, after he had preached to others, himself was not found vnreceaueable,
Phil. 3.
which he yet says elsewhere. I try if by any means I might attain unto
the resurrection of the dead; Not as though I had already attained it, either
were already perfect: but I follow, if that I may comprehend that for whose
sake also I am comprehended of Christ Jesus; Brethren, I count not my self,
that I have attained to it, but one thing I do; I forget that which is behind,
and endeavor my self to that which is before. And follow hard toward the
mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. The exercise
of the truly faithful.
It is the exercise of those that are truly faithful, continually to think
upon a new life, and a true repentance; In so much that it may be a study and
exercise, in the which he continues from the beginning of his regeneration,
until the consummation and conclusion of his life; in such sort, that by the
temptations wherewith he is jncessantly exercised, and prooved, he may be
refined like unto Silver or Gold in a fournace; and as for the conservation of
the body, it is requisite that it be continually exercised, and above all
things, purged of the superfluous humors and excrements, which therein are
gathered every day; also it is necessary that the soul and conscience of the
truly faithful be cleansed with continual repentance, and that it be as
much or more careful to weed and pluck up the evil herbs which do always
pollute his soul, as is a good Gardener to cleanse his Garden of all nettles,
thistles, and other weeds which spring therein. For the duty of a Christian
man, is, to jmploy all his life to put off the old man, and to put on the new;
which is an exercise that cannot be done without great toil and difficulty;
because that the old man is a robe so fastened and stitched to a Christian,
that a man cannot get it off but by peecemeale; and the new man is an other
robe so straight that it cannot be put on but with great labor and pain. Yet
must we strain our jndeauours, and show that we are faithful, Romans 6.
by the participation which we have in the death and resurrection of Jesus
Christ, abstracting from his death a virtue to mortify our flesh, and the
lusts thereof; and an other of his resurrection, to walk in newness of life;
and not to think that we can participate in the righteousness of Jesus Christ,
to obtain the remission of our sins, but we must also show by effect the
participatio^ which we have in the holiness of his Spirit. For we cannot be
just, but we must be holy, nor be holy, but we must be just; because that
Jesus Christ is never unfurnished, nor parted from his spirit; and does not
justify us, but at the same time and by the same means he sanctifies us; so
that at the very jnstant that we are jncorporated in Jesus Christ, for to be
his members, we are also consecrated to God to be his temple, where he dwells
by his holy spirit.

The fifth effect of Faith, Obedience.
THe other effect which Faith produces in us, is the obedience which we
strive to render to God, when by Faith we have been regenerated, as S. Paul
shows to the Romans chap. 1. verse 5. sayjng. By whom we have received
grace and Apostleship (that obedience might be given unto the Faith) for his
name among all the Gentiles. It is also said in the Epistle to the Hebrews.
Heb. 11.
That Abraham by Faith (when he was called) obeyed God to go out into a place
which he should receive for inheritance, and he went out, not knowing whither
he went; which are two places that show sufficiently that Faith beejng planted
in our hearts, it disposes them to render perfect obedience to the will of
God. Also we see that the elect, before they be called and regenerated by
Faith, they are ordinarily called in the holy Scripture, Rebels, dissobedient,
and Enemies of God. Ephe. 2. Romans 5.
But after their regeneration, they are called Servants, and the children of
God, by reason of the will and desire which they have to obey and serve him.
Now, there is nothing more pleasing and agreeable unto God, then obedience, the
which he preferres before all sacrifices; whereof we have a notable example in
Saul, 1. Sam. 15.
who was rejected and deprived of his kingdom with all his posterity, unto
whom nevertheless it was established by the ordinance of God; only because
that he had disobeyed God, and preferred his own opinion before the
commandment which was given him wholly to destroy the Amalekites. But one
only example might suffice to show how pleasing obedience is to God, that is
to say, that which Jesus Christ has rendered to God his Father in our name,
Phil. 2.
the which was of such great efficacy and weight with God, that it has blotted
out the disobedience of our first parents, and has restored us to a more
happy estate, then that of Adams was pitiful and miserable, wherinto by his
disobedience he had precipitate himself and all his posterity, as S. Paul
shows in the Epistle to the Romans, chap. 5. verse. 19. As by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by that obedience of that one, shall
many also be made righteous. And to the Phillipians, chap. 2. verse. 8. He
humbled himself and became obedient unto the death, even to the death of the
cross; wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every
name. That at the name of Jesus should every knee bow, both of things in
Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth. And that every tongue
should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the glory of God the
Father. And in the Epistle to the Hebrews chap. 10. verse. 6. In burnt
offerings, and sin offerings thou have had no pleasure. Then I said Lo, I come
(in the beginning of the book it is written of me) that I should do thy will
O God. Above when he had said, Sacrifice and offering, and burnt offerings, and
sin offerings, thou would not have, neither had pleasure therein (which
are offered by the Law). Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, he
takes away the first that he may establish the second. By the which will we
are sanctified even by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once made; David
also teaches us in what recommendations we ought to have this obedience in
the 19. Psalm, when he says, Psalm. 19.
The fear of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever: the judgments of the
Lord are truth, they are righteous altogether. And to show the care to render
this obedience to God, he say^h at the end of the same Psalm, Let the words of
my mouth, and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight. O Lord my
strength and my redeemer. And in the 17. Psalm. Stay my steps in thy paths,
that my feet do not slide. And in the 119. Psalm, Make me to understand the
way of thy precepts, and I will meditate in thy wondrous works. And in the
same part of that Psalm. I will run the way of thy commandents when thou shall
enlarge mine heart. And for to stir us up to render the obedience which we owe,
he propounds unto us in the same Psalm in the 12. part thereof, the example of
all creatures, which have never declyned from the purpose, where^ore God had
ordained them in their ^reation, as it appears by that which follows, O Lord
thy word endures for ever in Heaven, thy truth is from gene^ation to
generation: thou have laid the foundation of the earth and it abides. They
continue even to this day by thine ordinance, for all are thy servants, Except
thy law had been my delight, I should now have perished in mine affliction. All
these passages with jnfinite others which are scattered in the Scripture, do
sufficiently show into what duty the faithful man ought to put himself to
serve and obey God, seejng that this obedience is the sole and only means, by
the which we may be entertained in his favor, and retain his spirit with us.
If we should think to be the faithful servants of god, and that nevertheless
we should serve jdolatry, the devil, the world, our flesh, and the lusts
thereof, we should deceive our selves, Romans 6.
for as says the Apost. Know you not that to whom soever you give your selves
as servants to obey, his servants you are to whom you obey, whether it be of
si^ unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. Then the faithful man must
(to show that he is such a one) study with all his might to honor God by his
obedience, and by the fear which he shall have to offend him. We desire of God
every day that his Will be done, and yet there are few that use this prayer,
that prepare themselves to do it. And do less employ themselves to do it so
readily as it is done in Heaven: For the Angels are compared to fire, Ezech. 2.
Psalm. 104.
and to the wind, and to such creatures as have wings, Heb. 1.
to show unto us the diligence and great promptitude which is in these
messengers to receive and execute the commandments of God, without delaying,
or temporising any whit therein. Whereunto the consideration of our condition
ought to induce us, that we are creatures, servants, and children of God, and
also besides the price, and the number of the graces, favors, and benefits
which he has done and does unto us every day, and which finally are propounded
unto us by Faith in the gospel.

The sixth effect of Faith, Patience.
FAith also begets a Patience in all adversities, and causes that the
faithful man takes in good part and moderately all the afflictions and
calamyties which happen unto him, for the which he blesses and praises God,
acknowledging that they come from him, for his good and salvation, and always
to exercise, and accustom him to the obedience of God, and to strengthen him
in his duty, Luke 8.
as says S. Luke That the good seed which was fallen in good ground, brought
forth the fruit with patience. S. Paul also in his Epistle to the Hebrews
says, that by Faith, and patience, Heb. 6.
we receive the promises for inheritance. And in the Epistle to the Romans,
Romans 8.
he says. That by patience we wait for that which we hope. Now this
patience is a singular and commendable virtue, and the most acceptable that we
can offer to God, as says the Prophet. Psalm. 51.
The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a contrite and a broken heart, O
God thou will not despise* And the reason for the which he exhorts all those
that are faithful patiently to attend from God a good and happy issue of all
their adversities, saying. Hope in the Lord: Psalm. 27.
be strong, an he shall comfort thine heart, and trust in the Lord. And to
confirm that, he himself alleges the experience and proof which he has
had of it, Psalm. 40.
saying. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me and heard my
cry, he brought me also out of the mire and clay, and set my feet upon the
rock and ordered my going. And S. Paul to the Romans says, Romans 5.
that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope, and hope makes not ashmed, because the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given unto us; The which holy
Ghost being a virtue from above, and a Spirit of force, as says the Apostle,
upholding all christian and faithful men that they cannot be swallowed up of
temptation were they never so furious and violent, and remains firm and
immooueable against the winds, the storms and the ^empests and the waves, the
which beating against them do break and disperse ^hemselues, and bring forth
nothing but scumme, It is that which the Prophet says, And as for me, Psalm. 41.
thou vphouldest me in mine integrity, and do set me before thy face for
ever. Psalm. 42.
One deep calls an other deep by the noise of thy water spouts, all thy
waves and thy floods are gone over me. The Lord will grant his loving
kindness in the day, and in the night shall I sing of him, ever a prayer unto
the God of my life. Psalm. 66.
Thou have caused men to ride over our heads; we went into fire and into water,
but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place. The Condition of the faithful
We see thereby that the condition of the faithful man in particular, and of
all the Church in general, is to be like unto a boat, or to Noah's Ark the
which was exposed to the winds, which tossed it to and fro, without being
drowned nevertheless, yet it was so far from sincking, that the water which
drowned all the Idolaters and jnfidels, bare it upon their back to save it
from peril, also the Church is vexed and tormented on every side by Satan and
his adherents, and there is not one amongst the^ but bends his piece against
it, to overthrow and cast it to the ground; but in these endeauours that men
use against her, the patience which God has given her, is as it were a rampard
and bulwark, to cover and save it. It is the reason for the which S. August.
says that the Ark of God whereof we have spoken, was built of thick pieces of
wood, which were square, the which does represent unto us the virtue, force and
patience of the faithful man, the which howsoever it may be cast does not
roll like unto a round body, but abides always firm and stable upon one of
the sides thereof. Aristotle for this reason said, that an honest and virtuous
man, is Tetragone, that is to say, square every way. The faithful then must
not be astonished in tribulations, but be resolute in them, and thinck that
they are more profitable and healthful unto them when they bear them
patiently, then can be prosperity which flattereth and makes them wanton,
Comparison of Adam and of Job.
as says S. Augustine, making a comparison of Job, and of the first man,
saying, That the man upon the dunghill was more happy, then the man in
Paradise; because that the man in Paradise was overcome by the Serpent and the
woman; and the man upon the dunghill had overcome both the one and the other.
It is true that some times the temptations are so great and so long, that men
know not on which side to turn, because that the fire is kindled on every
part, that the Churches are dissipate, the children of God some one way, some
an other, are glad to save themselves by sea, through the woods and deserts,
and in caves; insomuch that it seems that God will wholly turn away the light
of his countenance from his children, because they shall not see the brightness
of his face. But then the faithful must make use of their patience, and that
they stiffen and hold firm against such temptations, assuring themselves that
in filence and hope they shall obtain the deliverance which they expect. Psalm.
126.
When the Lord brought again the Captivity of Syon, we were like them that
dream. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with Joy. Let
us then remember the exhortation of the Prophet who addressing his speech to
all the faithful says, Psalm. 97.
Ye that love the Lord, hate evil: he preserves the souls of his Saints: he
will deliver them from the hand of the wicked; light is sown for the
righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. And although that the persecutions
are sometimes so hard and so sharp that it should seem they are intolerable,
Psalm. 121.
nevertheless God who is keeper of Israel, whose eyes are always open to
behold and provide for all their necessities, and his ears to their prayers
and requests, to understand and grant them, always accommodateth his poor
Church. And although she be hunted out of Cities and Towns, he provides a
lodging to harbor it in the deserts, and to give it leisure to propagate; and
if she be hunted from all the places of the earth, in so much that there
remains no corner nor place where to withdraw her self, God preserues her
upon the Sea, as he did Noe and his family. We have two notable examples,
Examples.
the one in the Scripture, the other in nature, which we ought always to set
before our eyes, to uphold and assure us in all our afflictions. To wit, first
the Bush which Moses saw in the desert, The Bush.
the which bejng all on fire, was not burnt nevertheless, nor consumed nor
brought to ashes. Which did signify to us the estate and condition of the
Church, the which is always as it were on fire in this world, and as it were
in a fournace, without that the force and vehemence of the fire has any power
to consume it, no more then the young men which Nebucadnezar caused to be cast
jnto the fiery fournace, because they would not obtemperate, nor obey the
unjust commandment which he made them, to obey the stature which they had
erected. The other, is in that which God propounds unto us in nature, to wit,
The bird Alcyon.
of the byrd Alcyon, to whom God gives leisure in the midst of the hardest
of Winter, to build his nest upon the high rocks in the Sea, which for the
space of 14. days is as calm and peaceable, or rather more than in the heart
of Summer, until such time as their young ones are disclosed, and fledged to
fly away. So God at all times has so conducted the affairs of his Church,
that in the midst of the greatest and most horrible tempests that ever were,
he has always preserved it, and has furnished and prepared for it some
little place to make her nest and her abode.

We see every day, Comparisons and Inducements to Patience.
that in the night the clearenesse and light of the Stars does appear, and
that in day time they are covered, in so much that the beauty and splendor of
them is not seen. Also we see that the children of Abraham, that is to say,
the faithful, which in the scripture are compared unto Stars, in their
adversity do much more show the brightness of their Faith, patience, and
magnanimity, then they do in prosperity. Moreover, how dare we hope one day
to participate in the trivmpha^t glory of Jesus Christ, if in this world we do
not with patience participate in his cross? How also can we hope to attain to
eternal life without patience, seejng that the way which leads thither,
bejng full of Briars and thorns, cannot be passed, but they will catch them
that keep it, or walk therein; the which cannot be done without having great
occasion and matter of patience, the which shows it self more in suffering,
then it does in dojng or performing; as shows the Apostle to the Hebrews:
Heb. 11.
where he praises the faith and patience of those great and jllustrious
persons, that by Faith have combated with Kingdoms, have done justice, have
obtained the promises, have closed the Lions jaws, have quenched the vehemence
of the fire, have avoided the edge of the Sword, have showed themselves strong
in battle, have driven back the strangers Camps. And then a little after
prayseth those that have been tried by mockings and scourgings, yea moreover by
bonds and jmprisonme^t, they were stoned, they were hewn in sunder, they were
tempted, they were slain with the Sword, they wandered up and down in sheeps
skins, and in Goats skins, bejng destitute, afflicted, and tormented, whom
the world was not worthy of, they wandered in the Wildernesses and Mountains,
and dens, and caves of the earth. The which the Apostle has very well noted
to give us to understand, that the Faith and patience of the faithful, is as
much or more to be praised, for the constancy and virtue which it has to
suffer and endure great torments, as it is to do great and memorable exploits.
As we do not less praise the patience of Job, in the losses of his goods, and
children, and great dolours, which he constantly endured in his body, then the
pains, travails, and great patience which Joshua had to discomfort the 32.
Kings of the Cananites. Let us then conclude, that the patience which Faith
brings unto us and produces in us, is a very excellent and laudable virtue,
and which makes us not only Invincible against the temptations and sleights
used against us by our enemies, but also victorious; so that we may say, that
the wicked in their rage, are matter for God to jllustrate and magnify his
glory in the faithful who surmount them in their patience and magnanimity.

The Seventh effect of Faith, Humility.
FAith also produces from the faithful Humility, which is the Queen of
virtues; and that which God does most account of in us. For it is also the
principal, and without the which all the others are reputed as nothing before
him. And as says S. Augustine, It is of no less importance in Piety and
Religion, then the pronountiation in Rethorick. And as Demosthenes being
demanded, what was the principal part thereof, answered, that it was the good
grace and comlynesse which men had well to prononce and express the conceits
of their minds; also that good father said to this purpose, that if any one
demanded him, what was the first virtue of Christians, he answered that it was
humility, by the which men descending into themselves, having well and
diligently examined themselves, come to know themselves and the great
jmperfections, which are in them, as ignorance, the disordinate affections, the
passions, the desires that inclination to vice which is in them, that
contrariety which is in their nature to the will of God, to all his
ordinances, which causes that humbling themselves before God, they remit
themselves holy to him jmploring his mercy, and seeking in his goodness that
which wants in their nature; The which they would never do of themselves,
for naturally we are all jnclyned to presume of our selves, and to esteem of
our selves a great deal more then we are worth: and we hold that of our
first parents, and of the Devil, whose pride was the cause of their ruin, the
which could never have been repaired but by the contrary, that is to say, by
the humility of our Savior Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.
who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God.
But he made himself of no reputation and took on him the form of a servant,
and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, and to the death of the cross. The
which was the cause of blotting out the presumption of our first parents, and
the only remedy, to heal the wound which they had given themselves, and all
there posterity.

Now we must be very curious to purchase this humility, for without it we
cannot please God, who looks on the humble both in heaven and in earth, as
says the Prophet. Psalm. 113.
Who is like unto the Lord our God, that has his dwelling on high, who abaseth
himself to behold things in Heaven and Earth, he rayseth the needy out of
dust, and lifts up the poor out of the dung. That he may set him with the
Princes, and with the Princes of his people. And also. Psalm. 146.
The Lord gives sight to the blind, the Lord raises up the crooked: the Lord
loves the righteous. And in an other place. Psalm. 147.
He has no pleasure in the strength of a Horse, neither delights he in the
legs of man. But the Lord delights in the^ that fear him, and attend upon
his mercy. It is marvel that men who are so wretched and miserable, The
original of man.
that there is no creature in the world that surmounts them in this point;
nevertheless they think they surmount them all in sufficiency, glory, and
felicity; wherein they show the height of their miseries. For as S. Augustine
says in his book of Confessions, There is nothing more miserable then he
that has not pity of himself, and of his own misery. We are environed
with sin, and with all the evils and miseries that it draggeth after it, and
^otwithstanding we neither know nor ^eele it. As the Apostle confesses of
^imselfe, Romans 7.
that in the time of his jgno^ance, he did not know that the concu^iscence
(that is to say) the great and horrible corruption which is in man's nature, was
sin, if by the law it had not been taught him. It is that which causes that
we desire always to glorify ^ur selves in our selves, and never to
ac^nowledge that in God consists all ^ur glory, as David confesses, Psalm. 3.
But thou Lord art a buckler for me: my glory, and ^he lifter up of my head.
Psalm. 44.
I do not trust ^n my bow, nor can my sword save me. But ^hou have saved us
from our adversaries, and have put them to confusion that hate ^s. Therefore
will we praise God continually, and will confess thy name for ever. It is
that which the Apostle teaches us, 1. Cor. 4.
saying, What have thou that thou have not received? and if thou have received
all that is laudable in thee, why do thou boast, as if thou had not
received it? And elsewhere, Romans 3.
Thy glory is shut up by the Law of Faith, which teaches that what thou art,
thou art by the only grace and mercy of God. Romans 4.
And wherefore do we call our selves vessels of mercy; if it be not to give us
to understand that we are filled with the mercy of God, to cover our misery?
Why are we also called chosen to honor, 2. Tim. 2.
if it be not to teach us, that God has filled us with his glory, for to cover
our jgnorance and shame? Let us then say with David, Psalm. 40.
Blessed is the man that makes the Lord his trust, and regards not the
proud, nor such as turn aside to lies. Let us again say with him, Psalm. 131.
Lord mine heart is not hawty, neither are mine eyes lofty, neither have I
walked in great matters, and hid from me. Luc. 19.
And let us call to our remembrance that which Jesus Christ said, that, that
which is great before men is abominable before God; Ioh. 12.
and that the great men of this world ordinarily love better the glory of men
then that of God; which is the cause that few among the^ believe in Jesus
Christ, as he himself witnesses in S. John, that the principal said among
them selves, there is none but these poor jdiots that follow him, is there any
of the principal that have believed in him? For as he says, It is impossible
that those that desire the glory of men, can believe in God; as he also says,
in S. Matthew, That the poor, Mat. 11.
that is to say, Ioh. 5.
those that know and feel their poverty, and their misery, are only those
that are Euangelized: that is to say, that receive the Gospel, and the good
tidings which Jesus Christ at his coming brought into the world, Examples of
humility. Moses. Genesis 9.8.
in Faith and Obedience. All the great personages that ever were upon earth,
were all furnished and adorned with this goodly virtue. Moses acknowledges
that in his nature is but a heap of all vice and corruption, and that his
heart is jnclined to nothing but wickedness. David confesses that all men are
nothing, Plal. 92.
in sum be all vanity. The Children of men are vanity, the chief men are
liars, to lay them upon a balance they are altogether lighter then vanity.
Esaias says, Esaias. 95.
that all the righteousness of men, and all that is most apparent and
jllustrious among them, i^ nothing else but old rags, filthy and stinking, and
such as are the habits of beggars, torn and tottered, and covered with filth
and vermin, wherewith they cloth themselves ordinarily, to stir up men to
have pity and compassion on them to succor them with some alms. Danil. 9.
Daniell confesses and deploreth as well in his own name, as in all his
fathers, the great iniquity, wickedness, rebellions, disobedience, contempt,
and obstinacy, whereof all were culpable and inbebted to the Judgment of God,
Peter having acknowledged Jesus Christ and the great and admirable virtues that
were in him, said, Lord withdraw thy selse from me, who am a poor and
wretched sinner, unworthy to appear before thy face, and to be in thy
company, S. Paul acknowledges himself a blasphemer, Tim. 1.11
a persecutor the most scelerate and wicked in the world, and unworthy of all
the graces so great and in such great number which he had received of God. All
the Apostles, yea all the Church of God, desire of him every day: Mat. 6.
pardon us our offenses as we pardon those that have ^ffended us. Acknowledging
by his ge^erall confession the infinite number of ^er sins, which it were
jmpossible to ^eckon by particulers, as David also ^aith. Who can understand
his faults, Psalm. 19. Duty of the Christians.
^lense me from secret faults. We have ^ll then great need to humble our selves
before God, and to hold down our heads ^owards the earth, for shame and
grief, to see in us such a disorder and confusion as we see. And to say with
Job, Cursed was I when I sinned, Job. 9.10.
but if I have done well, yet shall not that make me lift up my head, nor
look the higher. S. Augustine in his confessions, Cursed be all our
vnrighteousnesses, if they be examyned and Judged without the pity and
mercy of God. Psalm. 99.
Seeing then (as says the prophet) that the sins which grieve us, are as an
jmmortable burden which presses us down; Psalm. 143. Psalm. 130.
we ought every day continually to desire of God, that he enter not into
Judgment with us, that he correct us not in his anger, and that he hold not
his express region in the examination and condemnation of our sins: Psalm. 96.
But that he unfold his greatest compassion over us. And although that to show
his liberality and bounty toward us, he has communicated and enlarged many
of his graces and blessings, fit Comparison.
nevertheless that ought not to lift up our eye lids, but we ought always to
have our head bended downwards, like unto the ears that are laden with corn
in a good year, and to acknowledge, that that proceeds not from us, but of
his only grace and favor; which dojng, we shall break all the color and
anger of our God; who seejng us so abated, will raise us again by his goodness,
and will forget all our faults, and we experiment that as the plants or young
trees do bend with the wind, and yielding unto the will and jmpetuosity of
them are preserved and maintained, an other.
which the great trees are not, as the Oaks and Walnut-trees, which by
resisting of the storms, are many times beaten down, bruised, and rent, that
also in humbling our selves, we shall avoid the fury of God; an other.
even ^s also we see in the thunderbolts, and ^n Artillery, whose fury is
quenched when they come to encounter with the ^arth, or a bag of Wool which
bejng ^oft gives place to the blow.

The Eight effect of Faith, it is the Mother of Prayer.
FAith also is the mother of Prayer, in the which the truly faithful exercise
themselves jncessantly, followjng the commandment of Jesus Christ, who
exhorts his Apostles, and consequently all the faithful, to pray without end
and without ceasing in Faith, without the which we cannot in any wise hope
that our requests be heard of God, nor likewise granted. For also the prayer
which is made in doubt, and jncertitude, is displeasing to God, as says S.
James, James. 2.
That the uncertain man must look for nothing from God, whatsoever he
demands. Romans 10.
And S. Paul demands, How it is possible to call upon God, if first we do
not believe and hope in him? Now this prayer when it is well made, and grounded
upon the promises of God, and that then it is addressed unto his Majesty, it
cannot choose but obtain of him what it demands. Wherefore David said, Psalm.
139.
That prayer was his refuge in all adversity. We have in the holy Scripture
jnfinite examples of the prayers that this good Prophet has made to God, for
to obtain of him some good and happy jssue in all his afflictions, Psalm. 3.
I did call upon the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy
mountain. I laid me down and slept, and rose up again: for the Lord
sustained me; I will not be affrayd for ten Thousand of the people that
should beset me round about. And in the 18. Psalm, where he records the
means that he uses to avoid the fury of his enemies, that kept him
besieged on every side, he says, that for to repulse and beat them back, he
helped himself principally with prayer, But in my troubles did I call upon the
Lord, and cried unto my God: he heard my voice out of his Temple, and my cry
did come before him and unto his ears. Then the earth trembled and quaked; the
foundations also the Mountains moved and shook because he was angry. Psalm.
18.
And also, Some trust in Chariots, Psalm. 20.
and some in Horses: but we will remember the name of the Lord our God. They
are brought down and fallen, but we are risen and stand upright. Save Lord,
let the King hear us in the day that we call. And in the 9. Psalm, The Lord
also will be a refuge for the poor, a refuge in due time, even in affliction.
And they that know thy name, will trust in thee: for thou Lord have not failed
them that seek thee. And in the same Psalm, The wicked shall turn into Hell,
and all Nations that forget God. For the poor shall not always be forgotten,
the hope of the afflicted shall not perish for ever. Of the perseverance in
Prayer.
Now although that God in some sort seem to turn back his face from us, and
to have his ears quite closed up at our prayers, yea and in all shows us a
dreadful and stearne countenance, and (as says the Scripture) presents
himself unto us with the face of a roaring Lion, or of a Bear that has lost
her young: Yet we must not yield nor desist from prayer, but take courage, and
stiffen our selves against the apprehensions which we have of the wrath and
anger which God does show us in appearance; Jacob. Genes. 31.
and do as did Jacob, who seejng him with-whome he wrastled, willing to
depart from him jn steed of forsaking him, held him more strongly then before,
saying, that he would never loose the hold which he had of him, until he had
obtained his blessing, and that which he demanded of him; which at length he
obtained by the perseverance and constancy of his faith and prayer. David.
David seejng himself environed on every side, by the troops of Saul, at the
rock of Hachilla, did not loose his courage, nor the hope, but strengthened
himself in the Lord, and did pray unto him in that extremity wherein he was,
Psalm. 142.
saying, Though my spirit was in perplexity in me, yet thou knew my path; in
the way wherein I walked, have they privily laid a snare form. And in the
same Psalm, Then cried I unto thee, O Lord, and said, thou art my hope and my
portion in the land of the living. Psalm. 141.
Also, But mine eyes look unto thee, O Lord God, in thee is my trust: leave
not my soul destitute. And in the 130. Psalm, Out of the deep places have I
called upon thee, O Lord: Lord hear my voice, let thine ears atte^d to the
voice of my prayers. And in the 69. Psalm, Deliver me out of the mire that I
sincke not: Let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the deep
waters. Let not the water flood drown me, neither let the deep swallow me up;
and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me. All these passages show
sufficiently, that the Faith of the good Fathers was not a cowardly and soft
Faith, which was astonished and yielded easily to afflictions, how hard and
sharp soever they were; but that like unto the Palm it did stiffen it self
and rise against the weight of the burden; So that it was never overcome, what
burden or weight so ever could be laid upon it. Likewise we see Jonas, in
the very bottom both of the Sea, Jonas.
and of the Whales belly, constantly to retain the Faith and persuasion which
he had of the truth of ^he promises of God, upon the which he did assure
himself; notwithstanding the great fault which he had committed in not
obaying the commandment which God had given him to go to Niniuie. And under
that assurance which he had thereof, and the remission of his sin, he prayed
to God in this gulf and bottomless pit wherein he was, and sung this
excellent Canticle unto him, which we read in his book Ezekias. Ezekias.
In the time of Sennacherib, who had conquered all the land of Judea, and
brought all the Towns and strong places, to his obedience, resting none but
the City of Jerusalem, which he kept besieged on every side, in so much that
the Jews were so shut up therein, that it seemed that their affairs were
altogether desperate, and that there was no place nor means whereby they might
save themselves, and put by this danger; nevertheless, this good kings heart
was never daunted, but he did continue so ankred in the faith of the promises
of God, and in hope of the help which he had promised him, that seejng the
extreamitie wherein he was, the scarsity of victuals which was in the town,
the bravadoes and threats of Rabsaces, all the Country thereabout wast and
desolate, he let not for all this, to rest firmly upon the providence of
God, and weight for his succor until the end, whereof God by his prophet had
assured him, wherein he experimented that the Faith which we have in God is
never vain; Psalm. 37.
provided that we depart not from it, and that by the example of Abraham, to
what point soever the faithful man may be brought, he may nevertheless
believe in hope, against hope, and let him not sleep like the Apostles: Romans 4.
but let him rather follow the counsel which Jesus Christ had given them, Mat.
26.
to watch and pray incessantly, that they enter not into temptation, Moses.
Moses being come to the border of the Sea, which stopped his passage before
him, being also pursued by Pharo, and his host behind, had great occasion to
fear, Exodus 14.
and think that of force he must yield with all his people to the mercy and
discretion of the enemy; yet that sunk not into his mind, but he armed
himself with the promise, favor, and presence of God, which did accompany
him, and assisted him, saying to the people, (who were all dismayed) to assure
them and to make them take heart again: have not I told you, that if you
believe you shall see the glory of God, and his almightinesse, to accompltsh
that which he promises without that any creature can be able to hinder him in
the execution of his counsels, which having said unto them, they presently saw
the Sea open at his prayer, to the end that the people might pass on dry Land
through these great and horrible gulfes.

Men must not then mistrust of Gods help, in what place soever they be, were
they, as it is written in Deuteronomy, in the bottom of hell, that is to say,
of all misery and affliction, always setting before their eyes, that in what
place soever they be, God who is their father, is there present, and a
spectator of their misery, for after he has tried their Faith and patience,
and heard their prayer, to draw them out of all the dangers wherein they are.
For as he has power to precipitate his into the pit to try them, also has he
to deliver them, and in comforting them, to give them matter and argument to
praise him, as he says by the prophet. He shall call upon me, Psalm. 91.
and I will hear him? I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and
glorify him, with long life will I satisfy him and show him my salvation.

The Ninth effect of Faith, true Adoration.
FAith also begets in the faithful man, true adoration and worship of God,
as it is said, that Jacob by Faith when he was dying, blessed every one of the
Sons of Joseph, Genes. 47. Heb. 11.
and worshipped upon the end of his stasse, By the which worship the faithful
do wholly rely upon God, and depend upon his providence in all their
affairs, following the exhortation that the prophet makes to every one of us,
Commit thy way unto the Lord and trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass.
And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, Psalm. 37.
and thy judgment as the noone day: wayt patiently upon the Lord, and hope in
him; fret not thy self for him which prospers in his way: not for the man
that brings his enterprise to pass. Cease from anger and leave of wrath:
fret not thy self also to do evil, for evil doers shall be cut off, and
they that wayt upon the Lord, they shall inherit the land. Which is no small
good to the faithful man, who from thence draws tranquillity and peace of
conscience. For bejng tossed with adversities which beat against him
incessantly, the one after the other, as the waves of the Sea do against
rocks, he has great need to be vpheld, that he be steadfast and firm, and
constantly to repulse the temptations wherewith he is assaulted on every side.
Plal. 16.
Whereto nothing is so fit, as always to look upon God, and to go under his
conduct, and to hope from him a good and happy issue of all that we see;
Psalm. 30
and although that ^he business be very confused and jntricate, that yet he
is able to determine of them, and to draw forth a good order out of all these
disorders which we see. And even as Mariners floating by night at Sea, behold
always the North pole to conduct them, and to keep them from gojng out of
their course: so in this world we must always have our eyes fixed upon God,
that he may prosper and govern us well in all our affairs, Psalm. 141.
and say to him as says the Prophet, O Lord that art my portion, Psalm. 119.
I have determined to keep thy words. Psalm. 56.
For thou have delivered my soul from death, and also my feet from falling
that I may walk before God in the light of the living. And also, But I will
sing of thy power, Psalm. 59.
and will praise thy mercy in the morning: for thou have been my defense and
refuge in the day of my trouble. Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing: for God
is my defense and my merciful God. O how happy is man, when he can say and
feel in his heart, as does the Prophet, Psalm. 16.
The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup; thou shall
maintain my lot. The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places: yea, I have a
fair heritage. I will praise the Lord, who has given me counsel, my reins
also teach we in the night. I have set the Lord always before me, for he is
at my right hand: therefore I shall not slide. Wherefore mine heart is glad, and
my tongue rejoices: my flesh also does rest in hope. Surely there is no other
means to content our mind, then the possession which we have of God, when we
love him, and that by Faith we enjoye him, wholly relying upon him, and
recommending all our affairs unto him, which cannot choose but be well
conducted, and come to a good end, when he pleases to jmbrace them; which is
the cause for the which the Prophet said, My soul keeps silence unto God:
Psalm. 62.
of him comes my salvation, he is my strength and my salvation, and my
defense: therefore I shall not much be moved. And also, Psalm. 111.
I will praise the Lord with my whole heart, in the assembly and congregation
of the just, the works of the Lord are great, and ought to be sought out of
all that love him. And a little after, The works of his hands are truth and
judgment: all his statutes are true.

Whence comes it, that men trouble themselves so, Censure of our imprudencie.
when they see any alteration in their affairs; and that, that which they
pretend does not always happen according to their desire? but that they think
not upon the providence of God, which rules over all things, and which
disposes of them according to his wisdom and counsel which is
inco^prehensible unto us; although we should worship them, and assure our
selves in our hearts, that he does nothing but by weight, number, and measure.
Romans 11.
And therefore the Apostle considering it with astonishment, and admiration,
cries out, O the deepenes of the riches, both of the wisdom, and knowledge
of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out,
for who has known the mind of the Lord, and who was his counselor; Or who
has given him first and he shall be recompensed, for of him, and through him,
and for him are all things, to him be glory for ever Amen. This only sentence
were sufficient always to keep our minds in rest, jf first we consider, that
all things come from God, and that therefore they cannot choose but be good:
because that from the sovereign good, there can come no good evil, and they
return to God, that is to say, to his glory, the which ought to be more dear
and precious unto us, then any other thing. Often times we find in the
scripture the exclamations, which the prophets use, upon the good hope of
those that rely upon God, that is to say, that worship him, and depend wholly
upon him. Like unto the saying of David, And in the 32. Psalm, Many sorrows
shall come to the wicked: but he that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall
compass him. And in the 84. Psalm, Blessed are they that dwell in thine
house, they will ever praise thee. Blessed is the man whose strength thou art,
and in whose heart are thy ways. And toward the end of the same Psalm, For
the Lord God is the Sun and shield unto us, the Lord will give grace and glory,
and no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly. O Lord of
Hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee. And in the 25. Psalm, Unto
thee O Lord, I lift up my soul, my God I trust in thee: Let me not be
confounded, Let not mine enemies rejoice over me. Duty of the faithful in
their afflictions.
Then when we see that we are oppressed, and that the most part of the world
conspireth against us, and do league themselves to bring us to ruin, we ought
always to remember our selves, and lift up our eyes toward God; even as the
servant when he is awde, has always his eye upon his master, and the maid
servant upon her mistress when she perceives her self to be threatened of
any danger, Psalm. 123.
and to assure our selves of the love which he bears us, by the which he is
induced to have pity upon us, and likewise of the care which he has to
provide for all our necessities, when time shall require: for having both the
times and the seasons in his hands and power according to the which he does
all works, and disposes of every one according as he knows the occasion to
be fit and convenient, Act. 1. Psalm. 94.
he will not miss to prouid for all, and to bring al things to their point,
when he shall see the time fitting. Whereupon we must also well note that
which the Prophet says, They shall look unto him, Psalm. 34.
and run to him, and their faces shall not be ashamed saying, This poor man
cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. And also,
Psalm. 17.
Concerning the works of men, by the words of thy lips I kept me from the
paths of the cruel man. Psalm. 73.
We see sometimes that the wicked prosper, and have a pleasing wind, yea they
have oftentimes better then they wish for, God giving them according to their
desires, all that they have a mind to, and abandoning them to their
concupisences, which we are angry at; yea, sometimes our jmpatience and wrath
carries us so far, as sharply to complain and almost murmr, because that
we who serve God and fear to offend him, Malach. 3.
and for this reason should be blessed and more gently and favorably
jntreated, then those that despise and blaspheme him at every word, are so
used, that one would think that we are in the world, Psalm. 44.
but to serve as a fable and a proverb to other men, who looking toward us,
In skoffing shake their heads. But then to abate the grumbling of our hearts,
we ought to speak softly to it, as it were in the ear. Psalm. 43.
Why art thou cast down my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? wayt
on God: for I will give him thanks: he is my present help, and my God.
Confessing that which the Prophet says, to wit, Psalm. 73.
Until I went into the sanctuary of God: then understood I their end; Surely
thou have set them in slipperie places, and castest them down into desolation.

Let us assure our selves then upon the providence of our God, and worship
him, to what estate soever we be brought; and let us not think that he has
left the care which he has promised to have over us and our affairs. But let
us always resolutely hold, Psalm. 33.
That the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that
trust in his mercy. And that which the Prophet says in the same Psalm, The
Lord looks down from Heaven, nnd beholds all the children of men. Also
that which he says elsewhere, Psalm. 113.
Who is like unto the Lord our God, that has his dwellings on high. Who
abaseth himself to behold things in Heaven and in Earth. If we have once our
eyes settled upon the providence of God, as we see the Prophet had, we shall
never be troubled in our consciences, neither shall we feel the anguish and
sorrow wherewith those are strongly vexed and tormented, who by their passions
are drawn now hither, the^ thither, without bejng able to rest in their minds,
nor to find any resolution in their jmaginations, whereupon they may stay or
rest; but we shall have our consciences quiet and peaceable, and what wind
soever blows it shall seem propicious and favorable unto us, and what danger
soever can present it self before our eyes, it shall never be so great as to
affright or make us tremble. For knowjng and believing that the goodness of
God is upon us both above and beneath, Psalm. 144.
and that we are environed with his grace and presence on every side, Psam. 46.
we will say with the Prophet, We will not fear though the earth be moved,
and though the mountains fall into midst of the Sea. Though the waters
thereof rage and be troubled, and the Mountains shake at the surges of the
same. And also, I will lay me down, Psalm. 4.
and also sleep in peace, for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety. Also
that which is written in an other Psalm, Psalm. 23.
The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. He makes me to rest in green
pasture, and leads me by the still waters. He restores my soul, and leads
me in the paths of righteousness for his name sake, yea though I should walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil for thou art
with me: thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. Thou do prepare a table
before me in the sight of mine adversaries; thou do annoint mine head with
oil, and my cup runs over. For what evils, storms, or tempests soever may
besiege us, we will always come to his conclusion of all our discourses, To
wit, that The Lord of hoasts is with us: Psam. 46.
the God of Jacob is our refuge. And that which is written elswere, Psalm. 118.
I called upon the Lord in trouble, and the Lord heard me, and set me at
large. The Lord is with me, therefore I will not fear what man can do unto
me. And in the same place, The Lord is mighty, and has given us light. The
resolution then that every faithful man shall have upon this article of
Adoration, shall be such a one as that of the Prophet, to wit, Thou art my God,
and I will praise thee, even my God: therefore will I exalt thee.

The last effect of Faith, Thanksgiving.
THe last effect of Faith is Thanksgiving, by the which, calling to mind the
great good which God has done for us, in such great number, that we should
not be jngratefull toward him, we give him thanks for them, and repeat the^
according to the occasions presented to us; to the end that God by that means
may be jnduced to continue and multiply them toward us, the which he does
ordinarily to those who do not forget the benefits and favors which they
receive from him, as it is said, That to him that has, shall be given; Mat. 13.
and from him that has not, shall be taken, even that which he seemed to have:
and elsewhere it is said, Psalm. 84.
That God gives grace upon grace to those that love and serve him. And in the
parable of the talents, Mat. 25.
we are taught, that if we be attentive well to use and manage the graces
and gifts which God bestows upon us, that he does conserve and jncrease them
unto us. Psalm. 145.
Now if there be any exercise worthy of a Christian man, and fit for his
duty; surely it is that of Thanksgiving. We see by the scripture, that the
principal exercise of the Angels in Heaven, is to praise God, and thank him
jncessantly, for that in their first creation he adorned them with perfections
and virtues, which do shine and are resplendant in them, as does the brightness
and light in the Stars which are fixed in the Heavens, and do continue
glorifijng God without end and without ceasing, having no other exercise but
that, nor other delectation and contentme^t, but daily to behold his face, to
admire and mire themselves therejn, without in satisfying themselves ever bejng
satisfied. Now have we more greater occasion to praise God, then have these
celestial creatures, because we have received a benefit which they have not;
to wit, that it has pleased the Son of God to take the seed of Abraham, and
to associate our nature unto him, Heb. 2.
which is a favor jncomparable, and the greatness and price thereof
unspeakable.

The graces which God has done to man.
Then if now we will join to this favor, the others particular, which he
has done unto us, as to the Angels in their creation, creating us after his
own jmage and likeness, giving us a soul of celestial beginning, jmmortall,
provided with understanding, reason, memory, will, life, jntellige^ce, force,
and virtue; afterward a body full of life, co^structed, and builded with such
jngenious art, that the architecture and singularity of the building, and the
framing of the whole world, is not greater then that of man's body, and the
jnfinite and jnnumerable commodities, which he has in all abundance given us
for to entertain and accommodate it, as the light of the Sun, the Moon, and
the Stars, to lighten us, the fire to warm us, and to serve Artificers to do
their works, the Air to breath, the water to drink, navigate and cleanse our
filthynesse; The earth to bring forth fruits and to nourish us; the herbs
and plants for Physic, and to delight us, not only by their sundry colors
wherewith they are enameled, but also by their odours and savours; The Beasts to
till, to carry cloth, nourish, sustain, and give us pleasure. Afterward,
Their corporal goods.
if we consider their corporal goods, as the members, and the particular
functions of every one of them, as of the eye to see, the ear to hear, the
tongue to taste, the nose to smell, the hands to work, the feet to walk, and
the members in general to apprehend the hot and cold, the hard and soft by
their feeling, The spiritual.
if also we consider their mooving, and feelings, the address and dexterity
which every one of them has to turn and manage it self, by the means of
the muscles, uerues, and ligaments. If also lifting our minds higher, we come
to consider the great and advantageous graces which GOD has jmparted unto us,
more then to all other creatures, as to discourse, consult, deliberate,
discern vice from virtue, the order of the confusion, note the days, the
months, and the years, what proper to every season, to be capable of the Arts
and Sciences, yea of the heavenly moovings, of the regions and clymats of the
earth, to navigate from all parts to the Antipodes, to discover the Mines and
entrails of the earth, to refine the metals, and to penetrate to the
secretest and profoundest things in the world, we shall thereby understand,
what has been the bounty and liberality of God toward us, who has so
abundantly and prodigally laid open all the treasures of his riches and most
precious moovables unto us, to make use of them to his glory.

The goods proper to his elect.
But if we come to calculate the goods: which particularly he imparteth to
kis elect, as the election, vocation, justificatio^, sanctification,
glorification, adoption of the Children everlasting alliance, Faith, Hope,
Charity, justice, the spirit of adoption, by the which they are illuminate,
consolate, fortified, guided, conducted, and governed, in all their ways, The
Kingdom of Heaven, life everlasting, that perfect and entire felicity which he
has promised and prepared for them in Heaven, and other blessings which in
greatness and number are jnfinite: then every one of them shall know how much
we are bound to praise and thank God. And to the end that every one of us may
the better dispose himself thereunto, it shall be good, A particular
description of our goods.
that in particular we remember continually some of the goods which God does
for us every day, as first that we live, move, and are in him, so that we
have neither Life nor breathing but from him; we cannot see without eyes, nor
hear with our ears, nor smell with our nose, nor taste with our tongue, nor
speak with our mouth, nor digest with our stomach, work with our hands,
walk with our feet, nor do any thing but by him. Also we cannot feel neither
hot nor cold, nor Joy nor sorrow, nor Labor, nor rest, nor ease, nor
disease, nor pain, nor health without him, which are all things, without the
which the nature of mankind cannot subsist; Afterward if we be strong to
work, and to resist those that would offend us, that comes from none but
him; Psalm. 98.
As it is written. For thou art the glory of their strength, and by thy favor
our horns shall be exalted, for our shield appertains to the Lord, and our
king to the holy one of Israel. Also, if we are nourished, clothed, lodged,
and fitted with all things necessary for us, and fit for the entertainment of
this life, and to avoid the miseries thereof, it is by his only means that
we have such a good: Psalm. 23.
as says David, The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. It is he that
conducts us and guides us, through all the ways which we address, not only
because we should not stumble, as says David, Plal. 91.
For he shall give his angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thywayes;
They shall bear thee in their hands that thou hurt not thy foot against the
stone. But also does conduct and set us in the way of his comma^dements, and
causes that we do not decline from the obedience of his holy will, neither to
the right, nor to the left, as it ^s written in the 119 Psalm. Psalm. 119.
Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy sta^utes. Then should I not be
confounded when I have respect unto all thy commandments. And also, Incline
mine heart unto thy testimonies, and not to couetous^esse. Yea it is he that
does direct our ^teps as he writes. Psalm. 37.
The paths of man ^re directed by the Lord for he loves his ^ay. Though he
fall, he shall not be ^ut off, for the Lord puts under his hand. It is he
in some that defends us from all dangers, as it appears by that which is
written in the 91. Psalm Who so dwells in the secret of the most high,
Psalm. 91.
shall abide in the shadow of the almighty. I will say unto the Lord, O mine
hope and my fortress: he is my God, in him will I trust. And also, Psalm. 95.
O come let us rejoice unto the Lord: Let us sing aloud unto the rock of our
Salvation. It is he, when we are plunged in the gulfes of adversity and
threatened of a total ruin, that against the opinion of all the world, yea
often of our selves, draws us back from the danger, from whence it seemed
that there was no issue: Psalm. 40.
as he says elsewhere. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he enclyned unto
me and heard my cry: He brought me also out of the horrible pit, out of the
myrie clay, and set my feet upon the rock, and ordered my goings. In brief
as the Church sings, Psalm. 119.
They have often times afflicted me from my youth (may Israel now say) they
have oftentimes afflicted me from my youth: but they could not prevail against
me. And also, They came about me like bees, Psalm. 118.
but they were quenched as a fire of thorns, for in the name of the Lord I
shall destroy them. Thou have thrust sore at me, that I might fall, but the
Lord has helped me. The Lord is my strength and song, for he has been my
deliverance. The right hand of the Lord has done valiantly.

Even when God does tempt us by tribulations and adversities which he sends
us, as by poverty, sickness, wars, famine, pestilence, His goodness toward us
in adversity.
and jnfinite other evils which he sends to his Church, to exercise and
jnduce it to watch and pray; although it seem that in them God treats us
hardly, and in an other fashion then a Father should his Children;
Notwithstanding in such exercises we ought yet to acknowledge the great favors
which through his goodness he shows us, having the care to chasten and
continue us within our duty, by his fatherly correction, that we be not
condemned with the world, which he has abandoned to the wicked desires
thereof. 1. Cor 11.
It is said of the Persians, that they had a custom among them, that when a
malefactor was condemned to be whipped, for some crime by him committed, he
was bound to kiss the rods after he had been whipped, and to go before the
Iugde to present himself upon his knees, to give him thanks for the
punishment which he had ordained by his sentence; shewjng thereby, that one of
the greatest goods that can happen unto us, is, to be corrected when we fail;
as to the contrary, the greatest evil that can happen to a man, is, when their
faults are dissembled, because that by the vnpunishing of them, they persevere
and grow so strong in evil, that at the last he is altogether desperate. Now
the favors which God does us are great, and in great number, Psalm. 40.
as says David, O Lord my God, thou have made thy wonderful works so many,
that none can count in order to thee thy thoughts toward us. And also, Psalm.
71.
My mouth shall daily rehearse thy righteousness, and thy salvation: for I
know not the number. The spring from whence issue all the goods which god does
for us
But yet besides that, we ought in them to acknowledge the great benificence of
our God. If we will consider whence it comes that he jmparts the^ unto us so
abunda^tly, we shall find that they are all gratis, and that he is not stirred
up thereunto, but of his only goodness, on the one part, and of the pity
which he has of our wretchedness and misery on the other part, Psalm. 44.
as it is written, They inherited not the land by their own sword, neither did
their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of
thy countenance, because thou did favor them. And we must yet acknowledge
an other favor, in that he gives us the right use thereof. For we see an
jnfinite sort that abuse thereof, and turn them wholly to an other purpose,
then that for the which God has given them; the which shows well that by
reason of the corruption and vice which is in us, we cannot make good use of
his graces, nor apply the^ to their uses, nor yet know the end for the which he
gave them unto us, and whereunto they ought to tend. What graces also does he
unto us, when through his mercy he delivers us from so many miseries and
evils that compass us about, by reason of the sin that is in us? Also, when
in so long a patience, he waits for the time wherein we should turn unto
him, to confess our faults, and jmplore the assistance of his great mercy,
giving us leisure to repent, although we be unworthy thereof; seejng the only
jngratitude which we use toward him, ought to be a sufficient cause; not
only to withdraw his beneficence from us, and close his hand of bounty quite
from us; but also rujnate and exterminate us wholly. Wherein he shows that
which is said of him, that, Psalm. 103.
The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of great
kindness. And who has his eye always rather turned to his promises to
execute them, the^ to his threatenings to remember them: and we see by
experience the truth of that which Ose the Prophet says of him, Ose, 11.
That if he were a man passionate with choler and fury, as men are
ordinarily against those that do them any displeasure, we had long since been
reduced to the state of Sodom and Gomorrha; that is to say, to nothing; and
that there should remain nothing else of us but a stinking remembrance of our
name, and a mark of the judgment of God, most horrible and fearful upon
us: but it is well for us that we have to do with so patient and so gracious a
God, and who does not only quite us Ten or Twelve talents which we owe him,
but ten and twelve millions. Mat, 19.
Yet is there one thing to observe, to acknowledge the greatness of the
benificence of our God, to wit, that we would never acknowledge his goods, if
he did not give us the grace to know them, and we would not thank him for
them, if he did not open our mouths to thank him, as it is written, Deliver
me from blood, O God, Psalm. 51.
which art the God of my salvation, and my tongue shall sing joyfully of thy
righteousness. Open thou my lips O Lord, and my mouth shall show forth thy
praise. Seeing then that he does us so many favors, in so many sorts, ought
we not to say with David, Psalm. 116.
What shall I reuder unto the Lord for all his henefits toward me? I will
take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.

The First property of Faith.
NOw having treated the definition, we must close our eyes and open our ears.
the parts, the causes, and the effects of Faith, It remains consequently to
declace the properties thereof, whereof the first is to close the eyes, and
open the ears, as says S. August. according to the definition which the
Apostle gives of it in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Heb. 11.
That Faith is a substance of those things which men hope for, and a
demonstration of those things which men see not. For the senses as well of the
body, as are the eyes, and the ears: as of the soul, as are the jmagination,
the reason, and humane prudence, are altohether enemies of Faith, as the
Scripture teaches us, that carnal prudence is enemy to God, Romans 8.
and altogether rebellious to his word, whereunto it cannot subject it self.
And that the reason is but darkness, which cannot in any wise comprehend the
light, and the senses vain and given to all Vanity. 1. Cor. 2.
Which is the cause for the which it is written, Mat. 16.
that there is none but the Spiritual man, that is able to know, judge, and
discern spiritual and divine things, and that the flesh and blood cannot
comprehend them, and much less raise and teach them, which is the cause why
David said, Psalm. 36.
With thee is the well of life, and in thy Light shall we see light. Psalm. 92.
And also, An unwise man knows it not, and a fool does not understand this.
And yet elsewhere, Psalm. 25.
What man is he that fears the Lord? him will he teach the way that he shall
choose. Examples.
We see that in all the examples of the faithful, which the Scripture does
propound to us, as well in the old as in the new Testament. Which we may note
first in Adam, Adam.
who having been shamefully driven out of the earthly paradise, and deprived of
all the pleasure which there he had, without having any more hope to recover it
again, was notwithstanding raised again by the promise which God made him,
Genes. 3.
so that he was not drowned in despair, although he had great and most ample
occasions; seejng that because of his rebellion and disobedience, he was
fallen jnto an jnfinite misery, and so pitiful and lamentable estate, that
it was jmpossible to comprehend and express it. For considering, (as it is
very likely) the darkness that was entered into his spirit, the disorder in his
heart, the vanity that had seized on his senses; and in general, the
corruption that was spread over all his members; seejng besides, that he was no
more so to familiar with God as he was wont, and that his presence was
fearful unto him, and he was astonyed at his word: seejng also the curse
which upon his occasion was powered, not only upon all the earth, the which
although it was tilled, brought forth nothing but weeds and thistles; but also
upon all the elements, and all the creatures, the which by his means were
fallen and brought to servitude and corruption; seejng also the disorder which
at once was entered into his house, and his eldest son, of whom, perhaps, he
hoped the restitution of the ruins which had happened unto him, to have risen
against his younger brother, and to have slain him cruelly, without having any
cause, neither true, nor apparent; all this together, was it not sufficient to
c^st him headlong into a gulf of despair, and to take all hope from him ever
to get out of it, if he had not been vpheld by the Faith of the promise which
God had made him? But looking upon it jntentiuely, and closing his eyes from
the consideration of all other things that might abate or beat him down, he
remained firm in the persuasion which he had conceived in his heart, of the
verity and certitude of the promise which God had made him, and combated by
this means all the jmaginations, and all the discourses which his reason (then
blinded) could propound unto him, to cause him to doubt thereof.

Noe likewise, Second example in Noe.
after God had advertised him, that within 120. years, he was determined to
drown the world, had, as may well be thought, many fancies in his mind, which
might make him doubt thereof, as the length of the time, the clearenesse of the
days, the temporal prosperity which continued upon the whole earth, the
mocking of those that jeasted at this threatening, when he foretold it them in
the name of God: besides all which things, he might think that God who was
jnfinitely merciful, and patient, and who jnduced by his only goodness, had
created the world, and with it endued man with his own jmage and likeness,
could never be brought to that point, to undo and cast down such a building
as that was. Yet nevertheless he persevered in believing steadfastly Gods
threatenings, the which to avoid, he built the Arc according to his
commandment to save himself, and his family, and the seed of all the
creatures of the earth. Wherein we see, when having closed his eyes to all the
considerations that might divert him, he settled himself at the only word of
God, by the Faith whereof he was saved (as says the Apostle) from the deluge
which drowned the world.

Abraham bejng very aged, received a promise from god, by the which he assured
him, that he should have a child by his wife Sara, who nevertheless was
barren, and besides incapable to conceive, as well by reason of her age, as of
natural means which failed her for conceaving. Nevertheless this patriarch
closed his eyes at all this; and had no regard to his body already benumbed,
seejng he was almost an hundred years old, nor yet to the matrix of Sara
already benumbed; and made no doubt of the promise of God in mistrust, but was
strengthened by Faith, Romans 4.
and believed in hope, against all hope, giving glory to God: and knowing
certainly, that he that had promised him, was also able to do it.

David bejng arrived in Saul's camp, 4. example in David.
who was affrighted with the fierce words and threats of this jnorme and
fearful Giant Golyah, 1. Sam. 17.
who with his look only made all Isreal's camp to tremble, was moved with a
zeal of the glory of God, whom he saw blasphemed with the barking of this
Mastiffe, and presented himself courageously to revenge the opprobrie of
Israel, and undertook to kill him, without regarding his youth, nor the
little experience which he had in war, nor that he was naked and without
defensive weapons, nor to the weakness of his body; nor on the other part, to
the greatness of the Giant, nor to the force and strength of his arms, nor to
the armor wherewith he was clad and covered, nor to the buckler, nor to the
spear, nor to his fierce and cruel countenance, approached to him without any
astonishment with his sling, and a stone, the which he hit right in the
forehead of this great Colosse, whose head he cut off with his own Sword, and
brought it as a trophy into Isreal's army. If men consider what was the occasion
of so fair and glorious a victory, which he brought back upon such a mighty
enemy; they will find that it was the Faith only, which he had in the name
of God; and by the which, shutting his eyes to the consideration of all the
things that might moove or turn him from such an enterprise; he settled
himself in the only preswasion which he had of the verity of the promise of
God, and of his assistance, under the conduct whereof he doubted not at all to
affront his enemy.

Fifth example in Joshua and Caleb.
The spies which were sent by Moses into the land of Canaan, to the end they
should bring him and the Princes of Israel word what was the situation
thereof, what the munition and strength of the towns, whether the people were
valiant, strong, and fit for the war; by the which places they might most
easily and commodiously enter; when they were returned, ten of them brought
word, that the conquest of the land was altogether impossible, considering the
Towns and strong places which there was, and the watch which was kept, and the
provisions for war, wherewith they were furnished; seejng also the great
number of people, strong, and well trained up to war that were there, for
tujtion and defense of the country; so that by their report they caused the
people to stand astonished and amazed, without courage to go any farther. Yea
they determined to return into Egypt, Number. 14.
if Joseph and Caleb presenting themselves before the whole assembly, and
having sharply reprooved their fellows, said alowde, no, no, we will eat
them as easily as a piece of bread; for it is not under the trust of our
strength, but only under the assurance of the name and of the promise of our
God, that we go to fight with them. What did they regard, saying that? humane
things according as they were disposed, and that appeared before their eyes?
No, but having their eyes shut against all that, they laid nothing else before
them, but only the promise of God, which was eternal and jnfallible. Elizeus,
in the time of the great and extreme famine which was in Samaria, 6. ezample in
Elizeus. 2. King. 7.
being besieged by the Sirians, said to king Ioram, that he should be of good
cheer, and that the next day the burden of corn should be better cheap in
Israel, then ever it had been before. The one of the greatest favorites and
nearest Gentlemen to the King, reprooving the words of the Prophet, said to
him, that that was altogether impossible, though all the windows of Heaven were
opened. But the Prophet assuring himself of what he had spoken, answered him,
thou shall see it, and shall eat none of it. Wherein we ought to note two very
good examples, the one of the faith of the Prophet, and the other of the
jnfidelity in that Gentleman; and withal the so assured reasons which the
Prophet gave, and to the contrary made the Gentleman to doubt. For what thing
could Elizeus see, to assure that which he said against all hope, except the
word of God which had been revealed unto him; in the which, without any
disputing or discourse, he altogether settled himself: and the Gentleman to the
contrary, not regarding any thing but what presented it self before his eyes,
and seeing no appearance of verity, doubted of that which he said, and seemed
altogether jmpossible to him.

We have jnfinite other examples in the scripture of that which is said; Faith
relyeth upon the word of the Almighty.
to wit, that the property of Faith, is always to close the eyes to all the
things that may make it doubt of the truth of the promises of God, and only to
look upon his Almightinesse, by the which he is always able to execute what
he says, and promises, as soon as he speaks it, witness David, Psalm. 33.
For he spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood. Sometimes it
happens, Remedy against mistrust and fear.
that by the rude jntreaty which God gives us, we conceive fancies and
jmaginations of him, which are altogether contrary to his nature, and which
presents him unto us with a dreadful countenance. As we see that it happened
eue^ to Jesus Christ his dear and well-beloved, who because he saw no sign nor
appearance of the favor of his Father toward him, cried out: Psalm. 22.
My God my God why have thou forsaken me, and art far from my health, and
from the words of my roaring? O my God I cry by day, but thou hear not, and
by night but have no audience. Bur then we must fight virtuously against
temptation, and not judge of the love or hatred of God, by that which it
seems to appear unto us, but stand firm and settled in the promise of God,
and persuade our selves, what face soever he shows us, that nevertheless he
continues the same, without altering his will, in any thing, or changing his
nature in any sort whatsoever. We must then in all our adversities, have our
eyes fixed upon God, and say unto him, that which David says, Psalm. 130.
I have waited on the Lord: my soul has waited, and I have trusted in his
word. My soul waits on the Lord, more then the morning watch watches for
the morning.

Also, Psalm. 16.
I have set the Lord always before me: for he is on my right hand,
thererefore I shall not slide. Wherefore mine heart is glad and my tongue
rejoices; my flesh also does rest in hope. For thou will not leave my soul in
the grave; neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption And also,
Psalm. 17.
Concerning the works of men by the words of thy lips I kept me from thy
paths of the cruel man.

Although then that God shows us sometimes an evil countenance, Psalm. 102.
yet must we always Judge of him, according as we are taught in his word;
and believe that he never changes, but that he remains always Like
himself: and that he is always true in his promises, and almighty to execute
them, when and how he thincketh good: without that there is any creature in
Heaven or earth, can hinder him, from effecting that which he has once
resolved and ordained in his counsel, A fit comparison.
we see that the Sun at his rising seems greater unto us far then it
shows it self at none day, albeit that it changes not his form any whit,
but that comes because of the vapors which are interposed between us and
it. Also our God does sometime seem unto us to change his form, but it is by
reason of our disordinate passions and affections, which present him unto us is
this manner; and then our judgment ought to be suspicious unto us; and we
ought to reject it, for to yield wholly to that which the word of God says unto
us, of his nature; that he is innumerable and abides always in one estate. An
other comparison.
And even so as we see that those that go upon any high steep thing, turn
their eyes from looking down, because they should not be affrayd; so should
we, in all our afflictions, turn away our vnderstaddings from all vain
speculations, and hold them as it were in a slip, to let them go only at
the consideration of the word of GOD. An other.
Sometimes God does that to us which riders do to great horses; to assure them
they often present glimering Swords before their eyes, to the end to accustom
them to look upon the splendor and glistering without starting. So does our
good God with us, he sometimes sets fearful things before us, and presents
himself to his children with a mask and false ougly visage; but it is only
to assure them against all fear. In which matter Faith may stand us in much
steed, shutting our eyes against that which shows it self exteriorly, and
opening our ears to hear that which God says unto it, and there to settle it
self wholly.

The second property of Faith.
THe other property of Faith is, Although that faith have her interuals, it
lets not to be Faith.
not to remain always in one estate, no more then the Moon, which we see
increases and decreaseth, and shows sometimes more, sometimes less light,
according as it is near or far off from the Sun, so Faith shows it self
in the faithful, at one time greater and stronger, at an other time lesser and
weaker; nevertheless it lets not to be always a Faith: no more then the
Moon lets to be the Moon what variety and changing soever there be from
her light, to obscurity, and from her obscurity to light. The which we see
in many examples of the Scripture, Examples in Abraham. Genesis 12.
but principally in Abraham, the Father of all those that believe, whom, when
God first called him, and commanded him, to go out of his country, and to
forsake his house, his friends, his rest, his pleasures, and all his
commodities, to go elsewhere into the country where God would conduct him,
without aduertising him, nevertheless of the place where he ought to address
him, nor of the means which there he was to find; notwithstanding he
suddenly resolves to obey to the will of his God, and to go as it were
blinfold, the way that it pleased him to send him, wherein he showed him a
great Faith, not discoursing upon the commandment which had been given him,
nor upon the ease or disease, commodities or discommodities, which he might
leave or hope for, in obaying the commandment that was given him. But his
Faith was not found alike, Genesis 12.
when in the Court of Pharo King of Egypt, he prayed his wife to dissemble
what she was, and to say that she was his sister only; without having regard
to her honor or to her chastity, the which he put in great hazard, as the
sequel showed afterward. Also when the promise was made him, that of his wise
Sara he should have a Son and heir, although that he and she were of
incapable nature, he to beget and she to conceive and bring forth:
nevertheless he made no doubt upon the promise which God made him, but
believed it and persuaded himself, although that the thing seemed to be
altogether jmpossible, that it should come to pass, so as God had promised
him, unto whom nothig is jmpossible of all that he says. When also God
commanded him to sacrifice his son Isaak, which he had had in his extreme age
by his wife Sara, who was altogether unfit to bear children, and that in him
all the hope did reside of the blessing which should be spread upon all
nations: he then showed a marvelous Faith, passing over all the difficulties
that could present them selves before his eyes, to obey with all pro^ptitude to
the commandment of god. But he showed it not alike, when for the second time
he would disguise himself in the house of Abimelec King of Gerar, and did
again solicit his wife to say and feign that she was his sister, wherein we
see, that the Faith in the Faithful is often chaungeable, when in the degrees
thereof, and that that sometimes, it is stronger and boulder then it is at
other.

2. example in Moses.
We also see that in Moses, who presenting himself in Egypt without any
fear unto King Pharo, (who was a cruel tyrant) to command him in the name of
God, to set his people in liberty and freedom, did not show himself, any
whit astonished, but upon his refusal, perseuered in soliciting him, and to
daunt him by terrible signs and miracles, without any fear or apprehension of
his threatenings, and did not dissist from his enterprise till he had brought
him to the point which he desired. Since being enclosed between him and his
soldiers on the one side, and on the other side the red Sea, which stopped his
passage, he feared not at all, but said to the people, who were altogether
dismayed, to see the present danger wherein they were, have not I affirmed unto
you, that if you believe, Exodus. 14.
you shall see the glory of God? which they saw presently after, passing
through the horrible gulfes, as it were with dry feet. But in Neriba and
Manassa, Psalm. 106.
he showed not such a firmness and strength of Faith, as he had don before;
because he doubted of that which God had assured him, to wit, that in striking
the rock an abundance of water should distill fowrth, and should follow the
camp into the deserts, to serve both their men and beasts to drink.

3. Example in David.
David also, who in his flight, when Saul pursued him furiously, showed diverse
times, that God had endued him with a rare Faith, and which seemed to be
sufficient to oppose it self against all the sleights and temptations rhat
could any way meet with it; and even that it was jnuincible, and
nevertheless, we see the great fall that it had, when forgetting all at once,
2. Sam. 11.
the great and jnfinite favors and graces which he had received of God, let
himself slip into this adultery jnfamous and abominable which he
committed with Bersabee: post posing his concupisce^ce, the fear which he
should have had to offend God, and incur his judgment.

4. example in S. Peter.
We see also, if we may so speak, the brauado of the faith of S. Peter, eue^
then when Jesus Christ having told him of his jnfirmitie, he durst to oppose
himself against that he said, and to affirm diverse times, that he was ready
to die with him that was his Master, and although he were forsaken of all his
fellows, yet that he would follow him, wheresoever he went: and
nevertheless, Mat. 26.
within a little after, at the voice of a simple maid, he denied and showed
his vanity: and all the audatious speeches which he had held, were but wind
and foolish boasting. Wherein we see, to what high degree of Faith soever men
are come, they have always need to acknowledge and feel their jnfirmities,
and to humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, that he may vphould
and sustain them; for otherwise they are always in danger, least that should
happen unto them that came to David. When he thought himself well assured for
ever, and strong jnough to resist all the temptations, and assaults that could
be given him by all his enemies. Psalm. 30.
In my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved, for thou Lord of thy
goodness have made my mountains to stand strong: but thou did hide thy
face and I was troubled, then cried I unto thee, O Lord, and prayed to my Lord.
That considered, Means to fortify and augment Faith.
every one of us must be curious, carefully to seek the means, by the which
our Faith may be fortified and augmented. The one of the which is, to pray to
God jncessantly, according to the examples of the Apostles, that he would
increase it unto us, for even as he is the author and beginner of it in us; so
also it is he that sets it forward, and finally accomplisheth it in all
points. Afterward we must dilligently hear and meditate upon the word of
God, the which for to nourish and heat it, and to keep it in good point, is
as much or more necessary then the wood in a hearth to entertain the fire, or
meat in the stomach to preserve health; as says S. Paul. Romans 10.
That Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Moreover it is
very necessary, principally when we are assaulted with any violent
temptation, that for to sustain us, we may have a recourse, not only to our
God by prayers, but also to our brethren, which we think to be well advanced
in the knowledge and fear of God; and too plentifully furnished with his word,
to the end, that by the conference which we have with them; we may be raised
and vpheld by the comfort which they shall give us, putting us in mind of
those parcels of Scripture which they shall know to be fit to fetch our hearts
again. For even as wine is cast upon the face of a man that is swonded, to
awake his spirits: so there is no remedy more proper to comfort our brethren
in tentations, then the word, when it is fitly applied unto them. One iron
(says Solomon) sharpneth an other, when they are rubbed the one against the
other, so is there nothing more proper to whette our Faith when it is blunt,
then the word of God, which serves it as a whetstone, and more when it is
alleged to him by his brethren, then if he meditated it himself only. S.
John Chrisostom to this purpose says, A good comparison.
that two or three brands laid near the one to the other, yield more heat
together, then they would if they were in sunder: So the word has much more
efficacy when it is treated by two or three which confer together of it,
then if it were raised or meditated of one man by himself. The means then (to
conclude our purpose) by the which we may strengthen our Faith, is to exercise
it continually in the manner spoken of. But yet there is nothing better to knit
it well, and to strengthen it, then to rejoice in the tentations which God
sends us: by the which the faithful wax strong and sturdy and assured
against all dangers, as we see the old experimented soldiers are, when they
have proved many assaults, alarums and battles.

The Third property of Faith.
To strengthen our selves in infirmity. 2. Cor. 12.
WE will say, that the third property of Faith, is to strengthen our selves
in infirmity, as says the Apostle, Most gladly therefore I will rather glory
in my infirmity, that the power of Christ might dwell in me. Therefore have I
delectation in infirmities, in rebukes, in necessities, in persecutions, in
anguishes for Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong. How this is
done.
For even as a man who has to deal with some mighty enemy, of whom he
doubts the sleights, and surprises, stands upon his guard, and goes still
armed to defend himself, and to resist to whatsoever may be plotted against
him; so also the faithful man seeing himself set upon by Satan, the world, and
Tyrants, arms himself all over, that he do not sink, and be beaten down;
he looks first upon the promise which God makes him, not to forsake, nor
abandon him, then afterward on his grace, by the which he was induced to make
him this promise, and to accomplish it when time and occasion shall present.
Then he looks upon Jesus Christ, who is the warrant of all Gods promises.
Also to the prayers to summon God to remember his promises, that he may
accomplish them. And he sets before him the examples of those, who in all their
necessities, have had recourse to God, requiring to aid them, according to the
promise which he made them, and in the which he had rested; finally, they
demand of God as did David. Cast me not away from thy presence, Psalm. 51.
and take not thy holy Spirit from me. Being armed with all these pieces, and
with the virtue from above, he is jnuincible, which we see in the examples
which are set before us in the Scripture. As in Abraham, Examples. Abraham.
Genesis 15.
when he went to set upon the Kings of the East, to recover Lot his nephew,
the spoil and booty which they carried out of Sodom, and other neighbor
places: he went thither with resolution and an assured heart, although he had
but three Hundred of his servants and domestics, with three of his neighbors
that accompanied him in this enterprise, and set upon their army with such a
fury, that in short time he had discomfited them; and notwithstanding, we
see that in less dangers, as in the house of Pharao and Abimilec, he had
been more soft and infirm. Moses.
We see also that Moses, who at the beginning was timorous, when God would
send him into Egypt for the deliverance of his people; when he had begun to
exercise his commission, to have been so resolute that Pharao could never
astonish him, neither with the words, nor threatens which he used to him, nor
yet by the jndignities which he did him: yea the more difficulties he found,
and hindrances in the execution of his charge, the more constant he was, and
full of hope to overcome them. David.
We see also, that David never had his Faith more burning, more strong, and
more courageous, then when he found himself most pressed and pursued with
affliction. The Church during the persecutions.
And in all ages, that has always been seen, that the Church never flourished
better, nor better showed what was the force and virtue of Faith, then when it
was cruelly persecuted: was there ever seen such a constancy among the
faithful, during the government of the Jews, as in the reign of Antiochus,
who was cruel above all others? Since the Kingdom of Jesus Christ was spread
over the whole world, was there ever seen such examples of Faith in
Christians, as those that were found in the time of Dioclesian, wherein men
held nothing more precious then martyrdom? whereunto they ran as it had been
to nuptials, without that any of them either by promises or by threatenings
could be turned from their Faith, what advantages or torments soever were
presented before their eyes; yea that the means which the enemy used to turn
them form there religion and confession of their Faith, was, that which
jnflamed them the more; so that there was no man but esteemed himself happy
when for the name of God he had the means to dye sooner then his fellow. And
there was more press amongst them to suffer martyrdom, and the cruellest
torments that the wicked could jmagine, then to purchase Bishoprics and
Ecclesiastical dignities.

Faith is like unto the Iron, the which the more it is beaten the harder it is,
Seemly comparisons.
and more pistol proof. The waters the more they are pressed, the stronger
they are, and the more jmpetuous. Which we see jn the Sea between two rocks,
and in Rivers under the arches of a Bridge. So it is with Faith, the which
never shows her force better, then when it is pressed; as the grape in the
press, and the mustard seed, when i^ is bruised in a mortar. Like to an Aim,
a little tree, whereof no account is made to burn, florisheth in the desert
places in heart of winter, when by the sharpness and rigor of the season, all
other flowers cease and are dead, also the Church of God, which is a people
vile and contemptible to the world, and esteemed as the superfluity and
sweeping of howses; never shows ^t better the flower and virtue of Faith,
^hen in the midst of the hard and sharp ^easons, and when all other trees and
plants seem to be altogether dead. Which is an admirable thing; for we see
that when the weather is fair, and that all the seasons do their duty, all
the fruits of the earth grow and come forward to the sight of the eye. But to
^he contrary Faith does never prosper well, but in foul weather, and when ^t
seems that all things are contrary to ^t; for it is a thing that experience
always and in all ages verified, that the peace, the rest and ease, have been
means, to whyther, corrupt, and to degenerate the Church; as every man may see
plainly in papistrie; and that to the contrary, the persecutions, wars, and
other evil visages which it has had of her enemies, have been the cause to
make it flourish. Even as we see the Larkes wax fat in cold weather, Other
good comparisons.
also the Church is never in better case, then when it is set upon by diverse
tribulations and adversities. And even as when a town is besieged, and that
the enemies have taken the counterskarfe, the ditch, and the rampart, those
that are within in retyring fortify themselves again, and strengthen
themselves with courage, because they see they are more pressed, to drive back
the enemy, and regaine that which they had gotten of them; so Faith, when it
sees it self rudely assaulted, withdraws herself from her dungeon, and in
her strong place, that is to say, to the grace of God, and there it refreshes
it self, and takes a new vigor, to resist the enemy courageously, and to
drive him back.

Of things conjoined unto Faith.
IT is now time to declare the things which are so conjoined and united unto
Faith, that they cannot be separated from it: as are the Spirit of God,
Charity, Hope, Slanders of Sophists against the pure doctrine of Faith,
refuted.
perseverance and good works: because that the Schole divines say, that Faith
and good works are things divided: so that the one may be without the other:
whereby they take occasion to callumniate and defame us, saying, that we
preach nothing but Faith, and say nothing of good works, as if they were
unprofitable; and they go farther, saying, that it seems that we would bring
into Kingdoms and common wlealths, a licentiousness and looseness: so that
every one may have no other rule to ordain the state of his Life and manners,
but his senses and appetites. Now it is very needful to reject and confute
such a slander, which is directly against the honor and glory of God, and the
health and preservation of all Estates in the world. For what were it if such a
confusion were once established? that every one might live at his pleasure and
at his fancy, having neither law nor reason to control his manners and his
actions, were it not altogether to overthrow the order which god loves, and
will have established in all things? For as says Philon there is nothing fair
nor pleasant in disorder and confusion. Whereupon we may infer, that there is
nothing more displeasing and abominable before God, then to live
disordinately, And to the contrary, that there is nothing more agreeable, then
to see things well ruled and measured, and altogether conformed to holy Laws
and ordinances which he has caused us to publish to this effect. Libertines
justly detected.
Let us then protest that we will not in any wise approve the pernicious and
devilish error of the Libertines, who will live at their pleasure, without
being at all subject to blame, correction, and reprehension, nor will not be
reproved nor bridled in their disordinate affections, and could willingly
wish, that they were let run by adventure, after their appetites, like a horse
without a bridle, and a ship without a Rudder. Now as for us, we declare and
protest again before God and men, that the greatest grief and torment that we
have in our mind, is to see in that manner the greatest part of men dissolute
and disordered. And the occasions which they give to the Ignorant and jnfidels,
so to blaspheme the name of God, and the doctrine which we profess, as they do
ordinaryly. I therefore beseech the readers of this treatise that they
diligently note all the reasons that are here deducted and discoursed, to show
that Faith is never separated from good works, no more then the fire his
brightness and light.

The first thing Joined to Faith, The holy Ghost.
THe first shall be taken out of that which is written in the 7. of the Gospel
according to S. John verse 38. He that believes on me as the Scripture has
said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life. But this he spoke
of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive; for the holy
Ghost was not yet there, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. Whereof may
be gathered that by Faith we receive the Spirit of God, which does regenerate
and sanctify us, in such sort, that we by his means, are made fit, ready,
and lightsome to all the works which the Apostles recites. Gal. 5.
The fruit of the Spirit is Charity, joye, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, Faith, meekness, temperance, against such there is no
Law, The same repeateth to the Ephesians, That we are his workmanship,
created in Jesus Christ unto good works, which God has before ordained that
we should walk in them. Ephe. 2.
And also he sharply reproves those that lived disordinately in the Church,
calling them Lovers of them selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, ungodly, without natural affection, truce
breakers, false accusers, riotous, fierce, despisers of them that are good,
traitors, headie, high minded, lovers of pleasure more then lovers of of God,
having a form of Godliness, but denyjng the power thereof. Titus. 2.
And declaring the end of our regeneration, he says, that the grace of God
which is healthful to all men has appeared teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, and righteously, and
godly in this present world, looking for that blessed hope and appearing of the
glory of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, which gave himself for us
that he might redeem us from all unrighteousness, and purge us a peculiar
people unto himself zealous of good works. These parcels and jnfinite others,
sowed in the Scripture in diverse places sufficiently show that the Faith of our
vocation and justification and of the Light, unto the which it has pleased him
to call us, Ephe. 5.
is to separate us from the world and from all the polutions and filthiness
there abounding; and not to communicate with the works of darkness, but to
walk in righteousness and truth, all the days of our life.

For why are we called good trees, An exhortation taken out of the names of
the faithful.
if it be not to bring forth good friute in season? Why likewise are we called
good ground if it be not to bring forth all sorts of good friutes, even when
we are well tilled and sowed by the word of God which is every day faithfully
and purely administered unto us by his servants? Ephe. 5.
Wherefore also are we called the spowse of Christ, if it be not to verify
him by the sanctification which ought to shine and appear in us? for it is the
end, that Jesus Christ set before him, when he delivered himself for it, to
the end to sanctify it, clensing it by washing of water by the word, to the
end he might make it a glorious Church, having neither spot, nor wrinkle, nor
any such thing; but that it might be holy and irreprehensible. Moreover God by
his Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 56.
foretelling what should be the state of the Church, at the coming of Jesus
Christ, says. That there shall be no more Eunuke that shall be able to say by
complaint that he is a dry tree: because that every one of them should keep
his sabbaths, and should choose the things which he would have, and should
keep his alliance. He would teach thereby that in his Church, there should be
no barren or fruitelesse person, that all should be as says David, Psalm. 92.
Such as be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of
the house of our God. Gal. 5. and. 6
Also S. Paul, says he not, that Faith works by Charity, and that in Jesus
Christ nether circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature? openly declaring, that by Faith men are so renewed that they chaung
their thoughts, their affections, their words, their works, their manners and
their whole life and conversation, the which they study to make comformable
wholly to the will of God, so as it is propounded unto us in his Laws and holy
ordinances: 1. Cor. 3.
Why also are we called temples of God? if not by reason of the holy exersices
which ought continually to be used in our hearts and understandings? why
likewise are we called high Priests? if it be not to give us to understand, 1.
Peter. 2
that our duty is to offer up our bodies a lively sacrifice, holy, pleasing to
God, Romans 12.
which may be (...) ^easonable service? And that we do not conform our
selves to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of our sense, to try
what is the good will of our God, pleasant and perfect? Wherefore also are we
called his children? js it not to render him the honor, the fear, and the
obedience which true children owe to their Fathers, and by that means to
glorify him? for a wise child, is the glory of his Father.

Our confession shows that which ought to be inseparably joined to our
Faith. 1. John. 5.
In our confession, we say that we beeleeue in the holy Ghost, not only to
assure that he is holy in himsefe, having a holiness essentially residing in
him: but also for the office which it does to sanctify all the elect, and
render them capable to do all the good works which they do; and to show in
effect, that they are separated from the world, the which is steeped in malice,
and altogether given to wickedness. We also believe the holy catholic
Church, that is to say, that there is a company of folks, who by the grace of
God are separated from the wicked, and consecrated to the service of God, and
that we are of this number; By means whereof our Faith obliges us to live
holyly, in the obedience and fear of God: so that if we be vicious and that
our life be disordinate in any kind of manner, we show thereby that we are
hypocrites, and that our confession is belyed by our works.

The Prophet Esaias says, that at the coming of Jesus Christ, which is the
chief, the foundation, A sumptuous description of the Church.
and architect of the Church, he was to build a Temple to God his Father,
framed of all precious things, as of Pearls, Saphirs, Emeralds, Rubies,
Carbuncles. 1. Tim. 3.
Which is to instruct us, that the members of the Church of God, ought to be
rare, precious, and exquisite in all sorts of virtues. To the end that the
house of God, which is the collom and vpholder of truth, should not be like an
edifice builded of mud, and slime: but a stately palace and sumptuous, and
worthy of the greatness of the majesty of our God, who is the creator of
heaven and Earth. God (says S. John) is light, 1. John. 1.
and in him is no darkness at all. If we say we have fellowship with him, and
walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. But if we walk in the
light, as he is the light, then have we fellowship one with an other, and the
blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin. By that we see
plainly, that we have no society and acquaintance with the Father and the
Son, if we do not our duty, and jndeauour our selves to live holily, and
conform our selus with all our thoghts, affections, words, and actions, to his
holy will, which is laid before us in his law, which the same Apostle confirms
moreover, in his first Epistle chapt. 3. verse. 6. As many as abide in him,
sin not; whosoever sins has not seen him, neither known him. Babes, let
no man deceive you, he that does righteousness is righteous, even as he is
righteous; he that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins
from the beginning: for this purpose appeared the Son of God, to loose the
works of the Devil; whosoever is borne of God sins not, for his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is borne of God. In this are
the children of God known and the children of the Devil, whosoever does not
righteousness is not of God, nor he that loves not his brother: for if we would
sin willingly, and live disordinately, taking pleasure to do evil, and
seeking the occasions and the means to follow and satisfy our worldly desires
and appetites, we should not be freed; but should show thereby that we are yet
slaves to sin; and that we did not participate any whit in the benefits of
Jesus Christ, who came into the world to no other end, but to deliver us from
the miserable servitude of sin, and set our consciences upon full and entire
liberty. We must then endeavor and jmploye our selves with all our might to
live well, to show that we are francke and free, and that our condition is no
more servile, as it was in the time of our jgnora^ce. 1. Cor. 15. Instruction
to holiness of life.
Is it not a thing more than reasonable, that we that are regenerate by the
grace of god, and by the Faith of Jesus Christ, who is the Adam, that is to
say, the celestial man, should bear his jmage, and his apparent token, not
only in the forehead of our bodies, but also in our whole life, and in all our
actions? And we must (to show that we are children of Abraham, and by
consequent heirs of the promise which was made him) resemble the stars of
Heaven, in light, Genesis 15.
in brightness, and in purity, the which may be manifest to all the world,
not only in prosperity, that is to say, when things happen to our minds, and
that the days are fair and clear; but also in adversity, when the night
seems very dark unto us, and the darkness spread upon us, and all our
affairs, having been created, and since bought and redeemed by the grace of
God, to the end that God might be glorified in us. We must then withdraw our
selves out of all mire and filthiness, and from all things in general, that
might be an occasion to the jgnorant and unfaithful to blaspheme the name of
God, Romans 2.
by reason of our wicked life and conversation. But what? if (as says the
Prophet) the just can live no otherwise but by faith (because the reward of
sin is death) must we not necessarily (if we be faithful and desire to
come to life) abstain from all those things which may bring us to death? Abac.
2. Romans 6.
The Prophet asks, Psalm. 15.
Who is he that shall converse in the Tabernacle of the Lord, and that shall be
so happy as to have a sure habitation in his holy mountain? He answers, He
that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the truth in his
heart. He that slandereth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his
neighbors, nor receaueth a false report against his neighbor. Which he yet
repeateth elsewhere, saying, Psalm. 24.
Who shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord? and who shall stand in his
holy place? Even he that has innocent hands, and a pure heart: which has not
lift up his mind unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive
blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation. This is
the generation of them that seek him. This is Jacob. Then must all Christians
to show that they are true, and not hipocrites, nor dissimulate, study, and
exercise themselves to follow virtue, and to fly from and detest vice; and
that they endeavor to resemble Gods Angels; otherwise they are but shame and
scandal in the house of God, to dishonor it: the which should be adorned and
hung with all holiness: as it is written in the 93. Psalm, Thy testimonies
are very true, holiness becomes thine house, O Lord, Misery of the
hipocrites and profane persons.
for ever. Such kind of folk the^ as live wickedly in the Church of god, are
like so many warts in a body, which serve but to disfigure it, and as
rottonnesse in a piece of timber. We must not think that we can dwell long
in Jesus Christ, who is the true sap of the vine, if we bear no fruit; for
he that is barren and fruitless, John. 15.
is cast away, and dries, then is gathered together and cast into the fire
where it burns. It is that which we ought to understand, if we do not our
duty to do well, and to withdraw our selves from all jniquitie, as much as
possible we can. For to be able to rule the state of our life so well that we
should not offend in any thing, which is commanded us of God in his law; Romans 7.
it were jmpossible for us to attain to such perfection in this world. But aa
says S. Ambrose upon S. Luke, Our perfection consists more in affection then
in effect. As the Apostle says to the Romans, That the will is present with
him, but that he finds not the means to perform that which is good. It is
then a great shame to a body that is in the Church of God, to make profession
of his religion in words and show only, if his life and manners be nor
correspondant to the words which he has in his mouth, and to the semblance
which he makes to be a Christian man, as the Prophet shows very well in the
50. Psalm, Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me. But to the wicked he says, What have thou to do to
declare mine ordinances, that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth,
seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee. For
when thou see a thief, thou runnest with him, and thou art partaker with the
adulterers. Thou give thy mouth to evil, and with thy tongue thou forgettest
deceit. Thou sit, etc. To whom they are like.
Such people are like unto a musty vessel, wherein the good wine bejng filled,
it marreth and corrupts presently, or to a stinking channel, by the which
the fair clear water which passes through it, corrupts and stinketh. Also
do all the graces of God which are powered upon such persons, they are so
far from waxing better thereby, and amendment by the receipt of them, that to
the contrary they grow worse and worse, and it had been good for them that they
had never tasted the good word of God, nor the heavenly gift, nor the powers
of the age to come: because that it (by reason they have abused thereof)
serves them for nothing but to keep them the farther from God, and to bind
them to a more grievous condemnation: seejng that in themselves they crucify
the son of God, and expose him to opprobry, for the earth which often
drinks the rain that falls on it, and brings forth fruit to those that
fill it, receaueth the blessing of God; but that which brings forth Thorns
and Thistles, is rejected, and near unto the curse, whose end tends to be
burned.

The second thing joined to Faith.
THe other thing which is inseparably joined to Faith is Charity, Charity
inseparably co^panied with Faith.
and the love which we bear first to God loving him with all our heart, with
all our strength, and with all our understanding; prefirring his love before
all other loves, Loving nothing but in him, and ruling the love which we bear
to all things, whether to our Father, to our wives, children, kindred,
neighbors, goods, heritages, and other things to to be loved, by that which
we bear to God; who being our sovereign creator, Father and protector, of
whom we hold wholly all the good which we possese and hope for, ought to be
preferred before all creatures, whatsoever they be, the love whereof should in
no thing prejudice that of the creator. Then the covetous, who love their goods
and riches better then him. The ambitious, who set him behind their honors and
estates; The voluptuous, who would not leave nor abate any thing of their
pleasures, to obey him and follow his will; Those also that love the world, and
themselves more then God and his word, are not truly faithful what opinion
soever they have to be so, and what appearance soever they have of it from
elsewhere.

Charity has also a regard to our neighbors.
Now even as the faithful man cannot be provided with a true Faith, if he do
not love God: so it is necessary that he love his neighbor, if he will be
known to be faithful, for as says S. John. If we love not our brother
whom we see, how can we love God that is invisible? besides that our
neighbors, being our brethren, and members of Jesus Christ, as we are, it is
not possible that we can remember that in our selves, but we shall be stirred
up to love them and show that we love them, by all the good offices that we
can do for them. And it suffices not but we must also love virtue, and our
duty, to acquit us toward God and our brethren, of that which we are
obliged to them, for we do not only owe them assistance in their necessities,
but also the care which we ought to have, as well of them as of their
salvation, to procure it with all our might, and by all the means we can.

These Loves draw on others with them. For if we love God, How far Charity
tends.
our neighbors, our duty, and virtue; we shall love all other things to be
loved; as the celestall and jncorruptible things, we shall love the company
of the good and seek after it; we shall love the word of God, to be
jnstructed, exhorted, comforted, reproved, and edified in all knowledge and all
fear of God; we shall love the light, to be guided in all our ways and not
stumble; we shall love peace and order in all things, in the Church, in the
government, in husbandry, and in our selves; we shall hate to the contrary the
love of the world, that is to say, of honors, riches, and vain and
corruptible pleasures; we shall also hate the love of our selves, by the which
we might be drawn to the love of many things quite contrary to the will of
God; yea we shall little love this present life, and all our temporal
commodities, which might turn us from the love and desire of the Kingdom of
heaven; and of those things that are helthfull for us. And for conclusion, we
shall altogether hate vice, and all the occasions which may draw or summon us
thereunto, the which we shall abhorte, as a plague and a contagious sickness.

The third thtng joined to Faith.
Hope accompanies faith.
FAith also is j^dissolubly joined with a certain hope, by the which we
patiently wayt for the effect of the promise which is made us; for the
difference which is between Faith and hope, is taken from their objects, which
are different. The object of Faith is properly the word of promise, The object
of faith and of hope.
which it regards and receives by Faith, and persuade her self to be
certain and indubitable: and the object of hope i^ the effect of this promise
which it waits for without doubting at all, at such time as god has
appointed to effect and accomplish it. And although that sometimes it be very
long, and that between the promise and the effect thereof, there is a long
space and respite: nevertheless setting before us the jmmutable and
everlasting truth of him that made the promise, it vpholdeth it self and
relyeth upon it as upon a pillar or collom, to patience, until the hour that
it shall please God, to make us know and feel in effect that which he has
promised, without precipitating or overthrowing it self into temptation,
whereby it might be assaulted by the length of the time, which God takes to
effect that which he says. We see that by many examples which the scripture
shows us, in many; as first in Abraham, Proof by example, of Abraham.
who waited for the effect of the promise which God had made about twenty five
years, without wavering, or being any whit shook with any doubt or mistrust
that he had, either that God had forgotten him, or changed his will. The
Patriarks likewise in Egypt, Of the children of Jacob.
after the promise received of the jnheritance which God had promised to give
them, stayed long, before they were established in the possession and fruition
thereof, nevertheless they never doubted but it should come to pass in time
and season; knowing well that word of God is everlasting, and that the Heaven
and Earth shall pass, before the least jot o^ little point thereof shall be
obmitted, bu^ all that is contained therein shall be accomplished. For it is not
so with the word of God, as with that of men, who bejng mutable and variable in
their counsels, desires, and wills, cannot for these reasons assure the hope
which may be set upon their word. But God who i^ jmmutable, and who continues
still the same in his nature, cannot promise any thing but the effect must
follow; yea, the promise and the effect in him are one selfsame thing, and
residing in him at the same jnstant, which is the cause for the which the
Apostle says, Romans 5.
That hope makes not ashamed. And Esaias says also, that whosoever hops in
God shall never be deceived, ^sal. 25.
of that which he looks for from him. And David says, Unto thee, O Lord, I
lift up my soul. My God, I trust in thee let me not be confounded: Let not
mine enemies rejoice over me. Also, Psalm. 40.
I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry,
he brought me also out of the horrible pit, out of the myrie clay, and set my
feet upon the rock, and ordered my goings. And also, Psalm. 144.
He is my goodness and my fortress, my Tower and my deliverer, my shield, and
in him I trust, which subdueth my people under me. Now this hope, Fruits of
Hope.
as says Gregory the divine, is a fit and sovereign remedy for all the
miseries and calamities that can arrive to a faithful man, how great soever
they be. Heb. 6.
Because, as says the Apostle, It is an anchor, the which being cast, not as
others in the earth, but in Heaven, it is jnfallible, and always certain to
hold the vessel during the storm, so that it cannot make shipwreck. And as
says S. Augustine. This hope makes the great and horrible tempests to seem
little, and the little ones none. Which we see in Job, who says, that he
hoped in God, although he saw his arm stretched out against him, and ready to
strike, to kill him, and overthrow him quite. We see also the effect of this
hope in David, who was never astonyed whatsoever adversity befell him, as may
be seen in the 27. Psalm, The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall
I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be affrayd? When
the wicked even mine enemies, and my foes came upon me to eat up my flesh,
they stumbled and fell. Also, Thou preseruest me from trouble: Psalm. 32.
thou compassest me about with joyful deliverance. Psalm, 62.
Also, My soul keeps silence unto God: of him comes my salvation. And
following, In God is my salvation and my glory, the rock of my strength, in
God is my trust. And that which makes this hope of the Christian man, can
never be confounded, is, that it sets before it always his head, who is in
Heaven, and who can now no more be suncke by floods or deluges of water, how
great and fearful soever they be. Now, though a man should be up to the neck
in water, and that his head were still above water, all the other members could
not be drowned, the head being eminent and floating upon the superficies of
the water: also the Church in general, and every member thereof in particular,
could not be drowned nor overflowed, their head being always elevated over all
the storms and tempests in the world, which he commands with a greater
power then even a King does his subjects. For the obedience which it bears
him, is as sudden as the commandment which he gives them, which is not
found among men, in what degree of authority soever they be in the world.

Faith is joined with the Spirit of regeneration.
FAith is also joined with the holy Ghost, The spirit of regeneration joined
with Faith.
as says the Apostles in the Epistle to the Galathians, Chap. 3. verse 2. This
only would I know of you, whether ye received the spirit by the deeds of the
law, or by the hearing of the faith? Are ye such fools, that after ye have
begun in the Spirit, ye would now end in the flesh? for otherwise without the
spirit, Faith were not sufficient to regenerate us, and to make us new
creatures. Yea without the virtue of the Spirit, Faith could not be produced
nor begotten in us; as says the Apostle, having the spirit of Faith, according
as it is written, I have believed, therefore have I spoken, also we believe
and therefore we speak, Psalm. 116. Why he is called the spirit of Faith.
he calls himself the spirit of Faith, because he is the Author of it. For
the knowledge which the faithful have of the promises of God, comes of the
holy Ghost: also does the trust which is in the heart, the which comes of it
self, which are the two parts of Faith. And even as elsewhere this Spirit
calls it self the Spirit of fear, of jntellegence, of prudence, according
to the graces, and gifts which he imputes unto us, and produces in us, also
for this same reason does he call himself the Spirit of Faith, because he is
the beginning the increasing and the consu^mation of it. Now this spirit is a
Spirit of life, without the which Jesus Christ (who is the life, the way, and
the truth) cannot reside nor dwell in us. And although that our adversaries
think and say, Miserable vanity of the unbelievers.
that it is a rashness and ouerwauing in the faithful man, to vaunt that he
is endued with the Spirit of God which dwells in him: Yet nevertheless he
ought not to doubt, but it makes his residence in him, as in his Temple. As
the Apostle says that if any have not the Spirit of Christ he is not his,
Romans 8.
and who is it that can assure us that we are the children of God, but this
Spirit of adoption, Gal. 4. Effects of the spirit of regeneration.
by the which we cry Abba Father? And which witnesses with our spirit, that
we are the children of God, and by consequent his heirs, which is likewise the
principal cause of all the good works that we do, and of all the good
thoughts and affections, which we have that this Spirit which the scripture
compares unto water, the which being powered upon a dry Land, causes the
seeds to spring and fructify which we are cast upon it. As says the
Apostle. Gal. 5.
That the fruit of the Spirit is Charity, joy, peace, a patient Spirit,
Louingnesse, goodness, Loyalty, softness, Temperance, How also should we
resist the flesh with the lusts and works thereof? that is to say, adultery,
whoredom, filthiness, jnsolencie, jdolatry, prisonings, enmity, strife,
spitefulness, anger, quarrels, divisions sects, enuies, murders, drunkenesse,
gluttony, and other like things, which cannot inherit the Kingdom of God:
were it not for the virtue and force of this Spirit, wherewith we are armed?
how also could we hold firm against so many temptations and assaults, which
are continually presented unto us by Satan, the world, tyrants, heretics,
hipocrites, and other enemies of the Church: if we were not clothed with this
virtue? Also who would comfort us in the midst of so many adversities, and
tribulations, wherewith our poor life is besieged, whiles we live in this
world, were it not this comforter, which is given us of the Father, by the
means of his Son? John. 14.
How also in the deserts of this world should we be able to find and follow
the straight way, if it were not showed us by the Spirit, and if it did not
guide us to keep us from straying? moreover having our spirits, our reason,
our senses wrapped up in darkness, how could we without this Spirit know the
truth, without the which we cannot be saved? John. 15.
How also should we be able to rejoice and have peace and tranquillity in our
consciences, amongst so many occasions that we have to be sorrowful, seeing so
many disorders and confusions which are in the world, manifest contempt of God,
in the most part of those with whom we live, so many blasphemies, so many
sacrileges, so many ingratitudes, so many jmpieties, and abominations, if this
spirit did not jnteriorly uphold us, and did not fill our hearts with joye, in
the midst of so many sorrows, griefs, and lamentations, which every day
brings unto us? 1. Cor. 12.
Also how could we open our mouths to confess the name of Jesus, and to sing
the praises of God, if it were not opened unto us by the Spirit, as says
David. Psalm. 51.
Deliver me from blood, O God which art the God of my salvation, and my tongue
shall sing joyfully of thy righteousness. Open thou my lips oh Lord, and my
mouth shall show forth thy praise. Moreover, without this spirit we could not
love God nor our neighbors; because that the charity of God is by it powered
in our hearts, as says the Apostle. It is also the earnest, the pledge, and
token which God has left to his children, to assure them of eternal life,
Romans 5. 2. Cor. 1.
and of the rest, of the joys and comforts, of the glory, honor, and of all
that perfect and entire felicity, which they ought finally to look for in his
kingdom, not only in regard of their souls, but also of their bodies, the
which by the virtue and vigor of this spirit which is in them, they shall be
quickened at the day of the resurrection, as was that of Jesus Christ, as it is
written, 1. Cor. 15.
The first man Adam was made a living soul, and the last Adam was made a
quickening spirit. We may then well desire of God, as did David, tha^ he would
preserve us this spirit, and say to him as says the Prophet, Psalm. 51.
Creat^ in me a clean heart, O God, and renew ^ right spirit within me. Cast
me not away form thy presence, and take not thine holy spirit from me. Restore
me to the joy of ^hy salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit. Let us
then diligently keep our ^elues from grieuing it, Exhortations.
and yet more from quenching of it, by leading a dis^olute and disordinate
life: 1. These. 5.
as many do that are vicious and profane, having no regard to their guest,
who being holy, loves all holiness; and cannot with a good eye behold any
filthiness or spot in those with whom it does converse. So that at the last,
if he see them to continue, he is constrained to ^orsake them, and to change
his lodg^ng. Which we see has happened often, and fresh in memory in these
last wars, where many having not (as they should) the conscience sound and
whole, and for this reason, 1. Tim. 1.
being abandoned from the presence and aid of this spirit, which was departed
from them, have made shipwreck of their faith and of all true piety, to
return to their abominations, and to the filthynesse of Papistry. Which we
ought well to fear, and to avoid it, follow the counsel of the Apostle, who
exciteth us to crucify our flesh, Gal. 5.
with all the affections and concupiscences thereof, and to walk in spirit as
we live in spirit. For as says the Apostle, Ephe. 4.
If we are once filled with this spirit, we shall flote upon all the waves and
floods of this world. And shall never be drowned nor suncke, what storms and
tempests soever may stir and threaten us: no more then a bushel or other
wodden vessel^ being upon the water, never goes to the bottom, being filled
with wind. Also we being provided and full of the spirit of God, who is
compared to the wind in the scripture, can never be overflowed nor covered
under the waters, being still vpheld by the hand of our God, who will make us
to swim on the top of the water, as Noah and his children did, during the
deluge, being enclosed in the Arc.

The first thing contrary to Faith, is Ignorance.
How perilous the Ignorance of the truth to salvation is.
HAving deduced the things which are joined and tied to Faith, it remains now
to declare those that are contrary and opposite, whereof Ignorance is the
first; for, to have faith it is needful that we have a certain knowledge, as
well of God, as of his goodness toward us; which we cannot obtain unless
we first know his promises, his alliance, and Jesus Christ, who is the
procurer of it; for those that ignore these things, cannot any way be
faithful. As also the Apostle teaches by the definition which he gives of
Faith, saying, Heb. 11.
Faith is a subsistence of things hoped for, and a demonstration of things not
seen. And a little after, By Faith we understand that the ages have been
ordained by the word of God, to be made a demonstration of invisible things.
Which shows well that we cannot believe the things that are revealed unto us
in the holy scripture, but we must have a certain knowledge of them; and such
a one as the Mathematicians may have of their Theoremes by the mathematicke
demonstrations; the which being grounded upon evident principles and and
maxims, cannot be but most certain and jndubitable. Also must Faith be
grounded upon the revelation of the mysteries and secrets o^ God contained in
the scripture, The ground of Faith.
as wel^ of the old as of the new Testamant. And for this reason all those that
desire and pretend to be faithful, must be taugh^ and instructed in the
scriptures, either by hearing, or by revelation, or else by reading and
meditation. Otherwise the^ are abused, and deceive themselves i^ the opinion
which they have to be^ Christians and faithful, notwithstanding their
jgnorance. For as has been said Faith cannot subsist without knowing the
things which it belieueth, and persuades it self as certain and infallible.
Ierem. 31.
Which is the cause that God willing to make a new alliance with hi^ people,
promises them to be the^ God, that is to say, their Father, protector,
tutour, defendour, buckler, an^ sufficiency: provided that the people on their
part will acknowledge him t^ be such a one. John. 18.
Also Jesus Christ said t^ this purpose, that eternal life consistet^ in that
they acknowledge thee the onl^ true God, and him that thou have sen^ Jesus
Christ, which are two evident notes, to show that we cannot be faithful, nor
by faith hope for eternal life, but we must know God, and the good will which
he bears us, and Jesus Christ, who by his death and perfect obedience has
procured it for us.

Esaias, Censure of Ignorance
for to vanquish and condemn the incredulity of the people of his time who
were rebellious and obstinate in rejecting all the admonitions which were given
them, as well of their faults as of the means of their salvation, he said to
them with a sower and sharp reproach, The Ox knows his Lord, Esaias. 1.
and the Ass his Masters manger. But my people know not me at all. Willing to
give the people to understand which he had chosen and taken into his alliance,
that they were altogether profane and unfaithful. Osee. 2.
Ose likewise speaking of the cause for the which the people had been ^ed
captive, said, That they were extirminate, banished, and exiled out of their
country, by reason of their jgnorance, and of the little duty that they had
showed in acknowledging God as they ought, and his ordinances to be conformable
unto them, and his graces and favors to love him, and to put their whole trust
in him. But David shows that very clearly in the nynth Psalm, when he
says, The Lord will be a refuge for the poor, a refuge in due time, even in
affliction. And they that know thy name will trust in thee, for thou, Lord,
have not failed them that seek thee. Whereupon must be observed, Use of the
knowledge of God.
that the Prophet presupposes that we should know God, that is to say, his
power, his goodness, his promises, and his truth, before we can be capable to
put all our trust and assurance in him, and to rely in all our affairs upon
his providence. And wherefore is it said that Jesus Christ is the light of the
wolrd, John. 9
which lighteneth all men? If it be not to give us to understand, that we
cannot have any faith, nor hope for life thereby, if first we be not
illuminated in a true knowledge of his word, the which for this reason calls
himself the light of life, and science of salvation? Why also says the
Apostle, that the sensual man has no knowledge of Gods matters, Luc. 2.
and that of him self he cannot know them at all, if it be not to give us to
understand, that we must be illuminated and regenerated by the spirit of God?
To the end that being made spiritual and faithful, we may be capable to
receive the life, which by Faith is administered unto us, and by the spirit of
God. The faithful people exhort one an other to go up into the mountain of
the Lord, to learn his ways, and to walk in them, giving there by to
understand that to edify our selves, in the Faith, love, obedience, and fear
of God, It was required to hear his word preached, and expounded in the
midst of the assembly. Which David knowing very well, How necessary this
knowledge is.
and that the frequentation of Christian assemblies, was a means the fittest
that could be chose^, to entertain himself in the faith and fear of God,
said. Psalm. 122.
I rejoiced when ^hey said to me, we will go into the house ^f the Lord, Our
feet shall stand in thy Gates. O Jerusalem; Jerusalem is builded as a City,
that is compact together ^n it felfe. And also. Psalm. 84.
O Lord of Hosts how amyable are thy Tabernacles. My soul longs, yea, and
faints for the courts of the Lord; for mine heart and my flesh rejoice in the
living God. And in the 42. Psalm. As the Heart brayeth for the rivers of water,
so pants my soul after thee O God. My soul thirsts for God, even for the
living God. When shall I come and appear before the presence of God. And in
the 95. Psalm, reproaching to the people their obstinacy, jncredulitie, and
jgnorance, he said, Forty years have I contended with this generation, and
said, they are a people that err in heart, for they have not known my ways.
Wherefore I swear in my wrath, saying, surely they shall not enter into my
rest. Whereupon it evidently appears, From whence proceeds the confusion of
the world.
that the people is jncredulous and consequently damnable before God, when he
jgnores his ways, and is negligent to hear, read, and meditate his word; in
the meditation whereof, we ought to pass our days and nights to exercise our
selves, and by consequent to increase and profit in Faith, which is the means
for justice and life. Jesus Christ speaking to the Samaritane to jnstruct her
in the faith, John. 4.
and to bring her to the knowledge of her salvation, said one thing to her
which ought to be well marked. You worship that which you know not, we worship
that which we know, for the salvation is of the Jews. Wherein he shows
manifestly, that the knowledge of the word of God, is necessary to trust in him
and to call upon him. 1. Cor. 14. Of the use of preaching the word of God.
And the Prophecy, that is to say, the true interpretation of the scripture,
why is it preferred by the Apostle before all other spiritual gifts? If it
be not because that by it we are led, and advanced to the knowledge of the
word and promises of God, by the which our Faith is nourished and entertained,
increases and profits more and more? Ephe. 4.
Wherefore also did Jesus Christ established in his Church, Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors? If not for the assembling of Saints, for the
work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, until we all
meet in the perfect man, by the measure of the perfect stature of Christ, that
we be no more wavering children, and led hither and thither to all winds of
doctrine, by the deceit of men, and by their coming in cantulous seducing.
Conclusion, it is not without cause, that the Apostle says, Romans 10.
That Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

Of whom we ought to learn.
If then we will go on in Faith, we must be curious to hear the word of
God, not of every person indifferently (for there are some that tavern it, and
and make traffic of it) but of those that are called and appointed to preach
it purely and publicly to the people, still for to edify them more and more,
and to increase them in the knowledge and fear of God. And the ordinary
people must not abuse themselves, trusting unto that which Papists say unto
them, that in their jgnorance they may be saved, provided that they rely upon
the Faith of their Pastors, wit^out seeking any farthar, after that which is
contained in the Scripture, which is a damnable and pernicious error. For all
the world, of what quality and condition soever they be, must understand his
salvation, and the things whereupon it is grounded, which is the cause that
the Apostle says in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Heb. 2.
For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward, How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be preached of the
Lord, and was confirmed unto us ward by them that heard it? and from thence he
draws a notable exhortation; therefore as says the holy Ghost. Psalm. 95.
To day if you will hear his voice harden not your hearts, as in Meribath, and
as in the day of Massah, in the wilderness, where your Fathers tempted me,
proved me though they had seen my works, Forty years have I contended
with this generation, and said they are a people that err in heart, for they
have not known my ways, wherefore I swear in my wrath, saying, Surely they
shall not enter into my rest. Also, Heb. 4.
Let us fear therefore, Least at any time by forsaking the promise of entering
into his rest, any of you should seem to be defrauded, for unto us was the
Gospel preached as well as unto them, but the word they heard did not profit
them, not being coupled with Faith to them that heard. It is the reason for the
which Moises in his canticle, exhorts with such a gravity of words, all the
world not to be slothful in enquiring and seeking after the means to know
what appertains to their salvation. Psalm. 90.
Teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.
Return (O Lord how long) and be pacified toward thy servants. But what
avails it to some to rest in that, Censure of those that are profane. Mat.
17.
seeing the commandment of God is so clear and so express, addressed to all
persons indifferently and without exception? This is my well-beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased, hearken unto him. Moreover if we believe Jesus to be
our Christ, that is to say, our King, high priest, and Prophet; were it not a
great fault, to refuse to be instructed by his doctrine, (seeing he is our
Prophet) or to be reconciled to God by his Sacrifice, being our high Priest,
and Priest according to the order of Melchizedeck? Also, Comfort for the poor
faithful.
to whom did Jesus Christ, excising his ministry upon earth, principally
address himself, to preach the word of God his Father? Was it not to the
little ones, and to obscure, unknown, vile, and contemptible persons? as
being more capable to receive it, and to profit therein; yea, speaking to his
Father, yea, he thanks his Father for it, saying, O Father Lord of Heaven and
Earth I give thee thanks, that thou have hidden these things from the wise and
learned and have revealed to little Children. It is so Father, because that
such was thy pleasure. All things were given me of my Father; and none know the
son but the Father, and also none know the Father but the Son, and he unto
whom the Son will reveal it. Come unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy laden, and I will ease you, Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me
that I am kind and loving of heart, and you shall find rest to your souls;
for my yoke is easy and my burden is light. Moreover if God promises to
power his Spirit upon all persons generally, Joel. 2.
great, mean, and small, upon the Fathers and the children, upon the Lords
and the servants, upon the sons and daughters, which is the only means by
the which our spirits being lightened, become capable to understand the secrets
and mysteries of God; Duty of the faithful.
why should men hinder the people to study in the word of god to know it? does
it not belong to all the children of a Family, to have the knowledge of all
the things contained in their Fathers Will, as well to know what goods he
leaves them, as the charge whereunto it binds them? To conclude, seeing that
God commands us in the Scripture, Esaias. 55. Amos. 5.
To hear his voice, to live, we must obey him, and not hope to have life by
any other means then by Faith and knowledge of his word. For it was it whereby
the world was created in the beginning and kept ever since in his being, and
the means also by the which the Church is animated to hope to live eternally.

The Second point contrary to Faith, is Infidelity.
THe other thing contrary to Faith, Two sorts of Infidelity.
is Infidelity, whereof there be two ^orts: The first of those to whom God
has not done the grace to communicate his word, as we see at this day in many
Regions and Provinces in this world, the word of the Gospel has neither been
heard nor preached in the Indies, Miserable Infidels.
in America, in the east Tartara, among the Scithians, and other Barbarians,
which have no other religion but that which they forge and jmagine in their
minds, in whom we may acknowledge the profound and admirable judgment of our
God, who has pity on whom he will have pity, and hardens those that he
will harden. And that in such examples we acknowledge the great graces and
favors of our God, whom it has pleased (jnduced by his only will) to
jlluminate us in a true and straight knowledge of his word; although he was
not at all obliged unto us; and that in us there was nothing more commendable
then in them, whom he has suffered and suffers still to perish in their
jgnorance. Ephe. 2.
Detestable Infidels.
The other sort of infidelity, is, of those which reject the word of GOD, and
despise it, as the Turks, the Atheists, the Philosophers, the Libertines; the
which give no more authority to the scriptures, rather less then they do to
the liberal Sciences mocking at the simplicity of those, who render themselves
so ready to believe the things the which cannot be grounded upon any natural
reason. The Jews likewise who reject the new Testament, which neveerthelesse is
the interpretation of the old, and without the which it is impossible to know
the figures and sacraments, in the which the truth of the secrets and mysteries
of God is covered and wrapped; and who besides are mortal enemies of Jesus
Christ, which is the principal, and the matter and substance of the Law, of
the Prophets, and of the whole scripture, may for this reason be set in the
rank of jnfidels, although they boast to have and to approve the old
Testament, the which not being by them understood, can stand the^ in no more
steed then a book closed and shut up, or which being open ^s written in an
unknown tongue.

And even as good meat cannot nou^ish a body, unless it be not taken and
eaten, or which being taken, is not well digested: so the word of God cannot
be profitable to their salvation, being not well understood, nor by them
referred to her end, which is Jesus Christ.

The Third thing contrary to Faith, is Heresy.
Heresy also is a kind of Infidelity, though it seem that it is grounded upon
the word, The opinionate and Heretics, are more execrable then the Infidels.
although that indeed it has no other foundation but his only opinion upon
the which it is ^etled. Now there is nothing more contrary to Faith (the which
ought to be certain and resolute of all that it apprehends) then opinion;
which is always doubtful and uncertain, and most an end contrary to the
truth. Whereupon we must hold the heretics, and all those that hold sects a
part, for jnfidels; whether they reject the scriptures wholly, or in part, as
Marcion, and the Manicheans; or that they reprove the true and wholesome
knowledge and interpretations of them, which cannot be but good and assured,
being conformable to the analogy of Faith.

The fourth thing contrary to Faith.
THe Schismatickes are also contrary to Faith, Into what danger the
Schismatics plu^ge themselves
when through any coffeehouse or repyning they depart from the universal
Church; because that a^ the things that are there done, do no^ please them. As
we see it happened to the Novatians and Donatists, who seeing that there was
not such a perfection in the Church as they would have desired; and that many
were there tolerated and suffered, although there wa^ much corruption, many
vices, infirmities, and imperfections in them and their lives, through a
disdain and contempt they withdrew themselves from the Christian assemblies,
to make Monopoles among themselves; in the which, those persons in the end
foun^ not themselves more perefect and virtuous then were those whose company
they had abandoned. Now such kind of people not believing the communion of
Saints, which is one of the principal articles of Faith; and without ^he which
it is impossible that we can be members of the body of Jesus Christ, to which
Jesus Christ we must be all v^ited; cannot for this reason be set in ^he
reckoning or rank of the faithful. And the Apostates, Horrible confession of
the Apostates.
who having tasted ^he word of God, and being jlluminated, ^ea, made partakers
of the gifts of the ^oly Ghost, revolt from the doctrine and pure profession
of the Gospel, from ^he use of the Sacraments, and from all ^ther exercises of
the pure Church: ^ught not they to be yet more reputed ^nfidels then all the
rest, having nothing ^se remaining whereupon to ground ^hemselues to assure
that they are Chri^ians; provided that there remain no ^arke thereof among
them? Yea, the ^aptisme which they have received in ^he Church, and the Lords
Supper, the which they have often celebrated, can ^ake them serve but for
evident proofs and testimonies, to convince and con^emne their wickedness.

Two extremities of Faith: The first named Presumption, which is the fifth
point, also contrary to Faith.
Vicious extremities.
FAith (like all other virtues) has two extremities, which are vicious; for
virtue keeps always a mean between those two. And when it rises or falls
more then it ought, it degenerates and waxes vice. Presumption stifleth Faith.
Now the one of the extremities of Faith is Presumption the which looks upon
us, that is to say, when we trust in our selves, or in any thing that
belongs to us. As if we would trust in the good works which we do, it were a
presumption, for the which the Pharisie in the Scripture was condemned; Luc. 18.
who was adorned with many fair and laudable virtues. But because he gloried
in them, and in contemplation of them, despised his neighbors: Like the
Publican, who me thinks seemed not to be so virtuous and perfect as he, did
by that means blot out all the show and price of the virtues and graces which
God had done him, for as Tertullian says, we must abound in good works, In
the Apologetike 1. Cor. 4.
but not presume upon them; because we must first know, that we have nothing,
but we have received it, and the glory thereof belongs to God, who is ^he
Author of all that which is law^able and commendable in us. Esaias. 64.
More^uer all our righteousness is but con^aminate by the corruption and vice
which is in us: So that if they are vn^olded before the face of our God it is
nothing but filth and stinckingnesse. In the book of confessions.
Accursed is all our righteousness, ^aith S. Augustine, if it be examined and
ivdged without the mercy of God which is the cause for the which the A^ostle
says, Romans 3.
That all our glory is ex^luded not by the law of works, but ^y the law of
Faith, without, that if we consider what our condition is, and ^he estate of
our whole life, we will ac^nowledge and confess that we are nothing in all
our glory, Remedies against this Plague. Psalm. 62.
but a thing of nothing, as says the Prophet. The Chil^ren of men are vanity,
the chief men are ^ars, to lay the^ upon a balla^ce they are altogether
Lighter then vanity. We mus^ not then make any account of all those things
wherein men glory, as of their wisdom, as of those of whom Daui^ spoke.
Psalm. 12.
Which said, with our tongue wi^ we prevail, our lips are our own, who
(...) the Lord over us? For we have alwaie^ known, that all those high minds
who trust in their own determinations, and who have thought to get estimation
by the greatness of their understandings and to advance themselves by the
subtlety of their wits, unto some high degree of honor and glory, have still
been brought down by God, who resists the proud, whereof the Scripture
furnishes us with examples enough, of Achitophell, Sobua, Aman, and others
such like, who thought that nothing could hinder them, but that by their
industry they should attain to what they did pretend, the which the Prophet
also teaches us, saying. The Lord breaks the eounsell of the heathen and
brings to naught the devises of the people. And we must presume no more of
our strength, Our shield appertains to the Lord, Psalm. 89.
and our King to the holy one of Israel. And also, Psalm. 33.
The King is not saved by the multitude of an host, neither is the mighty man
delivered by great strength. And in the 44. Psalm, They inherit not the Land
by their own Sword, neither did their own arm save them. But thy ^ight hand
and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou did ^auour
them. We ought not also to presume any thing of our righteousness, Iere. 2.
Against the false opinion of our perfectio^s.
^s did the Synagogue, which presumed ^o be pure and clean. By means whereof
God said, Because thou have this opi^ion of thy self, to be faulty in
nothing; I will call thee in question, and when thy life shall be well tried
and examined, it shall be known whether thou art so pure and clean, ^s thou
think. We ought to take heed of receiving these false opinions in our minds,
that we are or can be so per^ect, but that our jmperfections do always
surmount all the perfections and ^ertue that is in us. Psalm. 143.
Enter not (says the Prophet) into judgment with thy servant, for in thy
sight shall none that lives be iu^tified. There is speech of a history of
Pericles, who after he had long administered the common wealth of Athens, and
managed the public finances and revenues, was desirous to make up his
accounts, to make known the fidelity which he had used in his charge^
Alcibiades coming to see him, and seeing him so busy about the matter
abouesayd, said unto him, that it were much better if he did look rather not
to give account, then to give it. Which all faithful and honest men ought to
apply to themselves in regard of God, and to believe that there is nothing more
sure and expedient for them, then not to enter in accounts with this Sovereign
Lord. But to say unto him a^ did the servant who was jndebted tenn^ Thousand
Talents; Mat. 29.
Lord have patience, and deal not rigorously with me, I confess that I am
indebted such a great sum as it is impossible for me to pay. I have ^ goodwill
to do it, but I want the means* By means whereof I beseech thee that would
please thee to forbear me, and (...) use thy pity toward me, to the end I
may be able to acquit my self.

Those also that trust in their riches, Against the trust in Riches.
show thereby that they are jnfidels, and that their trust is vain, as was
that of him spoken of in S. Luke: Luc. 12.
who having reaped and gathered a great abundance of all sorts of fruits, said
to his soul, That it might rest, and that it had goods enough for many years;
and that for this reason it should not care nor fear that the goods could
fail. And as he made these discourses in his mind, he was adjourned to
appear that present hour before the judgment seat of God, to give an account
of his administration. Which is an example that shows us plainly, that all
the trust that men set in their riches, honors, strength, wisdom, might, and
credit, is vain and deceitful. And as says the Prophet, Esaias. 28. Against
the hope in the Arm of the flesh.
That such people take lying to ground their hope upon, the which says Job
may be compared to a cobwebbe, which may be violated by the only sleight of a
Fly. Let it not then be therein, nor in the arm and all the glory of the
flesh, that men settle their hope. For that, to speak properly, is nothing
else but to conceive wind, and after to bring forth some storm. Which we see
in the people of Israel, which set their hope sometimes in the strength of the
Egiptians, Esaias. 20.
sometimes in that of the Assirians, wherein they have always been deceived,
and have experimented in the end that this hope was pernicious unto them, and
like unto a Reed, upon the which a man cannot lean, Esaias. 30.31
but he puts himself in hazard to fall, and there will come forth a
splintor to hurt and prick his hand. In the 20, Psalm, the Chuch speaking of
her self and her enemies, says, Some trust in Chariots, and some in horses:
but we will remember the name of our God. They are brought down and fallen,
but we are risen and stand upright. By the things which have been spoken of,
it appears that there is nothing more contrary to the faith of a christian
man, nor that is more damageable unto him, then to put his trust in himself,
or in the other creatures, nor which sooner precipitateth those that ground and
rely thervpo^, and that presume that by their means they might obtain that
which they desire and pursue: for it is of God only, that the events of our
counsels (be they happy or unhappy) depend, by reason whereof it is most
requisite for us, to humble our selves always under the mighty hand of God,
and acknowledge that all our felicite cannot depend of any other thing, 1. Pet.
5.
then of him and of his only providence.

The other extremity of Faith, which is the sixth, which is contrary to it.
THe other exttemitie of Faith, is mistrust, Mistrust directly contrary to
Faith.
which is also contrary to it, to wit, when we mistrust and doubt of the
truth of the promises of God, and that we think, that therevppon we ought
not to assure our hope. Whereof we have a notable example in the King Achaz;
who having understood, that Razin King of Siria, and Phaceas son of Romelea,
Esaias. 7.
were leagued against him, to destroy him, and to substitute another in his
place: began to tremble, like to the leaves of Trees, when they are shaken by
the wind; insomuch that he could not settle nor rest his mind; what
admonition soever the Prophet Esaias made him, and what assurance soever he gave
him, that their enterprise should come to nothing; and that they were but
smoking firebrands whereof should come nothing but smoke. Yet notwithstanding
that all this that was said unto him, came from God, it could not assure him,
nor make his mind peaceable. Although that for the confirmation of the promise
that God made him, he preposed an offer unto him to demand what sign he
would, were it in Heaven, or in Earth, to assure him, and to take away all the
mistrust which he had. But he would not yield: which did greatly offend God,
and was cause of the misfortunes and miseries which befell him afterward.

This mistrust proceeds of diverse causes. 1. Cause of Mistrust.
Sometime it comes of the length of the time, which God sets to accomplish
and execute his promises as we see in Jeremy, That the unbelievers which were
among the people said, what we have so long looked for, the peace and
prosperity which was promised us by the Prophets; and behold we see nothing
but troubles and confusion: and that our affairs go always worse and worse,
which is the cause for the which the Prophet said, Psalm. 125.
For the rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the ritghteous* least
the righteous put forth their hand unto wickedness. 2. Cause.
That comes also sometimes, of the violence and great impetuositie of the
tempests, the which present themselves before our eyes, and which makes us
often to forget the remembrance of things wherewith we should be vpheld, and
sustained against the force of such storms; whereof we have a notable example
in S. Peter. Mat. 14. A notable example.
Unto whom Jesus Christ, walking upon the waters of the Sea, commanded him
to come out of his boat, and to come to him upon the waters which he did.
But when he was in the mid way, and that the winds began to rise, and the
waves to swell, he began to be affraide, and to sincke into the water,
because that he did not any more remember, the words of Jesus Christ, in the
which if he had altogether settled himself, the superficies of the water had
always been to him as a plancke, and he should have gone upon it, as upon the
Land which is firm and solid. But having forgotten it, and even doubting of
the truth and certainty thereof, he began to sincke in the water, in danger
to be drowned. That was the cause to make him cry to Jesus Christ that he
would save him, and that he was in danger to perrish, whereupon Jesus Christ
to make him know the cause thereof, said unto him, Oh man of little Faith, why
have thou doubted? As if he should have said unto him, that the occasion of
the danger wherein he found himself, was, that he had not altogether
assured himself of the word which he had spoken unto him. And to this purpose
may be fitted the apology of the Heart, A fit comparison to this effect.
unto whom all the other beasts reproved his fear, showing him, that being
armed and furnished with such weapons and defenses as were the horns which he
bare, he ought to present himself courageously to the combat, against the most
furious and sa^agest beasts that could be found: to whom he answering, said,
that they had reason to reprove and tax him, but that it happened unto him,
because ^ee found himself in danger, and hea^ing the crying of the dogs, he
had quite forgot his strength, and bethought himself of nothing, but to fly.
Remedy.
So happens it often to many faithful, who forgetting all their forces, as
the grace, favor, promise, and presence of God, which ought to assure them;
they think of nothing but the peril which ^hey see, and of their own
weakness. The which causes them to be run^wayes and cowards.

It comes also sometimes, 3. Cause.
when we see no means, whereby that which ^s said unto us, can come to pass.
For being sensual as we are, we always regard that which our senses can
comprehend: and as we see the affairs disposed, we judge of the effects. As
we may see in the example of Philip, to whom Jesus Christ commanded, to
cause that great multitude of people that followed him to sit down, John. 6.
that he might give them to eat, Phillip answered; Example in Phillip.
Two hundredth peniworth of bread would not suffice them, if every one should
take never so little. As if it had been impossible for Jesus Christ, to nourish
them without the ordinary means. This is common to all, and even to the
wisest, who can never persuade themselves, that any thing can be done, if they
do not see that the means is disposed thereunto. And nevertheless we have
so many examples to the contrary in the Scripture, That is to say, Remedy.
that God without ordinary means, has don his works, as in the beginning
without matter, without workmen, and without tools he built the world, and all
the creatures therein contained: to show his omnipotency, and to assure our
Faith by that means, to the end it might rest upon the only word of God,
without disputing and discoursing in her mind, of the means, and of the
fashion which God will make his work, but that she content her self with his
holy word, remitting it self altogether unto him or the manner how he will
effect it.

This mistrust comes also of the di^ersitie of the usage of God to his
ser^ants, 4. Cause.
and to those that dishonor and ^laspheme him. Because that seeing them so
hardly entreated, notwichstan^ing that they endeavor to obey him and to do
their duty to serve him; to ^he contrary, those that despise him, a^ound in
all sorts of goods to be gent^y used, to have all their eases. Examples.
Yea often to be better, then they can wish: ^en this temptation comes to
assail ^he children of God, who say as it is written in Malachi. Malachi. 3.
That men serve God in vain, and what profit if we ^eepe his observation, and
if we live ^n sorrow for the Lord of hosts? Now we say happy are the proud,
and even those that do wickedly are praised, and if they tempted God they were
delivered. Then those that fear the Lord ^pake one to the other, and the Lord
harkned and heard, and has written the memorial book before him, for those
that fear the Lord, and that think upon his name. Remedy.
They shall be mine (says the Lord of hosts) when I shall gather the treasure
together, and I will pardon them, so as every one pardons his son that
serves him. Convert you, and you shall see the difference between the just
and the infidels; between the servant of God, and him that serves him not.

This same temptation came to David, as it appears in the 73. Psalm, Yet God
is good to Isreall: even to the pur^ in heart. As for me, my feet were almost
gone, my steps had well near slipped, for (...) feared at the foolish, when I
saw the prosperity of the wicked. For there are no band in their death, but
they are lusty and strong, etc. It may also proceed from elsewhere; 5. Cause.
That is to say, when God seems to be asleep in our afflictions, and to
have no care to mitigate them, or to deliver us from them As we see in the
complaynt which the Church makes. Surely for thy sake an^ we slain
continually, Psalm. 44.
and are counted ^ sheep for the slaughter; up, why sliepest tho^ O Lord?
awake, be not far off for ever Wherefore hidest thou thy face? and forgettest
our misery and our affliction? For our soul is beaten down unto the dust,
our belly cleaves to the ground. When God also shows himself angry, 6.
Cause.
and his visage inflamed with chollor against his Church, and that he seems
rather ^n show to be a roaring Lion, then a Father most benign and kind, then
we tremble, and have our minds troubled with mistrust. As we see in the 77.
Psalm. I did think upon God and was ^roubled, I prayed and my spirit was
full of ^nguish. Thou keep mine eyes waking. I was astonished and could not
speak. Then ^ considered the days of old, and the years ^f ancient time. I
called to remembrance my song in the night. I communed with nine own heart, and
my spirit searched di^igentlie. Will the Lord absent himself for ever, and
will he show no more favor? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does ^is
promise fail for evermore? Against ^uch temptations, Remedy.
the which are the vio^entest and most furious that can be presented to a
faithful man, we ought to gather all our forces together, and harde^ our
selves against such hard assaults, arm our selves with the promises which God
has made us, and oppose them against them; as that which is written in Joshua,
Joshua. 1.
I will not leave, nor ever forsake thee. Esaias. 49.
And in Esaias, Although that the Mother should forget the fruit of her womb, I
will not forget thee says the Lord; for I bear thee engraven on the back os
my hand. And that which is in S. John, John. 10.
I hold my sheep in my hand who shall take them from me? Is not my Father
greater then all? And I and my Father are but one. Also, they shall not perish
eternally. We ought to call such promises to mind, and take them to sustain
us, and to rely upon them, against the great sleights and temptation^ which
happen unto us, and to say with David, Psalm. 23.
The Lord is my shepherd I shall not want. He makes me to rest in green^
pasture, and leads me by the still waters. He restores my soul, and leads
me into the paths of righteousness for his nam^ sake. Yea, thought J should
walk through the valley of the shaddowe of death, I wi^ fear no evil, for
thou art with me, thy ro^ and thy staff, they comfort me. Tho^ do prepare
a table before me in the sight of mine adversaries: thou do annoint mine
head with oil, and my cup runs over. And we ought always to hold this for
resolute, that God, what visage and countenance soever he shows us, never
changes, but continues all one, as it is written in the 120. Psalm. They
shall wax old as does a garment; as a vesture shall thou change them, and they
shall be changed. But thou art the same and thy years shall not fail. The
Children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall stand fast in thy
sight. A firm conclusion
We then, what changing soever we see, although it seem unto us, that the
Heavens, the Earth, and all the Elements do threaten us; and that all
creatures seem to have conspired our rujne; nevertheless we ought not to
judge of the nature of God, as of creatures; but to be resolute that the nature
of God is invariable, and that in his counsels, his words, and all his works,
he is constant and permanent for ever, and abiding always like unto himself.
By reason whereof, we ought not to esteem him according to our jmaginations,
and tha^ he seems to show and represent him self unto us in the estate of
his creatures; but always to apprend him such as he is manifested in his word.

Vain fear, contrary to Faith.
What such a fear is.
Vain fear is also a thing that is contrary to Faith, whereof S. Pete^ 1.
Pet. 3.
makes mention, when he says, Be not ye afraid for any terror of them,
neither be ye troubled. And Jesus Christ says, Mat. 10.
Fear ye not them that kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; b^
rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell. Are not
tw^ little Sparrowes sold for a farthing, and on^ of them shall not light on
the ground without your Father, yea even the hairs of you^ head are numbered;
fear ye not therefore ye are of more value the many Sparrowes* In this
sentence we must note man^ things, to strengthen our Faith. Wherefore we
ought little to fear men.
First that the power of Tyrants, and enemie^ of the Church, is limited, and
goes no^ farther, then the leave and permission that God gives them, to
effect his. For although that God sometimes (to exercise his children) gives
them power to vex and torment them in their bodies, he always preserues their
souls, and does not at all suffer that their fury reach so far, as to
endamage them in any thing, in matters concerning their salvation. Although
that sometimes we see many Princes so outrageous and transported with fury,
that they undertake against the ordinance and express will of God, to kill (if
it were possible for them) the souls of their subjects, constrayning them to
go to the Mass and jdolatrie.

The other point which we ought to note, is, Remedy against vai^ fear.
that our enemies cannot even offend us in our bodies, without his providence,
no more then the Sparrowes, which cannot fall upon the earth but God does
appoint it. Seeing then that the children of God are more dear and precious
unto him, then not only one but many Sparrowes, we must resolve, that whereas
God suffers that we should fall into the hands of tyrants, to afflict us by
prison, by confiscations, by banishments, by fire, and water: all this being
conducted by the counsel and providence of God, it cannot be but profitable
and healthful unto us. And for the last point we ought well to lay before us
that which he says, That the hairs of our head are all counted: Mat. 10.
and that not one of them cannot be diminished, but by the express will of our
God, who cannot (seeing his jmmense and infinite goodness) give any thing of the
estate of all his elect, but it must be for their good and salvation.

The other thing which ought to furnish us against this fear, is, the charity
of our God, the which as says S. Peter, being well apprehended in our hearts,
and meditated in our minds; will always chase away all casual fears, which
may happen unto us to trouble us. For knowing that God having once received us
into his favor, continues it toward us for ever. Romans 8.
And that there is no creature whatsoever, whether it be death, life, Angels,
principalities, power, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor
depth, nor any other creature, that is able to separate us from the love of God
which he bears us in Christ Jesus our Lord. What accident could happen unto
us sufficient to astonish our hearts, firmly persuaded of this dilection of
our God.

There is yet another reason which ought well to assure us against all fears,
Third. remedy.
that is to say, the presence of our God, who is never far from us; but is
always at our right hand, to uphold us ^s says David, I will praise the Lord,
Psalm. 16.
who has given me counsel; my reins also teach me in the nights. I have set
the Lord always before me; for he is at my right hand: therefore I shall not
slide. Wherefore my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices: my flesh also does
rest in hope. For thou will not leave my soul in the grave, neither will thou
suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Exodus 4. Iere. 1. Mat. 28.
It is the reason which God used to Moises, to Jeremy, and to all the
Apostles, to assure them against all fears and assaults, which may be given
them by their enemies, to hinder or stay them in the executon of their charge.
Fear not (says he) for I am with you. They shall fight and give you many
assaults, but I will maintain you, and place you every one like a furnished
city, and like a Collom of Iron, and like ^ brazen wall upon the earth,
against the Kings of Judah, and her Princes, against the high Priests, and all
the people of the earth that shall make war against the^ but they shall not
overcome thee, for I a^ with thee (says the Lord) to deliver thee* Let us then
think, as says S. John, 1. John. 2.
That the word of God, and his promise dwelling in our hearts by faith, we are
strong an^ invincible against all temptations. Besides, 2. Tim. 1.
That the spirit of God remains i^ us, which is not a soft and weak spirit,
bu^ a spirit of force, (as says the Apostle) which will uphold us against all
temptations, although that it seem in appearance, that we are very infirm
and weak. But let us think that the weak and feeble things of this world are
sufficient to confound and beat down all the highest and the strongest that can
be found; and even lead them prisoners in the obedience of Christ.

The evil conscience contrary to Faith.
THE evil conscience also, Whence this contrariety comes.
is very contrary to Faith, because it always ^ets the wrath of God before it;
and ^aith to the contrary, does always set ^he grace of God before it. For a
man that sins voluntarily, although he know that the reward of sin is
death, and that the curse of the wrath of God are propounded in the law,
against all those that transgress it. That presupposed, it is not possible but
he must be astonished, and that in his heart he has prickings, gnawings, and
stingings, which do transperse it incessantly, and that he feels in his
conscience an ulcer which tormenteth and hinders him from resting at his
ease. By means whereof, if we will retain Faith and enjoy the comforts which
it brings us, we must necessarily walk roundly; and apply our selves to do
all things, which God in his law has showed us to be agreeable unto him; to
the end that our conscience do not accuse nor reprove us, nor press,
jmportune, nor condemn us. For if our heart reprove us (as says S. John) God
is greater then our heart to reprove us. ^. John. 3.
So that the man that will not make shipwreck of his Faith, as some have done,
as says the Apostle, must endeavor to walk always in all his ways, in a
good, whole, and wholesome conscience, 1. Tim. 1. Psalm. 119
as David sings, Blessed are those that are upright in their way, and walk
in the Law of the Lord. And also speaking of the faithful man, Psalm. 112.
Surely he shall never be moved: but the righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance. He will not be afraid of evil tidings: for his heart
is fixed, and believes in the Lord. Remedies for this evil.
Every one must then endeavor to conform himself, and all his actions to the
will of God, doing according to the portion and measure of grace, which has
been imparted unto him, that which is contained in his Law. Psalm. 15.
For as says David, He that shall converse in this sort, and would go thus,
need not fear to be overthrown, but such a man God will bless. He shall
receive a blessing from the Lord, Psalm. 24.
and righteousness from the God of his salvation. This is the generation of them
that seek him, of them that seek thy face, that is Jacob. If then we will
appear before the face of God in assurance, let us walk before him in all
fear. Let us fly from evil, and follow that which is good. Let us withdraw
our selves from vice, and apply our selves to the exercise of piety, as much as
we can. We see that our first parents, whilst they continued in the obedience
of God, they were familiar with him, and spoke with as great assurance as one
fellow does with an other. But when they had disobeyed him, and eaten of the
fruit of the tree of knowledge of good from evil against his will, they began
to decline, and fly from his face, and to have him in such great horror, that
there was nothing more fearful unto them, then to find themselves in his
presence. Which happened unto them of nothing else but by the disobedience
which they had borne to God, and of the evil conscience which followed, which
made them thus timorous and fearful.

Hypocrisy contrary to Faith.
Whence comes this contrariety.
Hypocrisy is also contrary to Faith, because it sets only the appearance
of things before it; and Faith to the contrary preposeth always the truth of
them, John. 18.
as says Jesus Christ, when Pylate demanded him, Art thou King? Jesus
answered: Thou say it that I am King, I was borne for it, and for that I am
come into the world, to give testimony of the truth. Whosoever is of the truth
hears my voice. By these words he teaches us, that the faithful regards
always the truth, and sets it before them; whereas to the contrary, the
Hipocrite contenteth himself with the appearance. The one loves the things
that are of massy gould; and the other the things gilded only. Conference
and difference between Faith and hypocrisy. Esaias. 29.
Which is the cause that God, who is true, also loves the truth and roundnesse
in all things, and abhors hypocrisy, as it is written in Esaias, This people
draw near me with their, lips, but their heart is far from me. And Jesus
Christ in S. Matthew, Every one that says Lord, Lord, Mat. 7.
shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my
Father which is in Heaven. Many shall say to me in that day, Lord, have we not
prophesied of thy name? And have we not cast forth Devils in thy name? And have
we not done many virtues in thy name? And then will I say openly unto them, I
know you not, depart from me ye doers of iniquity.

And also in S. John, John. 8.
reproouing the word of the Jews, who said they were the children of Abraham,
and of God, said unto them; If you were the chilrren of Abraham, you would do
the works of the children of Abraham. Now you seek to put me to death that am
a man, who have told you the truth, the which I have heard of God, Abraham did
not that, you do the works of your Father: And the Father that you come of is
the devil, and you will do the desires of your Father. He was an homicide
from the beginning, and has not perseuered in the truth, for the truth is not
in him. Every time that he prefers lies, he speaks of his own; for he is
a liar, and the father of lies. And because I say the truth you believe me not.
It is also the cause for the which in the gospel of S. Mat. Mat. 23.
he reproves the Scribes and Pharisees, that they were Hypocrites; because
they did only cleanse the outside of the cup and the dish, but that within they
were full of rapine and excess. And adds farther, that they were like unto
white sepulchers, which seemed fair without, but within are full of dead men's
bones and of al filthiness. Likewise also (says he) you show your selves
just men outwardly, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. The
Apostle says to the Romans, That he is not a Jew who is so outwardly, and
that is no circumcision which is made outwardly in the flesh, but he is a Jew
which is so inwardly. And circumcision is that which is in the heart and mind,
not in the letter; whereof, The praise comes not to men, but to God. David
also speaking of those that shall be lodged and shall converse in the
Tabernacle of the Lord, says, Psalm. 15.
it shall be He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and
speaks the truth in his heart. And in the 24. Psalm, Who shall ascend into
the mou^tain of the Lord, and who shall stand in his holy place? Even he that
has innocent hands, and a pure heart; which has not lift up his mind unto
vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. We must not think, that that those hypocrites
who are like unto brokers, whose commodities are not loyal, rather nothing but
old patcherie and deceit, can be agreeable to God who loves integrity,
simplicity, and roundnesse in all things. And does not as men, who affect
flattery, and pay themselves easily with false coin, and when it is well
stamped, although it be falsely metled.

Superstition is contrary to Faith.
SVperstition is also contrary to Faith, The nature of Superstition.
because it is always in doubt and floting, like a bark upon the Sea; without
being able to rest in any place, being tossed hither and thither with every
wind of Doctrine, by the juggling of men, Ephe. 4.
as says the Apostle, and by their slight and cautelous seducing. Which is
nothing answerable to Faith, by the which being justified, we have peace with
God through Jesus Christ; we are like unto the prudent man, who has builded
his house upon a rock, Romans 5.
then the rain fell and the storms came, and the winds blew, Mat. 7.
and did beat against that house, but it did not fall, for it was grounded
upon a Rock. But whosoever hears these words that I speak, The nature of
Faith.
and does not put there in practice, shall be like unto the man that builded
his house upon the sand; when the rain fell, and the storms rose, and the
winds blew, and beat against this house, it fell, and the ruin thereof is
great. David also speaking of the faithful man, and of his assurance, said,
They that trust in the Lord, Psalm. 121.
shall be as mount Syon; which cannot be removed, but remains for ever.
Saint Paul condemns those scrupulous people, Inconstancy in Religion very
dangerous.
who have always their consciences troubled with vain fears and doubts, which
hinder them from rest, and from settling themselves firmly upon the promises
of God, saying, If you are dead with Christ, as concerning the rudiments of the
world, Coloss. 2.
why are you charged with ordinances, as if you lived in the world? To wit,
eat not, taste not, touch not. All which things ordained by the commandments
and doctrine of men, perish with the use; the which have nevertheless some
kind of sapience in voluntary devotion, and humility of spirit, and insomuch
as they spare not the body, but have no regard to the satisfying thereof.
Remedy thereof.
Now every faithful man must take great heed least he fall into such a vice,
which is one of the most dangerous; and contrariest to faith, that is to say,
when men are like unto a sponge, which drinks up all the lyquors presented
thereunto. 1. John. 4.
And that they also lend the ear to all doctrines indifferently, without using
the prudence and counsel which is given them, to try their spirits, whether
they are of God, and the doctrines likewise whether they be conformable to the
word of God, and to the analogy of Faith. Mat. 16.
For, as says Jesus Christ, we ought carefully to beware of the Pharisises
leaven, knowing that we cannot mingle never so little of it with the good
dowe, but it will be corrupted, and if when we will receeue a payment of any
thing that is due unto us, we are attentyue to way it, and to examine it by the
sound, and otherwises, least we should be deceived; what ought we to do when
it is done of our selves, and of the things appertainning to our salvation?
Mat. 10.
Ought we then indiscreetly to trust all persons that shall speak to us of
it? Let us then be prudent as Serpents and simple as Doves.

Of the object and subject of Faith.
It is now time to come to deduce, what is the object and subject of Faith,
that is to say, the word of God, the which as we have showed before, being
divided into three parts; of the law, of the threatenings, and of the promises
of God, The promises of God.
the promises are those whereupon Faith principally relieth. Because they set
before us the Grace of God, his mercy, and the remission of our sins; which
are the means by the which our consciences are assured, and the troubles
pacified wherewith they may be disturbed, for the law of god requiring of us a
whole and perfect righteousness, which is impossible for us to obtain whiles
we are, in the world vice, corruption, and infirmity withstanding which are
in us, which hinder us from being able to attain to the of this perfection: as
also the threatenings propou^ding nothing else unto us, but the wrath and curse
of God, it is impossible that by them we can resolve our selves of the grace
and charity of God, who hates wickedness, as it is written. Psalm. 5.
Thou art not a God that loves wickedness: neither shall evil dwell with
^hee. It remains then to conclude, that, why Faith has the promises of God
for an object.
that which Faith regards, is principally the promise of God, who sets his
mercy before it, and the remission of her sins, which are the points,
wherewith Faith is vpheld. Faith then regards not the traditions of men, nor
the decrees of Antichrist, nor any doctrine, other then that of Jesus Christ,
which was denounced unto us as well by himself, as by his Prophet^ and
Apostles.

It is the reason for the which God by his Prophet said, Esaias. 29.
That for nothing, and to no purpose, the people endeavored to serve him by
the traditions and commandments of men. Which he cannot allow of: considering
that which he has forbidden in his law, not to add nor diminish any thing;
but only to observe that which is there commanded and contained. Now, that
which is spoken of the commandment, by the which our obedience ought to be
directed; also is it understood of the promise by the which our faith ought to
be ruled And as we ought to do nothing but tha^ which God has commanded to
obey him; also ought we to believe nothing but what he has promised us:
seeing the only word of God, and that which is once come forth of his lips, is
firm^ and resolute. Psalm. 89.
For all that the devil ca^ say, the father and author of lies: all tha^ which
also Antichrist can say, and the false Prophets, her accomplices and adherents,
is nothing else but lying and vanity: whereupon our Faith being grounded,
should be no firmer nor surer then a building set upon the sand, the which
being beaten with the winds and waves, would presently be overthrown and cast
to the ground. The faithful man must then meditate day and night upon the word
of God. But let him principally settle himself upon the thankful promises of
God, upon the which as upon Pillars and Colloms, he ought to stay and assure
his Faith. The promises of God are I, and Amen in Jesus Christ.
And to the promises let him add Jesus Christ, who is their warrant and
pledge, without whom it is jmpossible that the Evangelical promises can be A
men unto him, as says the Apostle, that is to say, stable and certain. There
is the reason why the Apostle says that Jesus Christ is the principal matter
and subject of the Gospel; 1. Cor. 1.
because that by him the opening of the prison is made unto us, our ransom is
paid, our sickness healed, the wrath of God appeased toward us, and his
grace is purchased for us, and that in su^m, all that he has done and suffered
for us, is to assure our faith. For his righteousness, his obedience, his death,
his sacrifice, his resurrection, his victory, his prayer and intercession: all
this tends to no other end, Comparison to this purpose.
but to uphold our Faith. And even as the beams of the Sun spread over all
the world, have always the reflection toward the Sun, whence they issue; as
also all the lines of a circle tend and return from the circumference to the
center whence they part: also all the promises, the law, the threatenings, and
in general, all the parts of the scripture are referred and reported to Jesus
Christ, who is the whole substance thereof. Also for to furnish and strengthen
our Faith on every part, we must remember the properties which are attributed
to our God, as his omnipotency, his infinite mercy, his eternal truth, his
sovereign wisdom, and finally his justice. All the which things considered,
serve much to the faithful man, Assured consolations.
for the confirmation and assurance of his Faith. For considering his misery,
to remedy it, he opposes the mercy of God. Considering his weakness, he
opposes his almightinesse. Considering his vanity and lying, he opposes his
verity. Considering his jgnorance, he opposes his jmmoueable and infinite
wisdom. Finally, considering his justice, he opposes, to assure himself,
the death, the curse, and all the pains of hell which he has endured and
suffered for us; so that all the stay that is necessary to sustain and
strengthen his Faith: he seeks it not in himself, nor in his works, but in
Jesus Christ, who is the means of the grace of the alliance, and of all the
promises of God.

We must now know where our Faith resideth, and where she has herseat. The
seat of Faith.
That is in the heart (as says the Apostle) Men believe with the heart to
righteousness, and confess with the mouth to salvation. Then the Schoolmen
deceive and mistake themselves, when they put it in the understanding, and that
they say, that the only knowledge which we have of the Bible, and the
approbation of all that is contained therein, is the Faith of a Christian man,
Error of the schoolmen.
although he be not affectionate to the things contained therein; Wherein
they deceive themselves greatly. For a man must, to be faithful, have a heat
and flame in his heart, that may be warm, and fill up his zeal. So that he
may show outwardly that which he feels within, as we see in the examples of
all truly faithful that ever were, which no more then the new wives, cannot
contain in themselves the knowledge which they had of the promises of God, and
of the salvation which he had brought into the world, but they must needs
show it by their boylings, and make it known by the changing of their
manners, and of their lives, Error of the most part of Christians.
that they were new creatures. It is not then only in books where Christian
Faith consists; that is to say, to discourse well and discreetly of the holy
Scripture. It is no more in the countenance, nor in the ceremonies, by the
observation whereof a man may counterfeit and feign to be a Christian. Finally
it is not in the ear where Faith consists: but in the affection which we
bear to the word of God, which we have heard by the ear, and in the trust
which we put therein, without the which it is jmpossible that we can hold
firm, and resist the temptations and assaults which may be given us by our
enemies to shake our Faith.

The first question, to know whether the reprobate can be furnished with Faith,
or no.
THe Schoolmen say, that all men jndifferently, Error of the scholemen refuted.
as well elect as reprobate, are capable of Faith. But in that they agree not
with the scripture, which speaking of the elect, says of them. Mat. 13.
To you it is given, to know the secrets and mysteries of the kingdom of God,
and not to them. John 10.
And also Jesus Christ speaking of his sheep, says of them, My sheep hear
my voice. Then addressing his speech to the reprobate, he says to the^; But
you hear it not because you are not of God. S. John also adds, John. 4.6.
He that is of God hears us, and belieueth the word which we preach, but he
that is not of God hears us not, but rejects us. It is the reason for the
which the Apostle calls Faith, Tit. 1.1
the Faith of the elect, willing thereby to teach, that those only, and no
other, are subceptible of Faith. For there is none but them, unto whom God
has promised to take away the hardenesse and obstinacy of their stony and
hardened hearts, and to give them a heart of flesh, that is to say, soft and
flexible. We see also in this gradation on which S. Paul. Romans 8.
makes to the Romans, that the vocation and Justification are works of
Faith, and of the Spirit of God; proceeding from the election and
predestination, which are the spring thereof. Mat. 13.
Moreover the word of God, can it profit any where else, but in the Land which
is good and well tilled? Which it is not without the virtue and operation of
the holy Ghost, which is not communicated but to those only that are of God;
that is to say, that appertain to his election. Therefore is it that S. John
having said, that he has given that right to be made the children of God,
John. 1.12
to wit, to those that believe in his name, adds which are not borne of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man; but are borne of
God. And it is that which he says to Moses. Which the Apostle alleges in
the Epistle to the Romans. Romans 6.
That God has pity on whom he will have pity, and hardens whom soever
he will harden. And it is also the reason wherefore Jesus Christ said, that
none could come to him, John. 6
if he were not drawn thither by his Father. And also he said, that whosoever
had heard and learned of the Father, should come to him, and not any other. To
this purpose, S. Augustine, among the rules which he gives to refute the error
of the Pellagians, he said one that is notable: to wit, grace is not given to
all, and those to whom it is not given, is not because it is by them rejected,
but only because of the just judgment of God, who being free in all his
counsels, and being bound to no body, has given it to whom he pleased.

The Second question, whether Faith be perfect in this world.
Our perfection consists in the knowledge of our Imperfection.
IT is also demanded, whether Faith in this world can be perfect, and whether
men by their study and exercise can attain to that degree of perfection: so
that Faith may find it self in any one, accomplished with all her points?
Answer, There was never any man in the world, in whom the virtues (of what
sort soever they were,) have been perfect, but in Jesus Christ. And if in any
other but him; there is some seed and principles of virtues, they are
jmperfect, yea, (as says S. Augustine) that which wants of the virtues
always, surmounteth that which we have of them. And we have always need to
pray with the Apostles, That God would increase our Faith, for our vicious and
corrupt nature enclineth us still to all sorts of vices. But principally to
that of mistrust and doubt of the promises of God; the which we cannot well
persuade our selves, nor settle our minds, and our heart upon them; especially
when we are invironned with some dangers, and that before our eyes there
comes a representation of some horrible temptations, then we forget that God
has promised us, and seek of our selves the means to get out of those
dangers, thinking that it is the surest for us; although that in that we show
the rudeness and vanity of our senses, thinking that the creatures have more
force, means, and will to aid us, the^ the Creator, who is our Father and
almighty. Moreover, that which shows plainly the imperfection of the
knowledge which they have of God, Proof of the Inperfection of our Faith.
of his promises, and of Jesus Christ, who is the means thereof. For if, as
sayrh the Scripture, we know but in part, also must we infer, that we
believe but in part; and if the Faith were perfect in us, Faith I say, 1. Cor.
13.
by the which the hearts are purified; we should be pure and holy altogether,
and should have no more need, Act. 10.
neither to ask of God in our prayers, that he would pardon our offenses, nor
also to believe the article of the remission of our sins, Ephe. 4.
Also wherefore is it, that Jesus Christ being in the world, did institute the
ministry of his Church, and ordained that the word should be there continually
preached, the sacraments purely administered, the confessions, prayers, and
public thanksgiuings entertained by the pastors and doctors elected, and
deputed to that end; if it be not to exercise always the Faith of the
Faithful, and to increase it. We see that sickly men will always have their
Physic by them to succor them, and to have care of their health. Remedy for
this evil.
Also God knowing the weakness and feblenesse of our complexion, has
ordained in his Church, that there should be always pastors, who, like expert
Physicians, and wel^ learned, should have care to procure the health of all
those that are given them to keep. Comparison to this end.
And even as out of ^ wound that is always open, the matter must be drawn
which a tent and ^ plaster; also must the people be continually exercised in
the meditation of the Law of God, by the which they may be exhorted and
induced te withdraw themselves from vice, and apply themselves to virtue. A
gardner, what diligence soever he uses to cleanse and weed his garden well;
neuerthe^esse he cannot do it so well, but there will be some bad herbs
found, the which would stifle the good, if they were not plucked up. Also the
vices which bud in us continually, would choke up the seeds of piety, which
God of his grace has put into us, wirhout the great care and solicitude which
we ought to have to put them up, and endeavor until the end and extremity
of our life, to stop and stanch the spring thereof. For as says the
Scripture, although that we were pure and clean by the grace of God; yet have
we some need to wash our feet. John. 13.
And although that we are without leaven, yet must we always study to purge
the old leaven, to the end, 1. Cor. 5.
that we may be new dow.

Third question, whether our so little Faith, be capable to apprehend the
grace of God.
Answer, yea.
TO know, whether our Faith being little, can apprehend the grace of God, and
the beneficence of Jesus Christ whose virtue is jnfinite? Answer: Our Faith
although it be little, lets not though it be such, to embrace the grace of God,
his promises, Jesus Christ, with all his blessings. Comparison.
Like unto the eye, which is one of the least members, of man's body, does
nevertheless apprehend the greatness of the Sun, and the light thereof, the
which is spread over the whole world; Also does our Faith though it be little,
it lets not, for the littleness thereof, to conceive the Sun of
righteousness, and to apply to it self all his gifts and graces. Which we
see in the Apostles, unto whom Jesus Christ did often reproach the littleness
of their Faith. Example.
And yet for all that, he acknowledged them to be truly faithful, and even
to be his friends, and true children of God. John. 15.
A child with his hand, although it be little, takes that which is given him:
So the faithful man with his little Faith, receaueth all the graces, gifts,
and favors that God will enlarge and administer unto him. And even, although
it be sometimes contaminate with many sicknesses, as ignorance, cupidities,
passions, doubts, mistrusts, fears, and cares, nevertheless that does not
hinder at all, but sick as it is, it may notwithstanding well take the
medicines, and remedies which are fit and convenient to recover her health. An
other Comparison.
And even as a Leaper with his hand covered with Leprosy, lets not to take the
alms which is given him: also the Faithful, although he have an Itchie and
scabbie Faith, lets not nevertheless to apprehend the promises and all the
benefits of our God. John. 1.
For when God promises us, that he that believes shall be the Child of God,
and shall have life everlasting, he limiteth not the measure and degree of
Faith, to obtain that which he promises. But says only, that he that
belieueth, without determining the measure of Faith required, to attain to the
mark which he sets before us. As if he should say, who soever shall believe,
whether with great, or with little faith, provided that it be true and not
dissembled, shall obtain the remission of sins, and the other graces which God
promises him in believing. Also we see that he that said to Jesus Christ,
that he believed a little, and desired him that he would help his unbelief,
did not let to jmpetrate of him that which he demanded, non-obstan^ the
jmbecility and littlenes of his faith.

The Fourth question, whether Faith shows it self always.
A fit comparison.
TO wit, whether Faith be always apparent? Ans. Faith is sometime^ retained
in the heart, so that it appears not outwardly, by reason that sometimes the
temptations and dangers are so great, that it shuts it self up in the heart of
the faithful man. As we see, that in a great winter the seeds in the earth,
and the sap in the trees, keep themselves close and covered within, without
showing themselves; in so much that one would judge (feeing the superficies of
the earth, and the branches of the trees bereft of leaves, flowers, and fruits)
that they were dead. Nevertheles, the rigor of the season past, and the
softnes of the spring time come again, we see that the life was not
al^ogether extinguished, but only repres^ed, and shut up for a time, until the
cold and frosts were past. So we see in ^he Church, that the faithful (who are
^he trees and plants of the orchard of God) do not always show their Faith
and life which is in them; Example.
as in the ^ime of Elyas, although there were ^ great number, who had not bow^d
the knee to Baal; Nevertheless, ^et were they not in evidence. Which ^eceaued
the Prophet, and made him ^alsely to think, that he alone remained ^he servant
of God.

So it comes often, that the faithful men shall not be known exteriourly by
the works and actions of faith, although it be enclosed in their hearts, and
that upon occasion when it presents, they declare it according to the grace
which God gives them, agitation of the spirit which moves them to do it,
when time serves.

The fifth and last question, whether true Faith can fall away.
The elect of God are preserved finally in Faith
THe fifth and last question is, to wit, whether faith can be quite taken away
from the heart of him that has received it of God? Answer. Faith is permanent
until the end, in him unto whom God by his spirit, and his word has once
truly communicated it. And there is no slight nor temptation, whether of the
devil, of the world, of tyrants, o^ the flesh, that can quite extinguish it
when once it is kindled in the soul o^ the faithful man. Error of the
Scholemen.
And howsoever the Schoolmen say, that men truly faithful are uncertain of
their perseverance in faith: yet must the Christian against their false and
erroneous opinion, hold resolutely by the scripture, that, that which God has
begun in him by his Grace, he will advance it, Psalm. 138.
and will not desist from raising and pursuing, until such time as he has
fully accomplished it; whereto all the passages and parcels of scripture
following, may serve. First, that of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Philippians,
Of perseverance in Faith. Phil. 1.6.
I thank my God having you in perfect memory, always in all my prayers for
you all, praying with gladness, because of the fellowship which ye have in the
Gospel, from the first day until now. And I am persuaded of this same thing,
that he that has begun this good work in you, will perform it until the day
of Jesus Christ. The Apostle confirming that, also says, The foundation of God
remains sure, 2. Tim. 2.
and has this seal, The Lord knows who are his, and let every one that
calls on the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. Also, whom he
predestined, Romans 8.
them also he called; and whom he called, them also he justified; and whom
he justified, them he also glorified. Finally, speaking of himself and of all
the elect. I am (says he) persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. Christ also speaking to his sheep,
says in general of all. John. 10.
That none can put them out of his hand, and that they shall not perish
everlastingly, and that he will give them everlasting life, and no man can
hinder him in that. And also, John. 5.
he says. That all those which God his father has given him, shall come unto
him, and that being come, he will not cast them behind him for ever. Moreover
seeing he is never denied of any thing which he asked of God his Father, John.
17.
and that before his death, he prayed him solemnly for those that his Father
has given him: whereupon may be inferred certainly, that all the elect that
are comprehended in his prayer, cannot fail to persevere in Faith, and finally
by it be saved. Luke 22.
When also speaking to S. Peter, and exhorting him with his fellows to stand
upon his guard, least they should be surprised by the lurking, ambuscadoes of
the devil, and not to fall into their nets; he said unto him, That he had
prayed for him; to the end his Faith should not fail him; that ought not only
to be applied to S. Peter, but to the whole Chruch universally, which was
presented unto us in his person, and to the which for this reason that prayer
did also appertain. When also speaking to the to the Pharisees, he said unto
the^, That all that God his Father had not planted, Mat. 15.
should be plucked up, he meant to say the contrary, that no thing which his
Father had planted, as he did all the elect, should be plucked up, does not S.
John also say in his first Epistle? 1. John. 5.
That whosoever is borne of God sins not, (that is to say,) to death,
because he is begotten of God, he keeps himself, and that wicked one touches
him not. And also, whosoever is borne of God does not sin, for the seed of
him remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is borne of God. Again
does not Jesus Christ promise to whomesoeuer shall eat his flesh and drink
his blood, John. 6.
(which is done by Faith) that he shall dwell in him, and he reciprocally in
him that shall eat it? whereupon it follows, that Jesus Christ who is the
life, dwelling in the Faithful man, who by Faith has eaten his flesh, cannot
fail (for this reason) to live eternally in him. The prophets likewise
confirm, Esaias. 45.
as Esaias, among others, who speaking to Israel, said, That God saves them
with a perpetual salvation, Esaias. 51.
and speaking to the elect, says unto them to comfort them; Lift up your
eyes to heaven, and look down upon the earth; for the Heavens shall vanish
like smoke, and the earth shall be worn like a garment, and the Inhabitants
thereof shall likewise be abolished; but my salvation shall be for ever, and
my justice shall never fail. Jeremy, also speaking in the name of God, says
of them, That God loueeth them with an eternal love. And Ose speaking likewise
of the marriage and alliance which God, Ose. 2.
contracteth with them, says, That it is for ever, and that they must not
fear, that between him and his church there can ever come any divorce, nor
libell of refusal. David also assures us of that in many places, as in the
23. Psalm. Thou do annoint my head with oil, and my cup runs over.
Doubtless, kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and
I shall remain a long season in the house of the Lord. And in the 30. Psalm.
Sing praises unto the Lord, ye his Saints, and give thanks before the
remembrance of his holiness. For he indureth but a while in his anger: but in
his favor is life: weeping may abide at evening, but joy comes in the
morning. And in the 65. Psalm. Wicked deeds have prevailed against me: but
thou will be merciful unto our transgressions. Blessed is he whom thou
choosest and causest to come to thee; he shall dwell in thy courts, and we
shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thine house, even of thine holy
Temple. And in the 119. Psalm. Let my soul live and it shall praise thee, and
thy judgments shall help me. And also, Fly feom evil and do good, and
dwell for ever. Psalm. 37.
For the Lord loves judgment, and forsakes not his Saints: they shall be
preserved for evermore: but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off. And about
the end of the Psalm. The salvation of the righteous men shall be of the Lord:
he shall be their strength in the time of trouble. For the Lord shall help
them, and deliver them, he shall deliver them from the wicked, and shall save
them because they trust in him. But above all, the parcel of the Apostle to
the Romans is plain to prove this, Of the excellency of Faith for conclusion
of this Treatise. Chap. 11.
when he says that the gifts and the vocation of God are without repentance.
Seeing then that Faith brings us so many good things, as the grace of God,
the remission of our sins, the adoption of children, assured hope of the
kingdom of Heaven, and life everlasting. It may well of all the virtues be it,
which ought to be most reco^mendable unto us, and of the which we ought to be
most curious, as well to preserve, as to exercise it, and to make it grow and
profit in our hearts, by an assiduity of hearing, reading, and meditating of
the word of God. And to desire of him continually in our prayers, that by his
holy Spirit he would augment it in us, until that we may arrive at the
greatest perfection and highest degree thereof that we may. So be it.

FINIS.
A TREATISE of HOPE.
AMongst the blessings which God has departed unto us in Jesus Christ, A
blessing of God.
some we possess in this present life, others we look for in the life to
come; and of the first we have some as it were ^lready in our hands, we shall
enjoye the others hereafter. All are propounded unto us in diverse places of the
holy ^cripture, and briefly in the first chap^er of the Epistle to the
Ephesians. Faith.
Now ^s true Faith gives consent without any doubt, to all the verity of God
manifested in the Canonical books of the old and new Testament, as well in
regard of the resitall of the things done from the beginning of the world,
until the time of the Apostles, as they are therein declared, as of the
declarations of divine will, whether it does justly threaten the wicked and
punishes them in some sort in the world, whether it aduertiseth them of the
torments prepared for their souls and bodies; or whether it promises to the
just jnfinite blessings, and does jmpart some unto them as a trial of those
which it has prepared in a better life: Hope.
so Hope taken i^ his proper signification, regards the good things to come,
namely, thos^ which we look for by the grace of go^ in Heaven. For we speak
of the Christian Hope, discerning it by this title from worldly hope,
jmproperly name^ Hope by those that know not well wha^ it is to hope. The good
Israelites hope^ that the Messiah should at last appear^ in the flesh. We hope
that God would assist us, comfort us, and succor us, ye^ in so much as he is
our Father in Jesus Christ, that he will raise us again at the ^atter day,
that we shall be in body and ^oule eternally in heaven, to possess the
^nheritance which was prepared for us before the foundations of the world. ^t
is that which S. Paul, teaches briefe^y in the first Chap. of the Epistle to
the Ephesians, verse. 12. and 18. Therefore ^ee says ( Romans, 8.23.) that
we ^re saved by hope; having a regard to ^he condition of the Faithful in the
world, and to the state of the militant Church. Now hope (adds he) which is
seen, is not hope: For why should any man hope for that which he ^eth? But if
we hope for that which we see not, then we wait for it with ^atience.

The hope of Christians is no less certain then their Faith, Certainty of
hope.
which comes of the promises of God made to his for their salvation. It is
vpheld by that Faith named by the Apostle, Hi^ostacie or subsidence of the
things hoped for, Hebrews, 11. And it must also be certain and armed with
patience, by reason of the delay, which seems long to our impatience. And the
divine goodness so supporteth our weakness, wisely exercising our Faith by
this enterposing of hope which stands as in sentinel waiting the hour to be
put in possession of the good things, Her birth and Life.
which are promised him. Now as it comes and depends of Faith, consenting
to the promises of God; so likewise it is strengthened by this same Faith,
insomuch that we see, that he that made us such excellent promises, will not
fail in one of them, but will accomplish it fully. As little doubts she of
the power of him that promises, as of his will confirmed by a solemn oath, by
the gift of the son of God, and by so many other testimonies ratified by more
experience. Therefore when the Apostle wished that the eyes of the
understanding of the Saints and Faithful might be jlluminated, to the end
they might know what is the hope of the calling of God, and what are the riches
of the glory of his jnheritance among the Saints, he yet adds thereunto,
what is the excellent greatness of his power toward rhem, according to the
effi^acie of the mightiness of his strength. Ephesians, verse. 18.19. words of
great weight, and which show the inco^prehensi^le good of the christian hope:
Her excellency.
for ex^mple, it is said that Abraham, vnder^anding the promise of God, beyond
^ope believed in hope, that he should ^ecome a Father of many nations, and
^eing not weak in Faith had no regard ^o his body already benumbed, made ^o
doubt of the promise of God, know^ng certainly that he that had promi^ed him,
was able to do it, Romans, ^.18. etc. Then, as hope proceeds ^f this that
we believe that God is ^rue in his promises; so is it nourished and confirmed
by the certain perswa^on which we have of his infinite power. And even as our
Faith is groun^ed upon nothing but the power and truth of God, which promises
us euer^asting life, by the merits of the obedi^nce of one only Jesus Christ;
the like ^ught we to say of hope, grounded v^on Faith, Hebrews, 11.1. In whom
it is found.
Wherevp^on it follows also, that such a hope cannot be but in such persons
as are dowed with faith in Christ, because that the one proceeds of the
other, and is set upon the same foundations. Therefore also S. Paul prayed for
the faithful, that God would open the eye^ of their understandings, to the end
they might comprehend the hope of his vocation, and the riches of the glory o^
his inheritance among the Saints, a^ has been already showed. Let us ther^
conclude, seeing we are called to the hope of that everlasting, happy, and
glorious life, no less then to believe in Jesus Christ, that he sins no
less that does not in patience hope and wait for this celestial inheritance,
then the other that believes not in Jesus Christ.

The ground of Christian Hope.
Now seeing we are called to the hope of these everlasting goods things, they
are then promised to us that believe in Jesus Christ. And therefore it is
reason that our hope should abide grounded upon the promises of God, and all
that which concerning them: namely, upon Jesus Christ in whom they are
ratified, and whom we accept for a savior. These promises of eternal felicity
to the belieuers, are confirmed unto them. 1. By the solemn oath or vow of God
which is added thereunto. 2. By the precious blood of Jesus Christ, which is
the seal thereof. 3. By the admirable right, according to the which it has
pleased God to adopt us for his children and heirs. 4. By the holy spirit of
the promise who has marked all the faithful for the possession of this
inheri^ance, in whose hearts the divine promises are hidden, and which dwells
^n them, as an assured earnest or pledge ^f the inheritance promised and kept
^n Heaven. 5. By the eternal, immoo^able, and free election, according to the
which the Apostle affirms, that all the ^elieuers in Christ were
predestined, ^ot only because they should be adop^ed to be called,
justified, and sanctified, ^ut also to be sanctified. 6. By the ar^icle of the
resurrection and ascension of ^he Lord, and of his sitting at the right ^and of
God his father: which shows ^he truth of the promises made to him ^or our
salvation, and the power of the promise: for that which God was able to effect
in our head, he will also be able to do it in his members, as in effect he will
accomplish it. We have the proof thereof in that he quickened us when we were
dead in sin, he quickneth us every day by his grace, he has raised and does
raise us in newness of life. Also in the resurrection of Jesus Christ, set
soon after at the right hand of the father. So then, seeing we are called to
the hope of this promised inheritance, and which we ought to weight with
patience: seeing it is commanded us to hope so because of Jesus Christ: seeing
he that has promised it unto us is True, and Almighty to effect his promise;
let us conclude, that the hope which we have to obtain the celestial
inheritance, is assured and most certain every way. 7. For assurance of
strengthening, we have our conformity with our head in his sufferings, and in
the patience of his afflictions; insomuch as we maintain one selfsame cause,
to wit, the confession of the truth, and profession of the Gospel. Whereupon
the Apostle says, that if we suffer with Jesus Christ, we shall also reign
with him, 2. Tim. 2.12. Also, We boast even in tribulations knowing that
tribulation brings patience, and patience experience, and experience hope.
Romans 5.3.4. Also he joins the resurrection of Christ to his death, and
declares that if we be dead with him, we believe that we shall also live with.
him Ephe. 1.20. Ro^. 9.8. So the^ persecution for righteousness is a most
assured testimony to the faithful, that they shall participate in the glory
of their head and everlasting life. From thence it comes that the Apostle
rejoices with the Phillippians, because it has been given unto them for
Christ's sake, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him. Phil.
1.29. Wrighting to the Thessalonians, we our selves (says he) boast of you in
the Churches of God, because of your patience and Faith in all the persecutions
and afflictions which you undergo, the which are a manifest demonstration of
the judgment of God, that you may be reputed worthy of his Kingdom. For the
which also you suffer. 2. Thessa. 1.4.5. The same point of doctrine is treated
in the 12. Chap. of the Epistle to the Hebrews. And as it was needful that
the head of the Church should suffer, and by the way of the cross enter into
glory: also it is fitting that by many tribulations, the members of his body
should enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Let us then conclude, that the
sufferings for Jesus Christ, do maruailously confirm the hope of his reign.

Hope is a singular gift.
Besides, as Faith is a singular gift of God, so is hope, for as much as by
patience the believers wait for these great good things which have been
promised them. Therefore S. Paul wished fervently that the Faithful might have
the eyes of their understanding opened, to know what was the hope of their
vocation, and the excellency of the riches of the glory of his inheritance
among the Saints: Ephe. 1.18. Let us then also pray unto the Lord, that he
would more and more confirm in our hearts the hope of eternal life. Let us
hope that he will do it, seeing his gifts and his calling is without
repentance, and that he goes on to the end with the good work which he has
begun in his elect. Let us yet consider, that the nature of hope agrees
altogether with that of Faith: That is to say, it is assured, perpetual,
lively, of efficacy in those that are regenerate hoping in God. Seeing that
hope proceeds and depends of Faith which maintayneth it, necessaryly hope
is such as Faith is: so that the faithful truly hoping, although that, shook
with diverse sorts of temptations, it never falls by despairing altogether;
because that christian hope is settled upon the solid and firm foundations
above spoken of, not upon humane strength, dignities, or promises. Such a hope
is not idle, but ^ssured of the felicity, she contains the ^aithfull in
duty, causes them to pur^ue and desire to effect that which they ^now to be
agreeable to the Lord; that ^hey do gently support afflictions, ^aies and gates
to attain and enter in^o paradise, that they know by their own experience,
that affliction brings patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope, which makes not ashamed, Romans 5.3. For those that hope in the Lord
cannot be confounded; whereupon it follows, that hope depends not of us,
nor of our merits, otherwise, it were nothing but shame and confusion to us.

Summarie of the doctrine of Hope.
Let us yet make some exact summarie of the doctrine towching christian hope.
The word of hope is taken in two sorts: by a figurative and proper manner of
speaking. Figured in three sorts; 1. This word signifies Faith, by reason of
the conuenience of them, and because that true Fatth comprehends assured
knowledge and trust, Heb. 6.11. We desire that every one of you should show the
same care for the full assurance of hope until the end. 1. Pet. 3.18. Be
always ready to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the
hope that is in you. 2. Sometime it designeth the goods hoped for. Gal. 5.5*
We through the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness through Faith*
Colloss. 1.5. For the hope sake which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof
ye have heard before by the word of truth. Titus. 2.13. Looking for that
blessed hope, and appearing of that gloly of that mighty God, etc. 3. It is
taken for the support and aid which man persuades himself to find in God,
or in his creatures. Psalm. 65.6. Thou art the hope of all the ends of the
earth; and 142.6. I have said thou art my retreat, my hope, or my portion.
Esaias. 20.5. They shall be confounded by reason of Cus, which is their hope, or
that which they look upon. This word properly taken signifies a durable
affection of heart, raised by God, by the which we wait for the good things,
difficult, but possible to obtain, and such as not without cause we desire to
obtain. The Principal efficient cause of Hope, is God who gives it to his
elect. Romans 15.13. etc. Th^ss. 2.16. Now as our Faith by the means of the word
preached and heard, comes of the fidelity and truth of God, if you consider
the nearest cause, for certain Hope proccedeth of Faith; for being certain of
Gods truth, we give credit to his word in the which he promises us excellent
things, in hope to receive them at the time prescribed to give them. Heb 11.1.
The Apostle shows the object of our Hope, to wit, salvation in heaven, saying
that we are saved by Hope, and that the Hope which is seen, is not Hope; for
why should any man hope for that which he sees? Romans 8.23. Whereby we
gather, that Hope regards the things absent and to come; also that it
consists in the trust which we have to obtain and possess those things
according to the decree and promise of God. The subject of Hope is such a one
as that of Faith, the which has Hope for effect and fellow, during the whole
course of this present life. Faith is the proper goods of the elect of God, who
accep^ Jesus Christ for their only savior an^ mediator. To them then belonge^
Hope, the which (says the Apostle Heb. 6.19.) we have as an anchor o^ the
soul both sure and steadfast, and ^ enters into that which is within the
veil. The form of our Hope is the trust which the holy Ghost gives us that
we shall not be tempted beyond our strength, that the afflictions shall be
mitigated, that God will deliver us from all evils, and dangers, and will save
us in his heavenly Kingdom. The end, is to stay until that according to the
good pleasure of God we be put in possession of the good things which he has
promised us. If he be slack, wait thou (says Abacuck chap. 2. verse. 3.) for
he will not fail to come, and will not tarry. Let us then conclude of all that
has been said, A definition of christian Hope.
that Christian Hope is a gift of God the Father to all the elect in Jesus
Christ, by the holy Ghost for the upholding of their Faith; consisting in a
trust to obtain the goods to come: by the virtue of the which the same elect
are assured, that one day they shall be freed from all evils, to enjoy those
goods in the Kingdom of heaven. Her fair privileges
In the writings of the Prophets and Apostles are found many goodly privileges
of this true Hope. We will note some of them. 1. It trusts in God alone, who
is called the Hope of his people, and David in sundry places protests that
he has put all his Hope in him. 2. Remembering that malediction and curse is
pronounced in the 17. Chap. of Jeremy against him that sets his Hope in
man, and who takes the flesh for his arm, it takes heed carefully of
trusting in creatures. 3. It is our Helmet against the mortal strokes of
Satan, as the Apostle speaks of it. 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. saying, let us be sober,
putting on the brestplate of love, and of the hope of salvation for an helmet.
4. It is the Faithful companion of affliction for righteousness, and the joy
of the Faithful, as says S. Paul. Romans 5. and. 12. Experience brings Hope.
Also rejoice in Hope. 5. It is confirmed by the remembrance of the goods
received of God, and by the reading of his word. It conducteth us to heaven: it
is lively and immortal, it vpholdeth us invincible, it delivers us from the
fear of men, makes us happy; as infinite testimonies and examples verify 6.
Let us add that as there is but one Faith, also we have but one hope. You are
called (says S. Paul. Ephe. 4.4.) In one Hope of your vocation. Also there is
but one only body, one only Spirit, one only Lord, one only Faith, one
Baptism, one only God and Father of all, one holy Ghost, and one celestial
inheritance. Whereunto God of his mercy bring us.

FINJS.
A TREATISE OF CHRISTIAN CHARITY; Then specially of the works and exercises
of the children of God.
THe Charity of Christians toward God and their neighbors, The excellency of
christian Charity.
that Charity which the Apostle calls the end of the commandment, 1. Tim.
1.5. which comes of a pure heart, of a good conscience, and of a faith
unfeigned, is surely a precious gift of the Lord; besides this heavenly wish,
Peace be with the brethren, and charity with faith from God the Father, and
from the Lord Jesus Christ, Ephe. 6.23. Besides it is called the fruit of the
Spirit. Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the Spirit, is Charity, joy, peace, patience,
benignity, goodness, loyalty, gentleness, temperance. There we see a stately and
divine band of the Mother and her eight daughters. Thirdly, Charity comes of
Faith; for Charity loves and jmbraceth that which Faith shows and makes
known unto her, so that Faith is as it were the Mother of Charity; and of these
two heavenly virtues comes hope, whereof we have already spoken. This Charity
whereof we speak, is attributed to those whom (closed and conjoined with that
spiritual knot which S. Pau^ calls The bond of perfectness, Colos. 3.14.)
do study to keep me: Unity of the spirit by the bond of peace, Ephe. 4.3
forbearing the one the other in Charity, and whom the same declares, that
they appertain to Jesus Christ, Whose whole kindred is named in heaven and
earth, Ephesians. 3.15. These brethren and kindred are those that by Christ have in
one selfsame Spirit Entrance to the Father, Ephe. 2.18. Whereupon he
concludes and says, You are then no more strangers and forriners, but
Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God; Built upon the foundation
of the Apostles, and Prophets, etc. Ephesians. 2.19. By an other elegant
similitude, he shows in the same Epistle that all the lively members of Jesus
Christ are joined to their head by Charity, saying, Following the truth in
love, we grow up unto him which is the head, that is, Christ. By whom all the
body being coupled and knit together by every joint, for the fourniture thereof
(according to the effectual power which is in the measure of every part)
receaueth increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians.
4.15.16. From that which is said, we gather that Charity is the jnfallible
mark of christians, according to the sentence of the sovereign Doctor. A
definition thereof.
By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if you love one another,
Io. 13.35, Let us the^ say that charity is a gift of God, who by his holy
spirit for the love of JESUS CHRIST, does inflame the hearts of his children
with an ardent dilection which they bear him, by reason of his infinite mercy
toward them in their election, vocation, justification, sanctification, and
glorification hoped for according to his infallible promises: of the which
dilection proceeds the humble and free desire to render him obedience, and to
witness by all good duties a sincere amity to all men; especially to the
household of faith, with whom we rejoice that they were received into favor
and grace, and have obtained pardon for their sins, remaining bound with a
brotherly affection with them, by reason of the love of God our Father. S.
Augustine said in one of Epistles, that charity is a virtue, by the which we
love those things that are to be loved; which agrees very fitly with our
charity toward God, who loved us even when we were his enemies. The Lord said
of the woman sinner, that her sins which had been great, were forgiven her*
for (adds he) she has loved much, Luke 7.47. By this do we know that we
love the children of God, when we love God, and keep his commandments. For
this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and his commandments
are not grievous, 1. John 5.2.3. Who so loves others, he has accomplished
the Law: for that which is said, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit
adultery, etc. and if there be any other commandment, it is summarily
comprehended in this point, to wit, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
Love does not evil to his neighbor, therefore is Love the fulfilling of the
Law, Romans 13.8.9.10. The properties thereof are excellently described by the
Apostle in these words: Her properties.
Love suffers long: it is bountiful: Love envieth not: love does not boast
it self: it ^s not puffed up: it does no uncomely thing: ^t seeks not her
own things: it is not provoked to anger: it thinks not evil: it rejoices
not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth: it suffers all things: it
belieueth all things: it hops all things: it endures all things, 1. Cor.
13.4. etc. What a pattern for us all? God who is Charity it self) give us the
grace that all the days of our lives we may cast the eye of our thoughts upon
this fair and lively picture, to learn to walk in charity, renouncing all
impatience, fury, envy, arrogance, jmpudency, covetousness, violence,
malignity, jniquity, lying, cruelty, jnfidelity, profaneness, jmpiety, crimes
directly contrary to christian charity.

Let us in order see some effects of charity, Her effects.
which show what she is. 1. It is the testimony of Justification already
apprehended, following that which the Lord said to the Woman sinner, whereof
has been spoken before. 2. It is not altogether perfect in this present life:
but shall be in the life eternal, namely after the resurrection. Charity
(says S. Paul, 1. Cor. 13.8.) does never fall away, whereas as for the
Prophesies, they shall be abolished: and as for the languages, they shall
cease: as for knowledge, it shall be abolished. 3. Whether we consider the
household of Faith, or other men, Charity is well ordered; To this purpose it is
said, Gal. 6.10. Whiles we have time, let us do good to all, principally to
the household of Faith. 4. A servile fear does much hinder men's consciences in
the execution of that which appertains to their duty, and in the exercises
of patience whereto Charity remedieth, as says S. John in his 1. Epistle chap.
4. ver. 18. There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear, for
fear has painfulness, and he that fear this not perfect in love. 5. The
rule of indifferent works and actions, is Charity, witness the acts of the
Counsel at Jerusalem, the circumsicion of Timothy, and such like in the
christian primitive Church. To the weak (says S. Paul) I became as weak,
that I might win the weak. I am made all things to all men, that I might by
all means save some, 1. Cor. 9.22. 6. Charity is the end of the commandment
of the law, 1. Tim. 1.5. Matthew 22.37. etc. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the
first and the great commandment. And the second is like unto that, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. 7. It may be said that charity is superior
and inferior to Faith; but in diverse respects inferior, by reason of
justification, of her original, and of her measure. For we are justified by
Faith, Romans 3.27. not by charity, the which shows That we are justified,
James. 2.18.21. From faith comes charity: and that which faith apprehends,
is assured and accomplished; but charity has her progressions and
increasings: in sum, faith is the measure of it, and he to whom God shows
most mercy, more that man loves God and his neighbors. Why charity is the
greatest.
But on the other side, Charity is superior. 1. Because it shall never fall
away, and shall not be abolished in the life eternal, but shall there be more
accomplished. 2. As it is a happier thing to give, then to receive, charity
imparteth the goods and gifts which it has received, and faith apprehends
and keeps the goods which God does promise and present unto it. 3. In the
righteousness begun in those that are justified in Jesus Christ, who
regards properly sanctification and regeneration, Charity has ^he advantage
over faith. Whence it comes, that we are justified by faith, not by charity.
But it fol^oweth not therefore that we are iustifi^d by Charity, although it
be greater ^hen Faith and Hope. For in iustifica^ion, there is no question to
weigh the qualities of these virtues, to say, this is more proper to justify
man, than the other two; but in them is considered the office, the nature, and
the property of ^aith, which consists in that only which it apprehends and
applies to ^he person which belieueth this righte^usnes of Jesus Christ, which
is offered unto us in the Gospel. Charity has an ^ther charge and property:
it loves jesus Christ, which faith has received, ^ccepted, and embraced for
an only Savior. Therefore we do not well ^nderstand, when we say that
charity ^ustifieth, becaused it is greater then ^aith. For first we presvppose
confused that which is in debate, that by the dignity of his virtues the sinner
be justified before God; faith it self does not ^ustifie us if we understand
it so. We have but one only justice to subsist before the judgment of God,
that is, Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 1.30. and 2. Cor. 5.21. Secondly, that which is
said is thought simply spoken in some respect. Charity is not simply greater
then faith: but in regard of the during of the holiness of life begun in us.
Thirdly it is as if one should say, A King is greater and more raised in
dignity above some industrious Goldsmith his subject; then he makes a bowl or
a chain of gould better then this goldsmith. The head is more excellent the^
the feet, we ought then to walk with our head, and not with our feet. As much
may be said of other excellent parts of the body in comparison of some less,
which have their proper use. And although there be some dissemblance or
vnlikelyhoode in these examples, yet this is firm, that as the senses and the
members of the body have their objects and distinct offices, so must we
distinctly assign to Faith, Hope, and Charity, that which is special and
proper unto them, without confounding by our unaptness, that which God will have
distinct and distinctly considered. whether Charity gives form to Faith.
Those have also deceived themselves, that have maintained, that charity gives
form to faith, and has finished it, like as the matter receaueth
acco^plishment of her form. And it is a vain jmagination, to think and say,
that the form of one distinct quality only is another quality distinct of the
form by the definition thereof. The form of faith shows it self in the
intelligence and apprehension of the promise of grace; that of charity in the
love of God and of our neighbors; the one and the other works by their
nature and efficacy, besides who is the man of understanding that will
maintain that the thing ingendered, has the form of the Ingenderer? Now
faith ingendereth hope and charity, whereof she is the next cause. Therefore,
neither the one nor the other ought to be taken for the form of faith. To
conclude, as the moral virtues are not the forms of virtues intellectual; so
neither charity nor hope ought to be called the form of Faith.

Besides, the gift of charity is most necessary for us, How necessary the
gift of charity is.
because that other gifts (how excellent soever they be) are of no estimation
nor use, if charity be from them. Though I speak (says the Apostle, 1. Corinthians. 13.) with the tongues of men and Angels, and have not love, I am as
sounding brass or a tinckling Cymbale. Again, without charity men cannot find
peace nor agreement in any company whatsoever. Hatred brings discord; but
charity covers all faults, Prou. 10.12. 1. Pet. 4.8. He that loves his
brother, he abides in the light, and there is no occasion of evil in him. 1.
Ioh. 2.10. We walk now by faith, not in sight. Charity shall be accomplished
and made greater in everlasting life, without changing of sort; but faith shall
have her accomplishment seeing the good denounced and believed of all present.
We see now through a glass obscurely, but then we shall see face to face, now
I know in part, but then I shall know, as I have also been known, 1. Cor.
13.12. Hope also shall then be abolished, all evil being done away, the
tears wiped from our eyes, which shall see the things present which we hoped
for, for the hope which is seen, is not hope: for why should any one hope for
that which he sees? But if we hope for that which we see not, then we wait
for it in patience, Romans 8.23.24. Then as we now possess by hope this
inheritance which S. Paul calls incorruptible, which cannot contaminate, nor
wither; also we shall one day be in effect coheires with Jesus Christ, to
enjoy this inheritance indiuisiblie and eternally. The doctrine of charity, as
also that of faith and hope, amply expounded in the books of the Prophets and
Apostles, is precisely and articularly comprehended in the catechismicke
questions and answers. And as we must draw the summarie of the doctrine of
Faith, and of hope out of the symbol or creed of the Apostles, and the
dominicall prayer, that of charity is found in the Decalogue. That which
repugneth against the articles therein contained, ought to be detested as
erroneous and pernicious. For following the precept of the Apostle, 2. Tim. 1,
13. We must keep the true pattern of the wholesome words, and the good intent
by the holy ghost which dwells in us. It is fitting also to avoid all
profane and vain babblings, and the contradicting of a science falsely so
named, 1, Tim 6, 20.

In the consideration of the 10. article propounded in the Title. Let us first
treat of the works of charity toward our neighbors. 2. Let us rise to the
contemplation of the doctrine of good works. 3. Let us speak as shortly as
may be, of the virtues commanded and recommended to all Christians under these
words, Thou shall love thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy
self.

1. In the consideration of the first point hear treated generally, let us see
the reasons which ought to move us to Charity toward our neighbors.
Afterward what kind of works of charity are the principal. Also the rules to
the which all may be referred. Now although that the commandment of God, our
duty, the doctrine of Faith, of repentance, and of the judgments and
punishments temporal and eternal, ought to induce all christians to true
obedience toward the Lord: notwithstanding it shall suffice to touch that
which ought to move us to charity, the object, then the end thereof. The
commandment of God ought to have great sway which bears that we should love
our neighbor as our selves. If this friendship proceeds of a pure heart, the
effect thereof follows at need. Let us join to the commandment of the
Faith of the christian that obayeth. That works by charity, and it cannot
be that the regenerate man can be guided by the spirit of envy, rancour, and
cruelty, for the marks of the disciples of the Lord, is that they love one
another in him, whose example, above al in the behoof of Charity to his
neighbors, is set before his to instruct them, as he said expressly to them the
night before he died, and does there exhort them most affectionately,
according as S. John repeateth it in the 13.14.15. and 16. Chap. and his first
Epistle serves for a commentary to the commandment and to this example of the
master, of whom may be said in a word, that his person, his offices, and
benefits are nothing but Charity. Who so reuerenceth this savior in the
quality of a gift of God, ought to follow him as an example and patron of
virtue. And who so does otherwise loses the gift, and bears the name of a
christian in vain, yea to his great condemnation. This jmitation does not
consist in equality nor in perfection, but in a fervent desire, a holy will,
and a perseuerant continuance.

The object of charity.
The object of Charity is our neighbor, who stands in need of our help,
which belongs unto him, both in word and deed: according to the law. Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Jesus Christ being demanded of a
Pharisie, who was our neighbor, teaches him what he knew not, in the
description of the Samaritanes charity toward the Jew that was sore wounded.
Luc. 10.29. etc. There he shows that we ought to acknowledge for our
neighbor, every person that has need of our help, Degrees of neighborhood.
true it is that the degrees of neighborhood are diverse; and this diversity
makes men to vary, and often to redouble the obligation. There is a double
neighborhood: the one is natural, the other spiritual; the natural draws
us to all men as well Faithful as infidels. The spiritual is proper to the
children of God, and binds them the more. The natural.
As for the natural, it is compounded of three degrees, 1. We are neighbors
the one to the other by order of creation: for in regard of the substance of
our original, we are all come of Adam, by consequent neighbors in him. 2.
One man is neighbor to an other, because he is a man endowed with a body and
soul, and having been all first created in our first Father after the Image of
God, whereof yet some trace does appear, yea in the miserable sinners, so
far forth, that after the deluge God condemning murder expressly, says these
words, whosoever has shed man's blood, by man his blood shall be shed; for
God made man after his own Image; Genes. 9.6. 3. In regard of the common life
and of the society of men, wherein one body has need of the help and
assistance of the other; the rich men no less, sometimes more, then the poor.
In this society are found diverse particular degrees, part of consanguinitie,
of affinity, of public and domestic charge, part of diverse necessities and
difficulties which present at all times in the course of humane life, This
natural association of the children of Adam together, ought sufficiently to
teach them, to love one another; which the Philosophers have well comprehended,
according as their books witness; wherein they show that the use of reason and
speech was given to man, to the end that the one might tell the other, what he
judges convenient to require and to give ease. The Spiritual.
The spiritual society is of Christians among themselves, whereunto they are
drawn by a fouer-fowld necessity. 1. Of regeneration; seeing they are borne
the children of God by the seed of his holy word. 2. Of the mystical body,
being made members of that body whereof Christ our Savior is the head. 3. Of
the common vocation; for we have been called in unity of spirit by the bond
of peace. 4, Of a happy life; because we shall enjoy together eternally, in
common, and without division, the celestial inheritance, and the glory
prepared therein. This Spiritual conjunction shows sufficiently how
christians ought to be affectionate the one toward the other. Can any thing be
found better then to see the children of God allied and knit together by band
of perfection? what body is more agreeable to behold, then that mystical body
holding together so well in whole and in every part indiuisibly conjoined? There
is no savor so sweet, smell so odoriferous, meat so pleasing in taste, nothing
so delightful to the eye, harmony so pearsing the soul by the ear of the
world, that is worth the speaking of, if men compare them with the excellencies
of the good things enclosed in the mutual dilection and love of Christians the
one toward an other. All the pastimes, honors, and worldly goods are as
nothing that vanishes in the air, in comparison of this concord. What
dignity may be paraleld to that of the brethren of Jesus Christ, who being
assured one day to be made partakers of his eternal glory and society, take
pleasure to love each other on earth? whosoever is not stirred by this natural
and spiritual band of humane society to love his neighbor, is unworthy of
the name of a man, and ought not to be found or seen in any rank amongst
Christians.

There are four ends of the works of Charity. Diverse ends of the works of
charity.
1. The first is the glory of God, for God is glorified in the good works of
his children. 2. The second, consists in the mutual relief of the members
of the mystical body of Jesus Christ. 3. The third is the edification of our
neighbors. For when one sees an other affected to brotherly charity, such an
example does comfort, and incite them to their duty. 4. The fowrth is the
recompense promised to him that shall give a glass of cold water, to one of
the least of the disciples or members of the Lord. It seems by that which S.
Luc. writes in the 6. chap. verse 37. that Jesus Christ recommendeth four
sorts of Charity to his. 4. Sorts of works of charity.
Which all christians are bound to remember incessantly. 1. The first is, that
we should never judge sinisterly of our neighbor, but rather have him in good
estimation, hoping still of his amendment from good, to better. Not that this
commands christians to shut their eyes and make no difference between truth
and lying, between honest and wicked men. But only it is required, that the
Faithful amiably affected toward their neighbors, should not suffer
themselves to be tickled with curious envy, in penetrating farther then piety
requires, into the behauiours of their neighbors, but should retain
themselves and curb short their precipitate judgments. 2. The second, that we
should not use to our confusion that which is the common saying, A foolish
judge a brief judgment, in condemning our neighbors absent, or present,
without hearing him, and speaking of him at random, but rather to speak
gently of him, without slander, expounding that which we understand according
as charity requires. 3. The third is to pardon the faults committed against
us, to such as shall ask us pardon, following the promise of the Lord,
forgive, and it shall be forgiven you; as if he should say, as you shall deal
with your neighbors, God will deal with you. And he himself declares it
very expressly, by a good similitude in the verse following, in these words;
With what measure you meat, shall be measured unto you. 4. The fowrth,
requires that we should in effect assist our neighbors: which the Lord
specifieth in particular, in the formularie of the sentence propounded to his
disciples, and which he will pronounce at the latter day. There is no speech
of contracts, of lending and borrowing, of buying and selling, and other such
like, whereby the contractours ought to know in their consciences, whether they
follow the rule of Charity, but Jesus Christ speaks of giving, by
consequent condemns vsuries, rapines, and cruelties so often taxed in the
whole Scripture, and brings his to the practice of this holy and precious
sentence, Act. 20.35. That it is a happier thing to give, then to receive; a
sentence that condemns almost all the Christians that live in the world at
this day. Rules of chariti^*


There rests three rules to propound to Christians in the exercise of the
works of charity. 1. The word of God. 2. Faith. 3. Charity it self. jn
these three rules is enclosed the means to acquit our selves of our duties. As
for the world, let us take for example that which Solomon says, Prou. 5.15.
Drink the water of thy Cesternes, and the lively waters out of the midst of
thy well; let the springs run out, let them be for thee only, not for the
strangers that are with thee. He will first that every one should have the use
of his goods to his own commodity, according as his condition requires.
Afterward he treats of the liberality of him that has much, and will have
them to be liberal toward those that have little: that he hoard it not up,
but that he distribute some part of it to others. Finally, in regard of the
possession, that men should avoid bad husbandry and prodigality, for fear
least they should fall into want. Faith regards the commandment and the
promise of God. By the commandment the christian man is solicited to show
himself charitable: and by the fathers promise is enticed to discharge his
duty cheerfully and with alacrity. As for Charity, it is moved with the
commodities and jncommodities of our neighbors, rejoicing with the ioyefull,
lamenting with the sorrowful, suffering with some by christian compassion, and
bearing the burden of another with a sincere and cordial affection. Of alms,
the special work of christian Charity.
Now before we rise to the contemplation of the doctrine of good works, we will
add a consideration of the special work of a christian, which we call Alms,
which the Latins did call Eleemosina, from the Greek word Eleemosyne, derived
from the verb Elleeo, which signifies, I have pity and compassion, to show
the spring from whence alms done to our neighbors ought to come, and the
faults committed by those that do no alms but in vain glory, in reproach,
in injuries, in despite, in grudging, perforce, and for fashion sake, etc. S.
John declares in few words many things in the 3. chap. of his first Epistle
verse. 17. He that has the goods of this world, and shall see his brother in
necessity, and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of
God in him? He shuts up his compassion from the afflicted that shows him
no pitiful affection, that turns his back toward him, that thrusts him
from him and skorneth him, sending him back empty, that does not assist him
speedily, cheerfully, and sufficiently according to his small power. But
whosoever, with a true compassion, supplyeth to his neighbors necessities, it
may be said to them that he opens his compassion toward them. And this word
shows an intimate charity, which is as it were fastened to the most noble
interior parts of the body, a vehement pity and mercy, which is to be
compared to those of mothers toward their little children, which they love and
cherish tenderly and with an unspeakable care. Then how execrable are the
cruel and vnpittifull men, who so many ways dishonor the precious name of a
christian, and boast of vain titles, diffamed before God by reason of their
furious insolences toward the poor? What volume might serve to the
description of their mischiefs, if not Gods books? Apoc. 20.12. Those surely
will suffice; for S. John says there, That those that are dead shall be
judged by the things written in the books, according to their works. What we
must consider in doing of Alms.
For to understand what it is to do alms, let us consider the causes which
ought to stir us up to do it. 2. What affection he ought to have that does
alms. 3. The means which is to be kept therein. The causes which ought to
stir us up thereunto.
4. To what ends we must be almoners. 5. The fruits of this work of Charity.
1. For the first article, whereof has been spoken before, the profession of
christianity, the commandment of God as well in the Law as in the Gospel, the
example of the head of the Church, and of diverse members thereof in many ages,
the dignity and worth of the alms done in faith and sincere affection, the
consideration of the poor neighbor, the threatenings of God against those that
are cruel, are very pricking goads to put forward all good christians in the
way of their duty. The wrath of God is upon the covetous and such as are
enemies to the poor, he curses them, sends back their prayers, as says
Solomon, Prou. 21.13. strips such unthankful ones of their gifts, curses
their posterity. 2. As for the affection of him that does alms, 2. Of the
affection to do charity.
let him first fly hypocrisy and vain glory, enemies of the true faith, of
the fear of God, of love toward neighbors; afterward let him be moved with
sincere love and dilection toward God and the poor body which he is to
succor, proceeding in all this deed cheerfully and sincerely. These
affections are as the salt of alms before God, who desires to have cheerful
and glad giuers, who do not open their purse in chiding of the poor, but who
present to their sovereign their purse and their heart, making themselves
friends with unlawful riches, and a good treasure in Heaven. He delights
much in such offerings, Heb. 13.16. It is good lending to him with assurance of
profit or interest of one 100. pieces for one, Of the mean to be held therein.
and of eternal life. 3. As touching the mean, he that has much, let him not
be a nigard: he that has little, let him give cherefully of that little, like
unto the poor widow who giving but a myte, was preferred by Jesus Christ
before the rich who cast Silver by handfuls into the box of the Temple.
Secondly, it is fitting that there be some counterpoyze between the giver and
the poor receauer: the one adorned with free charity and alacrity; the other
with acknowledgement and thanksgiving. Thirdly, one may use discretion,
Regarding the household of Faith, then others, according to the rule of S.
Paul, Gal. 6.10. Finally, let them have regard to their faculties, that they
do not waste them all at once, but to remain master of them, to the end they
may distribute them with reason, according to the rules of duty, in the
vocation whereunto men are called. 4. We ought to do alms, to the end that our
neighbor may be succored, with diverse reliefs marked by the Lord. In S. Mat.
25. Also to provoke other faithful men to well doing toward the poor,
following that which the Apostle says. 2. Cor. 9. Afterward to the end that
such a work may testify of our Faith and piety: for the duties of Charity
are ordained, because that by them we should make it known, that we fear God
and desire to obey him. For conclusion, it is to the end that God may be
glorified. The fruits and profits of our alms are great and diverse. Of the
fruits and profits of Alms.
S. Paul protests that those that are liberal and charitable to the poor,
shall abound in all good works: and our Lord promises that God will reward
them openly. The Psalms of David and the proverbs of Solomon, are full of
excellent promises to this purpose. Let us add one out of Esaias in the 58.
chap. verse. 7. and following. The fast which I have chosen is it not that thou
break thy bread to him that is hungry? and that thou cause those that are in
poor estate to come to thine house? when thou see him that is naked, that
thou even cover him, and that thou hide not thy self behind thy flesh? Then
shall thy light appear like the break of day, and thy health shall come
presently, thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord
shall embrace thee. Then thou shall call, and the Lord shall hear thee; thou
shall cry, and he shall say I am here; if thou take away the yoke from the
midst of thee, and ceasest from lifting up thy fingar, and from speaking
evil. If thou openest thy heart to him that is hungry, and that thou satisfy
the afflicted: thy light shall come forth in darkness, and thy darkness
shall he as the noone day: and the Lord shall conduct thee continually, and
shall refresh thy soul in the great droughts, and shall fatten thy bones; and
thou shall be like a watered Garden, and like a spring whereof the waters do
not fail: and there shall come of thee people that shall build again that
which in time past was laid wast, thou shall set the foundations again which
were forsaken from age to age, and thou shall be called the repayrer of
Breaches, and the mender of the ways, that men may dwell in the country. Yet
another of the Prophet Daniell to the king of Babylon, in the 4. chap. verse.
27. Redeem thy sins with righteousness, and thy iniquities in showing
mercy to the poor. Behold this shall be a prolonging of thy prosperity. But
that which the King and Savior of the Church shall say at the last Judgment
to those that are charitable ought not to be omitted. as he himself has
declared it already with his own mouth, in the 25. of S. Matthew, verse. 34.
and following. Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come ye
blessed of my Father: take the inheritance of the Kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world; For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat;
I thirsted, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger and ye took me in unto
you, I was naked and ye clothed me, I was sick and ye visited me; I was in
prison, and ye came unto me. In as much as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

Of good works.
Now, and for the second part of our consideration of Charity rising to the
general contemplation of the doctrine of good works, necessary to be well
understood of Christians. For the ignorance thereof causes much darkness and
confusion in many other articles of doctrine. Let us reduce the whole to
certain points. 1. What good works we must do. 2. How we can do them. 3. How
they please God. 4. What are the causes of them. 5. Wherefore God adds so
many excellent promises unto the^. 6. Of what persons the works are agreeable
to god. 1. What work we must do.
1. As for the first point, let us consider who we are, to whom it belongs to
do good works: and who it is unto whom we desire to please in doing well.
Looking into our selves, our corruption will come and meet us; That has so
darkened our understandings, that of our selves we do not know what things
please or displease God. It were then a brutish fury, for us to undertake to
jnuent works wherewith to honor God, if we have not express commandment to
such a purpose seeing he himself says, in vain they honor me, teaching
doctrine which are but the commandments of men. Matthew. 159. If we
contemplate God, his holy Majesty will come into our thoughts, whereby we
shall take occasion to reverence it in all humility, to please and obey him
according as he prescribes by his word. Let us refer that to the sentence
written in Ezekiell, Chap. 20. ver. 18.19. I say unto their children in the
desert, walk not in the statutes of your fathers, and look not upon their
ordinances, and defile not your selves in their Gods of doonge. I am the Lord
your God: Walk in my statutes, and keep my ordinances, and do them. Also in
the 3. chap. verse. 17. Son of man, I have set thee as a watch at the house of
Israel; thou shall then hearken to the word of my mouth, and shall warn them
in my name. We gather of that which is above said, that we must not teach in
the Church, nor do any other works but those which God commands us by his
word, whereof we have the summary in the X. commandments. S. Paul speaking of
things directly or indirectly opposed against the will which God has
manifested unto us, 1. Tim. 4.1
calls them the doctrines of Devils.

2. The christian man well resolved that he must do good works, 2. How they
must be done-
asks in his infirmity, how they can be done? Let us seek out an answer
upon the which he may surely rely. Our Lord said to his disciples, Ioh. 15.5.
Without me you can do nothing. He speaks of holy actions, and of works
truly good. And the Apostle says, Heb. 11.6. That without faith, it is
impossible to please God. Also Romans 8.14. That those are the children of God,
that are led by the spirit of him. These testimonies show evidently that three
things are required in the accomplishing of good works; to wit, the knowledge
of Christ, the faith which is in a lively trust in this Savior and Mediator,
by the which the sinner is justified: then the ^ification, which is done when
Jesus christ powers his spirit into us by the ^eaching of the Gospel; for
without ^rist we are like unto a dried lop cut ^m the stock. But believing in
him, ^e gather new life; and as says the ^ophet, Those that wait upon the
Lord ^her new strength; their wings grow ^aine like Eagles, they shall rune
and shall ^ wax weary, they shall walk and shall ^ labor at all, Esaias,
40.31. So then ^thout the knowledge of Jesus Christ, ^e trust in him, and
vivification by the ^ly spirit, men cannot desire to do ^od works, less
effect, and ac^mplish them. Therefore they abuse ^emselues daungerously, that
think ^at the Pagans, unbelievers, and pro^e men, whose hearts are not
purified ^ the truth of the Gospel accepted by ^th, and who do not believe in
the ^nne of God, manifested to the Church ^ the doctrine of the Prophets,
Evan^elists, and Apostles, can do works ^easing and agreeable to God. And
^ose that maintain, that the natural ^an can of his own will render
obedience to God: and others, who jmagin^ a concurrance of the value of the
wor^ man and of the works, with the dign^ty and perfection of him that
comma^deth them: and those that without c^ryng whether the person pleases Go^
or no, teach that what he does, thinkin^ he does well, it is agreeable to God
(...) far, that it is even to boast themselue^ before the seat of his
justice, of the which they speak most unworthily, ^ without a convenient
respect of the satisfaction, obedience, and justice of Jesus Christ,
confounding miserably the cause of salvation with the demonstration of the
grace received, and the sig^ of justification.

3. How good works please god.
3. It is demanded, how good work^ please God? Ans. They please because of
Jesus Christ, in whom those tha^ please God are elected and well-beloved To
speak this more amply, we mus^ first remember that the party that do^ the
good works, is already reconciled ^ agreeable unto God, by the means o^ his
only Son. Secondly, that such a party justified by faith, during his abiding
in the world, cannot satisfy to all that which the divine law requires. To
the contrary, it cries every day unto the Lord, pardon me my sins. Thirdly,
the party justified, deploreth (with David and S. Paul) his misery before God,
resists his evil affections growing from day to day in those that are least
jmparfect, prays that God would not impute so many filthinesses and
jmperfections which appear on every side unto him. In the fowrth place
although that the party justified by Faith, acknowledges his defaults, this
nevertheless abides resolute in him that God requires obedience, although
jmperfect, and that the same is pleasing unto him for the love of Jesus Christ,
as says S. Peter, you are an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual
sacrifice acceptable to GOD by Jesus Christ, 1. Peter. chap. 2. verse. 5. It
follows upon that which we have now said, that our obedience does not please
by reason of the work done, or for any worthiness that is therein, or because
it is done (which it is not) either be reason of the degree or rank of the
party that did the work. For the good works of Cornelius the Centurion did
please God no less then the good works of S. Peter, the Apostle.

4. Why we ought to do good works
As for the fowrth point, many understanding that man is justified before God
by Faith only, without works, do make iniquity of the causes which ought to
inflame and prick us forward to good works. This question must be answered by
the scriptures, which propound three important causes, to wit. The necessity
of them.
Necessity, Dignity, Reward. Let us breefely speak of these three.
Necessity, is distinguished into five articles: to wit, of Commandment, of
duty, of Faith, of repentance, and of exemption from punishment, every one
which ought sufficiently to stir us up to do well. First, the creature must
necessarily obey to the Cteator. Then when the Lord seriously and severely
commands that we obey him, who sees not that Christians ought of all
necessity to study to do good works? Walk says he, Ezech. 20.19. in my
commandments: and S. Paul, This is the will of God, that is to say, your
sanctification; 1. Thessalo. 4.3. In regard of the necessity of the duty, the
Apostle notes it, Romans 8.12. in these words, We are debtours not to the flesh
to live according to the flesh. For if you live according to the flesh, you
die: but if by the spirit you mortify the deeds of the body, you live. Also,
1. Corinthians. 6.19. Know you not that your body is the Temple of the holy ghost,
which is in you, the which you have of God, and are not your own? for you were
bought with a price: then glorify God in your body and in your spirit, for
they are Gods. It is commanded to all the faithful carefully to keep and
entertain Faith. S. Paul shows the necessity thereof, saying, 1. Tim.
1.18.19. Fight a good fight, having faith and a good conscience, which some
have put away, and as concerning faith have made shipwreck. And in the 5.
chap. ver. 8. If there be any that provides not for his own, and namely for
them of his household, he denies the faith, and is worse then an infidel. The
necessity of repentance is conformed by this protestation of the Lord, As
surely as I live, I desire not the death of a sinner, but that he turn from
his wickedness and live. When a sinner leaves his wicked course, he is
quickened by the holy Ghost, to the end he may walk in newness of life: for
regeneration the beginning of that life, which is a new light, and a
restoration of the jmage of God in those that are justified. As for the
necessity to avoid his chastisements, David gives us warning jnough thereof,
when he says, God chastises the sons of men, because of their iniquities,
Psalm. 89.33. The second cause named Dignity, The dignity of them
consists in this point, that the belieuers are the children of God, temples
of the holy Ghost, pallaices wherein Christ dwells, whose members and
co-heires they are. What a wickedness were it, if they should resemble the
enemy of their Savior? What danger it is to defile the Temple of the Lord,
bearing therein the filthiness of Satan? And what cruelty to drive away the
holy Ghost out of his accustomed lodging? Seeing then that the property of the
children of God is to follow their heavenly father, who cries unto them, Be
ye holy, as I am holy, and that they are elevated and called to be holy; who
sees not, that it soueraignely appertains unto the Saints, during their
soiourning in this world, to do good works? The ^ware of them.
The third cause called Reward, oftentimes promised to those that are obedient,
Moses shall be a witness thereof unto us, of whom the Apostle says, Heb.
11.26. That in his labors he had a respect unto the recompense of reward. The
children of God are not mercenaries, and life everlasting is not a reward of
varlets, but an inheritance of children; the recompense which they expect, is
of the good will of him that loved them from before the foundation of the
world. They acknowledge themselves unprofitable servants, avouch that in all
good works they have done but a small parcel of their duty, that their
address, good thoughts, sufficiency, and force is of God, who makes in them
both the willing and doing according to his good pleasure: boasting in nothing
but his mercy, and to accomplish the law and accept of grace: But because that
this good Father has vouchsafed to promise them a reward, they receive it of
his free goodness, and the more he gives them, the less they lift up
themselves, and less they allege their services, and the more they condemn
in their minds the pride of the justifiing hipocrits, and the more they cry to
their Sovereign, Enter not into judgment with thy poor servants: for no man
living shall be justified before thy face, if he presume upon himself, upon
his advantages and dignities. One only Jesus Christ is our merit, our
wisdom, our righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. And also, the
Faithful, as Abraham, Moses, David, S. Paul, and all the rest, have well
known that godliness had the promises of this present life, as well as of the
life to come: and therefore asking of God their daily bread which comprehends
all the necessary aids and succors whiles they are in this world. If he
grant them unto them, they accept of them as voluntary rewards of his
liberal favor, and render him thanksgiving for them. They have to vphould
their hope in this behalf, infinite declarations of the good will of their
heavenly Father, who protests that the least good deeds of his child^en,
shall be followed with rich and ample rewards, yea even in this present life.

5 Now because that the good works done by Christians, 5. Why good works have
so many large promises.
are the endeavors of faithful servants, and of good children; Also that they
are neither pure nor perfect, considering their weakness and imperfection, the
first question is, Why God adds so many great promises to good works? their
are five reasons. 1. To the end that the accomplishment of the promises may be
an evident testimony of the providence of God, who would have men to know, that
the corporal good things coming from him, are dispersed by hap hazard, but
are distributed of his grace and goodness to his children; according to the
saying of Moses to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 30.20. He is thy life, and the
length of thy days. David promises that those that are good, shall be glutted
in time of famine, Psalm. 37.19. and says in Psalm. 34.11. that those that
seek the Lord, shall want no good thing. 2. It shows that God will conserve
and keep his Church in the world, yea in the midst of all his enemies; so
does he recompense the piety of his, as the Apostle. 1. Tim 4.8. says
expressly. 3. God will have the corporal necessities to sharpen Faith,
patience, prayer, the hope of his; and that in their refuge to his grace, they
go from force to force. 4. Also that the promises of tra^sitorie goods
advertise the Faithful of the certainty of their salvation. Faith, by the
which we embrace Jesus Christ and accept of the reconsiliation which he has
made for us, ought always to go before the requests that we make for bodily
goods. It is in favor of the only and well-beloved son that we have the
promise of blessing in heaven and earth according as he himself says of it,
John. 16.23. All that you shall ask of my Father in my name, shall be given
unto you. 5. The Lord will have all men to know that his Church is subject to
afflictions, and nevertheless is miraculously preserved in the midst of
dangers, as in times past in Egypt and in Caldea, as also Daniell in the Lions
den, and his companions in the fiery fournace: to the end that this
admirable protection of the people of God, and all his excellent deliverances
might be evident testimonies of the presence of the Lord among his people; As
Moses said, Nom. 14.13. Thou have made this people by thy might to rise out of
the midst of the Egiptians. And Joshua to the Israelites. You shall know that
the mighty living God is in the midst of us. Ios 3.10. that all the earth
may understand that there is a God in Israel. Ezechias also amongst other
words of his prayer, says, O Lord our God deliver us from the hand of
Sauchirill, that all the Kingdoms of the earth may know, that thou only art
the Lord.

6 what men's obedience pleases God.
6. Rests the sixth and last question, seeing all men are sinners, it is
demanded, what men's obedience pleases God? because it is written, That God
does not hear sinners, Ioh. 9.31. Answer is made to that by distinction, of
two sorts of sins; There is one sin committed wittingly, willingly, and
with the whole consent of the sinner, against his own conscience, in profane
despite of the trtuth manifested in the law, or in the gospel, of the which
the sinner is sufficiently convinced; The good christians are warranted from
this horrible danger. There are also sins committed by the corrupt and
vicious affections, by foolish confidence, jgnorance, evil custom, to great
presumption of strength, vehemence of unbridled passions, forgetfulness,
doubts, mistrusts, in the execution of the which the sinners feel the combats,
goarings, gnawings, heauinesses, shames, despights, frights and fears;
whereupon follows at length a sorrow according to God, then repentance,
faith, converting to God, changing of life, 2. Cor. 7. 10. The sinners of the
first rank are in a very dangerous estate; those of the second are not
deplored nor desperate. God knows those that are his, and shows himself
maruailous in his justice and compassions.

For the last article of our consideration touching christian Charity, Of the
virtues commanded and recommended to all Christians.
Let us treat of the virtues commended and recommended to all christians in
these words, Thou shall love thy God and thy neighcour. It shall be following
the order of the ten Commandments, leaving to whom list to undertake the
exact explication of the moral law, the which requires a volume. We do not
pretend to speak any more of the vices opposed against the virtues: for it is
enough at this time to put christians in mind whereunto they ought to apply
themselves, when question is made of the duty of charity. The virtues commended
and recommended in these words of the first precept, In the 1. Commandment of
the law.
Thou shall have none other Gods but me, are two, Piety, or true Religion, and
righteousness, consisting in the knowledge of the true God, to the end to render
and attribute unto him all that which belongs to him. 2. Faith, which gives
to God praise of truth, flying from jnfidelity, jncredulity, Atheism,
superstitious and false religions, heresy, profaneness, stupidity, Apostasy.
3. Religious adorations, as well of the heart, as of the whole body, referred
to the only true God. 4. Humility of the mind. 5. Patience, submitting
themselves to the conduct and wise will of God. 6. Godly fear, opposed against
all carnal, profane, infame, trust, and against servile fear. 7. Religious
obedience, ruling humane obedience. 8. The repentance for having offended God.
9. True conversion and amendment of life. 10. The love of God. 11. Zeal and
vehement desire to serve and obey him. 12. Trust in him. 13. Hope to obtain
infallibly all that he has promised us. 14. Fervent and interior invocation
of his name, often accompanied with prayers, sighings, groanings, humble
submissions of soul and body, before his holy majesty. 15. Affectionate
praise and thanksgiving with heart and mouth for so many good things received
of bounty and mercy. As for the virtues recommended in the second Commandment,
In the second.
the most part are comprehended with those of the first, under the words of
justice, piety, adoration, religion, and jnvocation. Our bodies and souls
appertain unto God, therefore is it required that the one and the other should
render unto him interiourly and exteriourly. The thought ought to conceive no
jdols, nor the hand bring them forth. He that in his soul rendereth the honor
that belongs unto him, does not prostrate his body for a religious adoration
before any other, but God. To him only ought we to be bound and reunited. As
with the heart, also with our mouth we ought to call upon him. The exterior
exercise pure and simple of true religion is here reco^mended, and opposed to
the prophanations of jdolaters, who use a divine service after their own
fashion. By consequent a christian does a good work, who harkeneth devoutly to
the word of God, who meditates upon it religiously, who assisteth and
practices with reverence the administration of the Sacraments, who
distinguishes wisely the work of man from the work of the holy Ghost, who
makes not words, nor corruptible elements, jdols; but who worshippeth God in
spirit and truth; who does not include the service of God in exterior
ceremonies void of faith, charity, and repentance, and who make no account of
men's inventions substistuted in stead of the ordinances of the true God; in
brief, who is religious, devout, truly humble, not superstitious, jdolatrous,
hipocrite, a justifier, a temporiser, and who fitteth to the humors and wills
of every one in the matter of religion.

In the.3.
The third commandment requires of Christians that they glorify God in their
words; which they do when they speak holily, in reverence and fear of his
Majesty, and of his works. This is comprehended under diverse sorts. 1. Whether
we treat of divinity in words, or in writing, we ought to aim at the
instruction of our neighbors, to our own edification, to the sinceere and
free profession of our Faith, Mat. 10.32. 2. To maintain the glory of God
against the prophaners and blasphemers thereof: Leuit. 5.1. Luc. 25. John.
2.20. 3. To call upon God with a fervent affection. 4. To call him to witness
and judge, in judgment and without, when there is question of important
affairs, and which cannot be decided by the testimony of men, but requires
an oath and solemn swearing. 5. To give him thanks for his good deeds; to
praise and bless him with Psalms and spiritual Canticles. 6. To magnify his
wisdom, power, justice, and mercy, in our conduct and salvation. 7. To make
him solemn promises for an acknowledgement of his extraordinary favors,
public and particular. 8. To give occasion to others by our good example to
glorify him with us. 9. To wish with all our hearts Gods blessing toward our
neighbors. 10. Carefully to seek and take all occasions of good discourse with
our neighbors to their edification and comfort, and to the glory of God.

In the fourth.
The fowrth commandment requires of Christians, that they frequent the holy
assemblies to be instructed, and comforted by the doctrine of truth, to pray
to God all together, to the end he may give power to his word, to sing his
praises, to give him thanks for the good things received of his grace, to
demand all sorts of blessings of him, to enlarge themselves in extraordinary
alms, to receive the holy Sacraments, to talk together of the doctrine which
they have gathered out of the sermons, to study attentively all that day in
the books of the holy Scripture, to visit those that are sick and otherwise
afflicted. The servants of the Church do a good work, If they preach the word
of God faithfully, if they pronounce the prayers devoutly in the names of all
the Faithful that hearken unto them, if they duly administer the Sacraments
duly. The magistrates sanctify that day well indeed, who so rule that it be
not at all profaned, that all things be done duly, in holy and convenient
order in the assemblies of the Faithful, that the children be well
instructed, kept in modesty, and all good duty: that the pastors of the
Church be entertainned charitably, heard reverently, and known in their
vocation.

The virtues recommended in the six commandments of the second table, In the
fifth.
ought no more to be omitted. The end of them, is the conservatton of charity
toward our neighbors. So then the virtues of the first commandment, which is
the first of the second table, have respect and touch the duties of Children,
wives, men, and maid servants, disciples, Faithful hearers, subjects, young
folks, poor, and idiots, toward their Fathers and Mothers, husbands,
masters, and mistresses, schoolemaisters, pastors, magistrates, old men, wise
and rich, reciprocally the duties of all the said superiors toward their
inferiors. All these duties comprehend many excellent virtues, and good works
contained in the word Honor, and in the other which beholds it, to wit, to
love, to support, worthyly to teach, and command. There is none so little in
the world, who has not the means to abound in good works. It is an excellent
work to be able to be a good child, a prudent wife, a faithful servant, a
diligent disciple, an attentive hearer, an obedient subject, a modest young
man, ignorant desirous to learn, poor, humble, a wise Father, a careful
mother, a loving maistet, a prudent mistress, a studious Schoole-maister, a
true preacher a just Magistrate, a discreet old man, a gracious wise man, and
a charitable rich man. It suffices us to mark in a word these virtues, amply
described in the books of Solomon, and in the Epistles of the Apostles. The
virtues of the inferiors, consists in reuerencing their superiors, in their
thoughts, affections, countenances, words and works. Those of the superiors,
in showing an honest and good example of life to their inferiors, to instruct
them well, to prescribe unto them what they have to do, to admonish them when
they fail, fitly to chastise those that commit faults, not to spare the
faulty, to maintain those that are innocent, in all affairs to have a
remembrance and care of the service and of the glory of God, to procure all
good to those that are committed to their charge.

As for the sixth commandment, In the. 6
the good works commanded therein are, that we should wish to our neighbors
long and prosperous life on earth, then grace and peace from God in life
everlasting, that we be careful of the preservation of our own lives and of
our neighbors, that we should help and counsel them, with assistance in word
and deed to live long, happily, and eternally, to turn them from the danger
which threateneth them corporally or spiritually, if we know any thing thereof;
to give them means to escape, so it be without offending God and our
conscience; to assist the hungry, naked, strangers, sick, prisoners, with
verbal and real consolaltion: to maintain with all our might poor widows,
orphans, and others oppressed, in all equality, with prejudice to our
vocations. Speedily and honestly to pay the labourer, faithfully to keep and
render the pledge, to distribute victuals and merchandise with all loyalty,
readiness, and alacrity, to be liberal toward the faithful that are needy,
to defend courageously in our vocation those to whom injury is offered, to
edify every one by a good example. The Magistrates have an ample field for the
exercise of many virtues in this commandment, as also in the three following.

In the seventh.
The seventh sufficiently recommendeth the chastity of heart and body, the
hatred of impudicity, will have us to detest all lasciuiousnes, whether in
respect of the parties, or of dishonest pictures, or the reading of filthy
books: that we should fly all occasion to please vain, filthy, and infamous
desires, that we should abhor dishonest wantonness, profane jestings,
rotten and filthy words, adulterous songs; that to the contrary we have the
praise of God in our mouths, that we avoid al unchaste touching, moving, and
leaping; Let us be sober in eating and drinking, modest in apparel and in all
our household stuff; that we keep the honor of our neighbors; that we enter
into the holy estate of marriage, if we have not the gift of continency; that
we live holily therein, as also out of marriage. These virtues are by so much
the more venerable as the corruptions, lasciuiousnes, and filthiness augment and
increase unpunished in these latter times.

In regard of the virtues of the eight commandment, In the eight.
let us wish blessing to our neighbors in their reasonable and godly affairs;
Let us preserve their good as our own, if we find any thing lost that
appertains unto them; Let us faithfully make restitutio^; Let us render the
pledge committed to our trust; Let us help them in all thtir need to our
power; Let us admonish him of his loss, if we foresee it, that they may take
heed thereof; let us lend to the needy without usury; let us give to the poor
without looking for restitution; let us pay the workman his wages promised
and due, yea without delay; let us be faithful to our companions and
associates; let us sell merchandise loyally and with measure and weight,
without fraud; let us be liberal toward those that are worthy of any
assistance.

In the 9.
The Ninth commandment requires that we should be glad of the good estimation
and report of our neighbors, that we should praise their virtues, and honor
them because of them, that we should give testimony of them to others, that
we should add faith to the faithful reports that others make of the^, that we
be ready to praise, and backward to reprehend, that we should greatly cover
the supportable imperfections, and should take things by the best end, and in
the least evil part; that we should suppress the false bruites raised against
our neighbors, should show a stern countenance to those that secretly tear
their good reputation, should sustain innocence: in sum, should do to our
neighbors what we would have done to our selves.

The Tenth and last commandment, In the 10.
which cuts the root of all ticklishnesse and evil desire which come not with
a full resolution and deliberation, touching that which our neighbors possess
of precious, shows that the christian virtues have their seat in the bottom
of the heart, they walk before the eyes of God, take heed of desiring to
content any body in appearance, but are simple, sincere, and purer within, then
without.

He that desires to specify and design the virtues by their names, may do
it as follows. 1. The first commandment comprehends eight virtues; to wit,
true knowledge of God, faith, charity or love of God, hope, fear of God,
humility, patience, perseverance. 2. The second, pure service of God
exteriourly, adoration, invocation. 3. The third, blessing of God,
thanksgiving, confession of our faith, zeal to the glory of the Lord,
celebration of him and his works in all reverence and fear, swearing in
verity. 4. External piety, devout exercise of true religion, meditation of the
works of God, beneficence toward the poor, helping the inferiors, honorable
preservation of the holy Ministry, well ordered use of the Ecclesiastical
ceremonies, and of the sacred signs. 5. The fifth, honor, love of true duty
in our vocation, approbation of the politic state, and of the persons called
to maintain it, reverence toward it, continual thanks to God for such a
favor and the preservation thereof to mankind, prayers to this effect,
obedience to such orders, equity to judge of the conducting of it, and to
support the defaults of those persons to whom it is committed, piety or
gentleness, universal and distributive justice, diligence, acknowledgement,
reverence, gravity, modesty, temperance, prudence, desire of a good renown. 6.
Particular and distributive justice, valor, constancy, patience, meekness,
mercy, love of peace, friendship, fidelity, whiteness, humanity,
beneficence, courtesy, well ordered severity. 7. Pudicity, conjugall chastity,
honest shame, temperance. 8. Just possession and good usage of our goods,
commutatiue justice, beneficence, liberality, hospitality, frugality,
contentment. 9. Verity, simplicity, roundnesse, firmness, docility,
moderation in words, taciturnity, eloquence, affable gentleness, agreeable
conversation. 10. Reverence and great respect of our neighbor, care of those
things that appertain to him as of our own, settled contentment in our
condition, perpetual consideration of the divine Majesty, and of the laws
which it jmposeth upon our thoughts, words, and behauiours, to avoid all that
it improueth, to follow and execute all that it approoueth.

FINIS.

