The Warfare of Christians: Concerning the conflict against the Flesh, the
World, and the Devil. Translated out of Latin by Arthure Golding.

Imprinted at London for John Shepparde. Anno. 1576.

To the right worshipful and his special friend, sir William Drewrie knight,
Arthur Golding wishes health with increase of worship and prosperity in Christ
Jesus.
SOMEwhat later tha^ I gladly would, howbeit not with less forwardness too
acknowledge how much I am beholde^ unto you, nor with less confidence of
your freendly accepting of my small travel, I offer to your courtesy this
token of my good will, For besides your other friendly dealings, both before
and since, I confess your goodness to have bin such and so great toward me
all the while I soiorned at Barwicke, in the time that you were Marshal there,
as I may not forget it without just blame of unthankfulness. Resting therefore
assuredly upon the continuance of the same, which I perceive by diverse proves
to be both deeplyer settled in you, and more increased toward me: I am bold
to put forth this little treatize under your name. The rather because I am
fully persuaded, that unto you which have bin trained up welneere as it were
from the shell in martial affairs of this world, and there through have had
experience of adversities and troubles, and do delight still to hazard your
self for honor in the service of your prince and country, it will be neither
tedious nor unacceptable to hear and consider of this kind of Warfare also.
For although it be not of like nature, nor to be atcheeued with like furniture,
pomp and brute, as the wars of this world are wont too be: Yet does it
far pass them, both in nobleness of captains, in valiantness of
soldiers, in greatness of peril* in certainty of conquest, and in reward
of victory. For in those wars, the captains (be they kings or keyzars) are
but mortal men, subject to all the same inconveniences that the rest of their
soldiers are, neither able to defend their soldiers nor themselves from the
stroke of Mars and death: but in this, the Captains are God the maker of
heaven and earth, and his son Jesus Christ, the Lord of life and death, whom
no sword, spear, arrow, curryer nor can^n can hurt, no nor hit, and which is
able both to save his servants from death, and too raise the^ when they be dead.
In those the soldier does in deed endure travel, labor, watching, hard fare,
cold, weat, heat, long seege, penury, thirst, famine, wounds, and death,
howbeit al these have often intermissions, and long ceasings, and commonly an
end by victory in few battles: But in this, besides the suffering of all the
said inconveniences and many more, the soldier must stand continually armed,
continually watching, and continually fyghting: then most ware to defend
himself, when he seems most to have foiled his enemy: scarce atteyning so
much as a breathing time, and never looking for final victory, but by his
own death. In those, the souldyer is at peace with himself, he has fellows
to stick to him and to help him, and he has none other enemies than such as
are of Flesh and blood, as himself is: but in this, he must be at utter
defiance with himself, he must hate himself, he must abide the brunt alone
without help of mortal wight, nay all mortal helps are so far from doing him
good, that they rather hurt him: and more over, he must maintain battle both
against visible and invisible enemies: and being but one, he must evermore
encounter hand to hand against three, of who^ the weakest is able to subdue a
whole world of people, if God assist them not from above. In those, the
greatest perilles are but the loss of health, limbs, liberty, possessions,
and life, which being dispatched by death (the end of all worldly misery)
shall be restored again in their due season: or else the loss of honor and
good name, the stayne and infamy whereof is outworne and ceasseth in length
of time. But in this, he that cowardly yields himself to his enemy, and is
finally overcome without recovery, forgoeth the freedom of a good conscience,
casts himself into all kind of wretchedness, and lozeth both body and
soul, to be plunged in everlasting darkness, torment, confusion, sorrow, and
shame. In those, neither the multitude of soldiers, nor the strength of
munitions, nor the store of artillery, nor the wisdom and policy of the
Captains, nor the advantage of the ground, nor the aid of mighty friends and
alyances, can warrant victory: but in this, whosoever has but only an assured
faith in Jesus Christ, is sure to outstande al assaults, to abide all bruntes,
too bear back all darts, to ward all blows, and finally to wade out of all
dangers with glad conquest and joyful victory. To be short, in those, the
reward of victory is but either the spoil of the enemy, the gain of some
City or country, the satisfying of hateful cruelty by beastly revenge, or
(which the world counts the greatest price of al such perils) the blasing
abroad of the name with renown, while the heart broyleth inwardly in the
conscience of his own misery: but in this, to him that gets the upper hand
is given quietness of conscience in the mids of woe, mirth of heart in the
mids of sorrow, joy of mind in the midds of torment, happiness in the mids of
mizerie, comfort in deepest distress, a gladsome life, a blisful death* and
after death (which in deed is no death, but a sweet and joyful rest) a crown
of everlasting glory, a garland of righteousness, a name of eternal honor, a
robe of vnappayrable innocence, a scepter of incomparable strength, a throne
of heavenly majesty, the fruition of the tree of life the perpetual presence
of God, the company of Jesus Christ, the fellowship of the holy Angels, the
society of al gods children, the inheritance of heaven, the possession of
Paradise, endless joy, felicity and blessedness, and finally unutterable
abundance of such good things, as no eye has seen, ear heard, nor heart of
man is able to conceive. This is the war that becomes a noble mind, a wise
mind, a valiant mind, a godly mind. This is the right way to the true
worship, honor and renown, which can neither be had by inheritance, nor given
or taken away at the will of mortal men, but comes of god. It is not for
cowardly, for childish, for nice, for tender, nor for effeminate folk too
deal herewithal. Strong chalendges require stout Champions. Stout I say not in
words or countenance nor in peevishness or pride of heart, but in faith, in
spirit, and in patience through the knowledge of Christ and his glorious
gospel. Therefore according to that knowledge and wisdom which God has
given you by the often hearing and reading of his word (see how the goodness
of the matter caryeth me into great boldness with you) buckle yourselfe to this
encounter of al other the most honorable, most glorious, and most assured,
after the example of our Savior Christ, who for the great excellency of the
glory that was set before him, despised al adversities, afflictions and death,
and notwithstanding that he was the son of God, yet learned obedience by the
things that he suffered. For (as says the holy scripture) If we suffer with
him we shall also be glorified with him. Whereunto that both you and we may
attain, I beseech him to grant us abundantly the grace of his holy spirit.
Amen. Written at London the xvj of January 1576.

A TREATISE concerning the conflict of the godly against the Flesh, the World,
and the Devil, which may be intytled the Warfare of Christians.
HOw great ye weakness of mankind is in withstanding vice and wickedness, it
may be perceived by many things, and specially in this, that if at any time we
do never so fully purpose and determine with our selves to live henceforth
according to gods will, and to obey his commandments: yet notwithstanding we
be not able to continue long, and much less to hold out to the end, in the
things that were very well intended and determined. The causes whereof it is not
hard to find out, or to discover the ground of this so great tenderness,
infirmity, and feebleness of man's mind. For if a man look well to it, he
shall find that the causes thereof are chiefly three: namely, first the
corruptnesse that is bred and borne in all men, or the forwardness to sinning
that sticks fast in the very bowelles and marie of us, which the divines do
commonly term by the name of the Flesh. Secondly the world, which offers
continually innumerable causes and occasions of all manner of vice, lewdness,
and naughtiness. And finally, that great Dragon the old serpent, called the
devil and Satan, which leads away the whole world, as says the Apostle in
the Apocalips. For he also is woonte to stir up, drive forewarde, and enforce
men to horrible deeds, to al manner of mischief, to unnaturalness, and to
blaspheming of God. These three, that is to wit, ye flesh, the world, and the
devil are the spytefullest and deadlyest enemies of mankind, with whom we have
continual battle and endless conflict in this life, so that we scarsly have
so much respit as to take breath, neither are they to be overcome at any time,
but by the help, aid, and grace of the holy ghost, given of the heavenly
father for our Lord and mediator Jesus Christ's sake, to such as crave it,
and call to him for it. Therefore let us briefly say somewhat of every of them,
and (in as few words as may be) show the continual encounter against the^
withont ceassing, and by what means they must always be withstood and
resisted. Now then, we must first of all bear in mind (as I gave incling
even now) that man's life is a certain continual warfare upon earth, which
is not to be finished but by death, and that we must spend our whole time as
it were in the Camp, as long as we live here. And therefore it is not to be
abidden, that ever we should give our selves to idleness, or mispe^d our time
in royot and voluptuousness, while we serve in the camp of the church, under
the standered and Ensigns of our Graundcaptaine Jesus Christ: but we must
always stand upon our guard armed with spiritual weapons, against the force
and assaults of our enemies, and be ever redye in mind to join battle. Let us
call to remembrance our baptime, whereby we gave our names into our captains
musterbooke, and bynding our selves by oath, professed and auowed ourselves to
serve him as his soldiers al our life long. Let us consider with our selves,
how good, how wise, how valiant, how invincible, of how great corrage
authority and skill, how rightly noble, victorious and triumphante, how
rightly holy and princely a captain and general of our wars we have, worthy
to be reuere^ced worshipped and honored even of the very Angels, for the
greatness of his glory and majesty. It is (as I said) the almighty son
of God, being himself both God and man, and the conqueror of sin, death and
Satan, even our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. Let us bethink us what
rewards and how great and how large we must look for upon the getting of the
victory: as everlasting triumph in heaven, endless life, peace and salvation,
and most blissed immortality matched with abundance of al good things. These
undoubtedly are the things, which (as says the prophet) another eye has
seen, nor ear hard, nor heart of man conceived, prepared of God for them that
love him. And therefore ye Apostle has just cause to think, that the
afflictions of this world are not worth the glory that shall be openly bestowed
upon us. Go too the^, let us by Gods good help buckle our selves to the
spiritual battle, let us think continually upon the fight, let us be of
stout and valiant courage in the Lord, let us (as says the Apostle) put on
the complete armor of God, through the furniture and defense whereof and through
the protection and help of our God, we may at length get the upper hand. The
thing is done in the sight of our Graund captain, who is present every where,
a great incoragement for us to deal valiantly. He both harteneth us to fight,
and helps us to win, and relieueth us when we faint, and crowns us when
we have gotten the victory, as Austine says very trimely.

Of the Flesh.
THe first enemy (as I said) is the flesh: that is to say, the corruptnesse
or naughtiness that remains in man through original sin by the fall of our
first fathers, which is as a certain firewood (as divines term it) by reason
whereof all of us are forewarde to sin and vice, some more, and some less,
according to the state and disposition of every man's body, as the serchers of
natural causes teach us. For the affections of men's minds do follow the
temperature of the humors in the body, which thing as the Philosophers do
affirm, so does experience plainly prove it. Hereby we see, that they in
whom blood ouerruleth, are commonly prone to lechery and royot: they in whom
choler abou^deth, are given to anger and pride: another does melancholic and
flewmatike persons want their vices, whereunto they be proner by nature than
other men are. And therewithal it is not to be denied, that a great part of
this pronenesse unto sin, comes of the evil trayning and bringing up of
children, through untoward nuzzeling and misnurturing of them, and by suffering
them to have company and familiarity with leude folk. For so it is avouched
by Maro in his husbandry, saying: So great a thing it is, to be inured from the
shel. And also by Aristotle in his Ethiks, where he says, Not a little, but
very greatly does it skill, whither we inure our selves one way or other from
our childhood. How great strength the acquaintance and company of ill
disposed persons has to corrupt men's natures, Seneca shows in a certain
place, saying: manners are taken up of conversation, and like as certain
diseases pass from one body into another by touching, so does the mind
convey over his vices too such as are nearest about it. The drunkard draws
his companion too the love of wine. The company of unchaste folk effeminateth
an honest man, though he be never so constante. Covetousness sheddeth his
poison into such as are next about him. In like case is it with virtues on the
contrary part, and so forth. But yet for all that, neither good bringing up
and nurture be it never so duly ministered, nor the study and instruction of the
best sciences, nor ye continual company with the best me^, can bring to pass or
attain, that ye vices whereto each man is naturally most inclyned, should be so
utterly rooted up, as no inclyng of his own disposition may remain behind.
For rightly does Lucretius say: We must not think that vices can be plucked
up root and rynde.
To furious wrath more hastly one bursteth out by (kind.)
Another is to soon inclynd to bashfulnes and fear,
A third is ouerfondly given all injuries to bear.


Now although the vices that are planted in us by nature be not utterly taken
away by the means aforesaid: yet are they repressed by them, and as it were
restrained with a bridle* so as they do not easly burst out into act:
Accordingly as it is reported of Stilpo, that whereas he was naturally given to
wine and women, yet he did so subdue and bridle his vicious nature by learning,
as no man ever saw him delight in wine, nor perceived any inclyng of lechery
in him, as Cicero writes of him. The like is reported of Socrates if my
memory fail me not. But now let us come to the reckening up of the vices and
faults of the flesh.

First and foremost our inward and homebred enemy which is called ye flesh,
never cesseth to entice us to foul and dishonest lusts, to filthy plesures, to
whordom, wa^tonnesse, malapartnes and all other such things. Grievous
undoubtedly and paynful in this case is ye encounter of a Christian man against
the flesh, insomuche that he is feign to fight after a sort with him self,
by reason that the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh. For the man that fears God, knows that whoredom is to be
eschewed, as Paul, or rather as the holy ghost teaches by Paul. He knows
that he ought to live chastely and honestly as God bids in the ten
commaundments. Therefore his desire is to follow Gods will and commandments
as heavenly hestes. But the infirmity of the flesh being ouerforewarde to
shameful voluptuousness, carries him another way against his will, do what
he can. What should the wretch do in this case? or whither may he turn him
self in this temptation and assault of the flesh which withstandeth the
spirit? Truly if he be wise he will without delay flee to ye heavenly father
for help, and by godly studyes, honest exercises, and often (howbeit moderate)
fastings, endeuer to bridle the rage of his flesh by some mean or other, and
to suppress and subdue the wantonness of it with continual temperaunce of
life. For I take that to be both an excellent and an helthfull remedy above
others to keep lust in awe. And for this cause does our savior among other
things, will us to beware that our hearts be not ouerloden with surfeiting and
drunke^nesse, commanding us also to watch and pray, lest we fall into
temptation. The apostles likewise exhort men to sobriety and stay of
themselves, forbidding them gluttony and drunkenness. Yet are not those the
only means to cool and quench lust: it must be matched with the help and aid
of the holy ghost, and specially with earnest mindefulnesse of Gods word, with
faith, and with prayer. For first of all in our temptations God must be
called upon, and that fervently and hartilye. Gods threatenings must be set
before the eyes of our mind, to fray us from sin. We must forthinke what evil
may ensue upon the committing of wickedness. We must call to mind the
examples of Gods wrath, whereof there is store in the holy scriptures. Then is
not the ouerlustinesse of the flesh restrained allonly by fasting and spare
diet, but much rather (as I said before) by indeueriug to subdue, or (as the
apostle terms it) to mortifye the lusts and sinfulness of the flesh, by
arming our selves with Gods word, faith, and prayer, and with the rest of the
spiritual weapons whereof saint Paul speaks to the Ephesians. And if all
these means boot thee not, (howbeit that thou must not leave off though thou
speed not at the first,) the last shote anchor that remains forthee to flee
unto, is honest and laufull marriage granted of God to such as have not stay of
themselves, according to this saying. For avoiding of whoredom let every man
have his wife, and again, It is better to marrye than to burn. But what if
the flesh be still inclyned and prone to aduoutrie even in marriage, as
sometimes it hapeneth? God almighty shield us of his mercy from so great
mischief, and from so cursed and ougly wickedness. For surely that were not
now a simple provocation of the flesh, whose infirmity wedlock might
remedy: but rather a temptation of the devil, enforcing to wicked and
abominable lechery. And therefore with great stoutnesse must that enemy be
withstoode, so as we must never give him leave to find us idle or weltring in
sloth full ease, but be always occupied in godly exercises and labors. And in
especially we must take diligent heed, that we out of hand discharge our
minds of all filthye thoughts and of what so ever else the devil prompteth us
withal and puts in our heads, so as we feed not our own humor with them,
ne stand long musing upon the^, but flee apace to Gods help, pouring out our
prayers before him, and dryuing out those evil thoughts, with better
thoughts, as one nail is driven out with another. Call to mind the
shortenesse of this life, the approaching of death every minute of an hour, the
Judgment seat of the Lord, the pains of hell, the fire that shall never
be quenched: And contrarywyse, the innumerable benefits of God, the cross of
Christ, the dwelling of the holy Ghost in us, and the Angels that are
appointed of God to shield us, the shame and reverence of whom ought too
restrain thee always from wickedness, for as much as they are ever present
with thee, having a continual care of thee, and furthering thee unto al
goodness. Also bethink thee of the sayings of holy writ, which do threaten
Gods wrath too whoremongers, aduouterers, and al others that are defiled with
like wickedness. For what means the sixth commandment, by saying, Thou
shall not commit aduoutrie? Uerily it forbids all uncleanness and dishonest
lusts, and it requires honesty and chastenesse, and therewithal temperance
and sobriety, whereby this cleanness both of mind and body is maynteyned.
What says Paul? Another whoremongers, nor aduouterers, nor nycelings, shall
inherit the kingdom of God: again, ye know that no whoremonger or unclean
person, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. Hereunto
also belongs this saying: It is the will of God that you should be holy and
abstain from al fornication. And this, Eschew whoredom: what so ever other
sin a man commits, it is without his body: but he that commits
whoredom, sins against his own body. Hereunto perteyneth this saying to
the Hebrews. Honorable among all men is wedlock; ^ ye undefiled bed: but
whoremongers and aduouterers God will judge. Remember what that chaste and
shamefast yongman Jacobs son answered to his mistress, when she would have
had him to be naught with her. How may I (quod he) do this so great
wickedness, and not sin against God: Ye see how the fear of GOD calls
Joseph from naughtiness. And anon after, when his mistress would have
compelled him, he fled away from her and left his cloak in her hand. Likewise
Susanna being led by ye fear of God, choze rather to die a shamfull death, than
to consent to aduoutrie. And Sophronia of whom Eusebius writes, struck her
self through with a knife, to the intent she would not bedefiled with whordome.
Call too mind how grievously God punished David for aduouterie. Remember how
the tribe of Benjamin was slain almost every mothers son, for defyling a
Leuits wife: and here I omit a thousand other mo, because I will not be to long.
Here peradventure y^ wilt answer, that thou call all these things to mind,
and yet art not able to withstand thy flesh, or to bridle thy lusts, that thy
continual praying unto god does not greatly avail thee, that thy paynefull
studying, thine honest exercises, and thy godly occupying of thy self, do
nothing profit thee, and finally that thine often abstine^ce, fasting, and
watching, thy soberness, aduisednesse, and continual keeping of company with
good men that love god, do boot thee nothing at al. Wretch that I am
therefore, what shall I do, say thou? I see brother, I see whosoever thou
art, that thou bear with thy self too much: surely thou art too fleshly
minded, since yt not even wedlock the wholsomest remedy of all others, and
ordained of God for the redress of such diseases: (as the Apostle declares)
can quench thy lust and call thee back from whoredom.

Therefore such cowardlynesse and nycenesse of mind must be put away, and
thou must wrestle lustily against the motions of the flesh, with invincible
courage of Gospellike mind, and not foade thy self in thine own feebleness.
Streyne thy self, not only to bear the brunt and assault of a short time, but
also to bear out the lingering tediousness of long continuyng temptation:
neither fainting as overcome or tired with the devils long holding out in
assayling thee, nor despayring of Gods help, who doubtless will succor thee
in time convenient, as says the Psalmist. He is too tender a carpetknight,
which will needs have victory of his enemy, without putting of himself too
any stresse or labor. No man is crowned (says the Apostle) except he
perform his challenge lawfully. And truly I confess that man's weakness is
over great too withstand the flesh and the Devil, if he have an eye too his
own strength: but yet (as says the Apostle) we be able too do all things
through Jesus Christ, who strengthens us. Therefore let us lean to the help
and defense of Christ, let us humbly pray to Christ for his assistance, let us
continually and incessantly beseech God the father for our Lord Jesus
Christ's sake, that he suffer us not too be overcome of temptation, but rather
that he deliver us from evil, that is to say from the Devil, for his son
our saviors sake, according as Christ commanded his disciples to pray. And
let us not doubt but that when we ask so according too his will, God will
hear us, and that he is able to do abundantly above all that we can crave or
wish. Remember that when thou want baptized, thou did enter thy name into
the musterbooke of thy captain Christ, and wart sworn unto him: that thou
promisedst to serve him in his wars all thy life long, and that thou forsokest
the world and the Devil. Now therefore stick stoutly to thy tackling, and
show thy self a man, whenever the case requires it at thy hand, in this
so great encounter against the Devil. Think thou that thou shall be
crowned without getting the victory? Or that thou shall get the victory
without battle? Or that thou shall fight without enemies to assail thee? And
what else is their challenge in the end, but ground of everlasting glory, if
thou buckle thy self to the battle with a stout and princely courage, upon
trust of Gods help? Go too the^, be valiant in the Lord, and in the mightiness
of his strength, as the Apostle counsayleth the Ephesians to be. Put on the
whole complet armor of God, that thou may be able to stand against the
devils assaults. Take to thee the shield of faith, wherewith thou may ward
all fiery darts of that wicked find. Take to thee ye spiritual sword, which
is Gods word, as the same apostle teaches us: and in resisting the Devil,
look not alonely to humane weakness, but look for Gods help with great
assuredness. How effeminate is he which can not bridle his lust and refrain
from aduoutrie, having entered into wedlock, which the apostle counsels for
avoiding of fornication? But surely he can, yea ver^ly can he, so he be
unfeignedly minded, and do earnestly indeuer it, neither cockering his own
nycenesse, nor discoraging himself through despair of the heavenly help,
which never fails such as pray heartily and continually for it. For God
helps our infirmity, so we shake off cowardlynesse and sloth, and fight
manfully and with stout courage against Satan: neither does God at any time
suffer us to be tempted above our power, but tempereth the success of the
temptation in such wise, as we may be able to bear it out, (as says Paul:)
nay rather he gives us victory of our enemies by our lord Jesus Christ if we
flee to him for succor, and call upon him trustfully for help, without any
doubting at all, as says saint James.

But let us proceed to the rest of the vices among which the first that incount
ereth us is the vice of the belly and the mouth, which is called gluttony or
riot. Wonderfully in good soothe is the flesh prone thereto, and is very loath
to be brydeled of it. She loves to live delicately, tenderly, ryotously,
feastingly, and not sparely, stayedly, and soberly. But the man that is rightly
well disposed and fears GOD, persuades himself that Gods will is to be
followed, rather than the flesh to be pampered, and thereupon indeuoreth to
repress gluttony and surfeiting, with the contrary virtues of sobriety*
stayednesse, and temperance of diet. And in deed if we may believe Physicians,
contraries are commonly healed by contraries. Therefore he lays before him
this saying of our God and Lord Jesus Christ. Beware that your hearts be not
over laden with surfeiting. And likewise this of ye Apostles. Ouercharge not
your selves with wine wherein is superfluity. Again, Drunkardes and Gluttons
shall not inherit Gods kingdom. And this saying of saint Peter's: Be sober and
watch, for your adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking
whom to devour, etc. And again this of Esaias: Woe be to you that rise early to
fall to bibbing and to drunkenness until night, yt ye may boil in wine. And
the godly man bateth and abhors these vices of the belly and the mouth so
much ye more, because they provoke the Flesh (which is to unruly already of it
own accord) to whoredom, aduoutrie, and such other shameful deeds,
according to this saying of the old Poet, Where wine is not, there is no
lechery. Neither did Terence say amiss, Where wine and dainty fare do want,
Dame Venus games wexe cold and scant.


For this cause Valerius Maximus witnesses, that in old time the Roman women
were not acquaynted with wine, verily least they might fall into any
dishonestie, because the next step of intemperance from wine, is woonte to be
to unlawful lechery. Also in that trifler of Africa, Venus terms sobriety
her enemy, threatening that she will use her service to disarme Cupid withal.
And in the Epistle to the Romans, Paul having made mention of feasting and
drunkenness, does by and by (without putting any other words betwixt) add
wantonness and unchastity, poynting as it were with his finger, that these do
commonly follow of the other. And that is even the very cause, why the holy
men were wont to fast so often and so long in old time: namely to the intent
they might by any means the easilyer withstand the ouerlustinesse of their
flesh, repress the rage of it, bridle the lust of it, keep ye filthy desires
of it in awe, and finally weaken and subdue ye force of it. And notwtstanding
this their seking of remedy against ye unruliness of their flesh by abstine^ce
and fasting and their indeuoring to live after a sort out of ye Flesh being
still in ye flesh, and in manner to ouermayster nature: yet nevertheless they
resorted humbly unto God for help and succor in that hard encounter, and
prayed unto him continually, reposing more hope and trust in gods defense tha^
in their own fasting. The same do I counsel thee to do whosoever thou be.

Now let us speak of idleness whereunto our Flesh is very prone likewise, as
which finds nothing sweter tha^ slothfulness, sleping, lasinesse,
vnlustinesse, loytering, drowsinesse, and lithernesse. It likes her well do
nothing, and to be cumbred with no business, but to rest from all care and
toil. But ye man yt is godly and no less a christian in deed than in name,
bears in mind y^ idleness is cause of al noughtinesse, and specially yt
filthy lusts are nurrished with riot and idleness, as one witnesses in a
tragedy. And therefore rightly does the witty Poet say in the Remedy of
love.

By mine advice shun idleness the first of all,
For idleness bredes love and love in state maintains.
It is both cause, and food whereon the mischief feeds
Take idleness away and Cupids bow is broke.
And al his bronds lie quenched, both void of heat and light.
Hereto belongs that which follows anon after in the same place.

And thou that sekest end of love, be doing still,
And thou art safe: for love gives place to paineful toil
Demau^dest thou wherefore Aegistus wedlock brake?
The cause apparent is, he livde in idleness.
Full trim does Lucian show in his dialoge of Venus and Cupid, that love and
filthy lust can take no place in them that never rest from labor, but are
always occupied about some business and work. For any manne may easily see,
that yt is the mark which ye dialoge ameth at. Besides this, idleness does
commonly cause us to delight in feastings and fellowshippes, to follow riot and
fursetting, to spend whole days in playing at dice, too seek to make
ourselves merry with fond talk, ribaudly jesting, and wanton and scoffing
speeches, to delight ourselves with gaudes and shows, and with such dities,
notes, and playing upon instruments, as are filthy both in words, deeds,
and gestures: and more over in dancing, frisking, and al manner of leaping,
and finally to run headlong into al kind of voluptuousenesse, and
vnrulynesse, as daily experience teaches, and the matter it self bewrays
openly. Therefore thou shall do well and rightly, if thou be always occupied
aabout some honest business, as in studying, in reading, in following lustily
the doing of thy vocation, and there withal pour out thy prayers oftentimes
unto God, and cry unto him for help: likewise if thou thank God for his
benefits, and if thy mind run continually upon the shortness and
uncertainty of this life, upon the looking for death almost every minute,
upon Gods iudgement-seate upon the pains of hell, and upon the joys of the
heavenly kingdom. Again, if thy mind be occupied in often musing upon
Christ's coming in the flesh, upon his suffering of death for our salvation,
upon his rising again unto life, and upon his asce^ding into heaven. And
finally, if thou be not idle at any time, but always occupied in some
exercise. And if thou have nothing to occupy thy self upon at home, (and yet
how can that be?) get thee to some Church, be at the hearing of some sermon,
be at the common prayers either mornings or euenings, sing Psalms and hymns
to God in the congregation of the godly, be present at the christning of
children, and join with others in praying, follow some corse to burial, and
call to mind thine own frayltie, talk with thy godly acquaintance concerning
divine things, call the poor to thy table, visit the sick, comfort them
incorage them to death, or do some other thing beseeming a christian man. And
so thou shall not be in peril of yielding to the temptations of the flesh or
the Devil. For I am afraid lest the getting of thee into the country, thy
walking about thine own grounds, the doing of some handworke, the going
abroad a hauking, hunting, and fishyng, the tending of gardines, and such other
things will help the matter very little. But yet are not those things also
without their commodities: and it is better to do those things than to do
nothing. For in doing nothing men learn to do evil, according to Catoes
oracle: Every idle body is full of conceyts, says the holy man: and (as I said)
the unmeasurable desire of feasting and gaming, with gluttony and surfeiting,
do spring of idleness. And out of them flow whoredom, aduoutrye, and other
sins worthy of everlasting punishment, as witnesses holy writ. Therefore by all means eschew idleness, and assuring thy self of Gods help, resist the
flesh which is foreward of it self to idleness, laziness, and
slothfulness, and allureth thee sweetly thereunto.

Now let us come to the vice which also is reckened of the Apostle among the
works of the flesh, namely to wrathfulnesse or desire of revenge, wherewith
there is no, man but he is sometime, yea and that very often cumbered, some man
more and some man less, according as every man's nature is. For partly al
men, but specially those in whom choler abounds, are most of al subject to
that vice. Therefore let every man endeavor with all earnestness, to repress
that affection as much as he can And because (as one says) the mind is
commonly overtaken of anger, before reason can provide to disapoint it, let
every man reclayme him self long before, and continually bethink himself how
to resist ye affection, and not to do any thing in anger. Let him call to mind
this saying to ye Romans* Derely beloved, aue^ge not your selves, but bridle
your anger. And this to the Ephesians: Be angry and sin not, let not the sun
go down upon your wrath. And since we read that many of the heathen men of
old time, were wont to bridle their anger with incredible modesty and gravity:
were it not a shameful and unseemly thing for us christians, if Gods will
should not win yt thing at our hands which reason won at theirs, namely yt
we should not yield to that incumbera^ce of mind. For although this affection
cannot be plucked up by the root, and quite and clean taken away, it is so
depely planted in us: yet must such rage be ever restrained and as it were
brydeled, and not let loode. And that lies (partly) even in a certain
willingness and enforcing of the mind by earnest indeuer and diligent
heedetaking, (for exercise, myndfulnesse, and custom, and much rather reason
and discretion, do greatly prevail in this behalf) but specially in Gods:
help and grace, if a man crave them humbly with earnest supplication and
prayer. And anger is to be restrained and with stood at the first brunt: so
much the more, because other evils do breed: and grow of it, as hatred,
enimitie, and strife, which fight full butte against the christian profession,
and wherewith the son of God would have his to be utterly unacquainted,
teaching them almost every where to mayntaine mutual love and charity.

There are yet other vices of the flesh, whereof I will treat in their due
place: and specially, carelessness, and ouerlustinesse in prosperity, whereby
it comes to pass, that our hearts forget God, so as we endeavor not, neither
to call heartily upon him, nor to give him thanks for his benefits, nor finally
feel his wrath toward us for sin, ne give our selves to the furthering of
our salvation in fear and trembling, by minding the amendme^t of our life. In
this case the godly man must strain himself, both to shake off that
carelessness which accompanies, prosperity, and also to retain modesty, and
to repress his ouerlustinesse, by considering with him self that all things
may be turned vpside down in the twinkling of an eye if God list. And because
that like as the flesh becomes proud of prosperity, so it droupeth in
adversity, or else takes it impatiently. Let the man yt fears God, keep some
measure in that behalf also and not shrink in heart, nor pyne away with sorrow
and heaviness, nor yet storm and chafe against God. But let him ever behight
himself amendment of his state, upon trust of Gods goodness, and call upon
God with great assuredness through the mediator Jesus Christ.

Among the vices or rather (as the Apostle terms the^) works of the flesh, we
must chiefly reckon covetousness, which is a lusting after another man's goods
and not after his own. For the flesh does willingly seek her own advantage,
and covet other men's goods. Hence spring wiliness, craft, deceitfulness,
cousenage, extortion, theuerie, and such other naughtiness. But the godly man
bears in mind how it is forbidden in the ten commandments, that he
should not couete any other man's goods, neither house, nor wife, nor man
servant, nor maydseruant, nor Ox, nor ass, nor aught else yt is his
neighbors. Neither is he ignorant how the Apostle says, that covetousness
is the root of all mischief. And therefore be labors by all means to keep
down his affection and lust of the flesh, and so he have meat and drink,
and cloth to cover his body, he is fully persuaded that he ought to hold
himself contented with them. Thus much concerning ye Flesh, which is wont to
stir men up, and to thrust the^ forewarde to follow and enjoy al manner of
pleasures, to deal unhonestly and naughtily, and finally to give themselves to
overcome all vices and lewdness. Whose untameable pronenesse to concupiscence
whosoever has overcome, has doutlesse attained the greatest and most glorious
victory that can be: concerning which matter one of ye ancient divines writes
thus: There is no greater victory (says he) tha^ that which is gotten of a
man's own lusts. He yt has overcome his enemy* is stronger, howbeit tha^
another man, but he yt has ouermaystred his own lusts, is stronger than
himself, He that ouerthrown his enemy, has vanquished but a forrayner: but
he yt has tamed his own lust, has subdued a household enemy. It is easier to
overcome any mischief than voluptuousness. For all other are terrible, but this
is fair spoken. He yt vanquisheth his lusts, triumphs over sin etc. The
Apostle wills to mortifye the deeds of ye Flesh by the spirit, that is too
say, to fight with all our heart and with all earnestness of mind, against
the sinful lusts whereunto our Flesh is naturally foreward, so as we indeuer
to bridle the flesh which is prone to all vices, and runs headlong to al
sensuality, and after a sort offer violence to our own nature, in crucifying
the Flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, as the same Apostle says.
For if ye live after the Flesh (says he) ye shall dye: but if ye mortify
the deeds of the flesh through the spirit, ye shall live: For they that are
gods children, are led by Gods spirit. Whereby he shows, that such as follow
wicked lusts, and restrain not their sinful motions with the fear and dread
of God as it were by bridling them, shall be in danger of gods wrath and of
endless death. For we must fight fiercely against the motions of the flesh,
and not do any thing against conscience. For yt do they which witingly and
willingly rush forth of set purpose into sin and wickedness, breaking Gods
commandments, shrinking through faynthartednesse, and driving away and (as
says ye Apostle) discoraging the holy spirit of God. Hereto belongs this
saying of the same Apostle, let not sin reign in your mortal body, that you
should obey it in the lusts thereof: another yield ye your members to sin,
as weapons of unrighteousness: But give over your selves to god, as raised
from death and give over your members as weapons of righteousness unto God.
And again. They that are after the flesh (says he) do mind the things that
belong to the Flesh: and they that are after the spirit, do mind spiritual
things. Surely to be fleshly minded is death, but to be ghostly minded is life
and peace: because that Fleshlymindednesse is enmity against God: for it is
not obedient: to Gods law, neither can be. They therefore that are in the Flesh
cannot please God. The same Apostle, to the Galathians says thus: Walk in the
spirit and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. For ye Flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against ye flesh. And those two are at
strife one against another, so as ye cannot do what ye would. And again:
They that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh with the affections and lusts
thereof, To be short, the Apostle warns us almost every where, to keep
continual battle against the Flesh when we be once regenerated, and to strive
with all earnestness to hold down and subdue the sinfulness and corruption
of our nature sticking still in our Flesh by the spirit of God, to crucify
that old man of ours with Christ, to clenze away the old leven daily more and
more, and (that I may use the Apostles own words) to mortifye our earthly
members, as lechery, vncloanesse, nycenesse, and evil concupisence. Therefore
let us not promise ourselves rist and safety in this life: we must stand
always as it were in battelray, so long as we carrye the old man about us and
we must fight against the Flesh without ceassing, that the body of sin may be
done away and perish, as the Apostle says to the Romans: And they that are
sanctified by the spirit, must not in any wise so deal, as sin may reign
and bear swaye in them: but they must with all force withstand the
sinfulness and forewarde inclination to offend, which is bred in them: and (as
S. Peter says) they must absteyne from fleshly lusts, which mayntaine war
against the spirit* and they must not abandon their members as servants too
uncleanness and unrighteousness, from lewdness to lewdness, but as
servants of righteousness unto holiness. Another must they run forward with
blind brayde whither so ever the flesh drives them, nor heap sin upon
sin: but they must fight (I say) continually against the flesh as long as
they live. They must subdue their naughty affections, and not cocker
themselves in their ouerte^dernesse, nor give head to their lusts. Finally we
must by all means endeavor, to put off ye old man according to yt former
co^uersatio^ which is corrupted we deceitful lusts: and to be renewed in the
spirit of our mind, so as we put on the new man, which is created to Godward in
true holiness and righteousness, (as Paul says to the Ephesians) I say, to
put off the old man with his deeds, and to put on the new, which is renewed
to the knowledge and image of him that made him, as the same Apostle says to
the Colossians, and lastly to forsake all ungodliness and worldly lusts and
to live soberly, uprightly, and godlily in this present world, waiting for the
blessed hope and glorious appearing of the great God and savior Jesus Christ,
who gave him self for us to redeem us from all vnrightuousenesse, and to
clenze us for a peculiar people to himself, that we might be followers of good
works, as the same Apostle writes to Titus.

I will add this one thing more, before I make an end. There has bin some
strife in our days, who are rightly to be taken for fleshly, and who for
ghostly. I will touch the matter shortly. He therefore is said to be Fleshly,
which strayneth not himself to the uttermost of his power, to keep down the
corruption and naughty affections that are in the flesh, and as it were to
purge away ye old leven: but is carried by them into al kind of leaudenesse and
wickedness, and rusheth wittingly and willingly against the precepts of the
ten commandments: and shaking off the force of god, bears too much with
him self, being a servant to his body, and (that I may use ye words of ye
apostle Jude) walking after his own lusts Contrariwise he is spiritual, which
being stirred up by Gods spirit, endeuoreth with all his heart to live a holy
life, to obey Gods commandments, to keep himself undefiled of the world, to
put off ye old man, to subdue ye sinfulnes yt is bredin him and (as says the
Apostle) to kill ye deeds of ye body, through ye spirit and which feeling his
f^esh striving there against, does yet after a sort offer violence to his own
nature, and suffers not him self willingly to be overcome of his own lusts,
in so much that if he can do no more, at leastwise he suffers not sin to
reign in him, but upon trust of Gods hope, indeuoreth to live out of the flesh
being in the flesh: in the mean while bewayling his own infirmity and
weakness, and because he cannot put away the renants of sin that stick
fast in his flesh, he prays too have them pardoned for Christ's sake. For let
no man look too pluck up quite and clean, or too remove whole away the
inbred corruption which is as the root of all sins. Always there remains
some behind, until the flesh be brought again into dust and consumed to
nothing. For only death is it that dispatcheth that mischief. In respect
whereof Augustine says thus: there is always a fighting in the body of this
death, because the concupiscence wherewith we be borne, cannot be ended as long
as we live. It may daily be diminished, but ended it cannot be: Concerning
this difference between the fleshly and the spiritual man, I will cite a few
things out of Irenaeus, who in his fifth book against the Heresies of
Valentine writes in manner thus: They that have the pledge of the spirit, and
serve not the lusts of the flesh, but submit themselves to the spirit, and
lead their life in all points agreingly too reason, them does the Apostle
rightly call spiritual, because Gods spirit dwells in them. And after a few
other words, the union of the soul and body (says he) taking Gods spirit
unto it, makes a man spiritual. But as for them that reject and forsake the
counsel of the holy Ghost, and serve the lusts of the flesh, and live not
according too reason, but are carried headlong into all sensuality, and being
utterly destitute of the breath of Gods spirit, do live after the manner of
Swine and Dogs: them does the Apostle justly call Fleshely, because they
mind nothing but Fleshly things, and so forth.

The same Author anon after says thus: For they that are such, do bear men
in hand that they believe in the father and the son, but yet do they never
set their minds upon Gods word, as they should do, neither are they
bewtifyed with the works of righteousness: but (as I said before) they live
like swine and dogs, giving themselves to uncleanness, gluttome, and all
other vices. Justly therefore does the Apostle term all such men fleshly and
sensual, forasmuch as ^^ey take not hold of Gods spirit by reason of their
unbelief and sensuality, but walk unreasonably after their own lusts. And
ye prophets call the^ cattle and wyld beasts: and common custom terms them
brute beasts without reason, and in all the Law it self calls them
unclean. And anon after: For the same cause (says he) the Lord terms them
dead men. For he bids them let the dead bury their dead, because they have
not the spirit in them that quickens the man. Contrariwise, as many as fear
God and hope for the coming of his son, and settle the holy Ghost in their
hearts by faith, shall justly be called men, and clean, and spiritual, and
ghostly, and alive to God: because they have the spirit of the father which
makes a man clean, and rayseth him up to the life of God.

Many things does Irenaeus allege there concerning this matter, which are in
deed worthy to be red, but yet am I compelled to omit them for avoiding of
tediousness. Nevertheless I thought it good to set down some part of them,
for the better understanding of the things that I have alleged out of Paul
concerning the Flesh and the spirit, only so far forth as belongs to the
present purpose.

Of the World.
NOw follows yt we treat of ye World, which provoke men to many evils, and
commonly ministers occasions and opportunities of all kynds of sin, corrupting
me^ by example, and undoing the^ by stu^bling blocks. First of all therefore ye
World stirs up ye Flesh (which of it self runs a main as is said) to
vainglory, prid^, and ouerweening. For whereas all of us are naturally desirous
of glory, more or less according to every man's disposition: y^ World
quickneth up pricketh forward, and as it were wakeneth yt affection by
innumerable ways. No man can willingly find in his heart to be unnoble and
vnrenoumed, and much less to be utterly despized as a rascal: there is no man
but he coueteth to place and put him self forth before others. And there be a
great sort, who loking to be alonly magnified and honored of all men, not only
despize other men's meandness in comparison of themselves, and make no
reckening of them: but also do always, either by open resistance, or by
privy undermining, malice, and guile, bite their equalles and matches, for
very spyte and cankred evil will, because they envy their virtue, praise, and
glory: as in manner daily examples show. And oftentimes it falls out, that
when we see other men in honor, authority, and credit, we also strive to
be equal with them, and whatsoever it be whereby renown, authority, or
dignity may be gotten, we give our selves to it with might and main to
atteyne the same, and envy other men for them. For commonly Pride is
accompanied with spitefulness. But it cannot be said how great a vice Ambition
or Pride is, nor how many mischiefs spring of it. Therefore that the godly man
may eschew pride let him bethink him of this saying of our Savior in the
Gospel: He that exalts himself shall be brought low. And of this in the
Apostle Saint Peter: See that ye have lowliness of mind settled in you, for
good withstandeth the lofty, and gives grace to the lowely. Therefore humble
your selves under gods mighty hand, that he may lift you up when time serves.
Saint James as it were poynting with his finger to this saying of S. Peter's,
says: Humble your selves in the sight of the lord, and he will exalt you. There
are other textes of scripture besides these, which are able to scare men from
pride. And certesse it is very hard for a man to assuage and repress this
loftiness of mind, and to think lowly and humbly of himself. For the root of
it is fastened deep in man's breast, springing out of the blind self-loue which
is ingraffed in all men by nature: Hereof comes the estimation and trust of
our own virtues, power, and wisdom, and the misknowing of man's weakness and
infirmity. This does oftentimes breed the despizing and oppressing of others.
A branch hereof is that vice whereof the Devil rather than the world is the
breeder, namely the hypocritical pride and pharisaicall ouerweening, where
through men do not only conceive some singular opinion of their own:
righteousness, but also despize other men as ungodly, in comparison of
themselves. Of the which matter there is a parable in S. Luke, wherein Christ
speaking of the praying of the pharisie and of the Publicane, adds this after
speech in ye end of it, that whosoever exalts himself shall be brought low,
and whosoever humbles him self shall be exalted. Heerewithall agrees the saying
of the blessed virgin and mother of God, that god lifts up and exalts the
lowly, and pulls down the mighty from their seats. But now let us proceed
to the rest.

Like as the Flesh is naturally given to riot, unruliness, and wantonness:
even so the world ministers sundry furtherances of lust, nurrishments of
vnstayednesse, and firebronds of lechery to the Flesh, adding fire to fire,
and oil to the flame. It sets all kinds of pleasures before it, and
whereas of it own accord it gapeth to greedily after such things: it not only
quickens it up with the smoothe enticementes of them, but also tolleth it on,
and holds it snared in captivity to them. Whatsoever the Flesh lyketh, of
what sort soever it be, be it right or wrong, the world does in all points
feed the humor of it, most perniciously soothing, following, smoothing, and
commending all things, and suffering it to be carried headlong into all
mischief, by foading the vices and lewdness of it. And verily the World is
to the Flesh as a fit cover for such a pot, as the proverb says: so iump
do they agree together in all points, as I will show more plainly in due
place. Oftentimes also the World yeldeth both causes and occasions of spiting,
of backebiting, of hatred, of revenge, of hartburning, of malice, of anger, of
impatience, of enmity, of quarellyng, of slaunderyng, of scoldyng, of raylyng,
and of innumerable other sins. And this is so true and manifest, as it can
neither be denied, nor ought to be set forth with more words. Therefore let
us be ever in a readiness as it were to some battle, whenever we, intend
to set foot out of doors and to go abroade^. Let us always set sure watch
upon our selves and upon our own minds, and when we shall have to do with
other men, let us look well about us upon all our sayings and dooyngs, as
though we were among the thickeste of our enemies. Let us eschew Stages,
Gamyngs, Syghtes, Dancing schools, and throngs of people, least any thing
happen to come in our syghte, which may either corrupt us by example, or
hurt us by giuyng us offense. Thou meetest a woman of very good favor and
beauty: beware thou fasten not thine eyes upon her. For he that looks upon
a woman to lust after her, is an aduouterer already in his heart, says our
Savior. Thou meetest with a rayler and a slaunderer: beware that thou neither
say nor do any thing unbeseeming a Christen man through anger, nor strive with
him in scoldyng and brawlyng. Unto these and such other like things the mind
must always be armed aforehande, that nothing may seem strange to us, nor
any thing happen unthought of or unprovided for. For (as one says) a sodeyne
storm abassheth men more than the storm that is forescene. For the avoiding
of these and such other things: because the shunnyng of them in the open
world seemed very hard: The godly in times paste did shet up themselves in
some solitary place, where there might be no room for so many occasions and
causes of sinning, nor for so many corruptions and stumbling blocks. Not
unwisely certesse nor unawarely did they deal, in mine opinion: but yet if all
other men should do the like, who should govern the common weal? who should
ouersee the Church of God? who should train up youth in godliness, nurture,
and learning? who should incorage men to virtue by example? Howsoever the case
stands, yet must thou wrestle with the world wheresoever thou becommest,
unless thou intend to live altogether among the dens of wyld beasts, as the
men that loved God did, in the noble days of the ancient times. Whom though
thou imitate never so nearly, yet am I afraid that thou shall find a world
even without the world, and that the very solitariness shall comber thee more,
than if thou leddest thy life where as is most stirring, and soughtest the
common commodity of others. What remains then, but that we live in the world
as out of the world? that is to say, yt we keep our selves undefiled of the
world, (as says S. James) and neither love the world, nor the things in ye
world, as says S. John. And as ye same Apostle adds immediately, The things
that are in the world are such as these, namely ye lust of the flesh, the
likings of ye eyes, and the pride of life. And by those are meant all manner of
lewd desires that fight against Gods law, al inticements of pleasure, all
kinds of lusts and likings, all couetousenesse, ambition, strangeness, all
pride full of a certain stateliness and vain bravery, and all
troublesomnesse of life. And these in very deed are the things that we have
professed our selves to renounce in our Baptim, and from the which all men
must flee, and keep them selves pure and undefiled, at leastwise if they mind
to be taken for Christians, and to be so in deed. For the love of the world
and the love of God cannot agree together, because (as says Saint James) the
friendship of the world is enmity against God: so that whosoever will be
friend to the world, is made an vnfrende to God. Now for the avoiding of the
several sins, whereof both the causes and occasions do spring of the
world, let every man bear in mind the sayings of the Scripture: as for
example, against hatred and hartburning toward our neybor, this saying of
Saint John: Whosoever hates his brother is a manslear, and you know that no
ma^slear has everlasting life abiding in him. And if any man say, I love God,
and hates his brother, he is a liar. Against wrath, this saying of our
Sauiors: Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be in danger of
judgment. Against railing and misspeaking: Whosoever calls his brother
fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire. And this of Paul's. Evil speakers
shall not possess the kingdom of God. Against impatie^ce and desire of
revenge, this saying of Christ's: Love your enemies, wish well to them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that hurt you and
persecute you, that ye may be the sons of your father which is in heaven. And
again: if ye forgive not men their misdeedes, neither will your father forgive
you your misdeedes. I will not pursew these things any further.

Let us remember that the occasions, and (as ye would say,) the handles
whereby to take hold of these sins, are given us of ye world: but the root
of them all is fastened deeply in the flesh: and that the world does oftentimes
cause the vices to brust out, which lie hidden within in the flesh. Dung
(says one) does not always cast an ill sent: but stir it, and thou shall
smell it. Even so we which seem to our selves to be meek, gentle, godly,
and christianly in deed, do by and by bewray what we be, as soon as the
world ministers occasion, For then true speech does from the heart proceed:
The vizor gone, the thing remaynes in deed.


That is to say, the naughtynesse and sinfulness which cleaves fast to the
bowels and maree of us, bursteth out whenever occasion is given, and
bewrays it self, so as the secret vices that lay hid in the innermost nookes
of the mind appear, and the privy thoughts of the heart which lay wrapped up
in darkness (as says ye Apostle) are brought to open light, so as a man may
now in manner feel with his hands the faultiness, stayning, and corruption
that is bred within us by nature. The world shows forth riches, wealth,
glory, honor, and pleasure. These stir up the inward lurking covetousness,
ambition, sensuality, and other lusts and affections, and bewray a man to be
far otherwise than he pretended to be. A man is at a deyntie, fine and
sumptuous feast, where there wants neither pleasant meat, nor most excellent
and noble wine. In this case perchance he that took himself to be very sober
and well stayed by nature, shall find in him some pronenesse and forwardness of
his flesh, to riot and surfeiting. For the vice that lay lurking within,
indeuoureth to burst forth into act, unless ye meet it by the way, and
resist it and fight against it with all your power, as the well disposed sort
and such as fear God have bin wont to do. So likewise (that I may allege
another example) the beholding of a fair and welfauored woman, shall
peradventure cause a man (which douted nothing less before) to feel some
filthy inclination of his flesh unto wickedness, which either he was utterly
ignorant of before, or at leastwise believed it not to be of so great force to
set him on fire. Therefore let no man, let no man (I say) trust too much to him
self, but let every man suspect himself, and acknowledge both the wonderful
forwardness of the flesh unto all sin and wickedness, and also the weakness
and frailty of man to withstand it: and to the intent he may eschew the
sins them selves, let him (according to the common saying) eschew the
occasions of sin: but yet let him in any wise call always upon God for help
and succor, and so living in a clean body, let him labor and travel toward
heanenly things in his mind. And inespecially, look what vices every man is
most given unto by nature, let him diligently shun both the causes and
occasions of them in the world. Let him forbear the fellowship, familiarity,
and company of unthrifts, let him not willingly be at any sumptuous and
excessive bankets, feasts, or meetings, unless he be in manner compelled.
And if he must needs be at them, let him be well ware of himself, that he
neither do, nor say any thing there, which may justly as ill become a
Christian, as it may perhaps well become the liberty of feasting. At a word,
let the godly man indeuer this at all times, and all places, that (as says
Saint James) he may keep him self undefiled of the world. Although this be
easier to be spoken than to be done, yet may it be done in part by the help of
Gods grace. Let us streyne our selves earnestly to the uttermost of our power,
and out of al doubt God will further our endeavor. Let us remember how Saint
John says, that the world passes away with the lust thereof: but he which
does the will of God, indureth for ever. Wherefore let us not love the world,
nor the things that are in the world, though they seem never so fair and full
of all kind of sweetness. Of which forte are these things wherewith the world
is wo^t to intrappe men unawares: filthy pleasures, shameful lechery,
glittering and sumptuous furniture of feasts, deyntinesse of meats, riches,
wealth, dominion, power, honor, greatness, glory, dignity, and (to knit up the
matter in few words,) the delights of the flesh, the pleasurings of the
senses, the allurementes of the eyes, and the pride and pomp of life. As for
all these things, the well disposed man that fears God, deemeth them not to be
true and substantial goods as they be commonly taken to be, but empty images
of good things, or rather some iuggling tricks, and even as a poisoned and
deadly honey, or else a deathfull draught of methe, as the Proverb says: and
therefore he refuses, forsakes, and skorneth them, and (as Saint James
counsels) keeps him self unstained of the world, and (as says Saint
Peter) flees from the corruption of lusts that is in the world. He knows
that all the world is set upon naughtiness, as John witnesses. Therefore
according to Saint Paul's doctrine, he seeks the things that are above, he
cares for the things that are above: he passes not for earthly things, nor
for the things that are put to him by the world, which he is not ignorant that
he renounced in baptim, together with all the pompes, allurementes and
pleasures thereof. And all these things does the well disposed man streyne him
self to do, upon trust of Gods help. But yet for all that, it is a thing of
great difficulty and labor, by reason of the naughtiness and sinfulness that
is thoroughly settled and rooted in his corrupt nature: wherethrough it comes
to pass, that look what leawdnesse and wickedness so ever the World
occasioneth and offers, the Flesh does greedily catch hold of them out of
hand without sticking at it. For the senses and thoughts of man's heart are
forward to naughtiness even from his childhoode: and all the imaginations of
his mind are bent at all times unto evil, as that grave Author Moses
witnesses in Genesis. Great therefore and paynefull always is the godly man's
fyghting against the pronenesse of his own flesh unto sin, which is
utterly incredible, and against his own weakness in withstanding the
allurements of the world, by reason of the vnweeldie and unbridled moodes of
ye flesh, which willingly follows, (I will not say outrunneth) whithersoeuer
ye world calls it, and gives no ear either to the souereintie of the mind,
or to the commandments of God: in so much that Paul said truly, I know
there dwells no good in me, that is to say, in my flesh: for, to be willing
is present with me, but I find no ability to do thee good: for I do not the
good which I am willing to do, but I do the evil which I am loath to do. And a
little after: I agree to Gods law (says he) as in respect of mine inward man:
but I see another law in my members, which warreth against the law of my mind,
and leads me prisoner to the law of sin that is in my members. Wretched man
that I am, who shall set me free from this body of sin? I thank God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Thus much hitherto.

Now then that the world does both mar with examples, and undo with
stumbling blocks, for as much as it is out of all doubt, I need not to use many
words to make it plain. A poor woman sees a rich Lady glittering in gold
and purple, and clad in apparel of sundry colors, and by and by she being
inflamed with desire of like gayness, stretches her self beyond her
ability, and has no measure of her costlinesse and superfluity. So great
mischief is there in example, whereof the world yields occasion. In the mean
while there is no more regard had of that which the Apostle Saint Peter says,
than of the man in the Moon, as says the proverb. His will is that the
attire of Christian women should not be outward, in brayding of their hear,
in wearing of gold, and in apparel of costly raiment, but inward and secret,
that the inner man which is in the heart, be clear from all corruptnesse, so
as the mind be mylde and quiet, etc. Also Paul's mind in his Epistle to
Timothy is, that wives should clad themselves in sobre apparel and attire,
with shamefastness and chastity, not with curling of their hear, not with
gold, not with pearl, nor with sumptuous raiment, but as becomes women that
show forth godliness by good works. Besides this, the vice, wickedness and
lewdness wherewith the world does always swarm and ouerflowe, do often hurt
by example, castyng stumblingblockes in men's ways, and ministering occasion of
falling, as, Lavish and ryotrous expenses, daily bellycheere, glorious and fine
furniture of feasting, rauishing and deflowring of maidens, aduoutry, incest,
Church robbing, blaspheming of God, and specially these, swerings, cursings,
and bannings, by the cross, wounds, and blood of Christ, which alas are too
too breeme and rife nowadayes. I omit how the world inhonoreth vices with the
names of virtues, calling riot liberality, unshamefastness, valyant courage,
stubornes, stoutnes: and crafty deceitfulnes, fynenesse of wit. Contrariwise
they deface virtues with the names of vices: calling stayednesse, sturdinesse:
thriftinesse, nigardlinesse: shamfastnesse, sheepishnes: mildenes, cowardlynes:
and warenesse, fearfulness. How many be there think you, which to eschew
the report of too much sparing and nigardship, do after the example of other
men, maintain princely cheer, and fare for a Pope, with all sumptuousness and
royalty? Thus the world minystreth both cause and occasion, wherthrough, they
that else would live soberly, thriftily, and stayedly, do live ouerdaintily,
fynely, and sumptuously, too the intent too escape disprayse. So likewise ye
shall find other some, which to eschew ye report of cowardlynes and
faynthartednesse, because it is counted an unseemly thing for a man to be so,
will rather revenge injury than forgive and forget it, and rather go to law
than lose any piece of their right. For the world does commonly term patience
by the leude name of cowardlynesse and lasinesse, and deem the desire of
revenge to be a kind of valiantness and stoutnesse meet for a man. To be
short, after the same sort there are innumerable, who to eschew the brute of
poverty, because they take that to be reproachful, do seek goods by all
means possible. whither it be by perjury, usury, or any other leude
slightes, not passing at all how they come by them, so they may have them. For
if any do heap up riches by hook and by crook, and enforce themselves to the
vttern o^t to get abundante of wealth, those does the world deem to be men of
forcast and policy, and it takes almost them only to be wise and only
worthy to be accounted of. As for honest pouerti^, it despises it, making no
reckening of such as eschew it not by all means possible. And so by inflaming
me^ with desire of wealth and riches, it brings to pass and obteyneth, that
like as in all other things, so also in this, men direct the doings and devices
of their whose life, chiefly by the judgment of the world, and neglect the
commandments and heavenly doctrine of God, running blyndly and madly into al
sin, corrupted by example one of another. Look what I have said of riches,
think the same to be spoken of power, dominion and authority: to the
atteynment of which things whosoever do be^de themselves with all their heart,
them does the world gape and gaze at above all others, as men of greatest
courage. Which dealing when well dispozed men and such as fear God do see,
who else are wont to despize such things, and to make none account of them:
they also are somewhat moved at it, and tickled with a certain desire of the
same things, the which (notwithstanding) they do easily put away and shake
off by and by, in respect of Gods will, which they labor to obey. To be short,
which way so ever a man turn him in the world, undoubtedly he shall every
where meet with somewhat, whereby the minds of the godly may be sore
offended, if they take not heed, and which may wonderfully defyle, atteynt,
and mar them, with the foul infectio^ of noisome example, be they never so
pure, sound, and clear: so as a man may rightly say, that the world is (after
a sort) the wide gate and broad way that leads to destruction, and is wont
to be always trodden and haunted of most men, whereof our Savior makes mention
in the Gospel. But I will not stand any longer upon these things.

Of the Devil.
THen let us come to ye third enemy, which is at deadly foade with us
continually. Uerily he is ye old serpent, which is called Satan and the Devil,
as John writes in the Apocalips. This is he that raungeth continually up and
down in Christ's sheepefolde, as an hungerstaruen Lion seeking whom to devour:
whom Peter wills us to withstand stoutly by faith. This is he that seduceth
the whole world. This is the author of sin, which allured the first father
of mankind into deceyt. This is he who^ our savior witnesses in a certain
place, both to have been a murderer from the beginning, and also to be a
liar, and the father of Lies. This is he of whom John says, The devil
sins from the beginning. This is both the prince of the world, as Christ
terms him in John: and also the evil, wherefro we desire in the Lords prayer
to be delivered. He therefore (to come to the matter) not only tempts us to
the mean vices and wicked doings, such as I have rehearsed already, and
whereunto both the flesh of it own accord is foreward, and the world
ministers innumerable causes and occasions: but also laboreth to drive and
enforce us to some greater sins and horribler wickedness, as Epicurish
contempt of God, the neglecting of gods word, unbelief, distrust, often
despair, false persuasion of ourselves, trust of our own strength, wilful
stubornnesse in evil, blaspheming of God, the wtstanding of the known truth,
hypocrisy, superstition, Idolatry, perjury, treason, aduoutrie, inceste,
murder, kylling of a man's own father or mother impoysonyng, witchcraft, and
other infinite sins, and such wicked and ungodly deeds, as cannot be
contained within any number. He laboreth to infeeble our trust in God, and also
to weaken or rather to take quite away the hope of our salvation, and to
quench our love toward God, and our charity toward our neybour. To be
short, he never leaves assaulting of us both within and without: he
preasseth, and pursues us, and never gives us any respite at all. And whom he
cannot overcome by sudden assault, them he indeuoreth to tire with long
continuance and with holding on still. He prompteth our minds with filthy,
shamful, and wicked thoughts, and inflameth us with sundry heates of lusts
within: and afterward he trumpeth such things in our way outwardly, as may
easily either corrupt us by example, or offend us unawares either in word or
deed. Finally he tries all the ways to the wood, that look to what vice a
man is most prone by nature and custom, he may throw him headlong into it,
and so finally destroy him. And not that only, but moreover he labors by
all means to conjecture and know what every man thinks in his own mind by
some outward signs and tokens. Therefore of all things it is the hardest for
a man to resist his so sundry and great temptations, unless god help our
infirmity. And the devil assalteth us not only in respect of the mind, that is
to wit, by provoking us to innumerable sins, and by thrusting us headlong
oftentimes into most horrible wicked deeds: but also indeuoreth to ye uttermost
of his power, to hurt our bodies, to appaire and hinder our health, to procure
sicknesses, to infect the air, to raise noisome tempests to stir up deadly
wars, great vprores, and troublesome seditions, and to minister causes and
occasions of hatred, hartburning and enimitie both public and private, whereof
diverse times do rise very great slaughters. And he is not more to be feared
when he assaulteth us openly, than when he steals upon us as it were by
undermining: neither is be more to be dreaded when he shows himself as he
is, than when he transformeth himself (as says the apostle) into an angel of
light. He deals with us openly, when he goes about to drive us to outward
sins and wicked deeds, as rape, aduoutrie, incest, manslaughter,
witchcrafte, and such like. And he steals upon us by undermining, when he
assayleth us unawares by secret traynes, making us negligent and in manner
careless in hearing of gods word, and slow and slothful in true
godliness and honest doings, as in the deeds of charity, in praying to God,
in giving him thanks, and in executing every man the duties of his own
vocation, and so oppresses us as it were in a sleep. And trewly Satan's
wiliness in assaulting us is wonderful. For one while in tempting us to
sin, he speaks us fair and smileth upon us, lessing ye heynousnesse of the
offense, and taking away the feeling of Gods wrath for sin, by removing his
grecuous threatenings out of our remembrance, and not suffering us to mind the
punishments that God has executed upon sinners in old time. To be short,
he makes the sinner careless on all sides, and (as says Cyprian) he
sootheth to deceive, smileth to smite, and allureth to kill. Otherwhiles on the
contrary part, he woonderfully inhaunceth our sins beyond all measure, and
drives us almost to despair by the feeling of Gods displeasure: he sets
before our eyes the examples and punishments of other men. and thereupon he
bids us gather what we our selves ought to look for, indeuering in
co^clusio^ to bereue us of all hope of forgiveness, and to draw us to endless
destruction Those undoubtedly be ye devils fyrie darts, which S. Paul speaks
of in the Epistle too the Ephesians.

Also this is a wonderful wyle of the devil above all the rest. For like a
craftsmayster and cunning forger of all mischief as he is when, he cannot,
overcome us by his own feats, and by the vices that he provoke us unto:
then laboreth he to overcome us by our own weldoings. O how dreadful an
enemy is he, which makes even virtue an occasion of sinning? This will
become the playner by an example, When he tempts a man to surfeiting and
drunkenness, if the man yield unto him, then has he woonne him to the
fulfilling of his lust, whereof he ministered matter unto him to perform it
withal. And if the party withstand it, then does he make him proud in his
heart, for having so good stay of himself, And so the devil overcomes even
in being overcome. Likewise when he goes about to inflame a man with love of
money, if the man take not good heed he is like to fall into the crime of
couetousenesse, which (as says the Apostle) is the serving of Idolles. But
if to spyte Satan withal, he become the bountyfuller and kynderharted to the
poor, then shall he hardly shift from swelling up with some secret pride.
Thus does Satan commonly cut every man's throat with his own sword, (as they
say*) and like a wily and old wringer as he is, he makes them to use his own
tricks and subtle sleyghtes. In fleeing from the smoke men fall into the
fire. By reason whereof, he is no less to be feared when he is overcome,
than when he overcomes. Diverse times he fayneth himself to be ouerthrown
and out of strength, to the intent to step up again the fiercer. He runs
away to draw men into ambushe, and to give them the counterbuffe unawares. He
gives place openly, to vanquishe by stelth. To be short, whom he cannot catch
with sweetness and delight, him he compasses with the conceyte and well
lyking of his own virtues. Hereof sprang this bosting of the pharisees: I am
not a robber, a wrong dealer, nor an aduouterer, as other men are. I fast twice
a week: I give tithes of all that I have. Rightly does Ambrose in a certain
place warn us, that all other vices prevail by evil deeds: but only pride is
to be taken heed of even in well doings. And surely there is not any man yt can
be ready enough to beware of pride. Even virtue it self (as I said) does
oftentimes minister occasion to this vice, yea and it comes to pass diverse
times, that we vau^t our selves to loftily in ye ouerwening of our own
myldenesse, and in the humbling of our hearts by bearing a low sail: insomuche
that even in mislykyng of our pride, we do after a sort swell secretly in
our selves for mislyking of our pride. And so we fall intoo the same vice yt
we shu^ned most of al. Warely therefore must we work, warely must we prevent
Satan's temptations, and we must labor to espy the intent and drifte of our
most wily enemy, yea and (as says Saint Paul) to know the very thoughts
and co^ceits of Satan. What then shall a christian man do in so many, so diverse,
and so great assaults of his most merciles enemy? Soothly he must flee to the
majesty of God for help, he must pray without ceassing, and he must with
earnest and hearty supplication, beseech the eternal God the father of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to deliver us for his son our mediator and
high priests sake from ye evil, which never ceasseth one minute of an hour,
but assaulteth us continually: and not too suffer us to fall or to quail under
temptation. Also we ourselves putting from us the ouertendernesse of our
hearts, must with singular stoutnesse resist the Devil that assayleth us, and
maynteyning war against him upon assurance of gods help, beware of the
ambusshes yt he has laid ready for us, and not give him any occasion to set
upon us unawares. Moreover, let us call to mind ye examples of the saints that
have wtstood ye Devil manfully and the punishments, yt have bin executed upon
sinners, and the grievous threatenings of the holy scriptures: yt in so doing
we may by the help of ye holy ghost, be able to overcome the temptations of ye
Devil the easelyer, and to vanquish our most subtle enemy, who assaulteth us,
not only by himself, but also by the world, and chiefly by our own flesh,
that is to say, by our own selves and in our own selves.

Neither let us hope for peace out of hand when we happen to have gotten once
ye better hand of him. What then? We must (as ye would say) stand continually
in battle ray: for we cannot be discharged of ye danger of the devils
assaulting, until we be dispatched of our life. Of which matter I think it
very expedient to add here ye words of yt holy man and martire of Christ,
saint Cipryan. Simeon (says he) auoweth yt Gods servants are then at peace,
and in free and quiet rest, when they be taken out of ye turmoyles of this
world, and are arrived in the haven and dwelling place of the everlasting
safety, and when they have put away this death and are come to immortality.
For yt is our peace, our sure rest, and our stable, firm, and continuing
safety. But as for ye world, what else do we in it than keep continual war
against ye devil? than stand in continual conflict against his darts and
weapons? we have to encounter against covetousness, against unchasteness, against
anger, against vainglory, we have a continual, endless, and combersome wrestling
to endure against fleshly vices and worldly allurements, man's mind being
beseeged and as it were trenched in with the noysomnes of ye devil, is scarce
able to encounter him and to withstand him in all places. As soon as
covetousness is overthrown. Lechery steps up: as soon as lechery is
suppressed, ambition takes his place: if ambition be shaken off, anger wexeth
fyerce, pride puffs up, tippling inticeth, envy breaks concord, and
ielosie cutteth off friendship. Thou art compelled to speak evil, which the
Law of God forbids. Thou art driven to swear, which is not lawful. So many
persecutions does the mind daily suffer, and with so many dangers is ye heart
distressed: and yet does it delight thee to stand still here among ye devils
swords, when thou should rather wish and desire to hye thee unto Christ,
by the help of speedy death? and so forth.

Now like as thou must not be proud, if thou have at any time overcome thine
enemy through the help of God: so must thou not be out of heart, though he
overthrow thee, and (as it were) dash thee against the ground but thou must
rise up again the lustilier against thine enemy, and not suffer him to go his
way vnfoyled. And that shall thou do, if thou pray often and heartily unto God
and crave the help of the holy ghost at God the fathers hand for Jesus Christ's
sake, and henceforth look more nearly to thy self, walking circumspectly and
warely in all things, and looking every way aduizedly about thee, that thou
offend not unawares, ne dash against any thing: if you be strong in the Lord, and
by the power of his strength, as says the apostle: and finally if thou always
and above all things be mindful of man's frayltie, that whereas thou seem to
thy self to stand, thou look thoroughly and substantially to it that thou fall
not, and employ thy self to thy salvation with fear and trembling.

But to return to our former matters, in the devils tempting of us, when he
pricketh us forth to any of the things aforesaid, we must first and foremost
take to us the sword of the spirit, which is gods word, after the example of
our savior Jesus Christ, who being tempted of the devil, resorted to the
mistical scripture, by means whereof he brought to pass yt the devil went
away vanquished, and did let him alone, as the story of the gospel witnesses.
The like must we do. As for example (thereby to make the thing more manifest) if
he go about to bring a man to ye neglecting of Gods word, and of holy
assemblies, the man of God by and by fearing himself, must bethink him of his
saying to S. John. He that is of God hears gods word. etc. My sheep hear
my voice. If he go about to drive us to despair for the unmeasurable number
of our sins: Let us call to remembrance this saying of our Savior in John:
God so loved the world, as he gave his only begotten son, to the intent that
whosoever trusts in him should not perish, but have life everlasting. And
this saying of the same our savior in Matthew: Come unto me all ye that are
weerye and ouerloden, and I will refresh you. Also this which is written in
the first Epistle of S. John: If any of us sin, we have an advocate with the
Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the atonement for our
sins. Again, herein appeared Gods love toward us, that God sent his only
begotten son into the world, too the end that we might live by him, etc. So
likewise, in all other of the Devils temptations and suggestions, the godly man
must (as I said before) take to him the spiritual sword, to encounter his
enemy withal, and he shall go away with victory in all co^flictes through the
help of God. For without Gods grace, man's endeavor is vain and to no purpose.
For all our ability comes of God, it is Gods every whit of it, as says that
blissed man Cyprian. Neither can we hope for any victory against the Devil by
reason of the feebleness and infirmity of our own strength: unless God
help us. And that is the very cause why our Lord commands us to desire of
God the father, that he should not lead us into temptation, but as often we flee
unto him, deliver us from that evil wight, which suffers us not to be in
rest and quiet one minute of an hour. The same Lord of ours exhorts us to
watch and pray, least we fall into temptation. Yea the Apostle Peter
quickens us to sobriety and watchfulness, because of our adversary the
Devil, who goes about like a roaring Lion, secking whom to devour.

But now to finish this part of the devils temptation, I will breefly set
down what Tertullian says of that most sturdie enemy of mankind. He never
suffers his malice to rest (says he:) he matcheth, he assaulteth, he
beseegeth: if he may by any means either strike the eyes with fleshly
concupisce^ce, or snare the mind with worldly intycementes, or overthrow
faith with fear of earthly authority, or writhe one from the sure way by
untoward traditions: he spares no stumbling-blockes, he spares no
temptations. To the same purpose also makes this of saint Cyprian: Our
adversary with who^ we be at wars, is old, and on ancient enemy. It is full
six thousand years ago since the devil did first fight against man. He has
now learned all kinds of tempting, and al slights and tricks to overthrow,
even by the long continuance of his practice. If he find Christ's souldyer
unprepared, raw, not heedful, nor watching with all his heart: he windeth
about him unwitting it, he beguyleth him unawares, he deceyueth him for want of
skill. But if a man that keeps Gods commandments and sticks stoutly unto
Christ do cope with him, he must needs be overcome, because Christ who^ the
man confesses is vnvanquishable. The same man in another place says thus. We
must keep watch my dear brethren, and labor with al our power, that we may
with all heedfulnesse and wakernesse withstand our enemy in his rage, who
shoots his darts at us to strike us and wound us in all parts of our body. He
goes prying about every one of us, and like an enemy that beseegeth the
walls of a town, he spyeth and tries whither any part of our members he
less stedie and assured than it should be, that he may break in at it to the
inner parts. He offers the eyes alluring shapes and delightful pleasures,
to destroy chastity by sight. He tempts the ears with shirle musik, that
the sweetness of the sound may lozen and soften the courage of the Christian
by heering. He provoke the tongue to misspeaking, he pricketh foreward ye hands
to malapertnes of slaughter, through provocation of wrongs. Too make a man a
deceyuer, he faceth him with unjust gain. Too catch the soul with
covetousness, he thrusts in hurtful commodity. To bereeue a man of the
heavenly honor, he promises him worldly honor. To steal from him ye true
things, he shows him ye false things. And when he can not beguile covertly,
he threateneth openly and apertly, manacing with terror of troublesome
persecution, as one yt is always enemy to Gods servants, and always restles
in seking to subdue them. In peace he is slye, and in persecution violent.
Therefore my deerebeloued brethren, our minds must stand armed and weaponed, as
well against all the devils deceitful slights, as against all his open manaces,
as ready always to fight against him, as our enemy is always ready to
assail us. Thus much says saint Cyprian.

And this enemy is so much more to be feared than ye flesh or ye world, not
only because he almost never ceasseth to assault us on al sides al our life
long, but also puts us to our plundge at ye point of death, when we be
ready to give up ye ghost. At yt which instant he laboreth to drive us to
despair, by setting our sins before our eyes, and by inhauncing them
wonderfully above mesure. Moreover, at the same time, he brings importunately
to our remembrance, the judgment seat of ye Lord, the torments of hell, the
fire yt shall never be quenched, and furthermore Gods rigor, and the examples
of Gods dreadful wrath in punishing of sinners, that he may drive the
wretched ma to despair of his salvation. Also he casts in a chokepeare to
make him dout of gods mercy, and puts perilous thoughts in his head, of
predestination. To be short, he strives to weaken the belief of the things
that are to be believed, and makes to call all the whole doctrine of our Religion
into doubt: that he may so at length throw him headlong into endless
damnation. Or if he perceive him self to win nothing that way: then he
transformeth himself into an Angel of light, and whom he could not perchance
drive to despair, him he stirs up to a certain ungodly selftrust, and to a
presuming upon his own deserts, and so labors to oppress him unawares with
carelessness, yea and even standing in a fond conceyt of his own good deds. Of
the which matter, forasmuch as I have spoken sufficiently in my book of the
comforting of the sick, I will add no more of it here.

These are almost al ye things yt came to my mind concerning the conflict of ye
Christen man against the flesh, the world, and the devil, which I thought good
too put forth. Great undoubtedly is man's inability to resist these enemies:
but yet (as I said) we be able to do al things through him that
strengthens us: and that is the son of God, our Lord and savior Jesus
Christ. Be of good cheer (says be,) I have overcome the world. Therefore let
us be of good courage, and call continually upon God for help, and (as our
savior counsels us) let us not be weery of praying, let us eschew al
occasions of sinning, let us forthwt stop the temptations at their first
entrance, and let us never suffer them to gather strength. For when men stand
or tarry any thing long upon filthy thoughts, they run in danger of being
overcome at the length. When we have gotten the upper hand, let us buckle our
selves new again to the battle, and not imagine the conflict to be come yet
to a final end. For we must look still for one temptation in another
neck. And if we be overcome, let us not be out of heart for it. For as it is
true yt one said, that is too wit, that the man which runs away may fight
again: so is it as true, that the conqueror has oftentimes bin overcome of
the vanquished. Let us do our endeavor, that whatsoever occasion our enemy
gives us of sinning, we may take hold of it to do well, and (as the proverb
says) let us cut his throat with his own sword. Right hard and difficult
surely is the combat with our enemy, but yet is the victory easy by the
help of God. Only let us withstand him manfully and with stout courage, and
God will help our endeavor, and (that I may use the Apostles words) he will
tread down Satan under our feet. When our enemy tempts us, let us always
call to mind the shortness and uncertainty of this life, the presentnesse of
death at all times and in all places, the peril of vnrepentantnesse, and the
endless punishments of hell, but specially and above all things, Gods being
present euerywhere, and the presence of the Angels whom our most merciful
father has appointed to keep us. Let us bear in mind that we be the temple
of God* and that Gods spirit dwells in us. Therefore let us not (I say) let
us not unhallow Gods holy temple, neither let us (as says the Apostle) grieve
the holy spirit of God by following our filthye lusts, and running forth
whithersoeuer our enemy the Devil calls us. Let us not drive away the
Angels, whom God has set to be our kepers for the mayntenaunce of welfare, the
reverence of who^ ought of right to call us back from sin and wickedness. Let
us be ashamed to do those things in the s^ght of the angels, which we would be
loath to do in the sight of a man. Let the pureness and holiness of the
Angels keep us somewhat in awe from sinning. Nay rather, let God himself who
is present every where, who is the searcher of men's raynes and hearts, and
which looks into the innermost conceyts of our minds let him (say I) ^ray us
not only from al leude and wicked deeds, but also from thinking upon any
thing yt is dishonest, filthy, or unclean, if we be not utterly godless and
stark Epicures Finally, let us indeuer to be sobre, and beware yt our hearts be
not ouercharged with surfeting and drunkenness. But as the Church of God sing
in hymns, I say, more sparely let us use
Our words, our meat, and eke our drink,
Our sleep and Play, that we may stand
More stiffly still upon our guard,
And let us shun all naughty things*
Which overthrow the wavering minds*
And let us give our wily foe
No room to use his tyranny.


Last of all, let us assure ourselves, that in this hard and dangerous
encounter against our inbred coruptio^ and pronenes to sin against the
innumerable inticements of the world, and against ye prince of darkness, and
god of this world, which maintains vnreconcylable war against us, the holy
ghost helps not ye cowards and hartles sort, nor ye sluggards and slothful
sort, nor such as sit loytring and idle as it were with their arms folded one
within another. Therefore let us not soothe our selves in our own weakness,
neither let us cocker our own nycenesse: but being armed and weaponed with the
spiritual furniture that saint Paul makes mention of in the Epistle too the
Ephesians, let us join battle cherefully, as valiant in the Lord, and by
the mightines of his strength as says the apostle. Let us not give bridle
wilfully to our affections, neither let us at any time shrink wyllingly from
Gods grace. They that streyne themselves are helped from above as they say. God
gives his holy spirit for Christ the meadiators sake, to them that crave it.
Through whose aid and help, man's infirmity which else had bin utterly unable
through the only powers of nature, is now enabled by power from heaven, if it
submit it self thereto: at leastwise so we fail not ourselves, but beware in
any wise that we receive not Gods grace in vain. For although we cannot by
any means utterly root out* and quite and clean take away the corrupt
naughtiness that is bred in us, nor pluck up (as ye would say) all the
rootestrings of it, so as nothing should be left: yet surely we may be able
by the furtheraunce of Gods help, to keep it down and after a sort to subdue
it, so as although we cannot utterly ouerwhelme it and quench it that it might
never rebel, yet we may keep it, in the mean while from reigning and from
ouermastring of us. So likewise may we be able to refuse the inticements of the
world if we endeavor it with all our power: and to wythstande Satan, if we put
away the ouertendernesse of our hearts: and finally to get the upper hand of
our enemies, if we enforce our selves to it with all our heart and all our
endeavor: howbeit, not we (as the Apostle says) but the grace of God with us.
Therefore: let us evermore crave this grace at Gods hand trustfully and
without doubtyng: let us flee thither for succor, upon acknowledgment of our
own inability to resist: and let us also yield our selves thereunto. So will
it come to pass, that the victory which we could not atteyne by our own
power, we shall atteyne by the help and furtherance of this grace, and that
through our Lord Jesus Christ, under whose antsignes we fight in the camp of
his Church, and unto whom we have given our selves in baptime, renouncing
there the world and Satan the Lord of the world, with all the pompes and
pleasures thereof. Let us follow this rightly noble, victorious, and
triumphante Graund captain, who both incorageth us to fight, and inableth us
to win: and both releeueth them that faint, and crowns the^ that ouercom. For
this is he which says in ye Apocalips, To him that overcomes, I will give to
eat of the tree of life that is in the mids of ye Paradise of my God. And
again Be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a crown of life. The
same Lord promises to him that gets the upper hand, both deliverance from
the second death* and hidden Manna, and the writing of his name in the book of
life, and the sitting by him in his throne, and the right of Gods children, and
the possession and inherlting of all good things. Whom would not so great
rewards incorage, were he never so rank a cowarde? who^ would they not thrust
foreward, were be never so heavy a sluggarde? If we be christians, let us
believe God the fetter forth of such rewards for us, and let the same
rewards kindle our corages to deal lustily. For as for him that is not moved
with such rewards, surely he is little better than an Epicure, and an utter
dispyzer of religion, and a man whose salvation is well near past recovery. God
the eternal father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, be ever our aid and
help in our continual battle against the Flesh, the World, and the Devil,
and suffer us not to sink or give over, but deliver us when we flee unto him,
from that wicked wight which leads away the whole world after him. To be
short, we beseech him to vouchsafe to make us able by his grace, to overcome
the fraylty of our flesh, to eschew the inticements, corruptions and infections
of the world, and to beware of the baytes, slightes, and deceytes of the
devil. And so, unto him with the son and the holy Ghost, be all praise, honor
and glory for ever and ever world without end. Amen. Amen.

IMPRINTED at London by Henry Einneman, for John Shepherde. Anno. 1576.


