A christen sentence and true judgment of the most honorable Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood declared both by the auctorite of the holy Scriptures
and the ancient Doctores.

Very necessary to be read in this time of all the faithful.

Concerning the dyscorde and varyaunce that is spronge and daily increases
of the sacrament of unity and understanding of ye words of our savior
christ jesus, that no man should be disquieted or troubled in conscience, me
thought it necessary to write a short instruction wherein by gods grace I
shall so pacyfye both the parties that without co^tencion they shall admytte
each other i^to brotherly love according to christ's exhortacio^, which would
have us to love each other as he has loved us and would have love to be the
token of his very disciples and faithful folowers.

The first Chapter proves that it is none article of our faith necessary to
salvation.
First we must all acknowleg that it is none article of our faith which can
save us neither which we are bound to believe under the pain of eternal
dampnacio^, for if I should believe yt his very natural body both flesh and
blood were materyally in the bread and wine, that should not save me seeing
many believe that, and receive it to their dampnacion. For it is not his
presence in the bread that can save me, but his presence i^ my heart through
faith in his blood, which has washed out my sins and pacefied the Fathers
wrath toward me. And again if I do not believe yt his bodily presence is in
the bread and wine that shall not dampne me. For it is not his absence out of
the bread that can dampne me, but the absence out of my heart through unbelief
now if they would here obiecte yt though it be truth that ye absence out of
the bread of it self could not dampne us yet are we bound to believe it
because of gods word, which who believes not as much as in him is, he makes
god a liar. And therefore of an obstinate mind not to believe his words may be
an occasion of dampnacion. To this we may answer yt we believe gods word
and knowledge that it is true, but in this we dissente whether it be true in
the sense that we take it in, or in ye sense that ye take it in, And we say
again yt though ye have as it appears unto you the evident words of Christ,
and therefore consyst in the bark of the letter, yet are we compelled by
co^ferryng of the scriptures together to enter within the letter and to search
out the mind of our savior which spoke the words, and we say thyrdly that
we do it not of an obstinat mind for he that defends a thing obs^inately
whether it be true or false, is ever to be reprehended but we do it to satisfis
our consciences which are compelled by other places of Scripture reasons and
doctors so to judge of it And even so ought you to judge of your part and to
defend your sentences / not of an obstinacy for then ye offend) but for to
satysfie your consciences as touching the Scriptures which cause you so to
take it. And so ought nether part to despise the other, for each seeks the
glory of God, and the true understanding of the scripture.

The second Chapter shows the reason and scriptures which cause us
otherwise to take it the^ ye common multitud at this time do.
Regard we therefore the precepte of our master christ ever norishyng
brotherly love in peace and unity, and if ye can not otherwise bear us, yet
admytte us as weak brethern. And as touching the causes which compel us so
to judge, we know yt Christ before his passion had a natural body, which he
received of the vyrgyn Mary through the power of ye holy ghost. This body we say
was natural and not fantastical, but had the qualyties of an other body in
all things save sin, nether was it more possible for that natural body so
being mortal and not gloryfied to be in diverse places at once, the^ for mine.
So that when we hear these words spoken, this is my body, and se that they
were spoken before his body was gloryfied, knowing also that a natural body
vngloryfied can not be in many places at once, and that if these words were
vnderstande^ as they sound he should have been at ye least in.xij. or.xiij.
places at once in his Disciples mouths, and sitting at the table with them,
It causes us to look better upon it, and so to search out the pure
understanding Now if ye object that he might be in diverse places at once, Then
may we answer by the auctorytie of saint Austen which says. Corpus in quo
resurrexit in vno loco esse oporteth. His body wherein he rose must be in one
place, and after determyneth that it contynueth in heaven, and shall so do
until the time that he shall come to judge both quycke and dead. Now seeing
saint Austen says that his body (wherein he rose must be i^ one place which was
his glorified body (the^ may we well say that his body not gloryfied can not be
i^ many places at once. And so must it needs follow that he can not be there in
flesh and blood. Besides that ye can show no reason why he should be in many
places at once, and not in all, but in all places at once he can not be,
wherefore we must conclude that he cannot be in many places at once. If ye say
that he may be in all places at once because he is also God. We answer that
the angel at the sepulcher said. Surrexit no^ est hic.i. He is ryse^, and is
not here. Wherefore if ye say that he is in all places, the^ make ye the Angel
a liar. Furthermore what time he ascended the scripture testifies that a
cloud took him out of their sight, and that two men stood by the Disciples and
said ye men of Galiley why stand ye gasynge up into heaven? This same Jesus
which is taken up from you into heaven shall so come even as you have seen him
go into heaven, here we think verily that Christ meant good earnest. And yt in
deed he was taken up from them into heaven as the Angel testyfieth, and yt
from thense he shall come to judge the quick and dead, as our Creed teaches.
Now if ye can persuade your own consciences and understand the Scriptures yt
he playde boo pype with his Disciples, and did but make him self invisible
only. Tha^ may ye take your pleasures, for Christ teaches us not to be
contentious.

The third Chaptre declares why Christ uses such manner of speech, and the
pure understanding of Christ's words.
IF ye would then axe us why christ should so say: and use these plain words
if he would that it should be spiritually understand. To this we answer that
it is the manner both of christ and his scriptures so to speak for diverse
consyderacions: Christ calls himself a very vine and his discyples vine
branches wherewith he has so perfectly set out his power, that a thousand
words could not express him so lively. For where he says I am a very vine
there declares he sensyble that as verily as the branches of a natural vine
can bring forth no fruit except they co^tynewe in the vine, even so can his
discyples do nothing except they abide i^ him Now where he says that he is a
very vine, he would not have you bound to believe for an article of the faith,
that he were a natural vine. But had lever that ye understand it mistically
that there is a certain property in this vine which does solyuely express him
that he can put no difference (for yt point) between a vine and him self but
calls him self even a very vine we use it also in common speech. If a man
se his neighbors horse having a certain properte which his horse has, then
will he say this is my horse up and down, not meaning that the substance of
his neighbors is his own horse, but that there is a certain property i^ his
neighbors, which is so like his that they could not decerne the one from the
other. Likewise Christ calls him self a door, not that he him self is a
material door, but because the door has a certain property which does well
describe him. For as no man can come within a strong hold but by the door,
Even so can no man come unto the father but through Christ, and for this
property does he call him self a door. And this does he to express even to
our outward senses what power he has and what profit comes to us through
him and even so in this Sacrament he calls the bread his body and the wine
his blood not that the bread and wine are his natural flesh and blood, but
for certain properties which are in them.

For he took the bread and brake it and commanded them to eat it, sayng this
is my body which shall be given for you. This do in remembrance of me. As
though he should have said these words. Now is the time come yt I must
depart from you. Nevertheless I shall give you such a perfyct token before I
go, that ye shall not doubt but that I am yours. Loo I shall be put to death
and my body broken eue^ as ye se this bread broken. Nevertheless by ye not
dismayde. Take this bread, and eat it, and swalow it down into your belyes
for this bread shall be unto you even my very body which shall be given for
you. For as verily as year partakers of this bread which by your senses ye
know ye have within you, even as surely shall ye be partakers of my body
which shall be crucyfied for you, though it were done a thousand mile from
you, wherefore ye need not to doubt nor fear in mine absence, seeing that the
fruit of my death shall be as verelye youres, as this bread which ye have
within you, but if ye should fall into any mystrust, then break ye among your
selves this bread, and eat it in the remembrance of me, that it may certyfie
even your senses yt you are partakers of my body through faith, as verily as ye
are partakers of this bread through eating of it.

The fourth Chapter notes another manner of speech and proves our exposition
by a proper simylytude of the brydgrome and bryde.
THis is the pure understanding of Christ's words, which many auctoryties
cause us to receive, and also that it is the common phrase of ye scripture no
man can deny, which is but meanelye excercysed in it. We read yt Jacob builded
an alter, and called it God, the god of Israel, we read also yt Jacob wrastled
with an angel and called the place Pem^ll.i. The face of God, we read yt the
pasch lamb was called the passing by of the Lord with infynite other of such
Phrases. How be it I think no man so innocent that he would co^tende and
affirm yt the very alter was the god of Israel, or ye place where he wrastled
to be the very face of God, or the natural lamb to be the passing by of the
Lord, but such names are given that as soon as we hear the^ we might know
what was meant by them. As by example he called alter the god of Israel, that
even the very name it self should testyfie that it was made to put us i^
remembrance of the very God of Israel. Likewise the place where he wrastled
was called the face of God, that ye very name it self might put us in
remembrance that there Jacob had wrastled with God, and had seen him face to
face. Also the lamb was called pasouer or the passing by of the lord, that
the very name it self might put us in remembrance that the lord passing by
had slain all the first begotten in Egept. And even so to our purpose the
bread is called the body, that the very name it self, might put us in
remembrance that his very body was broken for us And is as verily ours through
faith as the bread is ours by eating of it. And therefore added he also these
words This do in remembrance of me, which thing expounds all together if
we had wit.

If a brydegrome which had promised faith and troth to his bryde should
depart into a far country for necessary busynes that he has then to comfort
his brydes heart he would say on this manner. I must depart into a far
country for vrge^t matters. Nevertheless I shall leave you such a toke^ that ye
shall be as sure of me, as though I were here present with you. Take this ring
and put it on your finger for it is my faith and my troth which I have
promised to keep with you And therefore keep it i^ remembrance of me. And as
surely as you have this ring on your finger, so sure may you be of me that I
shall not dyceyue you. So that if ye should any thing mystrust me. Then behold
the ryng which is my faith and troth, and it shall certyfye even your outward
senses that I am youres. And much more is this true in the Sacrament, for a
man may repent him of his promise, and dyceyue his bryde, but Christ can not
repent him of his gracious favor, where with he loves us, he can be no liar,
nether can deceive us. And therefore we need not to doubt of his promise.

The fyfth Chapter shows the manner how it ought to be receued.
HEre also must we touch some what as concerning the receyuyng of it for
therein are many vexed some be so fearful to break Christ's institution,
which gave it in both the kinds that they wholly abstain and dare not come
at it. Except the priest would give it co^serrat in both kinds, and some there
are that never stycke at it, but receive they wot not what having no respect
unto Christ's institution And both are deceived, albeit the first are more to
be allowed, because they most sorrow to break Gods ordinas;ice. But I will
show you a means how ye shall ever receive it according to Gods institution,
although the priest would withdraw it from you. First ye need to have no
respect unto ye priests words which mynistreth it. For if ye remembrs for
what intent Christ did i^stitute the sacrament and know that it was to put us
in remembrance of his body breaking and bloudshedyng and that it was done for
our wealth, and we as sure of it through beleuynge it (according to his
promise) as we are sure of the bread by eating of it. If as I say ye
remember this thing (for which intent only the priest speaks these words
the^ if ye Priest leave out these words or part thereof he cannot hurt you,
for ye have already the effect and fynall purpose for which he should speak
them. And again if he should wholly alter the^ yet can he not deceive you, For
the^ are ye sure that he is a liar. And therefore when he brings the Sacrament
unto me, I will consider christ's mind and institution and nor ye priests
words. And will thanks my heavenly father, saying on this manner. Blyssed be
thou most dear and merciful father which of thy tender favor and benignity
(notwithstanding our grievous enormyties committed against ye (vouchsauedest to
send thine own dear and only sone to suffer most vile death for my
redemption. Blessed be thou Christ Jesus my lord and savior, which of thine
abu^dau^t pytie co^syderynge our miserable estate wyllyngly tokest upon the to
have thy most innocent body broken and bloudshede to purge and wash me which
am laden with iniquite. And to certyfie us thereof haste left us not only thy
word, which may instruct our hearts but also a visible token to certyfie
even our outward senses of this great beneficte that we should not doubt but
that thy body and fruit of thy passion are ours as surely as the bread which
by our senses we know that we have within us. Blessed be also that spirit of
verity. which is sent from God our father through our savior christ Jesus to
lyghte^ our dark ignorau^ces and led us through faith into the knowledge of him
which is all verity, strenght we beseech the our frail nature and increase
our faith that we may praise God our most merciful Father, and Christ his
sone our sauyoure and redemer, and the (with them) which art our co^forter to
whom be all honor and praise Amen.

Thus shalt thou receive it according to Christ's institution and though
chouse that the priest brings wine vnconsecrate, yet never stycke at that,
for as surely shall it certyfie thy consyence and outward senses though he
consecrate it not (so that thou know what is meant thereby) as though he made a
thousand blessings over it, and look what we have spoken of the bread and
even the same may thou verify on the wine. So that wenede to be no longer.

But committee you to God desiring him to open his light more abundauntly unto
us all that we may walk therein praysynge him eternally. Amen.

Contra Pacisienses, de contemptu mundi. God save the King.
Imprynted by me Richard Wire.

Cum priuilegio Ad imprimendum solum.


