THE BEST CHOICE. A Funeral Sermon. Published at the desire of some of the
friends of the Dead.

Psalm. 116.15. Right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

LONDON, Printed for C. B. dwelling at the Swan in Paul's Churchyard. 1607.

THE BEST choice. A Funeral Sermon.
Philip. 1.23. -- Desiring to be loosed and to be with Christ, which is best of
all.


THis Text that I have chosen, being considered as it stands here related, is
but a part of a sentence. For in this verse with the 22. going before, and the
24. following, the Apostle consulteth of two things set before him, whether he
may choose: not of any inconstant lightness, neither of any coffeehouse,
but because he sees in either thing good cause to desire it.

The two things whereof he consulteth whether to choose, are life and death:
(in which consultation most men would quickly resolve. For many desire life
with any conditions, as Augustine truly affirms in one of his Sermons, saying:
Longam vitam, etiam malam pene omnes volunt habere: all men welnie desire a
long long life, though evil and troublesome).

The commodity of life, for which the Apostle can be content to choose it, is
the profitable service that he might do to the Church. This he mentions as
drawing his desire after life in the 24. verse, saying: Nevertheless, to abide
in the flesh is more needful for you. Where note by the way, what it is
should make thee desirous to live in this world, only to profit others, and to
do the office of a good servant among thy fellow servants.

The commodity of death for which he wishes, that is, the fellowshippe of
Christ in heaven so to be obtained. This he mentions as drawing his desire
after it, in the words of my Text, saying: Desiring to be loosed and to be
with Christ, which is best of all. Where note I pray you, what is the hope and
desire of the godly in their death, namely, to be gathered to their Savior.

If we consider these words apart, singled from the rest of the Epistle, they
contain a perfect instruction concerning the death of true believers: wherein
are these three things.

First, that death is a thing of the godly to be desired, in these words,
Desiring to be loosed.

Secondly, that the godly are gathered by death, into the company of Jesus
Christ in heaven (which is the thing that makes their death to be so much (to
be desired) in these words: and to be with Christ. Thirdly, that the
fellowship of Christ, which the godly obtain after death, is the greatest
happiness that can be desired or obtained, in these words: for that is best
of all.

This Text I have chosen at this time for this reason. We are come together to
commit to the ground the body of a servant and child of God, who with all his
heart desired to be dissolved. Who desired his dissolution with the same reason
for which the Apostle desired it; namely, that he might be with Christ: and
desired this fellowshippe of Christ, with the same judgment, with which the
Apostle desired it, because he knew that to be best of all.

By the handling of this text, you shall see the wisdom of of his choice and
his desire, and so, I hope, be drawn with desire and judgment to wait for
the day of your dissolution, that you also may be gathered to Christ, which is
best of all.

Desiring to be loosed, eis to analusai: for so the Apostle describes death to
be an unbinding and loosing of man, that the soul set at liberty from the
fetters of the flesh, may return to his Creator freely. Which it cannot do so
long as it is shackled here in the body. And this description of death is most
convenient both to confute all Sadduces, and also to instruct us how to judge
rightly of death.

Every child of man is compounded of these two parties: of an humane body,
that is as the house and dwelling, and of a reasonable soul, that is the
tenant dwelling there. So are we taught in the history of the first man's
creation. Genesis 2.7. The Lord Gad made the man of the dust of the ground, there
is the body, the house of clay; and he breathed in his face the breath of
life. That is, says Tremelius, Animam vitalem elementari corpori inspirauit:
by inspiration he placed a living soul in his elementarie body, and the man
was a living soul, so soon as these two parts being joined together the man
lives.

And that which we call death, is no thing else but the dissoluing of this
composition, and the seperating of these two parts, that the soul may be loose
and at liberty to return unto God, as Solomon describes death in
Ecclesiastes, 12.7. Dust returns to earth as it was, and the spirit returns
to God that gave it.

Death is not the destruction, either of the whole man, or of any part of him,
as many suppose, that say in the Book of Wisdom, 2.2. We were borne at all
adventure, and hereafter we shall be as if we had never been. For the breath
is a smoke in our nosthrills, and the words are a spark raised out of the
heart, which being extinguished, the body is turned into ashes, and the spirit
vanishes as the soft air. Thus foolish men think that in death they perish
and come to nothing, and die as the beasts do.

And of this opinion, in the Church of the Jews, were the absurd Saduces, who
believed no resurrection to come of the body, and therefore thought that the
body perished in death. And they believed that there was no spirit separated
from flesh, no such invisible and spiritual creature, and therefore thought
that the soul perished in death. Their absurd opinion is recorded in Acts,
23.8. The Sadduces say, that there is no resurrection, nor Spirit, nor Angel.

But we believe and teach contrary to all Sadduces, both the immortality of
the soul remaining after death, and also the resurrection of the flesh at the
last day. For the soul of Lazarus being dead, ascended to a place of comfort.
Luke 16.22. And all that are in the grave (which is the receptacle of our dead
bodies) shall at the last day hear the voice of Christ, sending forth his
Archangel with the sound of a Trumpet, and they shall come forth to judgment.
Ioh. 5.28.

So that neither body nor soul in death perishes and cease to be: and
death is no destruction of man, but the loosing of the Spirrit out of the
prison of the flesh, and a dissoluing of man into his parts, as the Apostle
here speaks, desiring to be dissolved. Wherein it behooves no man to be an
agent, to loose himself, as they which lay violent hands upon themselves: but
we must all be patients, and wait upon God, till he that tied the knot of life
in thee, untie the same. The Apostle, to be with Christ, desired not to lose
himself, but to be loosed.

Desiring to be loosed. The Apostle in these words shows us his desire: and
in his desire, shows us that death and desolution is a thing to be desired
of the godly. When the labourer has wrought stoutly in the vineyard all the
day, and at length the evening comes wherein he may rest, he is glad of it,
yea he does desire and wait for the coming of the evening that he may rest.
Our life here beneath, is but as a day, and a short winter day; and here upon
the earth as in the Lords vineyard, we are appointed to labor: so the Parable
of the laborers hired to work in the vineyard, Matthew. 20. does teach us. When
the evening of our day, namely, death does come, the servant of God rejoices
that he may rest from his labor: yea, in wisdom he should desire the
coming of it, that he might rest from his labor: for death brings such
rest. The holy Ghost from heaven affirmed to John the Evangelist, Reu. 14.13.
that they which die in the Lord, do rest from their labors, and are therein
blessed. And a wise Poet truly said it, Est finis miseria in morte, in death
our miseries end.

When the soldier has put on armor, and lies in Camp against the enemy,
he longs for victory, that he may put off his armor, and rest from that
dangerous and painful service. And when that wished day is come, he
rejoices for his rest. For as the King of Israel answered the king of Aram,
though he that girdeth on his armor boast himself, yet he that puts it off
after victory, has whereof to boast. Now we are all Soldiers, and our life
upon the earth is a warfare. So Jerome reads the first words of the seventh
chapter of Job, Milita est vita hominis super terram: A warfare says he,
fighting against invisible adversaries. And we are sent into this world as the
Lords pressed men, under the Banner of Christ, following him our Captain, to
fight against sin, against the flesh, the devil, and the world, by doing
good works, and resisting tentations.

Sin fights against us, and often takes us captives. Romans 7.23. Paul
says, I see an other Law in my m^ebers rebelling against the Law of my mind,
and leading me captive unto the law of sin which is in my members. The flesh
fights against us, striving against the spirit, as the spirit strives
against the flesh. And Peter bids us, Abstain from fleshly lusts, because
they fight against the soul. 1. Pet. 2.11. The Devil comes fiercely upon us
as a roaring Lion, and fights against us. Ephesians. 6.16. being armed with fiery
darts. And the world does not love those whom God has choson out of the
world. John, 15.19. and the battle which we have to maintain against those
enemies is most perilous, because, Ephesians. 6.22. we wrestle not against flesh
and blood, but against principalities and powers, against the worldly
governors, the princes of the darkness of this world.

This battle ends not till the day of our dissolution comes: then are we
freed from tentations, and delivered from sin. For Romans, 6.7. the Apostle
says: He that is dead is freed from sin. Then do we rest and rejoice,
triumphing over all our enemies, saving that death for a time holds our
bodies in the dust of the earth. And therefore the day of our dissolution, as
the end of our both painful and dangerous war is to be desired.

He that can discern between labor with weariness, and rest with reward,
between war with peril, and victory with joyful peace, he will say, that
the day of death to a good man is to be desired more then life; because life
is labor with weariness, and woe with peril: but the hour of death brings
rest with reward, and victory with joyful peace. Ciprian in a Treatise of
his, De mortalitate, in the third section says of life; Quid aliud in mundo
quam pugna aduersus diabolum quotidie geritur? quam aduersus iacula eius and
tela conflictationibus assidius dimicatur? While we are in the world, what do
we but fight against the devil? and war with continual conflicts against his
arrows and darts? but of death he says: Illa est pax nostra, illa fida
tranquillitas, illa stabilis, and firma, and perpetua securitas: Death is our
peace, our sure tranquillity, our stable, firm and perpetual security.

When Balaam that false Prophet, that loved the wages of iniquity, being
hired by the King of Moab to curse Israel, had considered that cursing could
not be the end of Gods people, but that they were heirs of blessing, he
pronounced these words, Numbers, 23.10. Let me die the death of the
righteous: let my last end be like his. The man did see, his eyes being opened
of God, that the end of the righteous, for the peace and happiness thereof was
to be desired.

The day of dissolution to a righteous man, is like that day in which Joseph
was brought out of prison, and stood before Pharaoh: He had long been in
bonds. In prison he was basely clothed as became a prisoner. In the end his
fetters are laid aside, he is taken out of prison, he puts off his base
attire, he is washed and shaven, he puts on new apparel, is brought into
the presence of the King, and made a ruler throughout the Kingdom.

The just man's life is like the time of his captivity; and his death is like
to his delivery. While we live, the soul is enclosed in the body as in a
prison, and is clothed with the flesh, as with filthy garments, and is
clogged with sin, as with fetters of iron and brass; and is cumbred with
injuries and tentations, more grievous and noisome then the hunger, cold, and
noisome savor of the prison.

But when the hour of dissolution comes, the prison is broken, and we are
delivered. We put off the rags of the flesh, and are clothed with white: we
are loosed from the fetters of sin, we are washed in the blood of Christ, we
are admitted into the presence of God, and are made together with Jesus Christ
heirs of a heavenly kingdom. And therefore as Joseph desired to be delivered,
and had cause to riot when that day came, even so may the righteous desire
their dissolution, and they have cause to rejoice when the day thereof draws
nigh.

The death indeed of the wicked is very fearful, and by all means to be
avoided, if it could be avoided: For their death is like the evening to the
slothful servant, when his Master will examine his days work. It is like
the coming home of the Lord to the unprofitable servant, that had wrapped his
Tallent in a napkin, and buried it in the ground: he was called to account,
and because he had been idle, Mat. 25.26. his Talent was taken from him, and
given to an other, and after sharp rebukes, he was cast into utter darkness,
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. It is like the fearful assizes, and
day of goal delivery unto the malefactor, who being brought from the prison
to the Bar, and there condemned, is led from thence to the place of execution.
It is like the birth day of Pharaoh unto his officer the Baker, who was taken
out of prison, led to the gallows, hanged, and made a pray to the fowls of
heaven.

The death therefore of the wicked is evil, and to be shunned (if it could be
shunned) for in it ends all their rest, and begins all their labor. In
it, ends all their happiness, and begins all their misery. In it ends
all their pleasure, and begins their torment, which never shall end: and
they fall as the tree that is cut down for the fire. Read the report of the
unmerciful glutton, in Luke 16.19. what pleasures his life abounded withal;
which all turned to torments when he died.

But the righteous are cut down like to ripe corn, that with care is brought
into the barn: and they are delivered from the evils that are to come. Esaias,
57.1. they rest from all their labors past. Revel. 14.13. They come to their
perfect joy, in hope whereof they rejoiced before. Matthew. 25.11. It is said
to the good servant, Enter into thy Masters joy. And when they put off the
earthly house of this tabernacle, 2. Corin. 5.1. they have a building given of
God, not made with hands, but eternal in heaven. They leave earthly
possessions, which coming naked into the world, they found here, and going
naked out of the world, they leave here: and for them they receive an
inheritance immortal, undefiled, that fades not away, but is reserved for them
in the heavens: and then do they truly begin to live, when they depart out of
this dark vale of frail mortality.

Truly that servant of God (the ruins of whose earthly tabernacle lie here
before us to be interred) knowing that the death of the righteous was to be
desired, did with desire and longing, expect and entertain the hour of his
dissolution.

And when he had, not yet in deed, but only in his purpose and resolution,
put off his flesh, and received in himself the sentence of death, he could by
no means be drawn in his affections to put it on again, though the frail
flesh and his fading life, as enticing harlots, did earnestly strive to draw
his liking unto them.

But as a wise and stout trauailer, when after long and weary iournies, he
sees at last, not far off, the place of his habitation, does then with
double desire contend to come unto it; and will not then suffer himself to be
stayed, but says in his heart, Oh long desired seat of my wished rest, often
have I thought upon thee, now shall I obtain thee: my feet forget their
weariness, and my heart forgets all faintnes, for love of thee: and my desire
shall not end, till I obtain the end of my desire.

Even so this man, made wise by the word of God, which makes wise unto
salvation, and being strong and of good courage in the Lord, when after weary
travail and long iournies, in this wilderness of the world, and vale of
tentations, he was admonished by sickness and infirmity, that he was not
far from the end of his way, and that his resting place upon the hill of Gods
holiness was not much distant: he lifted up the eyes of his mind toward
heaven, and contemplating the beauty of the heavenly new Jerusalem, and of the
glorious kingdom prepared for the sons of God; with doubled desire he
contended thither, and casting of all those things that might stay him (the
love of this world and of frail life) he wholly breathed heaven, with this
resolution; Long have I desired thee, now have I found thee. When thou were
further of I desired thee, and now that my joy be fulfilled in coming unto
thee.

I speak not these things as only intending to praise him, though it be his
just and great praise that these things be truly spoken of him, and such a
praise as men do not usually deserve, namely, to renounce this world, and to
contend, with full course of strong affections toward heaven. For his praise
only, I speak not these things of him (though to the righteous there belongs
a blessed memory, Prou. 10.7.) himself desired not praise among men, but the
praise that is of God.

But I remember also for your sakes, and in him I shadow forth unto you (as in
an example agreeing aptly with the doctrine of my text) what ought to be the
desire and resolution of every of you: namely, to meet the Lords purpose with
your desire, and to go hence with joy, when the hour of your dissolution
comes, and not to look back in your love and wishes, to this world, as Lots
wife looked back to Sodom, when her departure out from thence was her
safety, and her stay could not have been any longer without her hurt.

Thus much shall serve to have spoken of the first words, wherein the Apostle
signifies his desire of death. Now let us consider of the commodity that he
looks to reap by his dissolution, which makes him so much to desire it.

And to be with Christ. The commodity of life was public, he might do good
to others. His words for that, are in verse 24. Nevertheless to abide in the
flesh is more needful for you. The commodity of death is private, he shall
win good to himself. That he pronounces in the words of this verse, Desiring
to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. In which words, giving reason of his
desire, he teaches us a fruit of our death, and what it is that should make
us desire death, namely, that thereby we might be gathered unto Christ.

Many men for many causes desire the day of their dissolutio^. But as the Lord
Jesus said, Luke 10.42. of Mary's choice, One thing is needful: so may we say
of the reasons, driving men to desire death, one is laudable.

Abimelech, the base son of Gedeon, besieged a Tower in Tebez, and coming
near unto the wall thereof, a woman threw down upon him a piece of a millstone,
wherewith she brake his head. Judge. 9.53. Then he called his servant that bare
his armor, and bad him draw his sword and kill him: yielding this reason for
his desire of death; That men might not say, a woman killed him. The valiant
man, for the avoiding of that dishonor, desiring the speed of his own
dissolution, by his armor bearers hands.

In the days of David, Absalom rebelled against his father. And Achitophel, a
man very politic, and a subtle counselor, took part with him. His counsel
Absalom refused, and followed rather the counsel of Huspai. Hereupon
Achitophel, partly angry, and disdaining that his counsel was not followed,
and partly fearing that Absoloms faction could not prevail, letting slip the
opportunity that he had counseled him to take, sadled his Ass, forsook
Absalom, went to his own house, set all things in order, and then hanged
himself. The proud Polititia^, not able to bear the disgrace, and fearing
afterclaps, (for he suspected Absoloms fall) hastened with his own hands his
dissolution. So Judas the traitor, not able to bear the disgrace of his own
treason in betraying the innocent blood of his Master, made a quick dispatch
of himself. Matthew. 27.5.

And not only the wicked, but the godly also, have sometime hastened their
death, and desired the day of their dissolution, upon weak reasons, which as I
dare not disalow, so I cannot greatly commend. When Sampson, by the subtlety
of a Harlot, came into the hands of the Philistims, they put out his eyes, and
caused him to grind in a mill. And when on a certain day, the Princes of the
Philistims were come together to sacrifice unto Dagon their god, to whom they
gave the praise, to have delivered their enemy into their hands, then Sampson
was called for, he must be brought forth to make them merry. And within a
large house, whose weight was born up with two mighty pillars in the midst,
Sampson was placed near those same pillars: who praying unto God to strengthen
him, with all his power prested the pillars, and overthrew the house, Iud.
16.30. and slew a great multitude. For there were without, upon the roof of
the house, three thousands, besides them that were within: and among the
multitude, he himself perished. The good man considered that it was his
calling to destroy the enemies of the people of God; and he loved not his
life, that he might with loss thereof, finish the work of his calling.

And good Elias, that zealous Prophet of God, in the days of Ahab, fleeing
from Iezebel, into the wilderness beyond Beersheba, and sitting under a
Iuniper-tree, desired to die, saying; 1. Kings, 19.4. It is enough O Lord, take
away my life, I am no better then my fathers. He was somewhat impatient, and
would have had his dissolution hastened, because he could rest no where in
safety from the wrath of Iezebel.

For many and diverse causes, which for the time have taken away the sweetness
of life, and the bitterness of death; many have desired the hastening of their
dissolution. But sudden, short, vnco^stant, and not always justifiable, is the
desire grounded upon those causes. Burdens press us not continually, that we
should be ever weary of bearing. Perils endure not ever, that we should ever
fear. Reproach does not always attend upon us, that we should out of a big
heart mislike our lives for shame. Pain and coffeehouse do not abide with
us still, that we should ever wish to die: the desire to be dissolved,
grounded upon these causes, cannot be lasting.

There is only one true reason, that takes away all bitterness of death,
and overcomes all sweetness of this present life, and breeds in us a true,
constant and sound desire of dissolution. And that is this, that the Apostle
here remembers, as the commodity or advantage of death, drawing his desire,
namely, that by this means he should be gathered unto Christ, and obtain
fellowshippe with him by fight, and not by faith: the gain, and glory, and
sweetness of which fellowship, we shall consider when we come to handle those
last words, (Which is best of all). Here it is more proper to consider and
show, that the fellowshippe of Christ is gained by dissolution, and that the
godly dying, do go unto him.

Of the two malefactors which was crucified with the Lord Jesus, the one upon
the Cross besought him, saying: Luke 23.42. Lord remember me when thou co^mest
into thy Kingdom: to whom he made answer in the 43. verse: This day thou
shall be with me in Paradise. Of which favor afforded to the thief, Ambrose
speaks excellently, writing upon the 38. Psalm, and framing a little short
speech to the devil, by whom Judas had been lately before set on to betray
his Master. The thief upon the Cross, says Ambrose, in his understanding
saw the kingdom of Christ, which Judas could not see in the feast and Supper
of Christ. Therefore did this heavenly voice second the thieves prayer, This
day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Thou did triumph o fierce Dragon, that
thou had drawn away an Apostle from Christ, Plus amisisti quam sustulisti qui
latronem vides in Paradisum esse translatum: Thou have lost more then thou have
got, and so think when thou see the thief translated into Paradise. For who
shall be excluded, when a thief is admitted? Thy minister, o devil, entered
thither from whence thou were cast out. But leaving further commenting upon
those words, in them we may see that the same day and hour when the soul of
a true believer departs from the body, it takes a happy iourny, and is
carried by Angels into Paradise, to enjoy the company of Christ.

In the fourteenth of John, verse, 2. Jesus says: In my fathers house are many
mansions. If it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place
for you: and though I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and
receive you unto my self, that where I am, there may you be also. His Fathers
house that he speaks of, is the ample kingdom of heaven: the many mansions
there, are the blessed resting places of the Saints: Jesus went to prepare
those places in his ascensio^: He comes again to every one of us in the
hour of dissolution, and by the ministry of Angels, receives our souls to
himself, that in the same Kingdom they may rest with him, till they receive
their bodies in the resurrtction, when both in body and soul, they shall
continue with him for ever. This promise of Christ to come again and receive
them to himself, did make them, says Augustine, in his 77. Tractate upon
John, Certes and fidentes, post pericula tentationum, se apud Deum cum Christo
esse mansures: Sure and confident, that after the peril of tentations, that
is, after death and dissolution, they shall continue with Christ in the
presence of God.

Unto that former place, join an other testimony out of John, in his
seventeenth chapter, from the twenty verse to the 25. Jesus prays for those
that believe in him, that they might be one with him by a most strait
conjunction. And in the verse 24. that they should come unto him, saying:
Father, I will that those which thou have given me, be where I am, that they
may see my glory which thou have given me, for thou did love me before the
foundation of the world, I will, says Jesus, that they be where I am. Then, as
he left the world to ascend unto his Father, so they must leave the world,
which they do in death, to ascend up unto Jesus Christ.

A notable place is that of the Apostle Paul in the second to the Corinthians,
5. chapter 6. verse. We are always bold, though we know that while we are at
home in the body, we are absent from the Lord: for we walk by faith, and not
by sight: Nevertheless we are bold, and love rather to remove out of the body,
and to dwell with the Lord. So long as we dwell in these houses of clay, where
faith is the stay and comfort of our souls. We are strangers from the real
presence and company of Christ, from heaven, and from our Country and resting
place. We are not in patria, but in via, not in our Country, but in the way
unto it. But when we put off the earthly house of this habitation, Quam
seperamur a corpore, says Anselme, presentamur Domino, vt eum in specie
diuinitatis suae videamus, and apud eum maneamus. That is, when we are
separated from the body, we are presented to the Lord, that we may see him in
the show and beauty of his divinity, and may remain with him.

Lastly, let us consider what we read, Revelations, 14.1. John sees many
thousands standing on Mount Sion, with the Lamb Jesus Christ, They are in his
company, and they follow the Lamb whither soever he goes. These places do
plainly teach us, that this follows the dissolution and death of the Saints,
as a thing for which it is to be desired, that they do go unto the Lord, and
enjoy the company of Jesus Christ their redeemer: their souls do so when they
die, and their bodies also in the resurrection, as the Apostle witnesses in
his first Epistle to the Thessalonians, 4. chapter, 16. verse, The Lord himself
shall descend from heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the Archangel, and
with the trumpet of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then shall we
which live and remain, be caught up with them also in the clouds, to meet
the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. But the body
resting in the grave, and waiting for that glorious resurrection, the soul in
the mean time leaving the flesh, and leaving the world, goes to Christ.

O blessed and most comfortable death of the Saints, which gathers the
members to the head in whom they live: and sets the branches close to the
tree in the lively sap whereof they flourish: which brings home the Bride
into the chamber of the Bridegroom, in whom only she rejoices: and
gathers the redeemed people together about their redeemer: who only has
made them free, and leads us out of this vale of misery, unto our Lord Jesus
Christ, that we may see his glory, and be partakers with him of his kingdom.

The worst then that can be said of death, for his doings unto the faithful is
this, that he is a cruel and churlish guide, that leads us unto a most sweet
and courteous Lord: that he is a rough and boisterous minister, that performs
and does for us a most acceptable service: that his countenance is much
deformed, and he fraieth those to whom he appears: that his hands are
burning hot, and he scorcheth those whom he apprehends. Yet among the
faithful, those whom he lays hold upon, he brings to Jesus Christ.

This is not out of the natural condition of death, that the faithful reap
such advantage by it; for death was born of sin, which divides us from God:
and it was ordained as a heavy punishment of sin, and it is still a sign and
remembrance of Gods anger for sin. But this comes to pass by the benefit and
favor of him, who by his death has destroyed death, and him that had the
power of death, that is, the devil. It comes to pass by the benefit of
Jesus Christ, who has made us more then conquerours over death and every
adversary, taking away the sting of death, and making a plague to be a
blessing, an enemy to be a servant, because now without death, that is,
otherwise then by the passage of death, flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God. This comes to pass by the merit of him, and by faith in him,
who is unto us both in life and death advantage, and whose we are both living
and dying, that whether we sleep or wake, we might live together with him.
Augustine speaking of benefit, attained by death in this world, I mean this
first death, in his 13. Book of the City of God, and 4. chapter, says: Non
quia mors bonum aliquod facta est quae ante malum fuit: sed tantam Deus fidei
prestitit gratiam vt mors, quam vitae constat esse contrariam, instrumentum
fieret per quod transiretur in vita^: It is not because death is now become a
good thing and a blessing, which before was an evil thing and curse: but so
much grace has God affoorded to our faith in Christ, that death which was
known to be contrary to life and happiness, should now become an instrument
of our passage to life and happiness.

And therefore not unto death and dissolution that does bring us unto Christ,
but unto Jesus Christ, that by death and dissolution does bring and gather us
unto himself, do we give thanks for this advantage of our death, that when
we are loosed, we go unto the Lord, for dread full death, in tantam vtilitatem
non vi sua sed diuina opitulatione conuersa est: is become a matter of great
profit to us, not by it own force and virtue, but by the help of God. Yet
from hence the faith full may learn and gather unto themselves plentiful
comfort against the terrors of death, and strong encouragement, if not to
desire and long for, yet to entertain with rejoicing the day of their
dissolution, because from thenceforth they shall be with Christ.

This did that servant of the Lord see, whose body we followed to the grave.
And therefore quietly, yea joyfully, he accepted, yea desired his dissolutio^,
sometime saying; Come Lord Jesus: and sometime saying, I come Lord Jesus: only
desiring, and constantly desiring to be with the Lord Jesus.

And this is it that shall make death (bitter in it self) to be both sweet and
pleasant unto us, when it comes. And therefore I beseech you learn now in
time, lay this doctrine up in your hearts, and often think upon it, that the
faithful departing hence, do go unto the Lord, that when the hour comes,
whsch cannot be avoided, we may embrace the pleasure of God, as the means of
our own good, and may not murmr in vain.

But it may be, some will say, is it a matter of so great price to be gathered
unto Christ, that a man should despise all the pleasures of this life, and
contemn all the bitterness and terrors of the hour of death: and with the
Apostle here desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ! I surely, and that is
it that follows in the next place to be considered, and in the last words
of my text.

Which is best of all. Unto the Lord Jesus at the last day, all both good and
bad, shall be gathered in the 25. of Matthew: at the 31. verse, It is said, When
the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all his holy Angels with him,
then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory, and before him shall be
gathered all Nations of the earth. And in the 2. to the Corinthians, 5.
chapter, and 10, verse, Paul says, We must all appear before the tribunal
seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things that are done in his
body, whether it be good or evil.

All therefore at that day shall be brought before the Lord Jesus: But the
wicked shall not come to be and to abide with Jesus Christ from that day.
Neither shall they in the hour of their dissolution be gathered unto him, to
be and abide with him before that day. They shall come unto him as unto a
Judge, armed with authority to condemn. They shall come unto him as unto a
revenger, appearing from heaven with flaming fire to destroy. And their
judgment when they appear, shall be to depart for ever from his presence. As
we read the sentence set down in the 25. of Matthew, at the 14. verse,
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels. And of the judgment of them, in that great day, that either know not
God, having had no calling, or obeyed not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
having obeyed no calling, Paul says, in the second to the Thessalonians, 1.
chapter, and 9. verse, That they shall be punished with everlasting perdition
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. Their coming
therefore is not to be and abide with Christ. And for the time of their
coming and abiding before Christ, it shall be most fearful unto them: of
whom it is written, Revelations 6. chapter, 16. verse, That they shall say unto
the mountains and hills, fall upon us, and cover us from the presence of him
that sits upon the throne, and from the Lamb, for the great day of his
wrath is come, and who can stand? (that is, who shall be able to abide his
judgment)?

But the faithful at that great day come unto him, to be, and abide with him:
to whom Jesus shall say in the 25. of Matthew, 34. Come ye blessed of my
Father. And of whom Paul does say, in the 1. to the Thessalonians, 4. chap: 17.
verse, So shall we be ever with the Lord. And that their being and continuing
with him is their happiness, as here Paul says, Even best of all. To this
purpose it is an apt speech that is in the 6. chapter of Augustines Manuale,
Faelix anima quae terreno resoluta tarcere libera coelum petit, quae te
dulcisimum Dominum facie ad faciem ceruit, quae nullo metu mortis affiicitur,
sed de incorruptione perpetua gloria letatur. Happy is that soul, which freed
from her earthly prison, does now in liberty enter into heaven, and there
beholds thee most sweet Lord Jesus, face to face, and is affected with no
more fear of death, but rejoices in the incorruptible estate of eternal
glory.

Mark the words of the Lord Jesus spoken to the Apostles, touching this very
matter of his fellowship in heaven, and you shall find them to contemn all
consolation. In the 22. of Luke, at the 29. verse, I appoint unto you a
kingdom, as my Father has appointed to me, that you may eat and drink at my
table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.
In the fellowshippe of Christ they shall be made partakers with him of all
glory and gladness, they shall be made partakers with him of all glory: for
they reign with him as Kings, and be copartners of his Kingdom, and join
with him in judgment, when he shall condemn the wicked. And they shall be
made partakers with him of all gladness, for they shall sit with him at table,
after the blessed manner of heavenly entertainment, and they shall eat and
drink with him, after the manner of heavenly diet, and it shall be done to
them that was said to the faithful servant, they shall enter into their
Masters joy.

The blessedness of this fellowship is described and shadowed forth unto us in
the Parable, by the happy success of the five wise Virgins, of whom it is said
in the 25. verse of Matthew, 10. verse, That they entered with the Bridegroom
into his wedding Chamber. What mean these things, the wedding day is a day of
joy and gladness? The place where the wedding is kept, is a place abounding
with rejoicing and feasting. Those that are guests, admitted to the fellowship
of that time and place, and admitted to the fellowshippe of joy and gladness.
The wine was merely spent at the wedding in Cana of Galilee, when the company
was sober, and Jesus, his mother, and Disciples were bidden and present. And
the faithful coming to Jesus, (for the state of all the faithful in those
five wise Virgins is shadowed) enter with him into the wedding chamber: that
is, they come to the place of mirth, of joy, and of gladness. Where, as
Anselme says, Munda anima sempiterno diuino consortio copulatur: The pure
soul is coupled as in marriage, with everlasting fellowship with God.

Father, says Jesus in the 17. of John, 24. verse, I will that those which
thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may see my glory which
thou have given me. That is, that at leisure and at their pleasure, they may
satisfy their souls with viewing whatsoever delight the Kingdom of heaven,
and the glory of the Son of God may afford. Which how great delight it is
unto the soul, they cannot conceive that are not yet admitted to see.

The Queen of the South, came a far journey, to see the wisdom, the riches,
the glory of Solomon, whereof she had heard report. And in the second of
Chronicles, 9. chapter, she came and saw, and wondered. And in the seventh
verse, pronounced the servants of Solomon and his men happy; because they
stood before him and heard his wisdom.

And when we shall come unto Christ to continue with him, and to stand before
him; is there not a greater then Solomon there? In wisdom, and riches, and
glory, far passing Solomon? How much more then shall we be happy and
blessed, to hear his wisdom, in whom all the treasure of wisdom and
knowledge are laid up? Peter says, He had the words of eternal life in his
mouth, whiles he was poor and despised on earth. His wisdom then must needs
be the words of eternal comfort and glory, which his followers shall hear
from his mouth in heaven.

And how much more shall we be happy in beholding his riches and glory, when
we shall obtain with him all use of his riches, and shall be transformed
into the like glory? For the just shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of
their Father, Mat. 13.43.

The beauty of Lillies and other flowers exceeds, by the saying of our
Savior Christ. Matthew. 6.29. the beauty and glory of Solomon. But the glory
of the Lord Jesus Christ far exceeds the glory of the heavens, his
exceeding glory giving light and beauty to the heavens. As it is said,
Revelations, 21. chapter, and 23. verse, The City of the heavenly Jerusalem
has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, for the glory
of God did light it, and the Lamb is the light of it. Then necessarily it must
give much more true content and delight, and be a greater happiness, to be
and abide with Christ to see his glory, then to be and abide in Salomons Court,
and to see his glory.

Yea so happy a thing it is to be with Christ, and behold his glory, that when
he was transfigured upon the Mountain, and had only two of the Saints in
company with him, Moses and Elias, and they conferring with him of no pleasant
discourse, but of his death that he should shortly suffer at Jerusalem: yet
the view of that short glory, was so excellent in Peter's judgment, that
though he and his two fellows were open to the check of all weather on the
mountains top, and were not themselves enlightened and glorified with that
glory, yet was he so wholly surprised and ravished with the sight of it, that
he would gladly there have made his continual abode, to have had liberty
still to behold the same: saying in the 17. of Matthew, 4. verse, Master, it is
good for us to be here: if thou will, let us make here three Tabernacles, one
for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.

Consider still the circumstances of that glory of Christ which they then
saw, and compare it with the revealed circumstances of the present glory of
Christ, which the souls of the faithful now after dissolution do see in
heaven: and it will appear, that though it were a good thing, and a sign of
great favor, to be admitted to see that glory of Christ upon the mountain,
yet it is as my text does call it, Multo magis melius, much better, best of
all: and the full fruit of infinite favor to be with Christ after dissolution,
and to be admitted in heaven to behold his present glory.

The Lord Jesus for his own part did then shine in glory, his face as the
Sun, his garments as the light. So that Peter does call it, in his second
Epistle, 1. chapter, 16. verse, Majesty, honor and glory: yet putting a
difference between that and another, which he calls excellent glory. From
whence that voice came, saying: This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased.

But Jesus was then upon an earthly mountain, upon Mount Tabor, he was not
then upon Mount Sion, which John in the Revelations saw. And he was accompanied
only with two of his Saints, wanting the honorable train of an hundred forty
and four thousands, having his Fathers name upon their foreheads, and with
heavenly music attending him upon that mountain. And the glory of Jesus in
that open and solitary place was short. Peter heard Moses and Elias talking
with him of his death that should shortly follow at Jerusalem. Peter also that
beheld that glory, was as slenderly accompanied with James and John, and in a
sort divided from the fellowship of the Saints. And he was also clothed with
mortality, and in himself still full of frailty and infirmity, and yet he
was astonished at the view of so great glory.

But now is Jesus in heaven, sitting at the right hand of God, clothed with
majesty and glory. Now is he accompanied and attended by armies of Saints
and Angels. Now is his glory constant, and shall never more admit any eclips.
The Saints that now come unto him, by putting off their bodies in death, they
put off mortality, corruption, frailty, and all infirmity, they are brought
by Angels into the society of Saints and Angels, as the Apostle to the
Hebrews speaks in the 12. chapter, the 22. verse: Ye are come unto the
mounts Sion, and to the City of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and
to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the congregation of the first
borne, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the
spirits of just and perfect men, and to Jesus to Mediator of the new Testament.
And while thus accompanied, they behold the glory of Christ, themselves shall
be transformed into glory.

Our judgment esteeming of this happiness to be with Christ, may be directed
and helped something by our words in recounting this happiness. But yet
neither can our words express, nor our heart fully conceive the great
happiness that the Saints of God find, when departing from us, they come unto
the Lord Christ.

Is not the natural child glad to be with his father, and does he not therein
find content? Is not the loving wife satisfied to be in company with her kind
husband, and does not that please her mind? Is not a true hearted and
faithful friend glad to enjoy the company of a true hearted and faithful
friend, and do not they being met, rejoice together? Even so the Christian
soul that loves the Lord Jesus, will desire to be loosed and to be with
Christ, for it knows that to be best.

Such to be the desire of a true holy soul, even by death to come unto him,
rather then by still living here, to be kept from him, may appear by the words
of private meditation, that Augustine uses in the first chapter of his
Soliloquia, saying: Cur faciem tuam abscondis? forte dices non videbit me homo
and viuet. Eia Domine, moriar vt te videa^, videam vt hic moriar, nolo viuere,
volo mori, dissolui cupio and esse cu^ Christo, mori desidero vt videa^
Christum, viuere renew vt vivam cum Christo. O Domine Jesus accipe spiritum
meum, vita mea suscipe animam meam, gaudium meum attrahe cor meum. That is, why
do thou hide thy face? Thou will say perhaps, no man shall see me, and live.
Come on then Lord, let me die, that I may see thee: Let me see thee, though I
die here. Oh I desire not to live, I desire to die, I long to be loosed that I
may be with Christ: I wish to die, that I may see Christ, I refuse to live,
that I may live with Christ. O my Lord Jesus receive my spirit, O thou my
life, receive my soul, O thou my joy, draw my heart unto thee.

Those which were present with this man in the time of his sickness, and hour
of his death, know with what constant desire he waited for and desired his
dissolution: therefore desiring to die, that he might be with Christ: and
therefore desiring to be with Christ, because he knew it to be best of all.

That the power of faith, and true knowledge of Jesus Christ had wrougth in
him, that he preferred Jesus Christ before al things, before life, riches,
friends, and whatsoever, knowing that to be with Christ, was more then all.

Blessed be God that is wonderful in those that believe. And let us by such
examples be moved to treasure up faith in Christ. The Apostle says in his
Epistle to the Philippians, 3. chapter, 17. verse, Look on them which walk
so, as they have us for an example. The Apostle himself was the example. He
desired to be loosed, that he might be with Christ, which is best of all. This
man walked so, for he desired to be loosed, that he might be with Christ,
knowing that to be best of all. Let us look upon him, and while we have time
and helps, let us lay hold on faith, that knowing death to be the gathering
of us unto Christ, and that company of Christ to be the highest happiness,
we may with quiet and glad minds, put off our flesh, when the day of our
dissolution comes, and may rest in the Lord, as this our Brother does.

Laus Deo. Amen.
FINIS.

