A light Bondell of liuly discourses called Churchyardes Charge, presented as a
New years gift to the right honorable, the Earl of Surrie, in which
Bondell of verses is such variety of matter, and several inventions, that
may be as delitefull to the Reader, as it was a Charge and labor to the
writer, set forth for a piece of pastime, by Thomas Churchyard Gent.

Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kyngston.

1580.

To the right honorable my especial good Lord the Earl of Surrey: Thomas
Churchyard wishes many happy New years, Fortunate days and weeks,
increase of honor and virtue, with most assured felicity.
I Know not my good lord, whether my boldness and presumption be greater,
then the baseness of my matter herein penned, and I mind to present:
considering the worthiness of the personage, to whom I dedicate my book, and
the weakness of my wit, that presents vain verses, where virtue of the
mind abounds. But for that I treat not of mere trifles, (nor mean to
corrupt sound senses, and good manners with wanton words or leude rhyme) I am
partly persuaded this mine Newyeres gift, shall give your lordship delight, and
purchase to my self the desired thanks, that every honest writer deserves:
Because the substance and effect of all my inventions, are shadowed under the
sheld of good meaning: And a matter well meant (by the courtesy of true
constructio^) may pass the muster and good opinion of the people, among the
best assemblies that looks on the furniture I bring, and ableness of my
pen. And albeit some weapons want to beat back the thompyng boltes of evil
tongues (in my defense be it spoken) yet the Armor of right, and Target of
trothe shall be sufficient to strike down the blows, that hautie hearts with
threatnyng thwartes can offer. And who so ever hastily or unadvisedly through
malicious words, hinders the credit of any honest works, may be thought
both a rash and a parciall speaker, and a busy medler in matters, they
neither mind to amend, nor nor will suffer that the world shall speak well
thereof. But now farther to proceed, and enter into the cause of this my
boldness, the troth is in calling to remembrance a promise that I made,
touching some verses. And honoryng in heart the Earl of Surrie, your Lordshipps
graundfather, and my master (who was a noble warrior, an eloquent Orator, and
a second Petrarke) I could do no less but publishe to the world somewhat
that should show, I had lost no time in his service. And finding an other of
his race and towardness, who has taste and feelyng in the good gifts of
Nature, and noble virtues of his ancestors, (the hope of which graces,
promises great perfection to follow in time to come) I thought I might
dedicate a book unto your Lordshippe, named by mine own liking Churchyards
Charge. But now right noble Earl, the world loving change and variety of
matter, waxes awearie of freuoulous verses (because so many are writers of
Mieter) and looks for some learned discourse, by which means my barrain
books may remain vnred, or misliked, and so lie on the Stationers stall, as
a silly sign of a new nothing, neither worth the buiyng, nor the regardyng.
To that I may answer (under pardon and correction) that the ground which
of Nature yeldeth, but Thistles or Brambles, may bring forth no good Corn of
it self, contrary to his operation and kind. Nor a man that is accustomed to
treat of trifles may, not meddle with the deepenesse of grave arguments. For
as it passes the search and capacity of a simple wit, to se into any matter
of importance, so it is necessary that a pleasant and plain companion,
should always be occupied about pastymes, and namely at Christmas, when little
short tales, drives out a piece of the long nights, and rather with mirthe to
procure a laughter, then with sadness provoke a lowryng: and he that sturreth
up the heavy minds to light some consaites, is more welcome in every place,
then he that overthrows the weak senses of common people, with curious
imaginations, and burdens both body and mind, with words of greater
weight, then common judgment can conceive, and be able to bear. A tale or a
toye mirrely delivered, pleases most men's ears: and an earneste sad
argument, either rocks a man a sleep, or makes the hearers a weary. And the
nature of Rhyme is to revive the spirits, or move a smile, when many a one is
scarce pleasauntly disposed. A Rhyme goes on such feet, stands on such
joints, and rappeth out such reasons, that wisdom takes pleasure in, and
folly will make a wonder of. The words by invention hits a thing so iompe,
and kepes such a decorum and method, that both order and measure is seen,
in the cunnyng conueyance of the verses, especially if the sweet and smothe
sentences be sifted, from the sour rough Branne of needelesse babble and
vanity. A sensible wit having the pennyng of the matter. But lo my good
Lord, in showing the nature and quality of a good verse, how my hoblyng is
seen, and perceived by the badnesse, or bare handelyng of the things herein
written: yet now I have ron so far in ouerweenyng, that either I am forced to
go forward, or remain in the midwaie discomforted, and without remeadye.
Wherefore, albeeit I shall show but a bondell of dry devises, I must open my
fardell, and make sale of such stuff, as my hedde has been stuffed withal:
Even like the poor Peddlar, that trudgeth with his pack to a Fair, and there
unfolds among some new laces and odd trifles, a great deal of old ware
and little re^nantes, that for lack of quick sale, has lain long in a close
corner. I need not to seek out a patron to support them: for they are neither
worth the readyng, nor the buiyng, yet having no better, am compelled to utter
the things I have left. Prouidyng that my next book may show somewhat
among the rest that goes before: for that it shall be dedicated to the most
worthiest (and toward noble man), the Earl of Oxford, as my laisure may
serve, and yet with great expedition. Thus being over tedious and bold, in
stretching out a short and sorry Epistle (that had been better knit up in few
lines) I wish your Lordship many new and happy years, long life to your
liking, to the honor of GOD, and increase of good fame: and a piece or portion
of each goodness can be named. From my lodging nere to the Court the first
day of January. Your Lordshippes always at commaundement^.

Thomas Churchyard.

To the freendly Reader.
I Daily trouble the good Reader with Books, Verses, Pamflettes, and many
other triflyng things, as mutche to hold thee occupied in good will toward
me (and keep thee from loss of time) as for any matter that I either ca^
gain glory by, or deserves to be embrased: but vsyng me and my works
thankefully, and paiyng me for my pains, with the like courtesy, that other
men reapeth for their labors, I think my study well bestowed, and promise yet
with my pen, to pleasure thee farther. And for that I would have all men to
think, that in trothe and plainness I have great felicity, and do hate any
kind of flattery or finenesse. I mean in my next book, called my Challenge,
to run over many of mine other works, and where peradventure by some
report of others, (that knew not the trothe,) I have failed in setting
forth of some services, among the which Master Ihon Norrice, and diverse
worthy gentlemen Captains now in Flaunders, have not the worthiness of their
services declared. I do promise that now being better instructed, and having
true intelligence of things as they were, I will at large write the
commendation of as many, as merits to be honored for their well doing, and
make amends, where either by ignorance, or the report of others I have
failed. For so sure as GOD is Almighty, if I could gain mountains of gold,
to flatter any one in Printyng an vntrothe, I would rather wish my hands were
of, then take in hand such a matter. For neither affection, favor,
commodity, fame, nor parciallitie, at no time nor season, shall willyngly lead
my pen amiss. And farther, if I thought any one for his own glories sake,
had told me more then is truly to be proved: I would not only condemn my
self for giuyng such hasty credit, to vainglorious people: But in like
sort my pen should show the blotte in their brows, that gives me wrong
aduertisementes. And so good Reader, conde^pne not me if anything be amiss,
or left out that ought to have been touched: For as I know and am instructed)
seeing not all my self) I must write, and so till my next book come forth
(where many things shall be treated of) and that my good will to the honoring
of virtue shall be seen. I bid thee fare well freendly Reader, crauyng thy
favorable Judgment on that I have written. From those men for whom my book
has bin a blast of fame unto (as I did believe by the true tro^pet of pen)
are not of such great ability, that either their purses power or
countenaunces, could comptll me to follow their humors: nor by any means
work my muse to their wills, whose ritchesse and wealth is not able (if men
would be hired) to wrest a wrie the hand and hedde of an honest writer. And to
make manifest that I neither will be infected, nor carried away from that
which is good, for any badde practice and persuasions, I confess before GOD
and the world, I scarce have received thanks, for the honest labors I have
taken (at their hands that I have written of) mutche less have I been
recompensed, or found cause to flatter the world. But in one thing I may
rejoice, the honorable person to whom my Choice is dedicated (and others of
great calling) has both been grateful sondrie ways (in most bountiful
manner:) and also has encoraged me to proceed in the like pains, which in
very deed I mind to go about as well to the fame and glory of good men, as
for the aduoidyng of sloth and idelnesse my self.

FINIS.
A story translated out of French.
IN old time paste in Picardie,
there dwelt an honest man,
Whose name the story does not tell,
what he was called than:
A wife he had, a house he held,
as Farmers use to do,
And lacked little for the same,
that did belong there too.
And as God sent him suffisance,
to rub forth life here lent,
So for to chere unwieldy age, fair children God him sent:
Of which he had one most in mind, a lad of liuly spre^te,
Who with great care he kept to school, as for his youth was meet.
This boy to glad his fathers heart, in books set his delight,
And learnd to make a Latin verse, to read and eke to wri^e:
And for his Nature was enclinde, to study learnyngs lore,
The better he aplied his school, he profited the more.
To make his school the sweeter seem, with Music mixed was,
The study that he followd then, the time away to pass:
Good books were bought and instruments, great charge was but small let,
If that thereby the father might, the son some knowledge get.
In seven years (as time it was,) this striplyng began to taste,
Time well employed, time driven forth, and time ill spent in was^e,
And made no small account thereof, but still sought more to have,
Wherewith he to his father came, on knees this did he crave.
I have quod he dear father now, my childishe days ore run,
And as I think, and you believe, my boys delites are done:
And as my wit and grace has served, some learning have I got,
And as I know you love me well, on me you should not dot^.
I mean I should not still at home, under my mothers wing,
Be brought up like a wanton child, and do no other thing:
The world is wide, I want no wit, your wealth is not so great,
But you may think in some dear year, I scarce deserve my meat.
And though your kind and custom is, full fatherlike alwaie,
Yet should your son discretion have, to ease you as he may:
Wherefore to make your burden less, let me go seek my happ,
And let no longer now your son, be lullde in mothers lapp.
The father wise well understood, his child's request at full,
And that the feathers of his youth, he thought away to pull:
(Before he gave him leave to part) by council grave and sage,
Well boy quoth he now art thou come, unto thy flowryng age.
Now art thou like the little wande, that bent and bound will be,
Unto his hand or to his skill, that list to master thee:
Now are ripe years soon rotten made, now art thou apt to take,
Both good and badd, but chiefly things, that age bidds thee forsake.
And now large scope shall sone forget, what short rein learnd in schole
And thou that wisely wast brought up, shall play the wanton fool.
Abroad as wild harebrains are wont, new taken from their book,
And in a while lay all a side, nere after their on look.
In eury place of thy repair, thou shall no father find,
Nor scarce a freende to who^ thou may, at all times sho thy mind:
But on Gods blessyng go thy way, thy wild Otes are unsown,
Hereafter time shall learn thee well, things to thee now unknown.
The ladde his leave and farewell took, well furnished for the nonce,
And had about him as I trow, his treasure all at once:
To court he came all maisterlesse, and saw what likt him best,
Of runnyng Leather were his shues, his feet no where could rest:
His books to blade and bucklar changed, he gave ore scholars trade,
Where revel roysted all in ruff, there he his residence made.
This rule had soon his purse so picked, that princoks wanted pence,
And often he saw some trussed up, that made but small offense:
His father far from seeing this, he come of honest stock,
He hoffryng forth a hateful life, in many a wicked flock.
And pricked often to slipper shifts, yet some regard he took,
To be a sclander to his kin, that kept him to his book:
And in a better mood to thrive, to service did he draw,
He must go that the devil drives, ye know need has ^o law.
A master of no mean estate, a mirror in those days,
His happy Fortune then him gate, whose virtues must I praise:
More heavenly were those gifts he had, then yearthly was his form.
His corpse to worthy for the grave, his flesh no meat for worm.
An Earl of birthe, a God of sprite, a Tullie for his tongue,
Me think of right the world should shake, when half his praise were rong:
Oh cursed are those crooked crafts, that his own country wrought.
To chop of such a chosen head, as our time nere forth brought.
His knowledge crept beyond the stars, and raught to Jove's hie trone
The bowels of the earth he saw, in his deep breast unknown:
His wit looked through each ma^s device, his judgment grounded was,
Almost he had foresight to know, ere things should come to pass.
When they should fall what should betied, oh what a loss of weight,
Was it to lose so ripe a hedde, that reached such a height:
In eury art he feelyng had, with pen past Petrarke sure,
A fashon framde which could his foes, to freendship often alure.
His virtues could not keep him here, but rather wrought his harms,
And made his enemies murmr often, and brought them in by swarms:
Whose practice put him to his plonge, and lost his life thereby,
Oh can^red breasts that have such hearts, wherein such hate does lie.
As told I have, this young man served, this master twice two year*
And learnd therein such fruitful skill, as long he held full dear:
And vsd the pen as he was taught, and other gifts also,
Which made him hold the capp on head, where some do croch full lo.
As credit came he careful was, how to maintain the same,
And made small count of life or death, to keep his honest name:
His father not a little glad, of his good happ thus found,
And he forgot no duty sure, to whom he ought be bound.
From court to wars he wound about, a Soldiers life to lead,
And leaned to the worthiest sort, their stepps to march and tread:
And followd Cannon wheel as fast, to learn some knowledge then,
As he before at masters heels, did waste with seruyng men.
But those two lives a diffrence have, at home good chere he had,
Abroad full many a hongrie meal, and lodgyng very bad:
All day in corslet cased fast, which made his shulders ache,
All night upon a couche of straw, right glad his rest to take.
Through thick and thin a thriftlesse time, he spent and felt mutch greef,
And ever hopyng for the same, at length to find releef:
No small while there as ye have hard, in cold sharp winter nights,
Where he did feel strange plags enowe, and saw full ugly sights.
Some die for lack, some seek for death, some live as though there were
Ne God nor man, nor torment here, or hence we ought to fe^e:
But yet he marked some of that sort, whose estimation stood;
Upon each point of honest name, and things that seemed good.
He saw likewise how Fortune played, with some men for a while,
And after paid them home for all, and so did them begile:
A weary of these wastyng woes, a while he left the war,
And for desire to learn the tongs, he traueld very far.
And had of eury langage part, when homeware did he draw,
And could rehearsal make full well, of that abroad he saw:
To study wholly was he bent, but countries cause would not,
But he should haunt the wars again, assignde thereto by lot.
And eke by hope and all vain happ, procured to the same,
As though each other glory grew, on wars and warlike fame:
Without the which no worlds renown, was worth a fly he heeld,
For that is honor won in deed, once got within the feeld.
Thus in his head and hye consaite, he judged that best of all,
And thought no mouth for Sugar mete, that could not cast the gall:
Good luck and bad mixed in one cup, he drank to quench his thirste,
And better brookt the second wars, then he did like the first.
And less found fault with fortunes freaks, time had so well him taught
At chances sour he cha^g'd no chere, nor at sweet haps much laughed:
In prison thrice, in danger often, both hurt and mangled sore,
And all in service of his prince, and all away he wore.
In mean estate in office too, sometime a single pay,
Some time few had so much a week, as he was loud a day:
When world waxt wise, and wealth did fail and princes pride appald,
And empty purse, and privy plag's, for perfect peace had called.
And kings and kingdoms quiet were, this man to court he came,
New from the gives with face and looks; as simple as a Lame:
Fresh from his enemies hands came he, where for his countries right,
He prisned was and forste to grant, a randsome past his might.
Sent home upon a band and seal, which is to strange a trade,
There to remain till he for help, some honest shifte had made:
All spoiled fleane bare as the bird, whose feathers plucked have bin,
Both sick and weak his color gone, with cheeks full pale and thin.
The sight so strange or world so n^^ght, or God would have it so,
This man had scarce a welcome home, which made him muse I tro
His country not as he it left, all changed was the state,
But all one thing this man deserved, therein no cause of hate.
A careless look on him they cast, favyng a few in deed,
Through wars brought (...) for service sake, and felt thereby his need
Of such as could and diffrence make, of drom and trompetts sound,
(From tabber pipe and Maipole mirth,) their helpyng hands he found:
And those that fauord featts of war, and savor took therein*
With open arms embraste him hard, and said where have thou bin.
But none of these could do him good, to set him up I mean,
His friends decayed his father dedde, and household broke up clean:
Crave could he not, his heart so hye, it would not stoop to steal,
He scornde to serve a foreign prince, prefarryng common weal.
Above all other things on earth, his country honored he,
At home he like more poor estate, then thence a lord to be:
Where should he sue where ra^ those springs, could co^^ his fever hot,
Where durst he moan or plain for shame, where might releef begot:
But at the fountain or well hedde, y^a at his Princes hand,
And in a few well couched lines, to make her understand:
His case his scourge, lo so he did, and boldly did he tell,
The same him self unto the Prince, who knows the man full well.
And gracious words three times he gate, the fourth to tell you plain
Unfruitful was things were strait laest, fair words mak^ fools full fain:
When prince nor country made no count, of him nor of his car^,
And none of both would help him home, of who he soughe for grace.
For whom and for their cause alone, in enemies hands he fell,
And for their right to wars he went, as all men knows full well:
And lost his blood for their defense, and for their quarrel fought;
And for the same full slenderly, lookte to and set at naught.
When he his duty to his power, did eury day and year,
Such unkind gwerdon had received, as well before you here:
He said let Marcus Regulus in same of Romans stand,
Which kept his oath and did return, again to Carthage land.
If Tullie were a live to write, his praises more at full,
Yet since I escaped my enmies hands, at home abide I wull:
He should not me persuade to go, where naught but death is found,
My country cares not for my life, then why should I be bound.
To toies or any other band, that I have power to break,
Which I was forced by my foe, in person for to speak:
And for the hope of countries help, and friends that there I had,
In any sort to please my foes, I was both feign and glad.
Not mindyng if my country would, release me from his hand,
To break good order any whitte, or violate my band:
For justice bids each man do right, which God does know I meant,
But now a captive yield my self, it may not me content.
For where that Tullie does affirm, men ought ^ keep their oath,
Unto their friends in eury point, and to their enmies both:
And brings Marcus Regulus, example for the same,
With other reasons many a one, which were too long to name.
He showed that the Senats all, would him have stayed at Rome,
And as in counsel then they satte, their judgment and their doom.
Was that the prisners should be free, which they of Carthage held.
And he should stay, full often his friends, this tale to him they teld:
They proffred help, and offered still* this Marcus to redeem,
But Marcus for a further skill, did little that esteem.
I find no succor hope nor aid, then bound why should I be.
More to my country in this case, that country is to me:
These words this heavy man rehearst, so bade the wars adue,
And thought he would no ransom pay, for any thing he knew.
Wherefore from court he tournd his face, and so an oath he swore,
As long as he his five wits had, to come in court no more:
He kept that oath and cut his cote, as clothe and measure would,
And down to Picarvie he comes, some said at thirty year old.
And for his lands and rents were small, a master lent he too,
Who used his servant not so well, as masters ought to do:
He was not made out of that mould, that his last master was,
These two in virtues were as like, as Gold was unto Glass.
Upon a day alone he satte, and said these words right sadd,
Are soldiers cast at carts arse now, that long fair words have had:
Shall kings nere need for help again, is fortune so their freende,
Have they a pattent of the Gods, this peace shall never end.
God grant yet will I shift I trow, for on or happ shall fail,
And in the storms my ship shall learn, to bear a quiet sail:
And clean forget brave days ago, that fed my youthful years,
Full glad that I have gotten home, and escape the s^rattyng Breers.
Of wars and other worldly toiles, adue I see their fine,
A wife shall now content my mind, such as the Gods assign:
A wooyng thus this hapless man, rode forth not set to sale,
Thought none like him in this his suite, was meet to tell his tale.
And as the heavens had agreed, the Planetts well were bent,
He sone descended from his horse, and boldly in he went.
Where dwelt a sober widdowe then, both wise and wifly too,
Late fallen sick, unknown to him, that time unfit to woo:
But her discretion was so great, and his behavior both,
These strangers fell acqueinted thus, if ye will know the trothe.
He faind an other ernd to make, dissemblyng yet a space,
Till he might spy a better time, to show her all his care:
So taking leave for friends he wrought, to bring this thing about,
In such affairs some spoke full fair, that are full well to doubt.
For commonly men take no cars, of others suits for why,
Their profit as they guess themselfes, in hindryng that may ly:
Some promise help and see no gain, may spring to them thereof,
Wax cold and slow for lack of spur, and use it as a scoff.
An other sort with stingyng tongs, say maistres take good heed,
This man will sone your feathers pull, and cast ye of at need:
Will you that have both wealth and ease, to young men's cursie stand,
And let an other master be, of that is in your hand.
Some seeking rule of that she has, and fleecyng from her first,
Do faune and flatter all the day, and guide her as they list:
And live on her, and hate her life, and wait her death to see,
And well can please her while she lives, her sectors for to be.
Such instruments these widows have, about them eury hour,
Perchance this man perceived the like, and had good cause to lowre:
But as he knew the fatal chance, of things comes from above,
So he began and sought to know, the fine of all his love.
And found a day full apt therefore, at large the same he told,
And flatly this her answer was, she never marry would:
If no new thoughts fell in her mind, whereof no doubt she made,
Except she chose a wealthy man, that had a grounded trade.
To live and had a hourd of gold, to keep them both from debt,
Good sir quod she on riches sure, my mind is fully set:
I can with riches virtues make, virtue with want is bare,
I pray you come no more at me, thus answered now ye are.
I would be loathe to hold you on, with words and mean in deed,
That neither you for all your suit, nor any yet shall speed:
He hearing this hangde down the hedde, and smilde to cloak his woe
A word or two he after spoke, and parted even so.
The way he rode, he cursed him self, for cruel death he cried,
And said oh wretch thou live to long, to long here do thou bide:
Not only for this froward happ, but for all other chance,
At any time thou tookst in hand, thy self for to advance.
Thy virtues ought if they may be, serves thee no whit at all,
Thy learning stands thee in no steed, thy travel helps as small:
Thy knowledge sought in wars abroad, at home does thee no good,
Thy la^gage is but laughed at here, where some would suck thy blood
Thy Poetts vain and gift of pen, that pleasurde thousands long,
Has now enough to do to make, of there a woeful song:
Thy friends that long a winnyng were, in court and country plain,
Does serve thee to as good a end, as mirth does sick man's pain.
Thy youth though part be left behind, whose course yet is to run,
With brag of show or seemly shape, what botie has it won:
Thy honest life or manly heart, that through each storm has pa^^e,
Thy reputation hardly won, what helps thee now at last.
Thus to his chamber in his heat, he comes with somyng mouth,
And in his bloody breast he felt, full many fitts uncouth:
And on the bed he laid him down, and for his Lute he raught,
And brake a two those giltlesse strings, as he had bin bestraught.
And ere he flang it to the walls, my plai^fe^re fare thou well,
Said he as sweet as Orpheus Harp, that wan his wife from hell:
You Instruments each one of you, keep well your care of wood,
And to the scrallyng eating worms* I you bequeath as food.
Up stepped he to his study door, all that stood in his way
He brake and burnt both book and scroull, and made a foul araie:
Some authors say that could not be, his wisdom did assuage,
The inward passions of his mind, and heat of all his rage.
But well I wotte he did prepare, to part from friends and all,
And stayed but till the Spryng came on, for leaf was at the fall:
Now all these storms and te^pests past, this man had such a vain,
When matter moved, and cause requierd, he went to wars again.
And studyng Fortune all a like, as hapless people do,
He fell straight ways in enmies hands, and was sore wounded too:
But taken pris^^^, promesd mutche, though little had too pai^,
(A subtell shift to save the life, and escape a bloody fraie.)
Yet still because he gallant was, and had some charge of men,
He held up hedde, and in strange place, took mutche upon him then:
The enmie ^^y^g this young man, both well brought up and trainde,
As one that kept s^tche state and grace, as he deceit disdainde.
And to be plain (in eury point) upon such terms he stood,
As his dissent and ofspryng came, of hie and noble blood:
Of gentill race he might make boste, but of so great a stock,
He ^ould not v^unt for that device, was but a scorn and mock.
Well by this means he was so likt, and made of eury where,
That all that land rang of the fame, and brute that he did bear:
And so the Princes of that realm, to court did call him tho,
Where he with feasts and triumphs great, and many a courtly sho.
Past of the time, and grew so far, in favor with the best,
That he would play at Dice and Cards, and so set up his rest:
For he had money when he would, and went so gaie and brave,
On credit that he finely wan, as mutche as he could crave.
And when to takers house again, this prisner should repair,
The greatest lords of all that soil, when he would take the air:
Would in a manner wait at hand, to do this prisner ease,
And well were they of all degrees, that best this man could please.
A number of his nation then, of right great wealth and state,
By this man's word and only band, straight way their fredome gate*
For he was bound for eury one, that token were before,
And so did for their ransom lie, and runnyng ^n the score.
And brauyng out the matter through, a Lady of great race,
In honest sort, and freendly mean, his freendship did embrace:
Who promesd him, to set him free, and help him thence in haste,
But still about this prisner lo, a privy guard was plaste.
Yea such a band and daiely watthe, as he might not disceiue,
Yet he had hope in spite to escape, away without their leave:
And shapt to fly, and give the slipp, if Fortune would agree,
The watch and ward, should be begilde, and prisner should go free.
And as these things a doing were, a man of mutche renown,
Was taken after in the feeld, and brought so to the touch:
Where hearing of this other wight, was askte if he did know,
The former person namde before, that daiely brand it so.
He is quod he that last was caught, a lusty Soldiour sur^,
A man that mucche has felt of woe, and great things can endure^
Of gentill blood and manners both, and wants but ^^^lth alone,
What what ^ir knight, have you said trothe, and is he such a (...),
Then shall he ^ye his braury dear, and pay therefore so well,
He shall not boste of that he gains, in heaven nor in hell:
So all in ^uerie flang he forth, and to this man he goes,
That was in deed so far in debt, for one ate for drink and clo^^.
And thrust him in a prison strong, where feeble food he had,
And heavy Irons which might make ^^ silly soul f^^st sad:
His mistres knowing of the case, her promise thought to keep,
So making in a Moon shine night, when neighbors were a sleep.
She drue her nere the prison door, and at a window pried,
Where planly full before her vewe, her servant had she spied:
To whom she spoke and told her mind, as closely as she might,
And gave him council in good time, to steal away by night.
And left him ^iles to set him free, and robes to do him good,
With some hard eggs and bread in bagg, and told him nere a wood:
There was a brom, where she would wait, for him when time drue o^
That doeu she took a freendly leave, for then she must be gone.
The prisner did devise his best, and bent to do or dye,
Prepaerd each thing in order well, as he on straw did lie:
The time approach, of his adue, and she was come in deed,
Unto the place appointed right, with go^d and ^ealth for need.
But breakyng down a rotten wall, the prisner was in fear,
For out of bed his keeper stepped, and asked who was there:
With that the prisner stumbled on, a hatcher sharp and keen,
And raught the gea^er such a blow, that long was felt and seen.
He cried and ro^e^ like a bull, where at the v^ssage throw,
Was up and straight to horseback went, but lo the prisner now:
Was at the wood, where he had found, his mistres all a lone,
Who wept and blubberd like a child, and made so great a moan.
For that they both in danger were, but what should more be said,
The man plucked up his heart and sprites, the woman sore afraied:
Ran home again to fathers house, and he that now was free,
Had neither mind on gold nor gift, but to the Brom goes he.
And there abode a happy hour, yea two days long at least,
He lay as close on ^old bare ground, as bird does in warm neast:
His mistres well escaped home, and in the house she was,
Before the cry and larum tose, so blamlesse did she pass.
And her poor servant, had wide world, to walk in now at will,
Although he was in hazard great, and long in danger still:
For he had three score mile to go, among his enmies all,
Which he did ^rudge in foul dark nights, and so as happ did fall.
He escape a scourge and scouryng both, and came where he desierd,
And finely had deceived his foes, what could be more requierd:
Yet long at home he (...) not rest, to wars again he went,
Where in great seria^e sondrie times, but half a year he spent.
And lo his Deasmi^ was so strange, he taken was again,
And clapped up closely for a spy, and there to tell you plain:
He was condemde to lose his hedde, no other hope he saw,
The day drew on of his dispatche, to dye by Marciall law.
The people swarmyng in the streats, and scaffold ready there,
A noble Dame, his respi^^ trau'd, and spoke for him so fear:
That then the master of the Camp, his honest answer hard,
For which he came ^^credite straight, and was at length prefard.
To right good room and wages too, then ritchly home he drew,
And left the wars, and in great heat, he for a wife did sewe.
But haste makes waste, an old proverb, for he was w^^d in deed,
God send all Soldiers in their age, some better luck at need:
Now he be thought him on the words, the widdowe told him of,
Which long he held but as a jest, a scorn and merry scoff.
She said that wit and wealth were good, but who a wiuyng goes
Must needs be sure of wealth before, else he his suit shall lose:
For want but breeds mislikyng still, and wit will decaue but woe,
(In lovers lomes, where clothe is rackt, as far as threde will go)
And when the threede of wealth does break, let wit and wisdom too
Do what they can to tie the threede, the knot will sure undo.
The story treats no more thereof, yet therein may you see,
That some have virtues and good wit, and yet unlucky be.
In winnyng wealth, in worldly happs, which common are of kind,
To all and yet the use thereof, but to a few a sinde:
For some have all their parents left, all they them selves can catch,
And ten men's liuyngs in one hand, and some have nere a patche.
And some not borne to sixteen pence, find twenty ways to get,
By hap yet some as wise as they, no hand thereon may set:
I heard a white hoare hedded man, in this opinion dwell,
That wit with wealth, and hap with wit, would gree together well.
But for to choose* the one alone, he held that happ was best,
He said wit was a happy gift, but wealth made all the feast:
Wit with the wise must company keep, then cold often is his chere,
Wealth has companions eury where, and banketts all the year.
Wealth has the way the cappe and knee, and twenty at his tail,
When wit has nere a restyng place, no more then has a Snaile:
Wit is compeld to be a slave, to wealth and serve him still,
Yet wealth is naked without wit, naught worth where lacks skill.
But if that wealth may match with hap, then bid fine wit go plea,
Our old Proverb is given me hap, and cast me in the Sea:
Unhappy must I judge this man, in sondrie sorts and ways,
Yet fortunate I call him then, in true report of prays.
The cheifest Jewel of our life, is virtues land well won,
Which liu's within the other world, when fame of this is done:
FINIS.
Churchyardes farewell from the Court, the second year of the Queens
Majesty's reign.
THough Fortune casts me at her heel,
And lifts you up upon her wheel:
You ought not joy in my ill hap,
Nor at my harms, your hands to clapp.
For calmes may come, and skies may clear,
And I may change, this mournyng cheer:
To gladsome thoughts, and merry looks,
Although you fish, with golden hooks.
And make the world, bite at your baits,
And feed your selves, with sweet consaits:
Mine anglyng may, at length amend,
My rod it can, both bow and bend.
As causes falls, for my behoof,
I leave you Courtiers in your ruff:
I will go live, with plainer men,
And use my book, and plie my pen.
Perhapps that I, asmutche have seen,
As they that braues, it on the Spleen:
Where Cannon roard, and Dromme did sound,
I did not learn, to dance a round:
And vaunte I may, my hap the worse,
I have with many, a threede bare pursse.
Been glad to serve, in Countries cause,
When you at home, were pickyng strawes:
Since you did spite, my doings all,
And toss from me, the tennis ball.
By words and woorks, and privy nipps,
A man may say, beshrewe your lips:
And use a kind, of ridyng Rhyme,
To such as wool, not let me clime.
Where every one, would Apples sheake,
Though at the hiest, the bows are weak:
The Crow bilds there, full saffe ye wotte,
And near the topp, the fruit is got:
Well I full low, must bear my sails,
In climyng often, footyng fails.
Watch you the ball, at first rebounde,
So I may stand, on even ground:
And play at pleasure, when I please,
I am not grieved at your ease.
Although that you, with shiftyng brain,
Do reap the profit of my pain:
And thrusts your hedds, tweene hap and me,
Whose hands do pluck, the bark from tree.
So great and greedy is your gripe,
You eat the fruit, ere it be ripe:
And none may feed, but you a lone,
You can not spare, a dog a bone.
Ye cleave together, so like Burres,
Perhapps in winnyng of the Spurs:
You may the horse, and saddle lose,
When that her hedde, whose virtue flows.
Shall see the deepnesse of your slight,
And set your crooked dealyngs straight:
And all your painted sheathes epsy,
And way what stuff, in shadows lie.
Think you she smiles not once a day,
To see how many vices play:
Upon the stage, where matter lacks,
You do no sooner turn your backs*
But greater laughyng rises there,
Then at the baityng of a Bear:
Me think you choose, your shopp not well,
In Court your follies for to sell.
That shopp stands full, within the wind,
Or else so much, in peoples mind:
That if one fault be in your ware,
Ten thousand eyes, thereon do stare.
And when they find, a counterfeite,
Or see, fine Merchaunts use deseite:
They cry a loud, we smell a Ratte,
Some have more wit, within their hatte.
Then in their hedde, that sells such stuff,
Well every man, unto his ruff:
And I into, my coat of Frees,
For I in Court, can hiue no Bees:
The Home there, is bought so dear,
I were as good, with country cheer.
Sit free in mind, and far from stats,
And daiely match, me with my mats:
As wait among, the hautie breed,
Whose humourss are, full hard to feed.
Where small is won, and mutche is spent,
And needless hands, do stop the vent:
That well might serve, a thousands turn,
Tushe at the prick, to kick and spourne.
I should but hurt, my shinnes ye know,
From Court to Country will I go:
With mutche ill happ, and loss with all,
Now may my boule, to byas fall.
In alleys smothe, where it may roune,
I see in Court, shines not the Son:
But on a few, that Fortune liks,
And there a man, shall pass the Piks.
Ear he may purchase that he craves,
As one does poole, an other shaues:
And marquesotts, the beard full trim,
Yet nothing runs ore the brimme.
Till pursse be full, and then perhapps,
When strings do break, there falls some strapps:
Into your hands, watch that who list,
A bird is better sure in fiste.
Then five in feeld, keep that thou haste,
Where wealth and wit, and time does waste:
Look not to dwell, what draws thee there,
But gain or glory, love, or fear.
If gain to Court, does make thee go,
Thou art no friend, but flatteryng foe:
That daiely seeks, thy self to help,
And couchest like the faunyng whelpe.
Till Prince has filde, thy purse with pence,
And then sim subtle getts him thence:
If thou in Court, for glory iette,
As dizard daunseth in a net:
The world shall thee, reward with praise,
Was never Courtier in our days.
So brave as he, then will they say,
And all not worth, a trusse of hay:
At home thy love, as well is seen,
And better, then in Court I wene.
If like a subject, there thou live,
And often good example give:
To such as stands thereof in need,
If fear draw thee, to Court in deed.
The Prince can find such quakyng soals,
She knows whose heart is full of hoals:
And sees what lucks in hollow stocks,
And treads upon such tremblyng blocks.
From such is bounties larges bard,
And then is bounty laced hard:
From such the well hedde stopped is,
A volume could I write of this.
As large as any Chequer roll,
But I the plain, and sellie soul:
Must think and wish the best I may,
And little of these matters say.
Yet he that stands, and gives ame,
May judge what shot does lose the game:
What shooter beats the mark in vain,
Who shoots fair, who shoots plain.
At little hoales, the day is seen,
Some in this case, may over ween:
And think they see in Milstones far.
And take a Candle for a Star.
Pass ore such toys, and answer me,
What cause have thou in Court to be:
If gain ne glory, fear nor love,
To Courtyng does thy fancy move.
What draws thee thither hedlong now,
Give ear, and I shall show thee how:
They sit and stare in Court some while,
Yea on the other does beguile.
With fairest semblaunce that is sure,
And every craft, is put in ure:
To snatche or compass that they seek,
Although it be not worth a Leeke.
The finest hedds, have furthest fatche,
The deepest sight, does nearest watch:
To trapp the upright meaning man,
And each one does the best he can.
To help him self, by others harm.
These Courtiers have so fine a charm:
I grant there is honor won,
And thither ought the subjects run.
To show their duties by some mean,
But why have some consumed clean:
Their lives and lands in this desire,
Ye know a man may love the fire.
Full well, and leap not in the flame,
Some think they win a goodly name:
When they at home are Courtiers calde,
It is full gaie, if he be stalde.
An alms knight ere that all begone,
His happ is hard, that hopes thereon:
Yet since I favor Courtyng well,
Would God I had more lands to sell.
To be at their commandment still,
If that a man have their good will:
He has enough, what needs more,
Old ladds may shifte upon the score.
And let their garments ly and sweat,
Or with their Ostes work a feate:
To set the horse in stable free.
But now the wives so hongrie be.
And housbands look so nere their gain,
A man as sone on Salsbrie plain:
Shall have a cheat, as by that trade,
The day has bin, who could with blade.
And Buckler square it in the streets,
Had bin a minion fine for sheets:
But now the pence do make the place,
And world is in an other ca^e.
Well let the matter pass a while,
And hear my tale, but do not smile:
I hapt in Court (as new Brom may,
That sweepeth trimely for a day.)
To be desierd to play and sing,
And was full glad in every thing:
To please the Lords, and lordely sort,
For that ye know with change of sport.
These Courtiars humors should be fed,
And glad I was to bend my hedde:
And be at beck when they did call,
In hope that sum good happ would fall.
To me for that apt will of mine,
Although my doyngs were not fine:
A Tabber with a Pipe full loud,
To better noise is but a cloud.)
Well as the Hackney is desierd,
And ridden till the Jade betierd:
I did continewe long me thought,
And still I spent the small I brought.
And never got I one denere.
Then thought I to begin the year:
On New years day with some device,
And though that many men be nice.
And blushe to make an honest shifte,
I sent each Lord a New years gift:
Such treasure as I had that time,
A laughyng verse, a merry ryme.
Some think this is a crauyng guise,
Tushe hold your peace, world waxes wise
A dulled horse that will not stir,
Must be remembered with a spur:
And where there serves ne spur nor wand,
A man must needs lead horse in hand.
So I was forste on causes great,
To see in fire where lay the heat:
And warm their wits that cold did wax,
But thrust the fire into the Flax:
It will not burn if flax be wette,
The fish these days ran shonne the net.
And hide them in the weeds full often,
Thou know that wax is tempered soft:
Against the fire, so frosen minds,
Must be assaied by many kinds.
To bring them to a kindly thawe,
Who thrusts a candle in the straw:
Shall make a blase, and raise a smoke,
An honest mean there is by cloak.
To stir the noble hearts from ^leepe,
Whose coffers, custom makes to keep:
Fast locked, that should be opened wide,
To help the poor at every tide.
They say that knew our elders well,
That often times they hard them tell:
That larges linketh love full fast,
And hardness loses hearts at last.
And honor leaves on liberal ways,
And fame and honor nere decaies:
Till hoorde in horie mucke does hold,
The free and worthy use of gold.
Oh sentence hye of Fathers wise,
I swear by all the gods in Skies:
These words deserve immortal fame,
And nothing is so mutche to blame.
As pintchyng hands that should be frank^,
Admit the taker yields no thank:
To him that gives, the gift does bind*
Each virtuous man and honest mind.
As captive in all good respects,
To be a freende in full effects:
As far as power may stretche unto,
And they that have in wars to do*
Can say, what bounty bryngs about,
Where that is not, the fire goes out:
And dies as coal to ashes falls,
As Fouler taks the bird by calls.
In strawyng corn and chafe by heaps,
So bounty as a sickle reapes:
The hearts and all within the breast,
No perfect love can be possessed.
Where francknesse makes no place before,
Though force of earnest love is more:
And looks not on the gift a whit,
It man in need and danger sit.
And find their friends both cold and dry,
Then love will show a lowryng e^e:
And halte with you, as you with him,
Although that some can cloak it trim.
I tell you love is easly lost,
If you on love bestow no cost:
Thus as before I did rehearse,
I sent each Lord a merry vearse.
A iollie libell long and large,
And therein did good will discharge:
But nothing did return to me,
That I could either feel or se.
Save from a brook, set pen before,
Raune dropps of gold, what will ye more:
Thus in this withred age of ours,
The smell is gone from goodly flowrs.
And golden world is tournd to brass,
Or hardness dwells where bounty was:
There is no way to gain nor save,
Then learn to keep the things we have.
For he that wants shall hardly get,
Except he fish with finer net:
Then either rhyme or reason knitts,
This world yields not to pleasant wits.
To basest mynds sometimes it bends,
For all the happs blind Fortune sends:
Does light on those she favors mitche,
Some man you see can nere be ritche.
Though twenty year he toil and toss,
For he is borne to live by loss:
And some that never takes pain,
In worldly wealth does still remain.
Ne Court nor Country seru's some man,
To thrive in, do the best he can:
Then find thou faut with ^^ne of both,
With blind affection each thing gothe.
Happ lies not in man's ronnyng still,
Nor Fortune follows finest skill:
Nor he does not the wager win,
That in the race has formoste bin.
In Judges mouth the sentence lies,
So whether men does fall or ryes:
Look up to him that ruels the Skies,
The ritche the poor, the fool the wise.
And they shall find my words are true,
Thus for a while, now Court adue.
FINIS.
Of a mighty great personage.
WHen Phoebus took his Purple bed,
to rest from days disease,
Naie seem^e to dippe his golden hedde,
under the Ocean seas:
And fair Lu^i^^ ganne to shine,
(...) in starrie Skies,
Then crepte the sweet and kindly sleep,
a long my slombryng eyes.
And pricked me so to take a napp, that as in coutche I lay,
I dreampt that Natures littled (...), about my bed began play:
And bad me rise, and vewe a wor^^^, that kind a new would frame,
For that she thought both gods and me^, would help to forge the same
You speak but like young girls quod I, she has all ready done,
Such works as now her hands would miss, if they were vnbegon:
With that dame Nature had, I spide with angry visage read,
And in her fury satte her down, full right against my bed.
Why fool quod she is Nature not, so perfect of her skill,
That she can give to flesh and fell, what shape and form she will:
Thou see each woorkman (...) grows, each wit does riper wax,
And knowledge can amend at full, the faults where cunnyng lacks.
The Goldsmith and the Caru^^ (...), and all that works with tool,
Do mende their hands and da^^^^ are, by Nature set to school:
The Princes palace made of old, looks like a sheep coat now,
So if this time and Nature list, to show their connyng throw.
We can set forth a Candle blase, beyond the shinyng Son,
And take the light from twinkling stars, whiles Moon her co^^es shal^^n:
Can I not call for Beauty whou^, that I have lent at large,
Have not the hye immortal Gods, giu^n Beauty to my charge.
And may not Nature break each mould, yt once her hand has made,
And work this yearthly dross again, unto a finer trade:
Yes sure said she, and I therewith, did humble pardon crave,
And at one instaunt by a sign, that mighty Nature gave.
A thousand woorkmen all with tools, came thrustyng in a rout,
And each unto his labor falls, as turn does come about:
They blewe and puffed and smoke out sweat, as though in the^ did lie,
To shape a mould, or show through cloud, that Venus dropped from sky
Have done quod Kind it shall be thus, too long ye trifle here,
Then Cunnyng by her curious art, deuisde such color clear:
That did the ruddie Rose disdain, and pass the Lilie white,
If that a medley of those twain, were made to please delight.
The woorkmen in this hasty broile, had raised up a mould,
And each one in his office fine, had done the best he could:
Now satte they still in silence sadd, and rested for a space,
With that dame Nature by her skill, set forth so trim a face.
That Son and Moon and seven stars, did seem therein to shine,
In which the pleasant gods had plast, a pair of gladsome eync:
Yea every God one gift her gave, as Pallas for her part,
Possessed her with a noble hedde, to judge or talk by art.
And I^no made request to Jove, that Venus Queen of Love,
Should never with false fond desiers, her modest manners move:
Dan Cupid brake a bow for joy, when this fair dame was made,
In sign yt she with Dians Nymphs, should walk in grenewood shade
The silly woorkmen seeing this, that servant were to Kind,
Trust up their tools and stole away, yet left the mould behind:
Which as I guess of diverse stones, was wrought by deep device,
For therein Iazings might you see, and pearls of passing price.
The Rubbie ritche, and pretty sparks, of Diamonds clear and bright,
The Emerald green, and Margarets fair, and Turks blew to sight
Whose virtues passes far my pen, or yet my tongue to tell,
Demand ye that of skillful men, that knows their Natures well
Lo foolish man, lo here thou dolte, quod Kind to me aloude,
How say thou is not this new work, more fair then star in cloud
Does not this work make all the^ blusse, yt I have wrought before,
Yea sure, ^or Nature is in mind, to make the like no more.
By this time was the Lark a loft, loud chirpyng in the air,
And each one to their daiely toiles, began busily repair:
So rose I up and rold in thought, where this fair wight does dwell,
And at the length I found in deed. I knew the worthy well.
FINIS.
Of Beutie and Bounty.
WHen Beauty Venus daughter dear,
from Jove descended down,
To reign on earth an Empress here,
with scepture and with Croune:
To Pleasures palace she repairde,
where with a Princely port,
She held an open household long, in feasts and royal sport.
The fame whereof rang through the world, so shrill in every ear,
That well was him, and glad was she, that might come banquet there:
The lists were made, the scaffolde decked, each thing in good arraie,
The Lords full brave, the Ladies fine, the Courtiers trim and gaie.
And as these states in triumph were, all plaste in their degrees,
And to behold the shiuerd staves, the people swarmde like Bees:
In stepped a goodly armed knight, on courser white as Snow,
And twice he paste the Tilte about, as soft as horse could go.
And when he came where Beauty satte, he pausde with howed head,
And loud in open audience then, all hail fair Queen he sed:
I came quod he from Manhoods court, the worthiest prince alive,
Who keeps his kingdom all by sword, and does for honor strive.
By battaill and by breakyng lance, who sent me hither plain,
To challenge for my mistress sake, the stoutest in thy train:
No sooner he his message said, but in there rusht a band,
Whose clattering harness causde their steeds upon no ground to stand.
The dust flewe up, the preace did shrink, the fomyng horses naied,
The trumpets blewe, the lance in rest, the spurs on sids they laid:
Fie cowarde knight quod Courage then, can all you fight with one,
So they retierd, and to the shocke, came youth all armde alone.
These cha^pions met as earth should shake, so fierce they seemd to be
As man became a Lion wood, and horse in air should fly:
At each encounter crasht their slaves, and fell amid the throng,
The bu^fetts were so freely dealt, the blood through Beauer sprung.
The Queen cride hola, cease quod she, you turn your sport to spi^e*
Some cause your color does increase, and Mars the pastime quite:
A cause quod Youth (most worthy dame) and my leege Lady dear,
Came ever yet before a Prince, so stout a challenge here.
Who dare with Venus daughter boste, dame Beauty justly cold,
That came from Skies, and satt next Jove, in sacred honor stalde:
Though Beauty sprang from yearthly cause, and had but shape of kind,
And did no heavenly gifts possess, nor virtues lodge in mind.
Yet Boldness churlishe challenge brave, too sawsie is you know,
And Beauty has too many friends, to see her handled so:
When Boldness hard this taunting tale, and marked the peoples chere,
He thrusted through the thickest throng, and drew the scaffolde nere
And all on knees he craved to speak, and answer to this case,
On whom the Queen for honors sake, did show a gracious face:
Speak on quod she, so stepped he up, and thus to her he said,
O puisaunt prince, thinks Youth of braggs, y^ boldness stands afraied
I am a branch of Manhoods blood, that stout conceit begat,
The hope and help of hie attempts, and slaie of every state.
That hither came for that no Court, can be where I am not,
No Tornay seen, no triumph made, no fame nor glory got:
And wotte you well, a Princess too, in Court I serve this hour,
That is as great in some respects, as she is small in power.
If stately honor can be gest, by goodly graces trime,
Or perfect beauty be possessed, where Bounty swimes at brime:
Or wisdom under seemly shaeds, may shine or yet be seen,
My mistres is a worthy dame, though Beauty be a Queen*
Report has blown to Manhoods ears, the trothe of that I tell,
Then Boldness needs not blushe to boast, y^ Bounty bears the bell
And since you license me to speak, I dare deuoide of blame,
Light such a torche unto your eyes, shall show this Ladies name:
When Sky is clear, and Summer set, to show the weather fair,
I mean when calmie blows the wind, and pleasant is the air.
A Marie gold then may you flude, full nere an Eglantine,
Whose flowrs within the North new buds, and yet in court does shine:
Her countenance carries such a state, full right amid her face,
As though therein the Muses nine, had made their mansion place.
A ratlyng sound unto your ears, of her now here I show,
Now rack and wrest my meaning out, and you my mind shall know:
This said each one on others looked, and he on horseback leapt,
And some that dwelt in their concept, full close in corners creapt.
The glorious sort that gapte for fame, where no deserts could be,
Did draw a back and preast a pace, with plain reproach to flee:
The hautie minds held down their heds, hye looks began blush for fere,
As Youth beheld this sudden change, he thought no tariyng there.
The Gods regardyng from the stars, what strife by Beauty rose,
Bad Venus call her daughter home, and homewards so she goes:
Then saw I Boldness turn again, who gave for Bou^ties wear,
A garlande of the goodliest flowers, that ever earth did bear.
And foarst her for to take the same, in sign of glory won,
As Beauty mounted to the Gods, and all the triumph done:
The people seeing Beauty gone, with one assent did cry,
That Bounty pleased more their minds, then Beauty did the eye.
FINIS.
Of one that by dissemblyng, fed his desire.
IF love be lust, the more my lack,
and less I think your luck,
Yet love I not for leude delight,
nor gain of worldly mucke:
But for a finer freake, be you the judge thereof,
When craft to cloak some secret smart,
beginns to scorn and scoff.
Wit works with words and wiells, a way to win his will,
And where y^ fleight shows gladsom smiles, ye world co^ceius n^ne ill
Mirthe blears the peoples eyes, and makes the matter light,
And sadness breeds suspect to sone, in hedds of deep foresight.
And world mislikes no toys, that mirrie laughter bryngs,
God knows what care the bird does feel, in cage that swetly sings
Some weep in weddyng weeds, and laugh in mournyng gounes,
And sure I smile my self sometime, when froward fortune frounes.
Where is most cause of care, most sign of joy I show,
For pleasure is redoubled often, where men dissemble woe:
Who bluntly bites a bait, and swallows up a hook,
Is caught like Gogon in a net, or conquered by a look.
But such as warely feeds, and pikes out bones full clean,
Shall eat their fill, and learn to know, what dainty morsells mean
Thus restyng at your will, I feed my hidden thought,
With fancies merry sweet conceits, a food full dearly bought.
FINIS.
Of steadfastness and constancy.
WHen Constance maks, her boed in bloody breast,
And builds her bower, with bows of bloming trothe:
There friendly faith, is sure a welcome geast,
And Ious does dwell, and Lady Venus both.
The Gods are glad, to vewe such trothe below,
The heavens hopp. to see such Constance flow.
But where fond lust, does lead firm love awrie,
And fickle toies, in feeble fancy falls:
And foul delight, does feed the wantons eye,
And steadfast hearts, are toste like Tennis balls.
There Pluto reigns, with all his hounds of hell,
In irksome shame, and smothryng smoke to dwell.
Oh what a praise, has Constance shinyng face,
What greater blott, may be then breach of love:
The constant mind, has sudden change in chase,
But they that will, of eury water prove.
Shall drink sour whey, in steed of sirup sweet,
For licrus lusts, a licour fit and meet.
Ten thousand false, I find where one is true,
With faith for sworn, lo eury face apears:
These faithless fools, that change for eury new,
Do look full smothe, yet prove but scrattyng Brears,
Since foul deceipts, has filde the world with vice.
We ought to give, dame Constance all the price.
O blasyng star, that burns like Eathna flame,
O fickle dames, go hide your hedds in holes:
Approach not nere, where I do Constance name,
Your dwellyngs are, among the dampened soles.
Go girnyng girls, and giglotts where ye lust,
Dame Constance sitts, in glory with the just.
FINIS.
Of one that f^unde falshed in fellowship.
IF faith take foil, and plain good will be lost,
Let fained love, seek Larks when Sky does fall:
If trial great, be made a double post,
No practice seru's, to shoffull Cards with all.
If waityng long, can win but cold reward,
Bid wily wits, go warm his hands at fire:
If trothe want, happ, for toil and great regade,
There is no hope, that workman shall have hire.
If letters large, but little likyng win,
Your bablyng tongs, in fine small boste shall make:
If service paste, a suit must new begin,
New hangers on, in haste their leave may take.
Since suertie shrinks, and freendship smells of gile,
Adue badd world, thy favor lasts no while.
FINIS.
Written to a virtuous gentlewoman, whose name is in the verses.
Deem all my deeds by true deserts.
that shows eury fruit,
And paise my words, and prove my woorks,
and so esteem my suite:
My trothe untried bids me retire, and bryngs me in despair,
Pass on says hope, good hap may come, the weather may be fair.
Prease not to fast says Danger then, for fear thy ^oote do slide,
Of hasty speed great harms do rise, as often has bin tried:
Repentance comes care men beware, for want of perfect skill,
Therefore let reason rule the rain, and wisdom master will.
Thus in mine hedde a battaill is, between my hope and dre^d,
Hope pricks me forth, fear driu's me back, my fancy thus I feed:
Though hope be far above my happ, good luck may me advance,
And this great war may be a peace, as al things have their chance.
The tossed shipp may haven it, that anchor hold has none,
As rainie dropps by length of time, may pearce the Marble stone:
What fort or hold is half so strong, that ever man could make,
But poulders force and Cannon blast, can make it down to shake.
The pelletts all that I must bring, unfeigned faith must be,
The ladder for to scale the walls, is trothe when tried is he:
This answer may the captain make, to whom my siege I lay,
Whose fort is won by such a sault, or by none other way.
With Ensign spread, and battrie set, I hope to make a breach,
And trust to win by suite at length, that now is past my reach.
FINIS.
A sarewell to a fondlyng.
THe heat is past, that did me fret,
The fire is out, that Nature wrought:
The plants of love, which youth did set,
Are dry and dedde, within my thought.
The Frost has kilde, the kindly sap,
Which kept the heart, in liuly state:
The sudden storms, and thonder clappe,
Has turned love, to mortal hate.
The miste is gone, that bleard mine eyes,
The lovnyng clouds, I see appear:
Although the blind, eats many flies,
I would she knew, my sight is clear.
Her sweet disceiuyng flattryng face,
Did make me think, the Crow was white:
I muse how she, had such a grace,
To seem a Hawk, and he a Kite.
Finis.
Written to the good Lord Mayor (of London now in office) called Sir Nicholas
Woodroffe Knight.
THe time shows all, as fire woorks wax,
in time great things are done,
Time weau's the web, and wrought the flax,
that pain through time has sponne:
Time must be sought, time must be used,
time must be tempred well,
Else out of time, in any sort,
the tale is that we tell.
So time moves pen, and sturrs the muse, (that time had lulld a sleep,)
To write of time and matter such, as may good credit keep:
Then my good Lord, to former time, I do refer my verse,
And ancient years, with elders days, that can great things rehearse.
Time brought the sword (that each one fears) to rule the rural sort,
Time wanne this City hye renown, and gatt it good report:
Time made the chosen Mayor a knight, and time did greater things,
For time made subjects love the law, and honor rightful Kings.
Thus time was nours, and mother both, to chosen children here,
And time out worn, takes life of trothe, so showe^ ^^ke candle clear.
Which time my verse reuiu's again, and brings fresh to mind,
The time that long is paste before, and thousands left behind:
For those that in this present time, list look on Elders days,
Who in their time did some good deeds, and reaped peoples praise.
As gwerdon for the time well spent, and virtues right reward,
That given is to graffs of grace, that God does mutche regard:
As time has taught, good men to rule, and made the bad obaie,
So time has rooted up all weeds, that made good flowers decaie.
This City claims by tracte of time, a stately Civil trade,
And is a Lamp, or shinyng Sun, to Countries silly shade:
For Civil manners here began, and Order root did take,
When savage swains in rubbishe soiles, did civil life forsake.
Here wit throw wisdom weldeth wealth, and world good time attends,
And God through trafficks toil and pain, a world of treasure sends:
Here states repair, and laws are tried, and noble customs shine,
Here dwells the Sages of the world, and all the Muses nine.
The Court it self, and Innes of court (where wit and knowledge floes,)
Haunts here as term and time commands, and people comes and goes:
Here are Embastours feasted still, and foreign kings have bin,
Here are the wheels of public state, that bryngs the pagent in.
And here is now the Maiden town, that keeps her self so clean,
That none can touch, nor stain in trothe, by any cause or mean.
Then here ought be no member left, that may infecte the rest,
Whip faultors hence, and plage the worst, and make but of the best:
Let stubburne route be taught to work, bid paltrars pack away,
Give Idell folk no lodgyng here, cause wantons leave their play.
Search out the haunts of noughtie men, and break the nest of thieves,
Yea pluck their liurey oer their ears, and badges from their sleues:
That breeds misrule, and rudeness shows, so shall the Civil seat,
(As Lantern to all Britain land) remain in honor great.
Demand how thredebare figboies live, and swearing dampened spretes,
Reform those blading desprate dicks, that roiste about the streets:
Disperse that wicked shameless swarm, that cares not for reproach,
Purge eury house from graceless geastes, that setts all vice abroche.
Rebuke those common alehouse knights, yt spends away their thrift,
And ask on Benche where Justice sitts, how roges and beggars shift:
Teach railyng tongs to tune their speech, and talk of that is fit,
Hold in the rash and harebraine hedds, by Law and Orders bitte.
Know whence these sausie libells come, ye feign discord would make,
And work by art and craft to pluke, the styng from subtle Snake:
This City is no harbryng place, for vessels fraught with vice,
Here is the soil and seat of kings, and place of precious price.
Here worthies makes their mantions still, and builds stately towers
Here sitts the Nobles of the realm, in golden hasles and bowers:
O London look to thy renown, thy fame has stretched far,
Thou art a stay in time of peace, a help^ in cause of war.
A fear to foes, a joy to friends, a Jewel in our days,
That well may match with any Town, or sea^e of greatest praise:
Here people are so meek and mild, that foreign nations throw,
In Civil sort, with wealth and ease, may live in quiet now.
What City can make ^oste and say, (great God ^e blessed therefore)
It does so many strangers feed, and so maintain the store:
For here the more the number is, the less of want we find,
Of corn and cates, ^utche store is here, it answers each man's mind.
Way wed the hearth of other realms, and you shall see in deed,
The plenty of this (...) I Will, supply our neighbors need:
In world who travails any where, and then repaireth here,
Shall fi^^e each thing good chepe at home, that is abroad full dear.
And none but London note it well, does keep one stint and rate,
O^ vi^^^iles in the market place, look throughout eury state:
Yea, here when God for wicked life, his bounty will withdraw,
The Mayor and brethren shonneth dearth, by rule and noble law.
Here is provision for the poor, and who that marks the ^ame;
Shall see that worthy Sages grave, deserves a noble name:
My boldness now (O my good lord,) excuse through my good will,
That ever in my Countries praise, is pressed and ready s^ill.
And where the noughtie lives of some, are touched by m^ peinie,
It is for Londons honor spoke, that can reform futche men:
Which in this stately shepherds fold, like rotten sheep do live,
And who for want of lookyng too, do (...) example give.
God grant whiles worthy Woodroffe rules, (and every other year,
There comes no Mothes among good men, nor Caterpillars here:
Thus wishyng well, in Londons laud, my pen I must excuse,
To Printer sent these verses plain, of this lasie mornyngs muse.
FINIS.

