CHRISTVS NATVS EST,
CHRIST is Borne.
Angels clap Hands; Let men forbear to Mourn:
Their sauing-Health is come; For CHRIST is Borne.
The History of Christ his Life and Death.
CHrist was borne in Bethelem a little Village in Jury, not far from
Jerusalem: Mary (a Virgin) was his Mother, and Joseph (a Carpenter) his reputed
Father. He lived in the reign of Augustus Caesar, Emperor of Rome, and was put
to death in the time of Tiberius. At twelve years of age he disputed in the
Temple, and put down the Doctors. He was the best Master that ever was, for
he gave (and to this day still gives) Heaven to his followers, yet had but bad
Servants, for Judas betrayed him, Peter denied him, all forsook him. He was
the best Sea*man that ever was, for he walked upon the Waters, and at his
bidding the Winds lay still. No man ever did such Cures as he did, for he
raised the dead to life, gave sight to the Blind, made the Lame to walk, and
cast out Devils. No man ever made such Feasts as he, his last Supper being
one, where he and his twelve Disciples sat together* At which time, rising
from Table, he tied a Towell about his middle, and then washing all their feet,
he dried them with that Towell: Another Feast was, which he fed five
thousands with five Barley Loaves and two Fishes: At another time (being at a
wedding) he turned Water into Wine.

His whole life was spent in labor, in Preaching, in fasting, praying, healing
sick People, and doing miracles, yet for all this the Jews hated him* Herod
despised him, Annas, Caiphas, Pilate, the Scribes and Pharisees, with all the
Doctors of the Law sat in consultation together, how to entrap him, and put
him to death, and for that cause hired many false witnesses, who came in
against him, but they agreed not in their testimonies: yet he was betrayed by
his own Servant Judas, who for thirty Roman Penes sold his Master, came to
him, cried, All hayle, and with a kiss delivered him into the hands of such,
as with Bills and Staves in the night came to apprehend him as a Thief; He was
thus haled to Prison. Then the custom of the Jews, being (at every Easter) to
have a Prisoner delivered to them to be put to death; and Pilate asked the
people if they would have one Barrabas (a Malefactor) or Christ* they cried out
to have Christ crucified, and Barrabas to be made free. Hereupon, Christ with
strong Cords was tied to a Pillar, and with Cords and Whips scourged. At his
Arraignment, he was spet upon, and struck over the face: At his coming from
the Hall of Judgment, he was whooped at, reviled, mocked, and miserably abused.
That day then which we call good Friday, being set down for his day of Death,
he was forced on his sore shoulders to carry his own heavy Cross, on which he
was to suffer, and to carry it through Jerusalem, to Mount Caluarie, his place
of Execution: But before this, in the open Hall, the Jews set a Crown of
sharp pricking Thorns upon his head, struck him with a Reed, and Ieered at
him: To that Cross he was nayl'd with his Thorny Crown on; his Hands and
Feet bored through, hung between two common Thieves: His side pierced with a
Spear; Vinegar and Gall given him to drink as he hung: Close to the Cross
stood his mother, her Sister, and Mary Magdalen: Christ said to his Mother,
Woman behold thy Son. In the end giving up the Ghost, the Body was taken
down; He was buried, yet rose again, and was amongst his Disciples until be
went up into Heaven.

O See! Man's Savior is in Bethlem borne,
His lodging base, he himself held in scorn,
The Cribbe at which the Ox and Ass were fed,
Mary (Christ's Mother) makes her young Sons bed;
Yet see how Shepherds fall down flat before him,
And how the Wisemen do with gifts adore him,
Hark, what a heavenly Qurre of Angels sing
Sweet Carrols, at the birth of this new King;
O happy man! when thus, (thy Soul to save,)
Christ comes from Heaven, and makes himself a Slave.
SEe else that Pillar, where being naked bound,
Thy Christ had his flesh tore with many a wound*
When a Cock crows, let it this grief afford,
To think how Peter (thrice) denied his Lord;
See Judas Lantern, and see Judas Pence,
See the Dice thrown, to unclothe Innocence;
See Pincers, Nails, and Hammers, how they mere,
To nail toth' Cross, Christ's blessed Hands and Feet:
O Wretched Man! where Christ for thee thus dyed,
Let him not still by thee be Crucified.
Christus Natus est

Quando?

Hac Nocte

Vbi.

Bethlem

(...) in excelsis.

H(...)

depiction of Nativity of Christ And for Debts which Men should Pay,
Down his Life at Stake did lay.
Here Is a Wonder never known,
A King a Manger makes his Throne.


The Explanation of this Picture.
A Religious Man inuenting the Conceits both for the Birds and Beasts drawn
in this picture of our Saviors Birth, does thus express them.

viz. The Cock croweth, Christus Natus est. Christ is borne.

The Raven asked, Quando? When?

The Crow replied, Hac Nocte. This Night.

The Ox cried out, Vbi? Vbi? Where? Where?

The Sheep bleated out, Bethlem* Bethelem.

A voice from Heaven sounded, Gloria in Excelsis. Glory be on high.

Whilst Armies of Angels sung, Halleluiah. Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and
power be to the Lord our God. Apoc. 19. 1.

An Epitaph upon Christ, who was Buried in a new Tomb, cut out of a Rock, in
which no Man but he was ever enclosed.
Within this Rock the Rock himself is laid,
Who both the Tomb, and the Tomb-maker made,
A Man he was, was no such man beside,
None lived so just, none so unjustly dyed:
He was in debt for nothing, yet did pay
The debts of all the World at a set day.
Never of Woman could so much be said,
When he was borne his Mother was a Maid.
He many wonders wrought* and this a chief,
A very bad Man, made he a Good Theife.
It happened well, he so by Jews was Crossed,
For all the Souls in the World had else bin lost.
Thirty-three years be lived: Had not he been,
No Christian upon Earth had ere bin seen.
He dyed a King, yet was a Beggar borne,
And wore (which no Kings do) a Crown of Thorn.
First went he to his Grave, from thence, to Hell,
Then up to Heaven* And there this King does dwell.
FINIS.
London, Printed for JOHN STAFFORD, 1631.


