A pleasant Discourse of Court and Wars: with a replication to them both, and a
commendation of all those that truly serve Prince and country. Written by
Thomas Churchyard, and called his Cherrishing.

Imprinted at London, by Ar. Hatfield, for William Holme. 1596.

To the Honorable sir George Carry Knight, son and heir to my Lord
Chamberlain, governor of the I Will of Wight, and Knight Marshall of England,
Tho. Churchyard wishes great worldly hap, increase of honor, and heavenly
blessedness.
IN remembering many courtesies, good turns, rare favor, and friendship flowing
from your Honorable disposition in this ebbing age, I vowed being found in
serviceable manner to requite: but sick, am forced to write the opinions of
many Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen (captains and cheefetaines of great charge)
touching the court and the wars. And for that I served under them, I set down
the words I heard many of them speak of those two honorable points, and
discourses. First at Lawndersey sir Thomas Wyet, Wallop, Bellingam, and many
more knights there. Then at Bollain the Lord Poynings, sir Rafe Elderkar, sir
James Crofts, and other knights there. The Lord Gray at Giens, sir Harry
Palmer, sir Lewis Dyue, sir Richard Bray, and many more there. At Hams the Lord
Dudley, and many gentlemen there. At Callis the Lord Haward, sir William Drury,
sir Anthony Ager, sir Thomas Cornwallys, and a number of knights and gentlemen
there. In Flaunders sir Anthony Sturley, captain Matson, Sybyll, Horssey,
Ieynks, Plonket, Hynde, and many more captains there. At Metts in Lorraine
captain Farnam, and in that town the Lord Admiral that now is, I being
without with sundry English Gentlemen there. In France captain Krayar, Sutton,
Twytty, Blunt, Dryuar, and numbers of captains there. In Scotland where I was
taken prisoner, sir William Winter, sir William Woodhouse, and many knights and
captains there: the Lord Clynton our Admiral then. At Burty Cragge sir John
Luttrell. At Dondee captain Marry Church, and sundry gentlemen there. In
Haddington sir James Wilford, sir Arthur Manering, and many other knights and
captains there. In Lawtherfort, sir Hue Wyllowby, captain Colby, captain
Hales, and many more there. In Ireland sir William Bellingam, sir Anthony
Sellenger, sir Henry Sydney, sir James Crofts: all these then deputies, and
many knights and captains there, at their commaundment. In Anwerpe after these
things my self the chief captain there then. In Brabant, Zeland, and Holland
under sir Thomas Morgan, sir Humfrey Gylbart, and sundry knights, there serving
a great season. In Scotland before under the Lord Gray at the siege of Leeth,
where sir William Pellam, sir George Haward, sir Andrew Corbet, and a number of
knights were, besides many captains and gentlemen of good worth. In Gyens
when it was lost, a captain my self, and taken prisoner under the old Lord
Gray, sir Harry Palmar, master Cripps, and other captains there. In Ireland
again under sir Harry Sydney, where sir Harry Harrington, sir Edward Moore,
sir Nicholas Bagnall, and a great company of knights and captains were, from
whom I went to the noble Earl of Ormond. In Garnzey, with sir Thomas Leighton
in good credit and charge a good while. In Anwarpe again, when sir John
Norrice, sir Thomas Morgan, sir Edward Hobby, and a number of honorable
personages brought over Mounsior thither. Thus making those services and many
more a benefit to my knowledge, and gathering some od notes and sentences among
those Honorable and marshall people, I bethought me thereof now in my last
sickness peradventure, and willing not to smoother them up in silence, have
published as follows in verse, what the opinion of many dead and alive has
been both of honorable Court and Wars: dedicating the whole judgment thereof
to your good consideration, because you are Knight Marshall of England, and
knows much of marshall causes. After whose good liking I do commend the work
to the whole world, humbly desiring you to read with good will, judge with
mild discretion, and rather commend than condemn: not thereby craving better
credit than it may merit, nor less thanks than an honest writer looks for:
though not finely written yet faithfully meant in plainest terms, because
cunning phrases savor of the school, where seldom I have stolen any great
learning, nor robbed good scholars of their books. If God freely gave, I have
frankly bestowed it, neither a niggard of my verses, nor sparing of my words,
but spending my muse and matter as plentifully as though I had good store
thereof: take it in good part so the writer stands pleased, God so knows, who
increase you in honor and durable credit.

From my chamber in Richmond, this new years day. 1596. Yours in all at
commandment, THOMAS CHVRCHYARD.

TEn thousand spend their time in vain,
That haunteth either court or wars,
In both of them some hopes to gain,
When both God wot full few prefars:
Then bluntly said, and truly told,
Long courting makes young men old.
Not rich, nor wise, till wit be bought,
Wealth follows few that thither run,
Some trudge to court to bring home thought,
Or see abroad how shines the sun:
But leaves Gods blessing far behind,
And lives upon an aspiring mind.
The court is but a pleasant cage
For birds to prune their feathers in,
A joy to youth, a pain to age,
Where many lose, and few do win:
A step of state, where honor stands
To bring free hearts in bondage bands.
A gladsome house of goodly gests,
That pay small service for their food,
A body full of hollow breasts,
Where hatreds eggs brings forth their brood,
A place of pomp, and peril both,
Where finenes ioines, with little troth.
A heaunly image here on earth
That looks like saint without a shrine,
An outward sign, and show of mirth,
Where many smarts are cloked fine,
A glass of steel in some od case,
Where each man may see his own face.
A randevou, where millions meet
In one kings reign or other sure,
A whetstone to a dulled spreet,
That many sweet conceits procure,
A palace fraught with fair delight,
That proves but black, when it seems white.
A drawing hope, that has no end,
In hearts that labor still for fame,
A strong crossebowe that will not bend,
Till courtly archers wins the game,
A plot where cunning digs up pence,
And yet a place of great expense.
Court is a maze of turnings strange,
A laborinth, of working wits,
A princely seat, subject to change,
Where Goddess like, dame Pallas sits,
A fountain frozen hard as ice,
Where cloked craft turns often the vice.
The well and spring that cooles the thirst,
And quenches each consuming heat,
The cooling card that hearts does birst,
The worm that life and lim does eat,
The gladsome gazing mirror bright,
That shows broad day, but brings dark night.
The field where fortune runs at bace,
And shows foul play where she does please,
The park, the forest, and the chase,
Where Dians Dear lodge safe at ease,
The feasting house, where surfets breed,
By tasting some things more than need.
The soil where Venus built her bower,
And Cupid shootes his shafts too fast,
The only grace of earthly power,
That was or is, and so shall last:
The mean to make mean men to mount,
Yet court of no man makes account.
The path to hit prefarments right,
But when or how, good hap must shoe.
The torch that gives a flattring light,
A blaze that quickly out will go:
The candle clear of comforts all,
Yet down untouched, the snuff will fall.
The feeding hope of all good hap,
Till want coms home with weeping eye,
The smiling cloud where thunder clap
Falls rattling from a pleasant sky,
The calmy air, that storms does hide,
Till wind bewraies a blustering tide.
The platform where all Poets thrive,
Save one whose voice is hoarse they say,
The stage where time away we drive,
As children in a pagent play,
To please the lookers on sometime,
With words, with books, in prose or rhyme.
The mount where might and mercy dwells,
The one may kill, the other save,
The spring that maintains many wels,
Where thirsty throtes do water crave,
The nurse that milk and pap may give,
To those that in great lack does live.
The civil sword of worldly sway,
That cuts off many a canker clean,
The head that secrets can bewray,
And teach rash wits to keep a mean
The eye that sees both hie and lo,
Much further than our feet can go.
The ground where plenty planted was,
When bounties blossoms brought forth fruit,
Then gold was but esteemd as glass
The prince so freely gave a suit:
The only spring and flowing spout,
Where all good turns came flowing out.
The royal house of all repair,
Where subjects swarm, and still do run
As thick as flies flocks to the air,
In summers day when shines the sun,
The paradise of earthly show,
Where many goodly fruits do grow.
The way to toull men on to spend,
As profit straight should rise thereon,
The ready rule to give or lend,
Play best be trust till all be gone:
The place where promis is forgote,
Or where fair words make fools to dote.
The ankor hold we trust unto,
If cord and cable do not break,
The gallant ship that may undo
With charge: most men whose purse is weak:
The quiet port when tide coms in,
For all bare barks that harbor win.
The swelling sea where some do sink,
(That waves and surges swallow up)
The doubtful banquet where some drink
Their bane out of a spiced cup:
The stage where many a part is played,
That makes some lookers on afraid.
The costly, sumptuous golden hall,
That eats up many a thatched hiue,
The bulwark and the brazen wall,
Against whose state no force dare strive:
The stay and prop to weakest things,
And unto man most comfort brings.
The flower and blossom of each land,
That yields sweet sent like mirr or balm,
Which does not on base fortune stand,
But safe in either storm or calm.
O God that guides each fortune now,
Preserve our court and kingdom throw.
FINIS.
COurt cannot pleas, each one that still does crave
No more than seas, can make all sailers rich,
Though few thereby, do gain yet some may save,
And keep a mean, if folly be not mitch,
There food is free, and all belongs to health,
Fire, rest, and ease, and pleasures of the eye,
Then for those ioies, who bids them spend their wealth?
Or follow gain, or waste their goods thereby?
If in one cloak, or suit a Lordship stands,
Blame not the court, but blame unthrifty hands.
Though shining robes, becoms a Courtier well,
Mean men may wear, good garments of small price.
If waste will needs, his patrimony sell,
Or play away, his lands at cards and dice,
Court is not cause, of that expense and charge,
No more than plow, and carts makes Farmars poor.
If gallants gay, cuts their own clokes too large,
That they like brooms, sweep rushes from the door,
Short capes in Court, were fitter for a shoe,
In such light weeds, of yore did Courtiers go.
If men could sort, themselves in Court aright,
The good may meet, as good as he therein,
And stately Court, hates all lewd manners light,
No coosning knack, can there no favor win.
Finenes and fraud, are often frownd at thear:
Dissemblance shames, to show a double face,
And though good wits, in Court can speak full fear,
Rip judgment soon, finds out a courtly grace,
And will not be, ore reached with shoe or sign
Of wily heads, though they be ner so fine.
Court is a well, and fountain full of springs
That runs to those, that watch their seasons due,
Who to the cock, their empty bucket brings,
When bounties streams, spouts water fresh and new.
All cannot thrive, that daily sell and by,
Some merchant proves, bankrout ere he be ware:
All shafts will not, against ill weather fly:
They hit the mark, that cunning archers are:
Court is not bound, to pleasure eury one:
Court is a king, and subject unto none.
If fauorits rise, dame Fortunes babes they be
Begot and bred, by sudden destnies lot,
Lads that good hap, has dandled on her knee,
Took all their pap, out of the sweet cream pot:
The rest are fair, young children borne to soon,
Or out of time, as many yoonglings be
No Planets birds, nor darlings of the Moon,
Nor fixed stars, that stands in highst degree,
But retrograde, in some aspects but base
Fallen fro the clouds, from Jupiters good grace.
Though many names, to court these Poets gives,
Whose fained Art, are full of fables vain,
When they themselves, by gifts of Princes lives
And by the Court, their betters far do gain,
Court cares not for, their stretched terms nor muse,
That in a mood, finds fault with this or that,
Whose hie conceits, does out their pen abuse,
Which on the spleen, may write they know not what:
Court thinks great scorn, to stoup or seem so weak,
As answer make, to any word they speak.
FINIS.
THe wars that marshall men do like,
For countries cause was first begun,
To shield and sword, to lance and pike,
The lusty soldiers then would run,
And glad was he in town or field,
Could force a foreign foe to yield.
No walls nor rampire could hold out
A lions heart in manly mind,
Men did in courage grow so stout,
They traueld far hot wars to find,
And when these men abroad did rome,
They brought great skill and knowledge home.
Kings gave them grace, and honor great,
Fame sounded trumpet in their praise,
World placst them in the highest seat,
So that like gods they raignd those daise:
Yea honored, made of, and extold
Above the worth of pearl or gold.
By them great empires did increase,
Kingdoms were won, and conquered all,
They held up wars, they made the peace,
They had the world at beck and call:
The sword subdues, and makes them slaves,
That stands upon their greatest braues.
Long in this course did soldiers live,
Beloud and feared as victors are,
They felt no want, but had to give,
The people took of them such care.
Kings and their treasure eury way
Kept noble soldiers from decay.
But when that kings from bounty fell,
And made but wars for their own gain,
The wars were then, a second hell,
Pleasure therein, was turned to pain:
Profit was gone, honor lay lame;
And soldiers sought no more for fame.
Yet countries cause mooud men to fight,
As hirelings work for wages still,
But take esteem, once from a knight,
You lose his heart, and warm good will,
Then after money does he look,
And licks his fingers like a cook.
When kings forget to give good turns
For good deserts: then soldier shrinks,
The lamp of love, but dimly burns,
And God does know, what soldier thinks:
All one we live (both days and weeks)
By love as larks do live by leekes.
Wars now is worse, than walking horse,
For like a hackney tied at rack,
Old soldier so (who wants force)
Must learn to bear a pedlers pack,
And trudge to some good market town,
So from a knight become a clown.
As good serve sowter in his shop,
As follow wars, that beggry brings,
Nay play the child, and drive the top
Or favor many fonder things,
And thrive there by, seems better far,
That run a gadding to the war.
Wars wins the workman scarce his bread,
A fig for fame, if that be all,
Wars quickly gets a broken head,
And gains no better fruit at all,
But when good blood is wasted out,
Into the ioints, wars thrusts the gout.
Lame lims and legs, and mangled bones,
Wars brings a man unawares God wot,
With privy pangs, sad sighs and groans,
Then come to court where naught is got,
Save s^auls and shells when kernel sweet
The hogs have, trampling under feet.
If five and forty sons I had,
Not one to court nor wars should go,
Except that some of them were mad,
So prooud both where I would or not:
But wars of all the arts that is,
Stands most from hap or heavens bliss.
Wars is a woorme in conshence still,
That gnawes the guts and heart in twain,
Who goes to wars must make his will,
For fear he coms not home again:
But at his welcome home in deed,
He gets but words, so starues at need.
Or at court gate must sit and watch,
Like goodman Cockscom keeping croes,
Go supperles to bed like Patch,
Or for his lodging gage his cloes:
A warm reward, a whip, a whood
Would do a silly fool more good.
Sell house and land, to follow drom,
And so bring home an empty bag,
Then like bare Tom of Bedlem com,
With broken breech and many a rag:
And see what pity world will take
On thee for thy great service sake.
Keep that thou have is counsel good,
What wars may win think that is lost,
For prince do hazard life and blood,
If enmies breath but on this cost:
Shun other wars as from a snake,
Whose sting a mortal wound will make.
Wars is but called the scourge of God,
A plague for man, and each things foe,
A whisking wand, a cruel rod,
That draws out blood at eury bloe:
A fearful bug, a cursed feend,
That drives good days and years to eend.
If dyuels dance when drum does sound,
And saints do weep, where blood is shed,
If wars does shake the heavy ground,
VVhereon fish, foul, and beasts are bred:
O wars pack hence, and run away,
From me and all my friends this day.
For where thou go all plagues repair,
All mischeeues march, all sorrows swim,
All filthy facts, infects the air,
All sin and vice is at the brim:
All dearth and famine are aflote,
And all or most, have God forgote.
Fie, fly from wars, as from a fire
That all burns up, or kills in haste,
Spoils and robs all, leaves all in mire,
Consumes all, brings all to waste:
Yet when the wars rules all like king,
Wars is himself, a beggry thing.
But if proud wars, begin to brall,
And quarrels picks, to wrong our right,
Then clap on arms, corslets and all,
To put a wrangling foe to flight:
And make them run like rats away,
That robs our cheese house eury day.
Lo knights, how plain poor poets shifts,
In scambling world to scowre the coast,
With rimes, and sends such new years gifts,
From sick man's couch to court in poast:
Where this may make a merry head,
To smile before he goes to bed.
FINIS.
Wealth, pomp and pride, with malice of the mind
Bred wars and broils, between two brethren furst,
The one feared God, the other most unkind,
For his foul fact, in world was held accursed.
Though wars began, throw pride and great offense,
As rods are made, to scourge lewd vicious life,
Yet fearful wars, has wrought great goodness sense,
And planted peace, where was but blooddy strife:
Wars makes men look, to soul and body too,
Which in no sort, proud peace can never do.
Who sees but death, and danger fears God,
A greater fear, no man alive may have,
As horse fears whip, and scholar fears the rod,
So sword is feared, that quickly brings a grave.
Wars makes men meek, virtuous, valiant and wise,
Hardy and bold, forward, faithful and true,
Goodness embrace, and villainy despise,
Kills old vice, and forms a man anue:
Quickneth the sprites, and kindles courage still,
That else grows cold, weak, resty, dull and ill.
Wars is no trade, for milksops, dawes and dolts,
Meacocks of kind, and cowards from their birth,
A spur for old Iades, a snaffle for young colts,
For lusty lads, the greatest joy on earth,
Breeds gallants up, puts lions hearts in men,
Breathes blood and life, into a trembling breast,
Makes hand draw sword, and fling away the pen,
Mount a great horse, and clap the lance in rest,
And woonders do, as Samson did in feeld,
Whose stoutnes made, the proud Philistines yield.
Wars wisely made, Brings triumph to the town,
Sends victors out, to fetch great wealth from far,
Keeps kings in seat, gives honor to the crown,
And no great fame is found where is no war.
Set wars aside, bid men go spin and card,
Distaffs are fine, when lance is flung away,
Make no more knights, let cowards be prefard,
Set lowts aworke, bid soldiers then go play:
So pluck down wars, and set up Robin Whood,
Or John a Style, that near did country good.
Wars was a wand, for wantons that were wild,
It made them tame, and greater maruels wrought,
But where you see, that wars are clean exilde,
Stout people faint, and kingdom coms to naught:
Venus and lust, are great together still,
Right takes wrong, and reason rules no whit,
Weak knees must bow, strong head will have his will,
And bayard blind, in teeth does take the bit:
Thus want of wars, confounds a worthy state,
And breeds at home, both quarrels and debate.
Wars was and is, and shall be till worlds end,
Till judgment day, you shall have little peace,
You say it is, a scourge that God does send,
A common plague for sin that shall not seace,
Think so and make of wars your profit then,
For soul at least. thus wars ve ought to love,
Because wars does reform the faults of men,
And by sharp means, it does his pashence prove:
If such effects, a blooddy wars brings forth,
When wars does com, do take it well in worth.
FINIS.
A COMMENDATION TO ALL THOSE, THAT EITHER BY INVENTION OF WIT, STVDY OF MIND,
TRAVEL of body, expenses of purse, or hazard of life, seeks the advancement
of their Prince and country.
THe world throwout, breeds men of sundry kinds,
Some of great spreet, great skill and deep engine,
Some mean and base, and some of noble minds,
Some gross of wit, and some most rare and fine,
As gifts of grace, and nature shapes them forth,
To show themselves, in actions men of worth.
Some plant and graffe, and still manures the ground,
Gains much thereby, as labrer lives by toil,
Some loves to sail, about the world so round,
To search what may, be seen in eury soil:
Some trudge to wars, and far abroad they rome,
For knowledge sake, to serve their prince at home.
Some have delight, to build and purchase still,
Thus all have not, one motion, mind nor will.
But such that seeks, for fame in foreign place,
Forsakes great ease, and wealth where they were bred,
Are speshall men, and do deserve more grace,
Than all the rest, what ever may be sed.
Leaves wife and friends, to try the tumbling seas,
Makes open sale, of life and all they have,
Are men that may, both prince and country pleas,
Who shall of right, be honored to their grave.
Then step in place, sir WALTER RAWLEGH now,
Show forth thy face, among the woorthiest sort,
Thy travel long, thy charge and labor throw,
Crowns thy great pains, with prais and good report.
Bid envy blush, for virtue hits the white,
Malice may bark, but has no power to bite.
World babbles much, but wit does all behold,
The touchstone must, at length try out the gold.
Who reads his book, and ways what he has don,
Shall sound his fame, as far as shines the sun.
FINIS.

