THE FORTVNATE FAREWE^^ to the most forward and noble Earl of Essex, one of
the honorable privy Counsel, Earl high Marshal of England, Master of the
horse, Master of the ordinance, Knight of the garter, and Lord Lieutenant
general of all the Queens Majesty's forces in Ireland.

Dedicated to the right Honorable the Lord HARRY SEAMER, second son to the
last Duke of Sommerset.

Written by Thomas Churchyard Esquire.

Printed at London by Edm. Bollifant, for William Wood at the west door of
Powles. 1599

(...) Thomas Churchyard wishes continuance of virtue, blessedness of mind,
and wished felicity.
IN all duty (my good Lord) I am bold, because your most honorable father the
Duke of Sommerset (uncle to the renowned impe of grace noble King Edward the
sixth) favored me when I was troubled before the Lords of the Counsel, for
writing some of my first verses: in ^uit all whereof ever since I have honored
all his noble race, and know^ your Lordship in sea services forward and ready
in all honorable ^ner (sparing for no charges) when the Spaniards approached
near ^countrie, I bethought me how I might be thankful for good turns and of
your noble progente, though unable therefore finding my ^e unfurnished of all
things worthy presentation and acceptance, I ^ke occasion of the departure of
a most worthy Earl toward the ^uice in Ireland, so made a present to your
Lordship of his happy Fare^ll as I hope: and trust to l^ue and see his wished
welcome home. This ^rewell only devised to stir up a threefold manly courage
to the reenarie multitude of sold^ers, that follow this Marshall like Gene^l,
and especially to move all degrees in general loyally to serve our ^d Queen
Elizabeth, and valiantly to go through with good reso^ion the acceptable
service they take in hand. Which true service shall ^louble their renown, and
enroll their names in the memorial book ^fame for ever. I fear I lead your
Lordship too far with the flou^ of a fruitless pen, whose blandishing phrase
makes many to gaze (...) and few to consider well of and regard. My plot is
only l^ude to ^chase good will of virtuous people, what the rest think, let
their ^sconstruing conceires answer their own idle humors. This plain ^esent
winning your Lordships good liking, shall pass with the great grace to his
honorable hands, that the prayers and power of good men ^ites willingly upon
toward the reformation of wicked rebellion.

Your L^in^ll at commandment, (...) Thoma^ Churchyard.

The happy Farewell to the fortunate and forward most noble Earl of Essex.
NOw SCIPIO sails, to Afric far from hoem
The Lord of hoests, and battles be his gied,
Now when green trees, begins to bud and bloem,
On Irish seas, ELIZAS ships shall ried,
A warliek band, of worthy knights I hoep,
Aer armd for fight, a bloedy brunt to bied,
With rebels shall, boeth might and manhoed coep
Our contreis right, and quarrel to be tried:
Right maeks wrong blush, and troeth bids falshed f^
The sword is drawn, TYROENS dispatch draws ny^
A traitor must, be taught to know his king,
When MARS shall march, with shining sword in ha^
A crauen cock, cries creak and hangs down wing,
Will run about, the shraep and daer not stand,
When cocks of gaem, coms in to give a bloe,
So false TYROEN, may faint when he would fight,
Though now alowd, on dunghill does he croe,
Traitors wants heart, and often taeks the flight:
When rebels see, they aer surpriesd by troeth,
Pack hence in haest, away the rebels goes.
^oud treacherous trash, is curbd and knocked with bloes,
(...) lofty minds, with force are beaten down,
^ainst the right, though often rued rebels roes,
^t oen sped well, that did impeach a crown.
^ad the Annaels, of all the Princes past,
^hear treasons still, are punished in their kind,
^ear shall you see, when faithful men stand fast,
^se traitors still, are but a blast of wind:
^rhe that first, formd kings and all degrees,
^e ruel of staets, and kingdoms ouersees.
^t and rage, this rank rebellion breeds,
^ock and spoil, sets bloodshed so abroetch,
^ethles attempts, their filthy humor feeds,
^hnes runs on, all hedlong to reproetch:
^dnes begaet, theas helhounds all a roe,
^ sons of shaem, and childern of Gods wraeth,
^th woluish minds, liek breetchles bears they go,
^ow woods and bogs, and many a crooked paeth:
^ng liek dogs, in litter, dung and straw,
^ed as bruet beasts, that knoes ne ruel nor law.
Fostred from faith, and fear of God or man,
Vnlernd or taught, of any graces good,
Nursed up in vice, whear false head first began,
Mercyles boern, still sheading giltles blood.
Libertiens lewd, that all good order haets,
Murderers viel, of women great with child,
Cruel as kiets, despising all estaets,
Diulishly bent, boeth currish, stern and wild:
Their whoel device, is rooet of mischeeues all,
That seeks a plaeg, on their own heds to fall.
Will God permit, such monsters to bear sway,
His justice haets, the steps of tyrants still,
Their damnable deeds, craves vengeance every day
Which God does scourge, by his own blessed will,
He planteth force, to fling down feeble strength,
Men of mutch worth, to weaken things of noght,
Whoes cloked craft, shall suer be seen at length,
When unto light, dark dealings shall be brought:
Sweet civil Lords, shall sawsy fellows meet,
Who must ask grace, on knees at honors feet.
^uednes may range, a while in ruffling sort,
As witless wights, with wandering maeks world mues
^ut when power coms, to cut proud practice short,
and shoe by sword, how subjects Prince abues,
^hen conshens shall, Peccaui cry in feeld,
^remble and quaek, mutch liek an Aspin leaf,
^ut when on knees, do conquered captives yield,
^he victor turns, his head as he wear deaf:
^ueth is grown cold, revenge is hot as fire,
And mercy sits, with frowns in angry attier.
World past forgave, great faults and let them pas,
^ime present loeks, on futuer time to com,
All aegis saw, their follies in a glass,
Yet were not taught, by time nor sound of drom,
This world groes blind, and neither sees nor heers,
Their senses fail, the wits and reason faints,
Old world is waxt, worm eaten by long years,
And men become, black devils that were saints:
^et Gods great grace, this wretched cause reforms,
And from fair flowrs, weeds out the wicked worms.
They com that shall, redress great things amiss,
Pluck up the weeds, plant roses in their place,
No violent thing, enduers long as hit is,
Falsehed flies fast, from sight of true men's face,
Traitors do fear, the plaegs for them prepared,
And hieds their heds, in hoels when troeth is seen,
Though graceless gives, to duty small regard,
Good subjects yields, obedience to their Queen:
In quarrels just, do thousands offer lives,
They feel fowl bobs, that for the bucklars strives.
This Lord does bring, for strength the fear of God,
The love of men, and sword of justice boeth,
Which three is to, TYROEN an iron rod,
A birtchin twig, that draws bloed whear hit goes,
When IOAB went, to war in DAVID'S right,
He brought hoem peace, in spite of emnies beard,
For IOZIAS, the Lord above did fight,
With Angels force, that maed the foes afeard:
The world does shaek, and tremble at his frown,
Whoes beck soon casts, the brags of rebels down.
^and fast and suer, false traitors turns their back,
^rue subjects veaw, maeks haerbrain rebels blush,
^tout heavy bloes, maeks highest trees to crack,
^n armed piek, may bravely bied a push,
Wheel not about, stand stiff liek brazen wall,
^or that's the way, to win the feeld in deed,
Charge the foer front, and see the emnies fall,
^he cowards brag, is but a rotten reed:
Victors must bear, the brunt of eury shock,
^ constant mind, is liek a stony rock.
^arewell sweet Lords, Knights, Captains and the rest,
Who goes with you, taeks threefold thankful pain,
Who sets you forth, is ten times treble blessed,
Who serves you well, reaps glory for their gain,
Who dies shall live, in faem among the best,
Who lives shall loek, and laugh theas broils to scorn,
All honest hearts, does civil war detest,
And curse the time, that ear TYROEN was born:
We hoep good hap, waits on the fleet that goes,
And Gods great help, shall clean destroy our foes.
FINIS.

