A Praise, and Report of Master Martyne Forboishers Voyage to META INCOGNITA.
(A name given by a mighty and most great Personage) in which praise and
report is written diverse discourses never published by any man as yet.

Now spoken of by Thomas Churchyard Gentleman, and dedicated to the right
honorable M. Secretary Wilson, one of the Queens Majesty's most honorable
Privy Counsel.

Imprinted at London for Andrew Maunsell in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of
the Parret.

To the right honorable master Secretary Wilson: Thomas Churchyard
presents this book and wishes increase of virtuous same, and desired
felicity.
IN rememberyng of courtesies which I found in Flaunders when your honor
was Lord Ambassador there, I thought my self more bound, than able to
requite, and so searchyng the storehouse of my substance, I savve nothing so
ready to spare as the exercise of my Pen in part of payment of that Iovve:
yet thinking thereby no piece of duty discharged. For the memory of a
good-tourne is a sufficient cause to a honest mind, ever to be thankful in
all serviceable manner, and never to forget a benefit received.

And especially in this scrupulous age and season, when good tournes neither
go a begging nor can not be gotten for great craving and much ado. And yet
some men of themselves are so noble and apt to do good, they can bestow many
pleasures frankly and freely, where no hope of recompense is to be found or
looked for, nor in a manner our deseruyngs are occasion of.

Among the cheef of that sort is the honorable sir Francis Walsingham, a
singular Proppe and Pillar, upon whom all our most feeble Soldiers do
lean, and from whom comes but fevve suitors discontented, or not reasonably
satisfied. The voice thereof is so general, that without any kind of
adulation I may report it. Albeit my fortune is not much amended, nor my luck
was never to light so far in his favor as to fasten a simple book of my
making in his hands.

For here I must confess to your honor, this little treatise (for that he
favors Master Forboyshers Journey) would gladly have bin supported by his
honorable countenance. But as a Boule in a smoth Alleye may get a job, and yet
prove to be a good saving cast when the game is in trial, so this my work
neither found free passage nor acces to his noble judgment, nor is not as I
hoep utterly void of a good Patroen to give it some credit, and yet the better
by his means it shall be accepted.

And the more is my hap that so honorable a parsonage as your self shall
vouchesafe to read it, and let it pas to the veaue and liking of the world.

Not that I presume that the vvriting thereof does claym any commendation, but
that by my boldness and study, the worthiness of trauelars may be vnderstoed,
and such as have sown the seed of painful labor and exercies, shall reap
the fruit of good fame, and possess that honest report that belongs to their
vveldoyng. My learning is not so great as to treat of hye matters, wherefore
I have chosen familier things too write upon. And so presenting to the people
that vviche they are best aquainted vvithall, I shall not vveery them with a
strange and stately style, nor ouercharge their judgments with far
fetched words or weighty devises. Yet blushe I to blot my book with
fancies and fabulls (which the folly of youth in former days led me to.)
And rejoice the more in findyng any occasion that may vvin good men renoume,
and make me put the idell pen to paper. And so this small vvoork of myen keeps
but my Muse occupied, and makes my friends remember me, and shoes nothing but
a commendation of those that love not to live unprofitable members: and
vvithall cares not for the hazard and danger of death, so some knowledge
rise to their Country by their pains and practices. Thus over tedious in
setting forth a triefle, and somevvat bold to trouble your good consideration
with so badde a discourse, I stay and keep silence till my second book
(promised long since to Master Uyez Chamberlayne) comes out, and shall be
published in print. Of the which book I mind to make you a present, and in
the mean season I vvishe that every good gift of grace may increase in your
honor. From the Court the last of April.

Yours humbly at commandment: Thomas Churchyard.

A discourse of the valiant Voyage to Meta Incognita.
THE first labor and verses in the behalf of Master Forboyshers voyage,
procured my pen after the farewell given to him (and his valliant companions)
to saiute them with a welcome home, Likewise in verse, so soon as they here
severally and saffely arrived. And now considering their great venture and
hazard and calling to mind the travail of Collumbo, Theuet, Gabotha,
Magelanus and others (notorious in nauigatio^, and singularly given to good
exercise and study) I thought it neccssarie for the encoragement of any
forward mind (seruyng for the maintenance of a commonwealth) to show a little
at large the goodness that rises by traueiling abroad, and commodity that
comes by seeking out such soiles and Countries, as may make our countriemen
here happy at home. There is such pleasure in this joyful pilgrimage (and it
purchases such a great profit in small process of time) that I do call it
the garlande of gain and glory, and perfect passage too all worldly felicity.

For in the redemyng of time that our ancestors have lost (and gainyng of
knowledge that makes our posterity both rich and honorable) we make the
barrain ground fruitful, and the idell people to become laborious, and ready
to answer our expected desires, and able to withstand the wicked wills, and
proud purposes of foreign power.

The days have bin (and of late) that a Pilot who knew but the coast of Spain
(the Canaries, or course to the Indians) has gotten such credit that each
Marchaunte thought himself happy that could commend his wealth and ship to
the hands of such a Pilot.

And now thanks be too GOD and our good industry, if you would make a voyage
to Cattaie, or in a manner to the very co^fines of Europe, Asia, Africa, or
America, you should quickly find ready members, and Noble minded Gentlemen,
that would not only hazard their own patrimonies, for the performance of the
exploite, but likewise accompany you with their own persons in y^ journey.

And for that every Gentleman (or labourar in the Uineyard) ought not only to
taste of the clustred Grapes, but also to reap some of the gain and glory
belonging to the Uintage, I think it most necessary and reason, that Master
Forboisher (General to Meta incognita) master Fenton, Master York, Master
Best, and others that were in the late journey, and eskriyng of an unknown
Ila^d, or country, should be registered in a perpetual book of memory, as
men that have esteemed nothing so dearly, as the vnfoldyng of hard matters and
hidden secrets.

Whereby, they have hope to spread Gods glory farther then ever has bin by
our common knowledge understood, or our highest senses and reasons could
reach unto.

And surely this is a true testimony of great goodness intended, that our
Nation in such a christian sort and manner, refuses no hazard nor danger,
to bring Infidelles too the knowledge of the omnipotente God, yea, albeit great
wealth and commodity may rise to us of their labors, yet the purpose of
manifestyng Gods mighty word and majesty among those that feed like
monsters (and rather live like dogs then men) does argue not only a blessed
success, but persuades a prosperous and beneficial return.

For admit that no further gain then Gods glory were looked for, and that
our peaceable Prince nourishes people only to that respect (as members and
instruments for the redeeming of many a lost soul) we ought to imagine there
can not be a greater grace, nor a more richer and precious thing expressed in
this ungracious time and season.

And those that offers to do their best in the furtherance of christian
religion, are sure diyng or living in that determination, to attain the
unspeakable and wished joys they desire besides here to remain with immortal
fame whiles the world lasts.

The cause and constancy of such as show any courage at all, either springes
from a divine delight in good doing, or a worldly desire of well wo^ credit
valiantly gotten. And the coward Spirit of those that dare attempt no hazardes
comes from a feeble judgment, or a weak womanish body that trembles to take
in hand any stout or manly enterprise.

Fortune herself gives place to any invincible courage, and the fortitude of
the mind co^quers countries, and overcomes the greatest conquerors that is
under the clouds.

I read of the first great Turcke Otthoman and others (with all their
successors) an incredible discourse, and yet by their mighty monarchies am
forced to believe their dignities and destenie did much depend upon their
resolute minds.

The greatness of Alexanders heart was no whit inferior to the great and good
Fortune he possessed.

And so generally to speak of the forwardness of man, and worthy laud that
folowes virtuous actions, I could occupy your ears with the hearing of many a
noble history, and prove thereby that nothing is comparable to a courageous
determination.

For as many aucthours affirm, (and man's actions declare) that man is but
his mind: so it is to be daily tried, that the body is but a mix ture of
compoundes, knitte together like a fardell of fleashe, and bondell of bones,
and united as a heavy lump of Lead (without the mind) in the silly
substance of a shadow.

We see a marvelous boldness in some horses, that with the least motion of
rodd or stick will take hedge or diche, when a royle of a greater stature is a
fraied of a little bushe.

Among Birds in like manner is a wonderful difference, and yet the Cock in
his combat surmounteth them all.

But Man the King of all creatures by force and discretion, gouernes what he
pleases, and co^passeth things that the base expectation neither can
comprehend, nor dare not attempt.

Now under correction, was not this a valiant adventure, to take in hand a
voyage never sailed before, (but by one Gabotha which hereafter I will speak
of) and in this sailyng to encounter such huge mountains of Iee, and pass
the same so orderly and so soon, without any probable certainty of a happy
success and safe return.

Albeeit that Master Forboysher had asaied the danger with some good sign of
benefit not long ago, Yet the course was so combersome, and the passage so
perilous, that few men were willing to make a trial of the journey, till these
Ge^tlemen and their courageous companions of their own good will, took upon
them to see the uttermost of the matter, and to abide the bronte of all that
might happen. And when they were undersail, behold how obediently and
painfully they behaved them selves, and forgettyng delicate and fine feedyng,
took what was fit for the turn, and stood content with what portion was
appointed, as men resolved to suffer a little scarcity and sorrow, in hope of
abundance and great pleasure to come. And agreed in felloweship so
faithfully, y^ it was to be iud ged y^ one Mother had sent so many children
abroad, to show what mutual love ought to be among brethren.

And in very deed the greatest conquest can be made is the victory and
masteryng of affections, (for the auoydyng of contencious tumultes, and
brablyng curiosity) which here tofore has hindered not only great services,
but also has bredde great mischiefs and wounded a common wealth, with an
infinite number of beggerie botches, and incurable diseases. By union and
amity we are taught both by the Be, and the Ant a lesson worthy notyng,
and so suckyng in season the fruit of our labors, with sugared pleasures our
pains be recompensed.

Now returnyng to my former discourse, I would a little touch by your license,
the hardy and brutishe manner of the people lately discovered for it seems by
their bold and beastly fashion, that they dare do any thing that their
consceites will allow, or courage of man may execute. First they adventured
by struggelyng and strength, to overcome man to man any one of our company,
and as I hear say xiiii. of them gave charge upon xxx. of ours, and stood
stoutely to their enterprise. Having with their able bodies such a kind of
agilitie and swiftness, as is to be wondered at: Besides they have a
dissemblyng policy to seem lame, when they pretend a mischief, and carriyng
such a dreadlesse mind, and desperate intention, they rather flyng themselves
headlong into the Sea (from the top of a mighty mountain) then yield to the
mercy of any that may subdewe them.

This is a strange kind of stoutnesse, and peradventure procedes from some
wrongs they have suffered by some other Nation then ours, whose cruelty has
made them so fearful to come in hands: That they have no skill of submission,
nor will not learn to know the courtezie of a Conqueror. Which resolution in
the^ (though barbarous it seem) shows a settled opinion they have in their
force and liberties, and vtters a miraculous manliness to abound in that
brutish Nation.

The more praise and renown shall they have, that seeks to reform these
foolish hardy Infidelles, and return too grope and find out the
commodities of that place, and conditions of the people enhabityng there.

And as touching the singular gain that may grow by their travails that
goes thither, I remitte that to the trial all ready had, and Judgment of
those that can look depely into the bowels and bothome of such causes and
business, assuredly beeleuing by that I have seen and heard, that many good
things will fall out to us by the journey.

Then let us with wishyng well be furtherars and fauourars of that noble
enterprise, which from the begin nyng of our age, was never brought to pass
thoroughly, nor in a manner directly thought upon. The course is so orderly
thither that none, which can skill of navigations, but will grant the voyage to
be easily accomplished: notwithstanding the Wind, Weather, and sharp air of
the country must be borne withal and suffered, as God shall ordain, and men
may provide for. In good sooth I hear a number that murmurs at this matter,
some such as never did sail between Dover and Callice, and some that have
sailed very far, and found no piece of benefit to be gotten in a cold
climate, making strong reasons and arguments on their own sides because they
have not proved the experience of this journey.

Well, I admit that many may mislike this trauail, and show many
persuasions for the maintenance of their dislikyng, yet considering that a
very wise and learned Gentleman (called Sir Humfrey Gilberte) has written of
this enterprise, and very grave and honorable personages, do set their
helpyng hands to the same, the mislikers should either hold their peace, or
put in practice a matter of more importance, or at the least behold the
success of the next journey, with more silence, and less murmuryng.

The exercises of Navigations is commendable, and makes many a good Mariner.

The time is so well spente (where otherwise Idleness would nourishe men in
vices) that diverse shall be kept occupied, and made the better able to live.

The attempt is so honorable, that few or none but base minded people will
condemn.

The charge is not so great to set the ships out, but y^ blessyng of God and
the benefit of the journey, may requite at the coming home again.

The subjects of our soil can lose but little, in setting idle men a work
about honest affairs: and both this land and diverse of our neighbors may
win much by their adventure, in bringyng among Christians that treasure,
which Gods enemies neither knew how to use, nor are worthy of.

Then tell me I pray you, what hurt may come unto us, where so great hope
of help is to be looked for?

Their Captains are known to be of good birth and hauiour.

Their Soldiers of honest credit and calling.

And all their Officers and Mariners are chosen people, of experience great
and good, and of good parentage and affinity.

The sufficiency of this people and certainty of their last doyngs, should
be a sufficient testimony for ever of their well meaning and good service.

Wherefore the lookers on may of courtezie sit still or be better occupied,
than be to busy in the hindryng of a noble journey and worthy actio^.

But GOD be blessed, either they can do no harm that are hinderars of good
things, or goodness itself is so free from danger that no man may hurt it.

I thought it convenient to show those that desire to know as breiflie as I
can, the order of their last setting forth, which was the xxv. of May from
Blackwall, and so staiyng a while before Graves end, they passed toward
Harwiche, where they did as the Lords of the Counsel by letters appoincted.

So taking leave from thence, they held their course to Orkneyes, than to
Caethneyes, a part of the main land of Scotland.

And so to S. Magnus sound, where the people were affrayed of our men at the
first: but afterward entertained them, as the commodity of the barraine
soil would suffer.

There the general gave a special Card and order to his captains for the
passing of the straites, and passing all the month of June toward the
Country, they came in July in the veawe of Freeselande, where they were
troubled with abundance of Ice, and felt extreme cold: albeeit it was in
July.

Then holdyng on a combersome course to pass the straites, they found such
storms and hard weather, that one lost a Rudder, and an other a Maste, and
the whole company were in sore distress and hazard. Which danger of storm
and anoiance of Ice dured a long time, in which season by diligence and Gods
good means, their came into the Straites (as they term it) where escriyng
land, they were troubled a freashe with such a deal of Ice, that they had
much ado to set foot on land, but in the end, at Haulls Island (so named for
Haulls favor) they landed and took such Eure from thence, as they thought
necessary for their purpose.

Afterward the General landed in an other Island, where vsyng courtezie for
the reclaymyng of the people there, was forced by the rudeness of that Nation,
too show some extremity in the taking of one in that Island, who^ he brought
aboarde the Aid. So seeking further intoo the straites (as the Ice would
permit) they came where they landed of their men a sufficient number, and
there giving thanks to God for their safe ariuall, they marched with Enseigne
displayed four or five miles intoo the Country, but the Mountains were so
great in that place they could not pass further, and return that night to
their ships, which made them retire. And marchyng back, they found a
strange Fish dead, that had been cast from the Sea on the shore, who had a
Boane in his Head like an Unicorn, which they brought away and presented to
our Prince, when they came home. But now after many things were tried, and
some season spent for searchyng out of Eure* they departed from Iackmans sound
and put into another place, named at that present Bears sound, and landing
there, found good Eure, of which Eure was dug twentye Tun in two days.

Then on a Sunday the General landed upon the mainlande, with a good company
of Soldiers. Which Maine was plainer ground than any of y^ other Islands
named before.

But the night following their landing, there arose such a wind, which brought
in tide and Flood so fast to the same sound where the ships did ride, that
the abundance of Ice did break a Cable of the Gabriell, and put all their
people in a terrible fear and perplexity, in which fear and eminent danger
they wayed the Anchor of the Michell, Master Yorkes ship, and were feign to
cast it on a great Rock of Ice. Which Rock defended them from the rest of
the Ice that might have done them no little displeasure.

And in short space after, the Ice so increased, that they were fain to way an
Anchor al at once, and take the miners aborde, and set sail presently to
Gabriells Island.

And the general findyng another sound (where Golden Eure was too be had)
caused the rest to come unto him that were of his company, and so laded their
ships with the portion that they were able to get and carry.

Now there happened a Calm, in which calm they plied the tide over to
Iackmans sound, and were enforced by a Tide of Flood to put intoo a sound
called Yorkes sound, and when they were entered there, they espied two Tents,
to the which some of our men repaired, and found y^ people fled, yet in the
same Tents were eight Boats (made of Seal skins) left, and possessed by our
men, with other trifles scarce worthy the mention. Notwithstanding, findyug a
Doublet, a Shyrte and a pair of Shues (known too be an Englishemans that was
left there the year before) Master York caused a Letter to be written by
Haull the Master of a Bark, and that letter to be left in the Tent, with
Paper, Pen, and Ynke, thereby to get some intelligence of the man they
presupposed to be alive, and to woork thereafter as occasion should be offerered.

And so leauyng the Tents standing: In them, Belles, glasses and other toys
to embolde^ the barberous people to use some courtesy, our men departed toward
Iackmans sound, without any further offense offered to the Infidels.

Yet took our men vieue by the way, where and how they might enuiron the
enemy about if necessity so compelled them.

And the first day of August, they came into Iackmans sound, and there took
such order, that as many as might be spared, should wait on the General,
for to get such honor or intelligence as the cause required, and every one
of them were bente rather to receive wrong, than offer any piece of injury.
And had good instruction given them by their readers, that all things should
be done by discretion and careful regard of duty.

But the Caniballes had such suspicion of their doornges, that our men's device
was in a manner frustrate. For the Tents were taken away, the enemies were
fled (or in holes among Rocks) and some of them were in Boats where our
men might not easily come unto them.

Whereat our people determinyng to do that they came for, landed.

At whom the Caniballes shot and offered too show some defense, which moved
so mutch the manhood of our countreimen, that they devised how to be
conquerours in such forte, as might sound to their reputation and christian
credit.

Making no delay upon this their resolution: Parted their company the one
half to follow the fliers, and the other half too trace out the fine Foxes
that were creapt intoo holes, which pollecie prevailed so mutche, that their
enemies were amazed, and stood not in suertie of themselves, for they were
followed on all sides, and not only hunted out of holes: but beaten and driven
back in open field. And yet they shot so sore, that they wounded a man of ours
dangerously in the body. Ourmen shot at them again, and they took up those
arrows and most obstinatly shot those arrows at our people without regard of
their own lives, by which folly of theirs, our men ran in upon them, hopyng
to take some of them alive. And they continuyng in this obstinacy (rather than
they would yield) tumbled down from a high Mountain, into the bottom of the
Seas.

So leauyng that place, from thence our men went to a soil they named the
Counties of War wickes Island, where was perceived by the wauing of a white
garment, and other signs that y^ Caniballes made: that they would deliver our
men again, for those people that they had lost. But the people our men had
taken, were kept to gather knowledge of, (and the Caniballes did but dissemble)
and in deed their fury burste out upon their practice. For when they saw
our men would not be trained into their Treasons, they issued out from the
place they lay in, and openly as they durst, and with out regard followed the
Ships, shoutyng and shootyng most outragiously, as long as they had any
power too come near our men. And it was to be judged, that there were of the
ennemies an hundredth or two more, in couerte, then our men had seen before:
which strategeme and fiennesse in the^ did plainly declare, yt they are not so
simple, but can devise more mischief then was looked for, or espied out at the
first. And our men having dispatched their hands of these Infidelles, did
lade their Ships, ended their business, and took in their stouffe, and
tents that was a shore, and giuyng thanks to God, for their so good happ and
fortunate success.

Their General gave commandment, that which of the Barks did first
recover the sight of England, should set into the shore, and there tarry the
counsels pleasure, if it happened them before to be severed by Wind and
Weather any way one from an other. And after this direction and order given,
they hoised up sails, and in very deed by occasion of cruel weather and
tempeste, could not keep compaignie long together. For Master Yorkes Ship
lost sight of the Aid and Gabriell, and was tossed so sore, that the main
Maste was blown ouerboarde, and his Ship diverse times in peril to be
shaken in pieces, besides a dangerous leakyng it had, which could not be
readily remeadied.: Yet as all violent things do endure but a season, so this
rage of storm ceased in continuance of time, and the Ship saffely arrived at
Yarmouthe Haven, where the officers of the Town did show great courtizie to
the sailers, and offered all the gentleness to the Captain that might be
imagined. The Aid and Gabriell in like sort felt their part of affliction
and danger, and at length came gallauntly home to Gods great glory, and the
gladness of good people.

Now is not this their pains worcester thie the pennyng, and does not this voyage
merit to be remembered: be judge thereof your selves into whose hands this
little treatize may happen.

And for that I have forgotten some necessary members, and furtherars of this
journey (whose charges and diligence is great) and other notable and prosperous
voyages, I pray you pardon me, though here I present too your good
commendation their names, and because Master Mighel Lock has always
furthered Master Forboisher, I may not omit his pain and willing exspences,
but bring to remembrannce the merits of so worthy a Merchant.

I call to mind in like manner how a Knight called sir Hew Willowbie, moved to
seek Cattaie, and bring home some news thereof, perished in the enterprise,
but though he be dead, his fame may be revived, and freashely live in our
memories.

There were of his company that found out (...) at that present time, which
men ought not altogether to be forgotten. I knew my self two notable men
of them, the one called Chancelar, and the other Borrowes, which Chancelar
especially was the odd man of his time, for matters touching the Sea.

Master Hawkins and Master Ienkinson, for many great trauailles, are here to
be honored with the rest, that have gone forward in any famous adventures.

These men and many more of excellent wits and practizes, were known and
tried in the reign of that noble young Prince King Edward the sixte, and were
furnished with goodly ships, at which time was considered, that great
vessels liyng idle at Gillyngham, spente and consumed much in keepyng and
repairing, and in the end but rotted away, without any profit or pleasure
springing from them, and that in sailyng abroad, might bring home commodities
innumerable.

And increase Mariners too the great glory and safety of our country: and
as I have understood and learned, the third part of the world is uninhabited,
and one Columbo an Italian, in King Henry the seuenths time, was set a work
by the King of Aragon and Queen Isabella, which Columbo made a discovery of
the Indians, by a voyage he took in hand, of which discovery sense that
season, is grown such an infinite treasure, as is incredible to be spoken of.
And this is to be proved, that there are nombers of places in the Indians not
yet possessed, nor never were in the hands of Christen people, neither yet can
not be offensive too the Spaniardes, if English men enjoy them: For in
conscience and right they were better to have our company, then neither we
nor they enjoy the mighty Mass of wealth, that these Indians would yield us.

The earth was made for y^ children of men, and neither the Spaniard, nor the
French, has a prerogative too dwell alone, as though God appointed them a
greater portion then other Nations.

In deed he that lies idlelie at home, and hopes that GOD will cast
kingdoms in his lap, may as well catch at the Clouds in the air, as come
by any commodity of the Earth. But to those that travails abroad, a double or
treble part is a lotted, as a man might say, that Destiny makes her dole,
and gives an almose to them that reaches out their hands for it: But too
such as thinks scorn too come, when the dole is a dealyng, she neither
castes a bare chipping of bread, nor flings any thankful chance of good
Fortune.

I trust we are not afearde to offend those, that with that gold seeks
means to conquer the whole world, and encomber by cruelty and pride ali the
kingdoms of the earth.

Why may not we as well by policy and Sword (if it come too that point)
posses a piece of those places, that falls by enheritance too none but such
as are able to get them and have power to defend them.

As our Proverb is, Win Gold, and wear Gold. So the necessity of
millions of men biddes them seek abroad for some benefit, or lie at home in
exstreme ruin and beggerie.

For want of good exercies to maintain a multitude that daily increase, the
fine and stout stomachs stoupeth to steal, and the cunnyng and crafty
wits compasses by falshead to come by true men's Goods, so that here at home
is no other occupation commonly used: But a new kind of art how to deceive
one another.

And surely it is no marvel, for if people be not employed to win their
food, and that neither Plague nor Wars do deminish the multitude. I fear
in a while we shall have neither meat for our mouths nor houses for our
heads.

I wonder why there is more men hanged in England in the space of one year,
then in five regions our neighbors in the space of ten years put to execution.

Belike if those busy Bodies and stout corrages were occupied about honest
causes, they would be rather able to give bread to the needy, then ready too
spoil and cut the throats of the welthy and rich.

You know, and all the world may see, that we had never bigger nor better
Ships, nor more abundance of them, which Uessailes were they abroad, the
sight and shot of them would make our enemies afraid and tremble. And those
ships sparkled several ways about some noble discovery, if our foes in the
mean while offered injury to our countey:

O what a discourage should the enemy have, when at their backs they should
find our ships under saill, armed and appointed too give them a charge and a
foyll. By the report of such as be wise and worshipful, if our goodly
ships were employed, where lawfully we may go and use good traficke. Their
yearly commodity would five times surmount the reuennue of the Crown. Further
I am sure of, if we took a custom too be abroad, both the Turks Galleys and
al other christen princes powers on the Seas, would give them free passage, or
stand in awe of our Princes Navy. Than judge what is lost by this our slacknes
and sloth, and consider what gain and glorious victory may be won with a
little trauaill and exercise, (the Mother and Nurse of life and good laws) a
thing most liked in a common weal, and followed and embraced of every good
mind. But I doubt whether Alexander the great was more to be praised in his
conquestes (for that he beegan with a kingdom) than such as with little
maintenance attaines by exercise of wit and body to any noble territory.

For Alexanders fame by Philip his Father was spread so far, that the
Macedonians name was a terror too their enemies, and Alexanders Purse and
power (with the greatesse of his heart) was in a manner such ready Proppes to
hold him up, that he could not fall but by the rebuke of Fortune or want of
worldly policy.

But such as from small ability or suckor, do rise too great wealth or
gouernmente (having neither King nor Kingdoms too comfort them) are of great
heart and corrage, neither inferior to Hercules, nor in their minds behind no
jot the mighty Alexander for worthy renoume.

For as by our common opinion they can not sincke that are held up by the Chin,
so is it hard too swim in a strong Flood (or be any way aflote) where is
great weakness of body and little strength to withstand the stream.

I can do no more with my pen but praise and commend all Noble and manly
exercises, in which exercise I put these parties before rehearsed, and all
other that may and do by their pains and discoueries help their Country too
commodity. And will spare neither charges, study nor travel in preferryng of
Gods honor and wealth of the Prince they were borne under. And albeit that this
journey is a special thing to be spoken of, yet in reading Belle Forest in the
second Tome and other Authors, I find that Gabotha was the first in King
Henry the seuenths days, that discovered this frosen land or Seas, from
sixty seven toward the North, and from thence toward the South along the
cost of America, to thirty six degrees and a half, as it is affirmed in the
sixth book of the Decade.

This being done (at that season) for the discovery of Cattaye, avouched by
the Spanishe Decades and other books and Authors of as great credit.

But this Gabothaes labor robs no piece of praise from master Forboyshers,
for Gabotha made but a simple rehearsal of such a soil.

And Master Forboysher makes a perfaite proof of the Mines and profit of the
country. By which action he encorageth sondrie good subjects to search out
the secrets of natural causes and hidden Treasures, kept for want of
exercise in Navigations from our knowledge and use.

And as I might properly say he has broken the Ice, explained the passage and
opened the Port of present commodity and gain.

Thus trusting you that read this work, will take in worth my good will and
pains (who has written in the praise of virtue, no more then is needful to
be touched for the avoiding of vice.) I remain at their deuocions that love
good study, and hate idleness and sloth, promising with this my poor and little
present, a greater book to follow of my Chips, which shall as I hope content
the Readers better then my first volume did.

And so wishing that those which envy well doing, may do well them selves
(to Gods glory, and honor of our Country) I troble you no further with the
readyng of my fruitless labors.

FINIS.
The tenth of May. 1578.
The partyng of friends.
With shaking hands and heavy heart, true friends their leave do take,
And one the other wishes well, and some for frendships sake,
Shed tears good store, and sadly sighs when they fro friends depart.
(...) sign of love, a solemn sho^, a prose of friendly heart,)
Who bydes at home, does way abroad, what perils men do pass.
And knows the course of mortal life, is like a running Glass
That never rests, but still holds on, his hours as clock and chyme,
Whose min^s^rels us pilgrims all, we waste and wear with time*
And such a^ way in Balance well the woe that trau'lars find,
Bids friends farewell as often as cause, can call the man to mind.
Yea when some sit at Bankets sweet, and taste on dainty fare,
They think^ on every hongry meall, they feel that seeds on care.
Than with they part of each good dishe, amids the hands of those,
That in strange lands, full far from home: for countries profit goes.
The wife that wa^ts the husbands vieue: bursts out in blubbring still,
The children find a sudden change: of Fathers warm good will.
The neighbors s^en can miss their friend: and all the Parish throw,
At Church or market in some sort: will talk of (...) now.
But those that bear vnfaied love: are never well at eas,
Until they hear how he has sped: that wanders Land and Seas.
And where two minds are knit in one* and bodies sondred be,
The lamp of love with lively Oyll still feeds the blase you see.
^o God and all good luck they say: be with my fellow than,
But if that none of these good signs: be freely found* in man.
And that they part with poulti^g looks: that lours like clouds in air,
(which with black storms has clean orecast: the pleasant weather
Be sure that scorn and deep disdam: in hateful breast is hid (fair.)
And weery world or wyly wit, would of a mate be rid.
Then churlish chat, and crabbed spech: like thonder bolt it flies
Strikes down good men, tears up renoume: and ratleth throw the skies)
A monster to good nature sure: a worm to kernel sweet,
A canker that does fret hard steell: a mayme to upright spreet.
O loathsome birds that hatcheth hate: O Snakish Serpents brood,
To wicked humors giving place: and has no noble mood.
To bid adue to wandering wights: that bids farewell God wot,
To all the earth, and seeks in Seas, Sometimes a luckles lot.
Well friends for that my heart is free, to wish and think you well,
My tongue is Trumpet of your fame: my pen like Larum bell,
Shall sound your prais and salve the sores, that sle Malbouche shall make
A clapping mill that grinds had grain, and does good ^orne forsake
Farewell deer friends from deepth of breast: could seas and I agree
In such old gyes of shaking hands, you should not part from ^ee
I stay to put their works in Print: whose merits claym reward.
And forto make my fortune mend, would have my friends pre^ard.
FINIS.
quod Tho. Churchyard. Gent.


