A Lamentable, and pitiful Description, of the woeful wars in Flaunders,
since the four last years of the Emperor Charles the fifth his reign.

With a brief rehearsal of many things done since that season, until this
present year, and death of Don John.

Written by Thomas Churchyard Gentleman.

Imprinted at London by Ralph Nevvberie. Anno. 1578.

To the Right Honorable, Sir Frauncis Walsingham Knight, Principal Secretary
to the Queens Majesty, and one of her Highness most Honorable privy
Couns^ile, THO. CHVRCHYARD wishes continuance of noble gifts, and increase of
virtues.
SOme men (right Honorable) search many soyles, and travel very far, to
find out a precious Jewel or rare devise, to present unto their friend when
they come home. And gayning by their gift and honest intent a thankful
benefit and special good turn, makes of their labors a pleasure and
commodity. But I, that often have bin abroad for the like purpose, and here
at home have sought the bottom of my study, and sifted out the best fruit,
that either devise of head, or pains with my pen could yield, can not find
any thing worthy acceptance, where I made promise, and purposed long ago, to
offer a present. And the longer I have tarried (and looked about me) the worse
I am furnished for the answering of my hope, and the less able I feel my
judgment, to perform that I purpose: like a man that would feign travel a
great journey, having a weak body, and a lusty mind. And before he commes
half way to the end of his pilgrimage: his legs wax lame, and he calls
for his crutche, and yet when there is no remedy, must either of force hoppe
homewarde again, or hale forward as fast as he may, to come to the knitting up
of his attempted labor. But though with like weakness my body is discouraged
(when the mind glories too much in his own strength,) yet another thing
comforts me, which may be a great help to my small ability, and a special cause
to find thereby some singular favor. Sir, the troth is, I hear that others
have sped well, and were well liked, for presenting to your honorable
discretion, the judgment of their Books: and creeping under the buckler and
sheld of such courtesy, though not with such matter as is meet for your
wisdom, I humbly present you with a brief discourse that I have drawn out,
touching the troubles and affliction of Fla^ders, not gathered out of other
men's gardens (the more my oversight) as the Be sucketh forth honey from
several sweet flowers, but collected and taken from the compass of mine own
knowledge and experience of our time, in the view of mine eye, and reach of my
reason. Yet had I beautified my Book, with the deep judgments of my betters,
and filled the empty places and se^te^ces void of learning, with some borrowed
terms and fine tra^slatio^s, as wisely and lernedlie some have done, my
ignorance and boldness herein so soon had not bin espied, and I might have
found more pill^rs and proppes to have sustained up from falling a long season,
my weak and f^eble workmanship, and tottering building: but wanting that
provision and foresight, and bringing from the Printer my Book, I make my
self and my credit subject to the worlds report, and must desire your
honorable countenance, to the furthering of my good name, and liking of my
work. And for that of late you were Ambassador in Flaunders, and have bin
long acquainted with the causes of that Country, I have dedicated my pains
herein to your hands and protection, minding, if this be well accepted (as I
doubt not but it shall be) to set forth another work, called, the calamity of
France, the bloody broils of Germany, the persecution of Spain, the
misfortune of Portingall, the troubles of Scotland, the misery of Irelande,
and the blessed state of England, as knows the Lord of all Kingdoms, who
accomplish and fulfill the good course your noble mind has held, and make your
desired hope to be as happy as your well won fame does deserve honor.

At your honorable commandment, Thomas Churchyard.

Flaunders bewayles with bitter sorrow, the soar affliction of her state and
Country.
THe wife, that has her husband lost, alone may sit and vvaile,
Whose tears fast trickle down her cheeks as thick as shovvres of hayle.
The friend that far is from his feere, and wants a faithful mate,
By vievve of foe, and fraud of world, lamentes his loss to late.
The labring man, that sees his land lie waste for want of plovve,
And can not well supply his lack, is fraught with sorrow throvv.
The sad and heavy minded vvight, (of joy that takes no hold,)
As mirth forsakes the stricken breast, has heart full dead and cold.
The Merchaunt whom the Pyrate spoils, and in vvide world is laft,
May blame the vviles of wicked heads, and curse their cunning craft.
The Captain which no soldiers has, who lost his force by fight,
Does fold his arms, and vvrings his hands, and sorrovves day and night.
But none of those compares with me, that left am as you know,
In friendlesse sort, with many babes, like widow full of vvoe:
That each man wrongs and fevve do help, and in mine aged days,
Am made a pray to people strange, that plagues me many vvayes.
I flourisht once in pomp and pride, beyond my neighbors all,
But where apace came in the tide, now flood begins to fall:
And at low water mark I stand, that erst have floated still,
My haven mouth is chokt with sand, my loades men lack the skill,
To pass the strayghtes, and safely bring, my barcke to quiet port.
Now waste and empty lie the towns wherein was greatre sort.
And where my Merchaunts traffic kept, now men of war do flock,
And where the gates vvide open stood, with bars and double lock
Now are they shut and rammed fast, and bulvvarkes still we make,
And ore the wales the Cannon rores, vvhereat our houses shake.
Our hearts in breast do tremble too, when we behold this change,
O ruinous land, oh soil forlorn, oh doleful destnie strange,
That throvves a vvelthie country down, and makes strangers reign
On harmless folk, and silly souls, and simple people plain.
My fall (alas) I see at hand, and where was most my joy,
The town where al my triumph was, shall be a second Troy.
Oh Antwerp, vvepe thy fatal change, thy filth has wrought thy foil,
Thou vvast the pirate of the world, that did all nations spoil.
And now I fear for thy foul factes, the world shall ring on thee,
For by my scourge and common plague, thy drearie date I see.
Yea many stately towns beside, well vvallde and peopled both,
Through wrath of God, and rage of war, to vvracke and mischief goth.
I was puffed up with Princely power, and vvorthie vvariours stout,
Who stood like friends, with push of pike, to keep proud enmies out.
And vvhiles in deed we drew one yoke, great things poor Flaunders did,
Whose former fame, and bright renovvme, in darkness now lies hid.
Because my pillars shrink in hoales, my nobles sevred are,
And for to please a foreign foe, casts off their country care.
We never fearde our fall, til now, the Faggots band is broke,
And sticks flee out, yea all the house is full of flame and smoke.
And in this heat and smother foul, the enmy spies his time,
And ^inely lays to catch the birds, the subtle snares and lime.
O vvilfull waste and blindness great, that will not see the sore,
Where bile begins to beale and burst, and breeds a canckred core.
O running vvittes, that roues and shootes, at marks past reasons reatch,
O froward flock, and scholars rude, that no scholeman may teach.
O vvretched members of my state, that tears in sunder all,
And seeks to give a cunning trippe, to soote that would not fall.
O carreine Crovves, that follovv flesh, and flee the fruit of spreete,
O tipsie brains, and senseless heads, that knovves not sovvre from svveete.
My glory had not so declinde, had you your duty done,
You have no stay, your steps do slide, your feet a gadding run.
Full many years, as cause you had, to Englands aid you stood,
And alvvaies leaned to that land, that most might do you good:
And now to strangers, frame your selves. your flytting may prove well,
But with the cold conceit of this, in care does Flaunders dvvell.
My care is less, though shame be much, for your offense and foil,
I bear the blame, and yours the fault, and I the only soil,
That some shootes at, and plays upon, what play, oh Lord, he knovves.
Some come as they were lookers on, but some have longer vvoes,
That reaches to the highest clouds, your quaffing sees not that,
You swallow up a Cammel great, and snatche a little gnatte.
I list no further speak of faults, nor teach you to agree,
But how so ere the matter goes, I vvarne you look to me.
O staggring state that reeleth still, yet look unto thy strength,
Or else my power and name shall slide, and thou shall fall at length,
And make a crack, as though in deed, ten thousand trees fell down,
O members mine, that me forgets, yet look to Antvverpe town,
That long has lasted to my fame, and stood with greatest peers,
With svvorde and shot in open plain, this many hundredth years.
But all in vain that tale is told. What should I further speak,
When might decays, and force of man, by finesse waxes vveake.
My members must give place to time, and I therevvith decay,
As frost and Snow, and cakes of Ise, do melt on Summers day.
The heat of my good hap is gone, the prime of pomp is past,
And as the warmth forsakes the world, the cold comes on as fast.
The Spring but threatens fall of leaf, all bravrie beggrie brings,
He vvepes in want, that first in wealth, and top of triumph sings.
Yet vvellavvay, and still vvo vvorrh, the causers of my cry,
Who rocks my people fast asleep, with many a farced lie.
And fables forced for the nonce, oh pause I go too far,
My sloth, or sin, or foul carovvse, is cause of all this war:
That bybbing up deep bovvles of wine, went drousie home to bed.
And savv not what shrevvde matters lu^kt, in sober suttel head.
Well, since my fault, as people say, is partly cause of this,
I must require the wondering world, to take it as it is:
And by the same, a mirror make, that they in one agree,
And seek throvv love and good accord, to shun the plagues of me,
Who now laments, and cries alas, too late as wisdom shoes,
And am compeld in hard extremes, to yield to mortal foes.
FINIS.
Of the Wars and troubles in Flaunders, during the reign of the Emperor
Charles the fifth, and since those days a rehearsal of sundry things, till
the late death of Don John de Austria.
IN the reign of y^ mighty Emperor Charles y^ fi^th, whose victories and
conquests are registered in Chronicle, Flaunders did flourishe with Souldioures,
abound in wealth, prospered in w^r, and wanted neither wise men to make peace
at their advantage, nor good Gouernoures, to maynteyne their public stare and
common commodity: and yet their Country stood never free from troubles, nor
their Towns, Fortes, and fo^tifications could any long while in quietness
remain, the occasion whereof may proceed, either of the ambition of this
greedy world, or the plagues prepared of God and poured on the people, whose
wealth and pride was so great, that they were wart so wanton with abundaunce of
treasure, that sometimes they fell to open rebellion, treason, and insolency,
and sometime to such disorder of life, as was not to be suffered. For the which
cause, the Emperor made in Gaunt a great Castle, and kept such a garrison in
the same, as might fear the offenders, and animate good subjects in well
doing. So the whole Country of Flaunders, Braban^, Seland, Holland, Artoys,
Henalt, Namure (and other members thereof whatsoever) were governed by a
Regente, called the Queen of Hungary, sister to the Emperor, in which
season fell out many matters, but especially such wars as I mean to make
mention of, and ought not to be forgotten in this short rehearsal of the
affairs of Flaunders.

Now to touch briefly the broils and business of those days, it is to be
presupposed, that France had a claim to some parts of the Country of
Flaunders, for which claim or greedy desire of dominion, a most cruel and
pitiful war burst out between the Emperor, and the French King. And
continuing long in diverse exploytes and exercises of arms, the King of Na^arre
with an army entered the low Country (near unto Saint Homers) burning and
spoiling what he thought convenient, or had by sword conquered.

Monsieur Grand Maeter, called Count Dernes, did leauie another power of
Burgonyons, Flemmings, and Englishmen, and so marched, to withstand the fury
of the French, and encamped himself near unto the King of Navarre, called
Duke de Vandoem, where was oftentimes hot skirmishes, and good leaping of
dikes, the service was so well plied on both the parties. At which service,
were sundry English bands, and many Gentlemen of England, as Sir Anthony
Storley, Captain Matson, Francis Hor^ey, Sir William Drurie, Captain
Mitchell, Captain Plonket, Captain Hind, my self, and a great number of
others, whose names I have forgotten.

This business being done, and the Frenchmen retired, Monsieure Grand Maeter
beseeged Hedding, and battered the Castle, where Duke Orace was slain, and
many other noble men of France, and at length, the Castle and Town was
assaulted, and Captain Matsons Auntiente was the first that entered the Town
( William Hind bearing it) and gave the first sign of victory: after which
Conquest, with the pause of three days aduisemente, the Castle of Hedding was
yielded to Monsieur Dernes, and the French Souldyoures marched away with bag
and baggage, to the great glory of the Burgonyons, and discontentmente of the
French.

The Emperor not long after, with a puissante power, and a mighty army,
beseeged Meatz in Lorraine, in which Town was a great number of the flower
of France placed, as Duke D'Aumail, Duke De Namures, and the Vidaem de
Chartoys, a lusty and noble Gentleman, with which Vidaem was the Lord
Charles Howarde of Effingham that now is. And the French so worthily behaved
themselves in that Town, (by sallies, and issuing out upon the Emperoures
Camp) that the Emperor was feign to raise his seege, with the loss of
twentye thousand men by Sword and Pestilence, and so departed, and missed
the thing he looked for*

From Artoys the mean while, Monsieur Grande Maeter, with a great power,
went along the water of Some, and spoiled two Towns of good strength, the one
called Noyon, and the other Roye, with a number of other Uillages. And in the
same journey, before Pyroen, was Sir William Drurie shot through the bridle
hand by a Frenchma^, y^ offered to break a Lance upon him, who threw down
his staff when he should have put it in the rest, and so discharged his
Dagge at Sir William Drurie, which was accounted the part of a Cowarde.

At the same instant, or very soon after, the Frenchmen beseeged Hedding
again, where Monsieur Byron was, as General. His Father Mon. Grand Maeter
came to raise y^ seege with a sufficient power, but came too late, for the
French had won it the same night that we lay in Camp, within two leagues
of Hedding, and Monsieur Byron coming away with bag and baggage, sent us
word of his misfortune, which news so took away the courages of our people
(I mean Burgonyons, and such as were in our Camp) that we marched without
sound of Drum or Trumpet that night, to Saint Poule, a neutre Town on the
frontiers, and the season was then so terrible cold, that all the way we had
but Snow and sleete in our faces, with such a wind and blustering storm,
as many dyed by the way, and many fell sick of their suddayne and sore travel.

Here I must a little tell you of the strange manner of both our Camps at all
times and extremities, which in deed was of the world to be wondered at: for
the French would sometimes make have to follow us, but when they came near,
then would they retire, with as great expedition, as they made have before:
and in like sort, we followed them upon the like advantage. But when our
Camp came in the smell of their Poulder, away we trudged as fast (God
knows,) without any great occasion. And in this trade and manner the whole
forces of both the sides continued a marvelous time, and yet assuredlye on
both parts were many stout and valiante Captains, and men of such fame,
as to these days there are but a few left alive of their worthynesse.

About this time Rentie was besieged, where many noble things were done, so
valiantly, and with such courage and conduct, as merits great praise: but in
fine, the French were feign to withdraw themselves, and the Burgonians
succored the Fort with no little loss or hazard.

The great City and Town of Arras had like to have bin betrayed, but the
treason was espied, and the practice prevented, to some loss of the French
side.

Monsieur Dernes dyed, and in his place came Monsieur Benningcourt, who, being
Graund Master, prepared to besiege Dorlean, and lay near it with a huge
power, the French by a great policy, laid an ambushe of horsemen and footmen
in a place convenient, and the Burgonions casting no doubt, went about some
enterprise, and fell in the lapse of the French, where was a marvelous great
fight and sharp encounter, horsemen to horsemen, at the least five thousand
on a side, and the Burgonians at the first wan a gyddon or two from the French,
and took many prisoners. But in the end, the broile began to be so hot, that
the Prince of P^anoys was smored to death in his armoure, and the Duke of
Ascot was taken prisoner, and the Burgonions were forced to make the best shift
for themselves that they could, at which service and other exploites before,
was Sir William Drurie, and most of the Gentlemen and souldioures of England
before named.

Hedding was again besieged by the Burgonions, and won from the French, and
rased to the very ground, to the utter disgrace of the French, and great
glory of the other side.

The Emperor his own person, and his sister the Regent, came with a
wonderful great army to Cambris, and abode the French Kings coming, for a
battle. The French King came, and presented the battle, with such a multitude
of brave Souldyers, horsemen and footmen, as seldom I ever saw before, and
in deed they marched full in the face and view of the Emperors camp, which
was so entrenched, that the French could not have any advantage, and so,
after the great ordinance had gone off a long season, the French in a most
noble and brave order retired.

A strong and goodly Town called Turwaine, was besieged by the Burgonions,
battered and assaulted, at which assault we lost many men. But the Spaniardes
were even with the town after: For at a parlee, the Spaniarde, suddenly
entered the town, and so a great murder of all sorts of people was made, in
somuche, that I saw sundry wounded and sick Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, leap
down from the top of the walls, but that prevailed not, for the murder
continued, and the town was clean spoiled, thrown down, and rased in most
cruel dispite.

There was many other services in Flaunders, the which I saw not at that
season, wherefore I do commit the report thereof to those that are better
experimented with the causes, and have a mind to set them out at large. For my
only meaning was, but briefly to make a rehearsal of such things as I knew
to be true, and may not wearye a willing Reader.

Now after a number of broils and warlike affairs were ended, the Emperor
and the Queen of Hungary took shypping, and went into Spain, and ended
their lives in a Monastery, and in Flaunders was placed, King Phillip, in
whose time was many great acts done, and sundry battles worthily gotten.

The greatest of those victories was at Saint Quintines, which town King
Philip besieged. To the rescue of the same town, the French King sent the
chiefest of al his nobility with a puissaunt power, but the King of Spain his
hap was to encounter them, and overthrow them: and making a great slaughter,
took the high Conestable of France, and many other honorable and mighty
personages prisoners. The town of Saint Quintines notwithstanding, stood to
the mercy of the sword, and would not yield in any respect. Whereupon a
General assault was roundly given, in going to the which assault, the Lord
Henry Dudley was slain, a lusty and toward Gentleman, but in ^ine, with much
ado, and very great service and slaughter, Saint Quintines was won and
spoiled, and an English Gentleman (now sir Nicholas Malby) of good valor and
courage, wanne Saint Quintines head, which was held as a great and holy
Relic among the Frenchmen.

At this siege was the Earl of Penbrooke sent from Queen Mary, as General over
five thousand Englishemen, and in that company, the Lord Gray of Wilton, the
Earl of Leycester, called then Lord Robert Dudley, and the Lord Henry his
brother, Lord Bray, Lord Delawaer, Sir William Courtney, Sir John Pollard,
and a great number of nobility, and worthy Gentlemen, which being mustred and
put in order of battle on Saint Peter's green by Callice, made as gallant a
show as was seen in those parts a long season before.

King Phillippe being happy in wars, and having always, or the most part,
victory (and advantage over the French) made what stir or business he
pleased, during the time of his abode in Flaunders, and departing to Spain,
left the Duchess of Parma as Regent. But about that season, or anon after,
the French King sent Monsieur de Terms, who was General of Callice (when
England had lost it) with ten thousand Souldioures, to destroy a great
piece of the low country, and they prospered a while, and burnte Donkirke,
and Berges, and sundry other Towns and Uillages. But the Count De Egmond,
with a noble band of Burgonions, gave a charge upon Monsieur de Terms before
Grauelin, and ouerthrewe his whole army, leaving but a few horsemenne to
run away and make report of the conflicte. Our ships on the Sea (as some
say) did further much this victory.

Thus all this while did Flaunders most manfullye an^ stoutlye strive with the
Frenchmen, and got commonly^ twice so much as they lost, either by martial
feats in field, or policy at home in peace. And surely Flaunders had the
name to have as great soldiers, and as wise Counselloures, as any one part
of Christendom. Let their acts in our days be a testimony to try their
valor and worthiness, and for my part I go no further in their fame and
glory, than al their neighbors can bear witness of, and has bin seen in
the compass of thirty years, of which time I have had some trial among
them of their wars and experiences in martial causes. But what can man's force
or policy do, when God withdrawes his goodness from the people^ Did not
Rome flourish many years, and conquered in a manner the greater part of the
world? Did not Carthage, Thebes, Athens, Florence, Genewa, Venice, Naples, and
a number of other Kingdoms and Seigniories, abound in wealth and glory? and
now at these days are but a few of them left able to compare with this little
Island. And to speak of Flaunders, though I knew the day when it might have
compared with the greatest state that I have named, the greater is the fall
thereof at this present, and the more it is to be lamented, not only because
it was our ancient neighbor and friend, but for that it was a famous and
rich country, which I leave to Gods ordinance and appointmente, purpos^ng to
follow the matter I have taken in hand.

The Duchess of Parma remaining Regent, had much ado to quiet things in her
time, for the state began to be divided, and a quarrel between the Cardinal
Granduiell, and Monsieur Degmond (who gave the Cardinal a blow) increased such
dissension, as could not be a long w^ile be pacified: and then the Prince of
Orange, Count de Horn, Count de He^traed, and others of the greatest
calling, advanced Religion, and brought such matters in question, as bredde
great business and bloodshed.

The first of this ruffling and stir began at Antwerpe, where they threw
down Images, and made a great vproare among the common people, so that they
fell to sides and factions, and thereby a grudge of ranckor took root in
their hearts, in such sort, that the one side sought the others overthrow
and utter subversion.

At this time, a great City called Valentian, taking hold and sauoure of
Religion, revolted from the Regent, which town was besieged a long season by
the Regents power, and by practice and policy surprised, taken, and cruelly
handled.

But in the mean season, there was one called Monsieur Tolouse, that assembled
a company of souldioures, to the number of two thousand, and fortified a place
near Antwerpe, called Auste^uiel, in mind to exercise Religion there, and to
draw as many unto them, as were favorers of that enterprise.

The Regent hearing thereof, with all expedition sent Monsieur Beauoys, with a
sufficient hand, both of horsemen and footmen, which set upon Monsieur Tolouse
his company (when they were not well provided to withstand such a chardge)
and ouerthrewe the whole assembly, putting to the sword as many as they could
lay hand upon, with as great terror and cruelty, as could any way be
imagined.

The common people of Antwerpe standing on their walls, and beholding this
murder and massacre, began to murmr at the matter, and so burst out in open
words of malice, and swore to revenge the bloodshed they beheld of their
brethren and countrymen. Whereupon a common cry was sodain^ly raised throughout
the streets, of Viue le geuxe, and all the people arming themselves in every
part of the City, came running to the Mear Broeg, a wide and large street,
adjoining to the Borse, and when they had assembled together to the number of
ten thousand shot, and armed men, they determined to march out of the
town, and meet Monsieur Beauoys, as he returned from Austreuiel. But in the
market place was assembled twelve Auntients of the Regents side, who had the
keys of the gates, and so kept the people from their purpose a little season.

But the multitude was so great, and the people swarmed so thick in every
place, that the Regentes power in the Market place were ^aine to draw the
Cannons from the walls, and gather their friends together from all parts of
the City, and having a great power, all in one place, they chardged all their
Cannons and great pieces with hail shot, and did fortifye themselves in
the Market place very stronglye.

The night before, one Captain Bright, and Captain Marya an Italian, had
broken all the bridges and passages, that the people of the City should have
gone over, or have had any passage at, which was done upon some suspicion
they had conceived of a reuolte.

The people being with this and other occasions made angry, and brought in a
rage, began furiouslye to go about the walls, and kept together by
thousands and multitudes, the number whereof could not easilye be known: but
they were judged in all to be five and twentye thousand able men, and yet
among them had they no special Captain, no^ any that would take upon him
to show what was necessary to be done, in this their extreme hazard and
danger.

The Prince of Orange, the Count de Horn, the Count de Host^ Monsieur
Decaerdes, and all the nobility being afraid to offend the King with an open
reuolte, did persuade the Regents power, to make peace with the people, and
about that persuasion they spente three long hours. But the Regents power
being experimented Soldiers, would lose no occasion to conquer their
enemies. And on that point they stood so sti^elye, that they determined
presentlye to give the commoners a battle, and try out the matter by sword,
and not by sweet persuas^ons. And to perform the same, they set all in
order, and were ready to march into the City, and meet with the people, as
by fortune they might any way encounter them.

The Prince, and the Nobility much grieved with this bloudye resolution,
repaired toward the people, and told them all the matter, and willed them to
go to their own houses, and he would see, that all things should be well
ended.

The people liked no whit that council, and gave the Prince evil words, and a
great number of them burst into my lodging. And because the Prince had made
of me before, (and that they knew I had served in the Emperoures days,)
they called me forth, and said I should be their leader, which thing I
refused as far as I durst, alleging, I was ignorant of such affairs:
whereupon, they bent their pikes on me in a great fury. I beholding the
extreamitie I was in, gave them my faith, and so came into the street among
the rest of their company, where I was so received, as few would have
believed the manner thereof, but such as had seen it. Witness Sir Thomas
Gressam.

Then knowing the danger we were in, and finding no way so good for our
expectation, as speedily to prevent the harms the ennimies might do us, I
drew the whole power into a strong piece of ground, called Noua Vielle,
dug and defenced of it self, and took out of the company an eight
thousand souldioures well appointed, and marched to one of the Gates. And
beatyng down a little posterne with bars of iron, we sallied out into the
fields, to encounter Monsieur Beauoys, giving change to a thousand shot, to
keep the posterne, till we returned in again, which duly did their endeavor,
as well for their own lives, as our safety. But wanting horsemen to discover
the enemy, and having no fit ground to avoid the charge of the enemies
horsemen, which came lustily on a great gallop to hold us in play till their
footmen had overtaken them, we softely and orderly retired, leaving in the
face of the enemy a sufficient company of shot, that galled their horses,
and held the^ at a stay, til we had recovered the town again, which done, we
shut up the posterne, and left men to guarde it, and so came to our power,
that had in this season furnished themselves with weapon, powder, shot,
armor, and all things necessary for a battle.

At our coming in, the prince of Orange came to me, and gave me thanks, for
saving the lives of so many men that had bin abroad, which Monsieur Beauoys
was like enough to overthrow, because he had a great band of horsemen in his
camp.

The Regentes power in the market place hearing, that our men would fight,
and had prepared things for that purpose, and seeing our company increase
continuallye, stood in a doubt and durst not issue out of the market place,
which was well fortified and guarded round about with great chains and
great pieces rammed full of hail shot, and other mischief meet for a
murder.

Now I asked of my company, if they would fight, and desired such as would be
in their houses to depart, whereat they flang up a thousand Cappes, and cried,
arm, arm, Battallia, Battallia, viue le geuxe. I hearing this cry, and
noting their courage, as well as I could, set them in order, and took with all
possible speed the high way toward the Market place, willing all those that
would save their houses from spoiling, to aid us with Munition, and such
things as we wanted. And as soon as we came to C^pper str^et, we sent four
thousand shot to enter (on a warning given) on the backs of our enemies,
which they were ready to do when we joined in battle.

The day was fair, and the people left in their houses, rejoiced so at our
coming by them, and made such a shoute and cry, that we had good hope of
victory: and to atteyne the same, we marched a great pace, cr^ing all the way
Viue le geuxe, in so much, that the very noise of this cry came to the
hearing of the enemy, and neither Drum nor Trumpet could be heard of any
side, the cry that we made was so great, (the like of which noise since I
was borne I never heard.) And as we approached almost to the mouth of the
Cannon, and view of the enemy, the Prince of Orange, and all the Nobility (to
save blood, and the lives of thousands) came between both the armies, and
desired us to retire, declaring, the enemy was stronger (by mean of their
good Souldioures and artillery) than we: and as he said, it was impossible
for us to enter upon them. At which words, our people fell in so great a rage,
that they cried, kill the Prince, and surely, had not some saved him (I name
them not) he had bin slain. But both the Prince, and a number of the noble
men, being frighted with the furious folly of the people, retired so hastily
forward, that their Horses fell down: and the Prince being conuayde safely
into another Street, we took the advantage of time. And making a show, as
though we had overthrown these noble men, we marched immediately upon the
enemy, crying s^ill Viu^ le geuxe, and they beholding our boldness, and
perceiving the sho^te that should have entered on the back side of them,
without gyuing fire to any piece, cried in like sort Viue le geuxe, and
yielded themselves, without any stroke stricken, unto us, in most humblest
sort and manner, simply and plainly. A thing to be wondered at, and could
not be brought to pass but only by Gods ordinance.

Now having this peaceable victory, we sought all possible means to rest
in surety, and come by that we desired, which was (as the people confessed)
the liberty of the Gospel. And for our most advantage, we took with us
diverse of the enemies chiefetaynes, and four and twenty Cannons and great
pieces, which they had all ready charged, and marching from the enemy, we
came to the Mear Br^eg, and there encamped, chayning and choking the corners of
every street with Carts, big timber, Barrels, and other necessaries, to
hold out the enemy, and to debate the matter at the push of the Pyke, if
need required. And finishing these fortifications, we thrust every window
full of shot that might serve for the ^lancking of the streets, (and
command the rest of y^ houses in the compass of our shot) that nothing
might be a let or hind^rance to our desired hope.

By this time, the Prince had the keys of the Town, and no man could either
enter, or go out, without the license of the people encamped in the Mear Broeg,
for we kept the watch and ward, and had the only rule of all Antwerp, without
any empeachment or contradiction.

And about midnighte after this victory, diverse of the Souldioures in great
companyes came unto me, and desired to go and spoil the Catholics houses. I
told them, that it was more meet to watch and be in readiness for the
enemy, for the Prince had told me, how they prepared to assault our Camp
the same present night, which policy kept our people in quiet: and
further, I knew, if we had spoiled one house, we should have ransackt the
whole Town, and when I had gotten any treasure, I being a stranger,
should have had my throat cut for my goods. But in very earnest, I made the
Prince privy to all those things I did, or intended to do, which kept the
best of the company in fear to offend, and made the worst reform themselves,
before they committed any violente act, or fell into open disorder and folly.

The second day, the enemies began new practices, and the Margraue and
Burgo masters went busily about some mischief toward us, and devised many
ways how they might weaken our power, and augment their own strength, and
had secret communication with many of our camp (who were rich men of the Town)
to bring to pass the effect of their devises.

About dinner time, I being with the Prince at the Table, the people had
broken into the Friars, and spoiled their house, which was a beginning of a
bloody business, had it gone forward. The Prince hearing thereof, sent me to
pacify the hurly burly, and I came, when six Friars were going to hanging,
and the people were determined to kill all the Papists in the Town,
especially the Priests, Monckes, and Friars: but I persuaded the people to be
in quiet, and preserved the lives of the Friars, and thousands of their
betters, both honest Gentlemen, and wealthy Burgeses. The same night, the
rudest, and most disordred of al our company, came in a great heat, and told
me, that in one Battes his house, an Englishman, was a great flock of Friars
and Religions persons, and all the treasure that they could gather and bring:
but by this time had a practice of the Burgo Masters taken such place, that I
was feign to keep watch all the night, with all the armed men, and chief
shot in our Camp, and yet clean against our hope; diverse of our people
were fled from us to a contrary side.

Then I was sent to the Prince from our people, to demand what was the meaning
of these matters, for he had daily conference with the Borgo Masters, and
others, about a common quietness (which our rude and basest sort of
Souldioures understood not.) And the Prince to my demand answered some what
sharply, and declared, that the Calui^stes had sworn to kill the Martinistes,
which he would not suffer, and by the threatening of himself to his own face
the first day, he smelled some such smoke as would breed a furious flaine
of fire. Wherefore he willed the people to use more temperance, and show more
fidelity and service to God and his person.

This message so vered the vain heads of numbers in our Camp, that they
determined to the last drop of their bloods to maynteyne their purpose for
their lives and liberty. And the grauest and wisest sort, who were of great
wealth and experience, confessed openly, that the brute raised, for the killing
of the Martinistes, was a device of some diuelishe invention, to set breethren
at variance. But in a little while after, our company grew so weak, that we
were but fifteen thousand left, of five and twenty, which fifteen thousand
were become so resolute, that they purposed the next morning to give all their
enemies a battle, and s^are, neither to spare one nor other. And in this heat
and fury, they badde me look to my promise, and keep my faith, for they
doubted not, but God would give them victory, for their quarrel was only for
the aduancemente of Gods glory and his word.

The next day, the enemies grew very strong, what with Spaniards Easterlings,
Burgonions, Almaynes, and Martinistes, the streets were all covered with their
assemblyes. And we hearing they were sparckled abroad, and without order,
suddaynely we thought to charge them: and so putting our selves in battle,
began to march: the brute whereof so amazed the enemies, that they caused the
Prince to send and stay us, and that they were glad to talk of peace, and
would not any way offend us, the Prince sent. Whereupon we stayed, and I was
again sent from the people to the Prince, to will all our adversaries
immediately to lay down weapon, and go home to their houses, for otherwise
there was no hope of peace. The Prince willed me to persuade them to go home
first, and promised that all the City should be in quiet, so soon as they
were in their houses: to the which I replied, and said, that our people were
now able and strong enough to debate the matter in any manner of sort, and being
in their houses, and the enemy in armor, the surety of our people might be
doubtful. And I knew I should but offend the people, to bring them news,
that they must give place to their enemies, when they were masters of the
Town, and the enemy scattered abroad, and not like to be in order, if we
took the advantage that God had put into our hands. Wherefore in have there was
no more to be said, but either the enemy must defend and fight, or without
delay withdraw themselves home ward, and let them use victory that gat it.

The Prince gave no answer to this, and our men halled me away, that were
sent to the Prince with me. And when I came to the people, there was a new
cry, Viue le geuxe, Battailia, Battailia, and such a shoute and noise was
suddaynely raised, as made y^ enemy afraid and trem^le, and the whole Town
to draw to some accord and pacification. And in great post have came a
messenger from the enemies, that they would lay down weapon, and agree, that
there should be a free liberty of Preaching, and no person should (of this
our assembly) be troubled, for any matter or cause committed. And to perform
this that the enemies offered, they promised to swear on a Bible, and so they
did, at which oath and offer our people reioysed, and clapped hands, but still
they manfully stood in order of battle. The enemies duly observed the
appoyntme^t made, and went every man to his lodging, accordingly as the order
was taken, and when we saw and found all things in quiet, we marched along the
streets with Anciente displayed, and as every man came by his own house, he
entered. But before we were all placed in our lodgings, it grew very late. Thus
ended this great reuolte, without bloodshed or hurt to any one person living.
And for our pains, and true performance in things that we promised, we reaped
trouble and persecution: and in a little season after, both Prince and people
were driven through a thousand hazards, to save life and liberty. The Prince
was feign to depart to a Town of his own called Breda, and having have away
(or for some great cause) left his son and heir called Monsieur Debuer in
Louaine at Schole: and diverse Gentlemen shifted away as they might: among the
rest I seambled hardly into England, being laid for, and yet so desguised,
that I escaped the hands of my enemies, who had a commandment from the
Regente, to put me to death with Martiali law (a badde recompense for so great
good and diligence bestowed on her people, and a naughty reward for the fruit
of a good meaning mind.)

Flaunders, and all the low Countries belonging to the King of Spain, after
this time, fell in a marvelous mislike of King Philips friends, and so to
bridle that Country, and keep the people in awe and fear, were appointed
streighte laws, and severe Gouernoures. And among the rest of cruelties, the
inquisition was thought a necessary curb or plague, to persecute y^ heads that
were thrust out too far. And with this inquisition was sent from King Philip
the Duke of Alua, a grave Prince, but a stern and stout Souldyoure, at whose
coming, the Duchess of Parma was to depart, and to yield the gouernemente to
the aforesaid Duke of Alua. And to fetch him into the Country, went the
Count Degmond, and all the Nobility of Fla^ders, whereof some were either in
Religion, or other causes, to King Philip, offenders before. But neither their
offering of service, nor diligent attendance, could pluck him from his
purpose, that came for a pretenced persecution and s^ourge, prepared for people
that God appointed to be plagued. And the Duke of Al^a minding the matter he
came for, and forgetting no advantage that might be taken in time, began
roughly, and with some rigor, to show the power and commission he had, sparing
neither purse, c^ming, nor practice, to accomplish his desire, and bring to
full effect by sword and policy the substance of a plotte and ground, settled
in his judgment. And going on a determined course (neither reuocable, nor to
be controlled) like a Hercules, that would set Pillars where never none had
bin, proceeded so far in his own opinion and resolute mind, that he feared
the offenders so much, that glad was the man (of what degree soever he was)
that by submission might purchase his favor. And he fyndyng himself thus
feared and sought unto, used his forces and extremities, to subdue by violence
that which some Gouernoures by sweet persuasions would have reformed:
whereupon, he laid hands on the Count Degmonde, Count De Horn, and many
others, that he thought would be a let to that he went about, and had at
his commandment for the execution of these causes* a great number of
Spanyardes and Strangers, that gaped for nothing else, but the lives and
goods of those, that either rigor of law, or seueare justice had condemned:
so without delays, or deferring of punishments, upon an open Skaffolde, to
the great terror of y^ beholders, Count Degmonde, and Count De Horn were
beheaded, after their araynemente and condemnation made: and many others were
not only daily troubled, but likewise were put to death, and a general
persecution was ministered and felt through the whole Country of Flanders.

The Spaniards, as masters and rulers of all Fortes, Towns, and strong
holds, prospered in wealth, bravery, and benefit, and became so hauty and
stout, that neither Burgonion nor Flemming durst struggle with them, in ame
sort or manner: by which means, the people murmured, and thought all amiss,
but knew not how to amend any piece thereof. Wherefore they put their necks
willingly in the yoke, and drew that way that the Spanyardes would wrest them,
offering no resistance to any insolence or disordered behauioure that the
Spanyarde might use toward the^. And in that kind of servitude the poor
Country continued a long season.

Upon the mislike of some ^ractions, and other streyghte handlings, there grew
a grudge and a common hatred among the people against the Spaniards, but they
were so hardly held and looked unto, y^ both their power failed to answer
their minds, and their courage was daunted, and could do nothing in recovering
their former liberties and privileges belonging to their state. Then diverse
fled from their patrimonies and living, and came to the Count Lodwike, who
had gathered a good power, and lay in Freeseland to anoy the Spaniards, and
wi^e a Town called Groening. And this valiat Earl had many followers and
favorers, and many times wanne of the Spaniards, and put the^ to the foil.
But in conclusion, his people being not all sound (nor so desirous to sight as
they were willing to have wars) in a manner at a great extremity and pushe of
service, for sooke their noble Captain, and cowardly behaved themselves, when
valiancie should most have bin seen, and force of manhood and sword might by
fortune have got great victory. In which over sight and feeble spreete of y^
Almaynes, the Count Lodwike was put to flight, all his power either
overthrown or dispersed, and he himself forced to make shift in the best
manner he could (having lost at this encounter seven thousand men, and all
his camp spoiled, and no one thing left at his power and commandment, that
before his enemies had no power of. Master Crewes, an ancient Souldioure, was
at this overthrow with the Count Lodwicke.

The Spaniardes, as occasion fell out, on this victory (besides the other
great hopes they had) waxed some what more stout than they were wont to be,
and having the bridle cast on their necks, (and holding the bitte in their
teeth) ran what course they thought convenient, not fearing the mire that a
headstrong horse might happen in, nor suspecting any danger that overmuch
liberty might bring them to, fell after in a mischeuous Labyrinth, and could
not get out of the same, since that present time, to this day, as hereafter in
plain discourse shall appear.

Now the Country of Flaunders, perceiving that the Spaniardes sought not to
preserve the people thereof, nor use any mean to increase credit, and
continue in good liking, and finding (as they thought) those that should have
proved guides and shepeheards, became Wolves and spoilers of their common
wealth, the willing obedience of thousands grew to a common contempt and
wilful stubbornness, and few was the number were left willinglye to obey
the Duke of Aluaes direction, and new devised orders that the strangers had
offered them.

So some ran to y^ Prince of Orange, some sled to England, (and that in great
numbers) some slypped into France, and some were ready to turn any way, and
go where Fortune assygned them. And great was the grief that some did feel,
that tarryed at home, who gladly kept silence, and watched a season to utter
their malice, or avoid their present mischief.

Flaunders and all the low country being in this perplexity, began to
decline and wax feeble, both of force and courage: the souldioures little set
by: their marchaunts despised: and their noble men so daunted (by means of the
pride of the Spaniarde, and plague of the ^nquisition) that they thought
themselves rather in a slauishe bon^age, than handled like subjects: and
would have feign shaken ^st the yoke of this servitude, but their power was so
small, and their misery so great, that little or nothing at all could they
do, and were forced to bear and su^er with patience, a burden most heavy,
and a load that ouercharged both body and conscience.

The Prince of Orange having hope, that sundry of the towns and streets of the
Country, in this extremity would have joined with him (for the recovering of
their liberty and privileges) drew himself among his friends in Germany,
and practiced for money and men to be ready with an army to encounter the Duke
of Alua, and either by battle to end tho miseries of Flaunders, or by strong
hand to drive out the perturbers of their publske state and quietness.

And so resolved to try, what good fortune, and fast friends would do in
those affairs. He remained at his house (ten Dutche leagues beyond Collen)
called Dille^burgh, a goodlye seat, and a fair strong Castle, to which place
repaired many noble personages of Germany and Capitaines of great conduct and
charge, to devise and talk of matter convenient for the purpose rehearsed. In
which communication was concluded, that as soon as an army might be levied,
they would meet and assemble at an Abbey near unto Andernake, which
Monastery was beyond the river of Rhein, and stood well for the surety of the
people that there should be mustred.

It came well to pass after a long provision, and that a brave regiment of
Frenchmen were ready (that Monsieur Maulberg brought out of France) that the
Prince and his people met and assembled at this Abbey, in such warlike sort
and order, as gave a great hope of some high attempt and enterprise. For in
very troth, the Count de Hostraet, a noble worthy manne, the Count Lodwike
a most valiaunte soldier, were come to the Prince, and brought with them a
great band of Burgonions of great and good houses, and such as had bin well
experimented in wars. And a marvelous company of Swarfe Rutters, high
Almaines, and Sweessers were come from Germany, and at one instant and time
they met all together, and muster was taken of aleauen thousand horsemen, and
two and twenty thousand footmen, which made so noble a show when they were
assembled, as (me thought) was worthy the noting, and might encourage any
soldier to march among, and keep company withal.

The Prince had prepared so great a treasure, that immediately after the army
was mustred, there was a general pay for two months, and out of hand order
was taken for to pass over the great river of Rhein, not far from Andernak,
the town being glad to stand as our friends, and aid us with all that they
might. And so marching forward as direct a way toward Flaunders, as was
thought necessary, we encamped between Boen and Collen, where the Flemings and
high Almaines had of the Frenchmen in our Camp received some words of
reproach, touching the overthrow that the Count Lodwike had at Groening in
Freeslande: on which words, the Almaines being full of wine, made a mutiny, and
put themselves in battle, and shot off their small pieces, and began a foul
business. To appease the same broyle, all the whole army were in arms, and
the Swarfe Rutters were mounted, and were come into the field, the French and
Burgonions took one side, and the Almaines and Rutters another, and so there
was a great murder: but it dured not long, for the Prince of Orange and his
brother Count Lodwike, by much entreatie stayed the strife.

The Duke of Aluaes Camp heard of this mutiny, and had not a great river
bin between our Camp and his power, we had smarted for the folly the
Almaines committed. But as by wisdom and hap of good heads, sell out better
things than was looked for, and all matters were quieted, and she beginners of
this vproare and madness, were by martial law punished.

After this, we encamped before Ayex Ocorken, where commonly the Emperor is
crowned, a great City not very far from Mastricke, the people whereof did
fear to be besieged, and so with a great sum of money redeemed their town.
The Spaniardes the near unto our camp showed themselves, and were repulsed to
their loss, and so the camp marched a little further in a most brave and
gallant order.

The Prince of Orange used here a noble policy: first he sent to the Bishop
of Leeg, willing him to let his army pass through the City of Leeg,
promising to pass quietly* the Bishop being wily, sent the Prince word,
that he would make a bridge by the City, for the army to pass over at, and
made the Duke of Alua pr^uy to his practice, who should have bin on the other
side of y^ water with his army, to have received our people. Which Stratageme
the Prince suspected, but yet with fair words he held the Bishop in
belief, he would pass over the bridge, and took the offer thankfullye, and
a day was appointed, that al things should be in a readiness. But in the mean
time, the Prince by good espiall, tried out the fine fetch and cunning of the
Bishop, and suddenly, when no one man in our army knew which way we should
march, the Drum was sou^ded, and our carriages going toward Leeg, and al our
faces turned that way, and marched a good while as though the Prince meant to
pass over the bridge spoken of. And when our people began most to doubt
some danger, and talked of the hazard, the Prince caused our army to turn
their faces, (and by that time night approached) and having good guydes, we
marched swiftly without making any noise. ij. Dutch leagues down y^ rivers side
called Moesse, y^ wether being foul, and the night very dark. And surely a
sore journey it was, and a long march. But in the morning at the dawning of the
day, we came to a shallowe place of the water, where was a foord to pass
over, and so much expedition was made, that eleauen thousand horse and two and
twenty thousand footmen were passed over the water in one days labor: but
the legs of the horses kept up the water so long a season, that the river rose
a yard in height, by which means, many horsemen and footmen were drowned, and all
our victual had taken great wet, and was in a manner marred and spoiled quite.
Notwithstanding, to our great hope and comfort, our camp was now in
Flaunders, and our enemies were deceived utterly of their expectation and
device.

Now after this labor, we tarryed over long to refresh the army, for three
days were spent in idleness, in which time, the enemies head and body was
occupied, little to our advantage: yet the third day we marched full upon
the enimyes camp, which day was so clear, and the country so plain to
march in, that all the order of our camp might be throughlye discerned. And
who that had seen the glistering battles of footmen, and the awful show and
troops of the horsemen (which were not a few) would never in his life days
forgette that noble assembly: for it was a wonder of the world, to see so
many brave and lusty soldiers together (and as it seemed) every man was bent
to battle, and prepared with weapon and courage to conquer a Kingdom. And
undoubtedly, the most of our camp looked that night for a combat and sharp
encounter, for the enimyes were three and thirty thousand footmen, and five
thousand and eight hundredth horsemen, and gallant laddes both well furnished
and well disposed, which was argument enough, that they would look us in the
faces: their leader in like sort, a grave Prince, and an ancient and wise
soldier, always stout and honorable. But neither we feared his force, nor
doubted his policy, but marchyng toward him, came in view of his camp, and
so neer^* (...), that his great Cannons went off at our ^ple, and cure pieces
played lustily on his power again, and a hot skirmishe began with eg^e
desire on both sides to get glory, blood and victory. But the Duke had
entrenched his Camp so stronglye round about, that our horsemen could not
give a charge. And peradventure all our Swarfe Rutters were not of one mind,
as the sequel hereafter may show. Thus in s^irmishe all the day was spente,
in so much, that at night we were feign to encampe our selves on a top of a
hill, full in the enemies eye, the service dured so long and late, we could not
be better provided.

The Duke of Alua at three of the clock after midnight dislodged his Camp,
went from Mastricke, where he la^, and marched along the river side toward
Leeg very closely, and without brute or sound of Trumpet: and at the peep of
day, our vancurrers had a view of the enimyes, and we might at the length
perceive them fully, and behold the whole order of their battles and march.
Our people being moved with that ^ighte (albeit it was somewhat fearful to
fainte courages) offered the skirmishe, and continued in the same a long time:
butiour meaning was, to march into Flaunders, and get some Towns for our
succoure, and money for the relief of the souldioures. So we came to a Town
called Tonger, and took in the same a number of Waggoris laden with victual,
that was going to the Dukes camp: and from thence to Sentr^e an other great
Town we marched, which Town was strong, and stood against us, til they saw the
battery placed, the^ was it yielded, and somewhat spoiled, where religious
persons were found: and it redeemed itself for a sum of money, and remained
in peace, when we marched further into y^ country.

The Duke followed our Camp daily, and waited so upon us, that the
stragglers were soon sent home, and y^ whole army took great heed and
care of all things they did. The wether was most part foul, and the ways
seldom fair, and victualles ever hard to come by, by mean of a commandment
and charge given by the Duke to y^ Boores and Countrymen, who continually did
annoy us as they might, breaking bridges, Mils, and all other things that
should do us good, for the which, their houses and stackes of corn were
burnt, and their wives and family, when we took them, were very ill entreated.

This scarc^tie of victual, and cruelty of the Countrymen increased daily,
and as it was reported, diverse of good calling brake promise with the Prince,
and drew an other way, which in very deed pintched and wroong the heart in
the breast of those that wisely wayed the inconstanc^e of the world, and such
as had not made before good provision, were put to their plunge, and felt
penury and indigence enough: and as victual wared scant, so garments,
horseshoes, and other necessaries could not be gotten for money, that was a
miserye remedile^e, and a mischief, that neither man nor beast might easily
abide. Yet as for victualles, some shift with sword was made, that people
perished not in ertreame lack and want of sustentation.

Many days and seasons we pingled and struggled with the Spaniardes for bread
and other cates, and often we met with them in the Towns, Uillages; and
open fields, and skirmished at y^ very skirts of their ca^pe, procuring the^ to
fight. But y^ Duke would have no battle, and our Rutters were so wise, y^ they
would make y^ war long, to bring good bags, and full purses, and Wagons home to
their houses, when the Prince should retire. But whatsoever might be judged of
the matter, the soldiers on both sides were sometimes loath to encounter,
except upon a great advantage, and much procurement to the same, they were
pricked forward, to ^eeke adventures, and feel the force of Fortune.

The Prince being once near Louaine, and thought to have besieged y^ town (by
the watch and waiting on him that the Duke used) was driven to seek many
ways to compass that he sought: one while to bid the bace to the Dukes
company, and another while to practice (for the preue^ting of mischief) all the means that possible could be devised: and retyring sometimes to make the
Duke follow: and following sometimes to put the enemies to flight, if fortune so
favored, and occasion could be taken, and houering up and down a great time in
the manner rehearsed before, he had to pass by Tillemont, a bridge between two
woods, which bridge his enemy thought to guard, or at the least, to show some
exploite at: and encamping themselves near the Prince, the Princes vangard and
maine battle, marched toward the passage. The Duke (to occupy y^ tune til his
purposed device took place) made as though he would have bidde^ battle, and
came full before ye reregarde of the Prince, to a waters side, having on both
his wings a mighty wood, and guarded behind with wagons and cariages, and
hasted apace toward the Prince with all his power. The Prince very glad to see
the enemy so desirous of battle, approached with his reregard near the enemy,
and sent with speed for the vangard and maine battle, to come back again for
causes convenient, which came, and in open field presented themselves in order
of battle to the enemy: but the Duke kept him and his power beyond the
water, and yet put out diverse bands to hold the Prince in play, and draw our
people near the great and small shot. The Burgonions, Rutters, Almaines, and
most of the lustiest soldiers about the Prince, ran so courageously to this
encounter and piece of service, that sundry were galled and hurt at the first
charge, and few or none that adventured any thing at al, but escaped hardlye
the danger of body, and loss of life, the ground which the enemies had chose^
was so full of advantage, and the Spaniards so valiantly maintained the
skirmish. Notwithstanding, the Princes power augmented continually, and plied
the service, in such sort, that the enemies perforce were driven into their
main battle. But this bickering endured so long, that the day was far spent,
and numbers of our men were hurt. Among the chief a noble man (and a
special spark of life) called the Count De Hostraet, was shot through the
leg, of which wound, after he dyed. And as many stout Souldioures that
season served well and worthylie, so was none more to be commended, than the
Count De Lume, a Leagoyse, otherwise called Count De la Marsh, who only came
to the Prince with a brave band of Horsemen, for the reuengemente of his
Cousins death the Count Degmond, which lost his head, as before you have heard.

Now what should more be said of this matter, but that the Duke in this mean
season had conuayed five thousand shot (the leading whereof had Julian
Romero) to the bridge and strayte passage, not far from Tillemont. And this
Julian, as he was a marvelous valiant and good soldier, of great
experience, fame, forwardness, and antiquity, so did he so cunningly in a
woodde at this present lay an ambushe, that it was to be wondered at: the
manner whereof follows.

First, when he came to this strayte, he caused the Spanyardes (which in good
sooth were noble Souldioures, and resolute men) to lie flat on their faces,
and as closely as could be devised, without making brute or business: and
commanded, that no one man should be so hardy as to stir, til he gave a
warning and watchworde. Which the Spaniards obeyed in every point, for they are
men of great obedience and vigilancie, where they ought to be ready, and at
commandment.

The Prince having a mind and good occasion to pass this strait before the
night came on, marched toward the brigge, and all the way the Duke waited on
him, making many offers to have given battle: and still great service was to
be seen, and the enemy was ever occupied, to bleare our eyes the better. And
yet the Prince to prevent mischief, sent a number of Almayne shot (named
the Forlorn hope) to the selfsame woodde, where Julian Romero lay, to be as
it were a succoure to his army, if the Duke had charged on the reregard, as
was presupposed he would, the advantage was so great. And this Almayne shot
were so careless, that as soon as they came into the woodde, they lay loking
over a high dyke, how the Princes cariages, stragglers, vangarde, main
battle, and wings thereof should pass over the bridge, and had no further
consideration, but gazed before them, when behind their backs the enemy was
privily placed. Well, in fine, the Princes power came on, and the artillery,
the stragglers, the cariages, the vangarde, the main battle, and all, saving
the reregard, passed over the bridge, but the reregarde, because it was next
the Duke, and in danger to be set upon (by the Dukes power) was double guarded
with horsemen, besides the ordinary bands it was wont to have. And further,
the vancurrers, and gallantest Gentlemen of person and manhood, attended on
the reregard, to see the end of the matter. And so soon as the reregarde came
between the two wooddes, the Spanyardes did show themselves suddaynely, with
such a terrible shot and thunder, of Muskette, and Calyuer, that the
Almaynes by terror of the same, flang down their pieces, and would have
fled, but most of them were immediately spoiled and flayne.

The Horsemen of the reregarde were so amazed at this adventure, that they
scarce knew what was best to be done: yet in conclusion, a noble Captain,
called Rides, and diverse other bands of Swarfe Rutters wheeled about, made head
to the enemy, and were ready to give a charge on Captain Julian. And albeit
a great dyke was a let for the charge, yet the Rutters scambled over the
same, and as they might, in the woodde, slew diverse of the Spanyardes. But the
Duke plied the matter so sharply upon the backs of the reregarde, that
Monsieur Maulberg (a Baron, with a regiment) and most of his band of brave
French Souldioures, were put to the sword, or drowned, and many Burgonyon
Gentlemen and Souldioures of all sorts were likewise slain or overthrown in
the water: in which conflict, we lost four or five thousand men. But the
Prince beholding this murder, and in danger of the shot continually, was
dismayed no whitte: for being on a high ground, full before the Dukes Camp, he
sent down succoures to his people, and bent all his great Ordinance upon the
Duke, and stayed his whole straggling army in the very view and shot of the
enemy, a thing most rare and strange to be seen.

The Dukes power, as they might notwithstanding, followed victory, and till
the dark night did separate the armies, the shot on both sides never
ceased. And look what prisoners the Duke did take, before the day went out of
the Sky, he caused them to be burnt all together in one house, the smoke and
smell whereof came with the wind full into our noses. Thus we encamped in
that present place, hoping for a revenge the next morning, at which season
was Monsieur Ianlees to come out of France to the Prince, and with him two
thousand Horse, and four thousand footmen.

The Duke hearing of Monsieur Ianlees coming, went to meet him, but would
not encounter him that time, because the Princes Camp was so near. And
Monsieur Ianlees came over the water at Namure, where the garrison resisted him
to their po^er, and lost a hundredth or fourscore Souldioures at that time.
Ianlees entering with blood, marched forward bravely with his little Camp, in
the which he had five good pieces of artillery. And at length he came in
the view of the Duke of Aluaes Camp, and being resolved to fight, rather than
retire, he put his power in battle, and took the next way to the Prince, in
most manly manner, as indeed he was a stout Gentleman. The Duke seeing his
boldness and courage, gave him the looking on, and let him pass, and so our
Camp and his joined together.

Upon Ianlees coming, who brought a marvelous gallant company (of
Gentlemen, and experimented Souldioures) it was thought, that without delay we
should have sought out the Duke, and have given him battle: and in that mind
was our whole power many a long day, but what was the occasion to the
contrary, I know not, and what did keep us asunder so long, does pass the
reach of my reason. A weerysome time in this sort poor Soldiers turmoyled,
who were visited with so many wants and extremities, that it would have pitied
any Christians heart and mind to consider of: yet the willingness of people
to do some worthy act or enterprise, took away a piece of the heavy
burden, and made the fardell of affliction the lighter to bear, and the less
repined at: and it was a miraculous matter, for men (as some may allege) to
live without bread, beer, ale, or wine, so great a time as we did: for most
certain, the scarcity was such of the same, that some in the Camp (and right
good men) for the space of twenty or thirty days, never tasted of bread, nor
drank better than water: yet what with Apples, and fruit, and other moist
things we found, the Camp was satisfied, and men (in hope of better sustenance)
shifted out a sorrowful season, and nothing grieved their hearts more, than
that they could not end or ease that misery with y^ hazard of battle.

Now when necessity compelled the Prince to wythdraw his power, or
desperate^ie to set on the enemies camp in a fixed determination, he sought
daily after the Duke of Alua, who still avoided the fight. Yet to train the
enemy near us, and bring the^ from the wooddes to the plain (that the
Horsemen might charge them.) The Prince marched toward Leeg, and beseeged
that great and goodly City, although the Rutters stiffely refused that service,
saying, it was imperial, and a Town they ought not meddle withal. But from
whence that reason was racked, or whereof that answer did smell, I report me to
those that knows the handling and scanning of such cunning mysteries.

The Cannons were planted, for all this contradiction, and the great pieces
did play upon the City two or three days, and the Duke hearing thereof, came
(as it was reported) to set on some of the Princes people and forces. The
Prince having examined a prisoner that was taken at that present, and
understanding where and which way the Duke might be found, sent for his chief
Captains, and commanded anon after midnight, to dislodge quietly without
sound of Drum or Trumpet, and march (as they might) toward the Duke: albeit
the night was dark, and the weather inconstant, which was a great trouble to
the Camp, yet the Prince was resolved to try out by adversity, whether the
Duke or he had the more hard destiny and adverse fortune. Now the Souldioures
began to rejoice, and although the way was combersome, and the night dark
and uncomfortable, yet every man bore a portion of the travel, in hope to come
quickly to an end of the trouble. And by my troth, the manner of our march was
so difficult and strange, (and y^ Camp went so scattered abroad at all
adventures) that we were like enough before day to be some of us t^nne mile
asunder, or to happen in the hands of the Duke of Aluaes watch unawares, and so
we did: for some taking the Rutters (that the Duke had) to be our men, and
mistaking the way they should have kept, fell in the middle of y^ Duke of
Aluaes centinell, but they were but a few that so foolish^y wandered. Yet by
this blind occasion, the Duke gat lightof the Princes purpose, and thereon
entrenched himself and his Camp in a strong ground, to his great surety and
advantage. And at the break of day, our Camp began cheerfully to sound a
march, full in the hearing of the Dukes power. I doubt, if I made mention of
the mirth that our people had, some fine fellows would scarcely believe it:
wherefore I proceed to my matter.

The Camps thus being near together, were both in order of battle, the Dukes
entrenched, and the Princes in open plain: and the Princes power presented the
battle in a brave and goodly order, but it was refused. Notwithstanding, y^
enemy issued out of their trench by multitudes, and offered y^ skyrmish: but
that was thought but a mean, to gall and hurt our best Souldioures (as in
deed a skirmish^ in some cases is no better) wherefore the Prince marched about
more needful affairs, and yet held the enemy play enough, with a
sufficient company, for that purpose they came out for. In a little while
after, knowing y^ the Duke would not fight (though he were able, and durst if
he pleased) the Prince meante to depart from Flaunders, and coming by trifling
Towns, yet some of them well walled, he did what he thought convenient to
those Towns, and at length came before Chaiteu Caembersey, which would not
yield, and so the Prince beseeged it: but the battery was so far off, that
it did no great hurt. And the Duke minding to show some rescue to the Town,
came in the sight of our Camp, and lodged between two great wooddes. Yet
nothing worthy noting was attempted. And the Prince, seeing time was consumed,
without any profit or lykelyhode of battle, he marched unto France, entering
between Gwyse, and Saint Quintains, two special Towns of the French Kings:
and coming now into a goodly Country full of wholesome Wives, and healthful
things (that our si^ke and sore weatherbeaten Camp needed, and were glad
of) we rested awhile, and filled our empty bellies with benefyte of the
earth, and blessings of God: and so in small process of time returned into
Straesbr^eg, and other parts of Germany, where after this long voyage, and
hard fare, many dyed of such diseases as follows the miserable estate of man,
and cuttes off the days and lives of Millions. The Prince went in a while
after to his house at Dillenbrough, and every other person to such places and
Countries as best they liked, and might most content their minds and
calling, and the Duke drew himself toward Antwerpe, and both their great
armies were dispersed and severed asunder in a short season. But Flaunders,
being ordained to troubles, could no season rest, without some persecution
and practise^s to vex and disquiet the state, so that thousands were always
busily occupied, not only to molest the Spaniards, but also to get and win
such plottes, and pieces of the Country of Flaunders, Zelande, and Hollande,
as might be an occasion to bring the Privileges of all the Country in
question, and debate their causes at large. And having had some talk one
with another of these matters (that were against the Dukes gouernemente) the
Count De Lume, otherwise named Count De la March, a lustye Gentleman, came with
a sufficient power, and took the Breell, an Island that fronts upon Flushing.

The Prince and his brother was or had bin before with the Duke de Dupont, and
the Prince of Condey, in great services, for the which they wanne worthy fame
for their adventure with the said Prince of Condey. And the Prince of Orange,
would take no charge, but as it seemed, came to see how the affairs of the
world would burst out or finish. Yet in the end, the Prince of Orange and his
brother came home, and the Count Lodwike, to exercise his great heart in great
things, went against y^ Duke of Alua, and was received into Mounts in Henalt, a
strong town. The Duke not asleep, but had so waking a wit, y^ he would rise
early to bid his enemies good morrow, came and beseeged Mounts in Henals (Sir
William Morga^ being then with Count Lodwike) and with much business and great
ado, upon hard conditions, agreed, that the Count Lodwike, and all his noble
Soldiers, should depart with bag and baggage, whersoeuer they pleased. The
Duke most honorably saw the capitulation observed and kept, and the Count
Lodwike and his friends marched from Mounts with honor enough, though not so
much as they looked for. And thus was that broyle taken up and ended, and a new
to be practiced and begin.

If I have placed ye winning of ye Breell, taken by y^ Count de Lume, before
other things that happened somewhat before y^ exployte, or rehearsed any thing
out of his due order in ye rest of my work, I trust y^ report of mine shall
hurt no whit y^ troth of every matter severally by me penned: for in mistaking
one season for another, and not borowing out of any book (that flatters the
time) any piece of matter, at their great Torch to light my little Candle, I
might wa^der out of my way, and so go about, but can not miss the coming
home to the troth of my purposed enterprise. For I have written nothing, but
either mine own eyes beheld it, or at some one time or other I was in the
Country while it was a doing. And so, the loss of the Breell, to conclude,
caused Flushing, and other places to revolt, and argued, that in the neck of
those changes, would happen an infinite number of unwelcome chances, to such
as thought themselves of fortune most assured.

The whole Country through, was so far out of quiet, that y^ Duke not only
filled the new Citadell in Antwerpe with Soldiers, but likewise, put great
garrisons in all places and Towns of strength, which garrisons peradventure
behaved themselves not so well toward the people, as they looked for. And as
they might meet to reason of those matters, and other things of weyghte, they
muttered, in much mislike at many occasions, but more for fear than favor,
they followed the Dukes device, and both with money and men aided the Duke,
against those that were disturbers of his state. Yet such broils were
abroach, as could not be remedyed without much bloodshed, and hardly that
way, as experience in process of time did declare.

Now in the heat of this murmuring, an infinite sort of scattered people drew
to the Count Lodwike, and many made suit to the Prince, to step in and
thruste out strangers, especially Spaniardes, that then were generally
despised. The Prince having many injuries offered him, and remembering old
wrongs and new displeasures, began to give ear to such persuasions, as
touched the privileges and liberties of those Countries the Duke had
government of, and by deep foresight and judgment, avoided the danger of
his enimyes, and so stood on his guarde in all things he went about. At which
resolution, his friends a folowers reioiced, and every one according to his
ability, put to a helping hand, and sent him such succoures, as he was able in
person and power in a short time to meet his enimye on land or on Sea, such
was his foresight, his force, and good fortune.

Now the towns in Holland and Zealand began to bend apace, to be at y^
Princes devotion, and the Prince hadset out a number of Ships, which often
encountered their enimyes, and wanne great and rich prizes, and seldom lost
any thing, but still fought it out so valiauntlye, that victory seemed to
be theirs by inheritance.

A fleet of Ships came from Spain to the Dukes aid, and some of the best
of them happen into the Flushingers hands, coming into the Haven, which
ships were fraught with treasure, that served the Princes turn a long time
after The Count Lodwike had done very great things in sundry enterprises,
and service of no little charge and hazard, and was like to prove the oddest
Soldier of a noble man in his days: but the Duke did always so pursue him
with a great power, and great practices, that he could not, nor was not able,
to prevent the Dukes pollici^s and Stratagemes. And so at an overthrow, which
fell on the Count Lodwikes side, he was forced to fly, and as some affirm,
was either drowned, or slain after. Master Clap. and Master Font, English
Gentlemenne, were at this service, and Font was slain there.

Diverse other Gentlemen pri^ly, without the knowledge of our Prince, and her
highness honorable Council, stole by secreate means, out of England to
Flushing, for the which at their return home again, they were a long while
frowned upon, and could not come in Court. Sir Humfrey Gylb^rt was their
General, Captain Cotton, Captain Morgan, Captain Chester: and many other
Capitaines and Gentlemen, for knowledge sake, fame and entertainment, went at
that time over, and fell thereby in displeasure here at home.

The Spaniards many times came near to Flushing, and the English ba^ds met
them often, between whom was diverse hot skirmishes, and courageous encountre:
and albeit that the English deserved much praise for their forwardness, the
Spaniards were not behind in any forward service, or striving for fame and
place: for at every meeting, the Spaniarde both in nimblenesse and stout
behauior seemed often to want neither agilitie, courage, nor conduct: and the
Gentlemen and old soldiors of them, durst^tug and wrestle for the maistery with
any one that they encountered, as our wise and stout soldiors gladly do
confess, and think it a great injury, to have a stout enemy any way evil
spoken of.

As very many towns fell daily to the Prince (which he fortified strongly,) so
a town among the rest called Harlam, was so well m^nned and defended, that
the fame thereof must needs be sounded with a Trumpet of everlasting renoume,
of which I mind a little to speak, as much to show what y^ manliness of man
can do, as to declare what honor belongs to stout soldiers.

Harlam being a place of strength, somewhat by nature through the mean of water
(and other causes a fortress requires) was manned and furnished with most
assured soldiers. And as the Duke had great ado in many other places, and
made great armies to besiege them, so at the siege of this, y^ Duke lost such
a number of me^, as is incredible to be spoken, and would hardly be believed:
for women there were of such courage, as was wonderful to behold: and one
woman took a miraculous charge upon her, which was, to have the leading of men
(a matter to be simled at, but yet of troth, and to be credited. Then if women
were so stout, what might men of noble heart and mind prove? forsooth their
acts and deeds did show the^ to be in courage more than Lions, and in worth
and valor more than a. C. M. of the ordinary sort of people. For some have
bin in many services, that never saw y^ like of Harlam soldiers: and men may
travel to the very confines of Christendom, and not find such people, as were
at Harlam (besieged by the Spaniardes) a nation in these days, that can both
besiege a town, and can do much in the field) which people had such resolute
minds and willing bedies, to defend and suffer whatsoever might happen, y^ they
seemed to be made and formed, not out of our common mould, but wrought and
created of some special substance and workmanship, wherein y^ glory of
manhood and valiancie was cu^ningly co^prehe^ded. O that my st^le were so
stately (and could carry such life) that I might worthily express the noblenes
of their courages. But I may not praise the alone for their courage, but exalt
the^ also for their policies, and suffera^ce of al misery and adversities a
long season, and in a manner past y^ power of man's weak nature and condition.
But alas, y^ while they were ouertake^ with too much trust in their enemies
words, and led at length like sheep to y^ slaughter: but how I list not tell
you, referring y^ judgment of such like actions, to those that have y^
managing of mighty matters, and knows how to co^quere and govern.

Well, to finish and knitte up the scanning and services of the famous
souldioures of Harlam; to the furthest of my ability, I will honor the bones
of all such warlike people, wheresoever I shall find them, and with perpetual
same advance their bodies to the lofty skies.

Uery many practices the Duke both by force and finesse wrought against the
Prince, and was assisted and aided with many of the states of the low Country,
to entrap the Prince, or take the Towns he had in his hands from him, but
nothing could prevail, although great and huge armies of men went about the
overthrow of the Prince and his fortresses. And such Towns were at his
commaundment in Hollande and Zelande, that the greatest armies of the world
could not win, without marvelous charges and loss of people to the
assaylantes, which was well tried and proved, by the success that the Duke
and his friends continu allye found, who never ceased to work al possible
means to attain that he sought, and that which his power and people were
thought might command (which was not a little) because their forces were
double and treble in number against the Princes power, and held the whole
countries in awe and subjection.

The Princes good fortune so much amended, and he grew so mighty both by sea
and land, that neither the Duke sometimes would meet him, nor many others (of
ability full great) had mind to encounter his power, which always were
resolved to fight, and seldom took foil or disgrace, but once before Harlam,
in offering to victual the Town, and at some other seasons, that are not of
so great moment, as merits much memory. And the Prince taking hold of
thankful fortune, and following to the furthest, the good hap was offered him,
besieged some places that the Spaniards were in, and wan those fortes or towns,
and disposed of them what he thought most necessary. Among the which towns,
Midlebr^eg was one, where the service was great, and much time was spent,
before the Spaniardes were clean thruste out thereof.

Many attempts were made to Ansterdam, a goodly seat, and a strong, but that
was many times, or for the most part, addicted to the Spaniardes, and so were
other towns, that the Prince made but little account of.

But now (to make short) the Prince having in a manner all Zeland and Holland,
and all the strong places thereof, had so wearyed the Duke, and the states of
Flaunders, that he possessed them in peace: or if they were assaulted, they
were so well defended, that the Duke not only lost his labor, but likewise
great numbers of men, so that the King of Spain gaining but little by the
Dukes government, as many supposed, sent for him away, or he made suit to
go home, and the Duke Medina Cely was sent to remain in his place. But the
Duke Medina Cely seeing that the state of Flaunders (and all the low
Countries) was so rent and torme in pieces, that he could not knitte them
together again, therefore (as it seemed, and many wise men did deem,) he
ha^ed himself thence, and minded not to take charge and government of a
Country so much disquieted, and so ^arre out of order. And in his place came
the Duke de Terra Noua.

This Duke de Terra Noua, when he came into Flaundors, and had seen and
found, that severe Justice, and straighte and hard handling, brought the
people in mislike (and made many a great mischiefelye l^rking in a bollowe
heart) began his government more mildelye, and used a more gentle manner
toward the inhabitants of Flaunders, and yet was stern and ^oute enough
(as far as his power stretched) toward the Prince of Orange, and many
times anoyed him, and held^ him very hardly.

But in effect, neither the Duke of Aluaes great labor, service, nor
security, nor the Duke de Terra Nouaes courtesy and gentleness could
reclaim those people that took a toy in their heads, like some kind of
Hawks that will not come to the Fawkners fiste, nor give ear to any
strangers lewring. And surely, if some hawke have once taken the check, she
will royle abroad at her pl^asure, and pray where she l^steth. But to the
matter, the common people of Flaunders were so vexed with the Spaniardes, and
troubled with strangers in their Country, that they cared not to what
servitude they offered themselves, so they might be rid of them, that so
long had over labored them, and tired both their minds and bodies.

In this wandering sort of disliking, and uncertain manner of surety, the
poor and common people were carried about with such a multitude of miserable
conceits, that they knew not to whom to complain, nor unto what pillar they
should lean, and in a manner were ready to sincke and drop down, under the
mass of mischief, that lay as heavy as lead on their shoulders.

The Duke de Terra Noua no less troubled in judgment (for the dischardge of
his care and authority) was often times not well in health, and so consuming
some years in dooyng what he determined, at length he gave over his life, and
Flaunders remained a season without any strange Gouernoure, albeit molested,
(as the people thought, not a little) with the Spaniardes, which of all
griefs, did most gripe them, and gladdest they were to be cased of.

And to bring to pass some great matter, and to be dischar^ged of this their
daily sorrow and continual clogge, the States in companies as their minds
were bent and sauoured that faction which wroughte against the Spaniardes)
did devise and talk of the recoueryng of their liberties. And for the
attayning of the same, they pollitiquelye laid a plain plotte, and swore
among themselves* to perform every point and piece of their purpose.

The Spaniardes both by outward countenance and bending of brows, perceived
there was some privy practice a working, and prepared to withstand it by all
the means possible might be devised: and keeping close their own council,
concluded, that when occasion came, they would put in execution the matter
they had treated of, and all the mean while they furnished themselves with
every thing fit for their purposed device.

The contrary part casting no peril, and standing too much to the opinion
and bayne hope of a multitude, went openly about their business, and
assembled of their friends a great company together, able with good
government to have given a battle: which band and careless company lay in
Antwerpe, solacing themselves, and making good cheer, as al things should have
gone with the^ according to their wish.

But even as those people that Samson destroyed amidde their banquets and
feasting (smarting himself with committing the murder) or rather like wilful
weaklings and wanton children that never tasted the strength of a man,
believes, that blunt wasters will byte like sharp weapons, and so ^unne on
head to their own harms, and behave themselves so carelessly for the combat,
that one man well advised, shall beat a hundredth of those harebraines. Even
so, and in no better plight, or in a worse case, y^ multitude were taken and
put to open foil and reproach, to the great shame and oversight of
themselves, that had charge, and disgrace of every good souldior that they
loft.

The Spaniards wisely and warily (but sure about a bloody and cruel act) came
as closely as they could, together into the Castle of A^twerpe (which the
Duke of Alua caused to be builte) and there consulted quickly on the thing they
hastily went about: and making no more add, but ei^er to kill or be killed,
about dinner time when some have more mind of their belly, than their safety
(and fall to quaffing and bibbing, when greedy hunger and thirste should be
moderated with sober diet) the Spaniardes issued furiouslye into the City,
into which the great Cannon shot came roaring before them, and with them
came such a thunder of harquebuzers, and trampling of horses, that the Town
thought, that Hell had been burste open, or that the skies had fallen
upon them by some sudden rattle and thunder-cracke from the Heavens. But well
away, many a sily soul by this bloudye bargain were sent unto Heaven or
Hell, and the simple people that trusted to the wisdom of their leaders, fell
all by their own folly to the mercy of the Spaniardes, which are not
ignorant in the usage of victory, nor ouer-mercifull till they find
themselves Masters of the field, and in secure and peaceable estate.

Thus Antwerpe was throughlye spoiled, and in many places burnte and defaced,
where the Spaniardes found such a deal of gold and treasure, as has not
bin possessed by one spoil in any two Towns these many hundredth years: and
there was taken prisoner, the young Count Degmond, with some others of good
reputation: a warniug to all wanton Cities, hereafter to give and keep better
watch of their liberty and wealth, and to cause the inhabitants of every
Town and Corporation, to have such regard of God, and the leading of their
lives, that they come not into the indignation of the highest, who often does
visit the base conditions of the people, with sword, fire and pestilence, and
many other punishementes and plagues, that our present days does present
us, and the worlds wickedness cannot shun.

It is to be thought, while these things were a doing, y^ Don John de Austria
was drawing himself toward Flaunders: but as it fell out by matter that
follows, a very few of good calling in the state were willing to receive
him, especially willing to be governed with a stranger, or stand any way
pleased with the Spanyardes in the low Country. For long before the murder
and bloodshed in Antwerpe, there was so hot a fire kyndled in the furnace of
the breast, and fancies of men, that all the water in Antwerpe Town could not
quench. And after this furious fact was committed, neither gentle words, nor
mylde Gouernoures (if they were strangers, that should speak or govern)
could salve the swelling sore and bleedyng wounds of the tormented minds,
that daily were perplered with thought and care of their poor Country of
Flaunders. How the Spanyardes had used the people at any time, or how this
vnquen^hable fire of malice did first take flame, or how the hearts of the
commons conceived such offense, as was past forgiveness, I neither know nor
meddle withal: but I know, and experience teaches, it is a hard and a
dangerous hazard, to happen in the hatered of a multitude, and be condemned of
the common people, albeit their judgments are not always sound, yet their
displeasure is durable, and so sore to sustain, that the wisest of al times
and ages, have bin content to bear with their follyes, and rather flatter
them to have their favors, than with Milions of Gold dwell any while in their
dislike. And malice is of the nature of Cancker, which the longer it is
suffered on good metal, or badde, the further and deeper it eats, and
rusteth the thing it takes hold of. Or hatered may better be compared to
Gunnepouder, that the longer it is dried, the sooner it takes fire, and when
one corn thereof is touched with a ho^e coal, it not only consumes it self
with a flasshing flame, but burns or hurtes all that stands near it, or
commes in the compass of his flame and fury. And commonly malice is never
quenched, till revenge has produced some notable mischief, and so y^ person
y^ strikes, and body that is stricken (either by rigor of law, or violence
used by weapon) end in a short season, their lives, that long have bin a
nourishing. Wherefore as diverse affirm and confess, there is not a greater
enemy to common wealths and Countries, tha^ that gnawing worm of continual
malice and hatered, which for small offenses, has made so great a dissension,
that mighty Monarkes have bin shaken down withal, and many a state at this
day stands tottering thereby, and are ready when a rough tempest does blow, to
tipe in y^ dust, or feel the force of a terrible b^ast. God grant that
Flanders he not the first, that hatred and malice (by mean of dissension) shall
bring to decay. So now to my matter, as breefely as I meant to pen out this
discourse.

The coming do^wne of Don John to the low Countries, made the Spaniards look
for some succoure, and moved the people of Flanders to think and look of
other ma^ters, and in a while they openly published, that they could not abide
the behavior of strangers, and would not permit any ^o to enter and
govern, before the Spanyardes were e^pulsed or drawn by the King from their
territories, offering all obedience and duties to the King of Spain their
Master, if the Spanyardes and strangers were taken from the^. But their offer
and demand took such small hold in the fanour of Don John, that great matter
grew thereof, as I might p^rceiue, being in Bruzels, by their musters there, and
Don John's preparation lying at Lusenbroeg, and after, at a Town called H^: The
States, I mean such as held against Don John, somewhat standing on their
guard, made straight orders for the Spanyardes, if they used violence, and had
so good an eye over them, that at a tune, when the Spaniards thought to do some
erployte, a Ge^tleman of Scorl^d, named Captain Bassorde, lying in a village
with his regiment of Scottishmen, had such a hand over the Spaniards, as they
no whit liked, and yet they assaulted the Scottishmen, which at that time were
but ill provided. All this season, and a long while before, was the right
Honorable Master Doctor Wilson (now Secretary to the Queens Majesty) Lord
Ambassador in Flanders: and two sever all times was sent in Embassage thither,
at that time, the Captain of the I Will of VVight, called Master Edward Horssey,
for to make peace, and for such causes as pleased our Prince.

Ambassadors were sent thither from the Emperor, and from the Electors and
States of Germany, and in long debating of matters (to the which the Bishop of
Leeg came, a great Segnior, and stout Prelate) a peace was concluded, and for
the joy thereof, I saw a general Procession in Bruzels, where all the
Ambassadors and States were (saving the Ambassador of England, and all the
Nobility of Flaunders) which made such a show, and reached such a length in
the streets, and tarried so long there, as was a wonder to behold, and the
strangest view that had bin seen in that place many years before, the
number of Gentlemen was so great, and the common people so many.

But all this rejoicing turned to woe and lamentatio^ within a short term
after, for when the Spaniards were gone, there ^ell out such matter between ye
States and Don John, that the Spaniards came again, but not to Antwerp, for
that the States had politikely possessed, and many other Towns before, of
great importance and strength: and Don John and his people were assembled in
Namure, and much business was set abroche between these two sides (after Don
John had bin triu^pha^tly received into Bruzels) and either of these parties
armed themselves, and wrought for their advantage what pleased best their
fancies, some sending into Spain, and some sending otherwhere, the necessity
of both their causes so required, and the troublous time they felt, enforced
those causes.

The estates now began to lean to the Prince of Orange, and deal thoroughly
and plainly with him, which was a great strength unto them, and an occasion
to reform the rest of the nobility to draw one kind of way, if they
determined to withstand Don John, as they made show they would. But some that
made promise there unto, brake suddayncly, and turned to Don John, who was
leauying of a power to invade Flaunders, and had together both footmen and
Horsemen, a very gallante company, and those were ancient and perfect
Souldioures, that had served many years in great adventures and hazards. And
to speak as the common fame went (and right wise and noble men did report,)
Don John for his own person was a wise and most famous noble man, that well
was worthy (for many good parts in him) to have had the leading of a Camp as
great as King Alexanders army of Macedonie, whose men of war were at the
conquering of most part of the world. Thus was Don John and his power in a
manner ready to march, and lay about Namure, to tarry the coming of some
such bands of Horsemen as he looked for, and be fully furnished of such things
as he wanted.

The States had in like sort assembled a very great army, and were as ready
to march, as occasion fell out: and knowing that their enemies must have much
ado, before they could win any Town of credit, the States determined to
weerie Don John, and so by policy and practice to strive with him, rather than
with plain force and fight to encounter him: for their mighty walled Towns
were a great block in Don John's way, which neither could be won by their
enemies, nor yet well could be beseeged, but that the States had a mean to
aid the Towns, and power enough to raise the seege, and could at any
advantage give Don John battle, without which advantage it were no wisdom
to deal with a strong and stout enemy. And on that resolution stand the
noblest Souldioures now living. And would to God that towardly Prince and good
Gentleman, the King of Portingall, had stood on that point, which shall be
spoken of in another matter, God sparing me life. But now to my purpose I
proceed. But as the States looked to take Don John at advantage, or aweerie
him and his Souldioures with long wars and much labor, Don John and his
company were so well experimented with pains, and accustomed so often to
suffer the misery of wars, that they had such able minds and bodies to
endure and bear off the burden of adversity, yt the states should not easily
that way have had their wills, over them, although that the Spanyardes, by
long rest and delicacie of Flaunders, were become some what slothful and
effeminate: yet are they of such courage and complexion, when force does
compel them to trudge and to toil, that straightwayes, their nature is
converted to their old manner and custom, and they could for a need frame
themselves to a new trade of travel. Which shows them as well armed within
their minds (where the man is best known) as clad and defenced without,
where nothing is good, if the mind set it not forward, and maintain it to
the uttermost. And the opinion of some soldiers is, both at home and abroad,
that who so ever is dainty and unseasoned, and can not martch in hardness,
without a bag and a bottle, were better be by a warm fire, tha^ in a cold
field, and will do more harm in a little piece of beef, than he ca^ to good
in a great battle, he is so loaded with his trinkets, and minds so much his
meat. And although in a spleen I have spoken of the Spaniard, (yet no other
than he deserves) so have I seen both Frenchman and Borgonyon (and some of our
own nation besides,) that in the feelde are more greedy of glory, than hungry
in the house, when a banquet is on the table. I must leave off this speech, and
follow another humor. So Don John and the states, as you have heard, devised
how the one might deceive the other: and yet neither of them both ventured
further than good occasion commanded them. And in this cold kind of service,
the soldiers remained, amyd the heat of Summer a long season, till Don John's
power began to bid the bace, and by a great mischaunce took the power of the
states at advantage, and slew some of them, and had the rest in chase as
far as they durst follow, and so that byckering ended.

The states upon this little overthrow (wherein the Scottish bands had the most
hurt) attended both horsemen and footmen, out of Germany, and gave Don John
leave a while to march about a piece of the Country, minding as soon as the
Cassemeer came down, to go to the field again. And in the mean time, the
states put their people in garrisons.

Their enemies having a little leisure and romth given the^ (more for some
coulorable cause, than any constraint) began to spur about, and espy their
commodity: and by sleyght and force (as a camp can not want neither of the^
both) slipped into some simple seats and towns, and carrying away credit
with them, because they kept the field, were received into many places, and
chiefly into Louain. And some such as would untwist the fast thr^d of Faith and
Promise, became so ^pper of their words (when they minded to break that the
states could not hold them: and so after flickering fortune ^hey fled, a
matter worthy to be touched, but left off by me, to a riper judgment, that
clearelye can construe the reason of these rotten causes.

A notable soldier called Monsieur de la Moet, governor of Gra^eling, went
from the states at this time (as he said) to keep the town, for the king. And
diverse others as the Count D^nes, Monsieur Barlymont, and more than I can
name, made their own way to go whether they pleased: and for the time, the
world in Flaunders was quick, and dead: they were in dolor and heaviness,
that had not a light mind to comfort a sad heart: for the world was so
sorrowful, or so subtle, y^ a man might not scarcely at that season laugh with
his friend, nor trust his own brother. For cunning and craft, had put
constancy out of countenance, and finesse, with ^icklenesse, were matched
together in one corner of Flaunders, or another: and so the world wagged, and
the weakest were thruste to the wall, and the strongest could struggle and
strive against all things, but the stream.

When time came on to set abroch matters that might not run clear till the
lees were settled (and Wine would be known from vinegar and Ueriuice,) the
events of weighty matter burste out, and made every man of both the sids, Don
John's, and the states, look well to their footing: for of necessity, and
countries cause (besides the desire of fame and honor) both these armies must
march, to view the one the other, and in open field, do somewhat for
reputations sake, and that they came for. And as far as I can judge, prince
Cassemeer at this time was not come to the states. Well, the camps were in
march, and both of them desirous to do what best became the time: and among the
states, were ^repte (for service sake alone) some English Gentlemen, with such
bands as they could happen upon, and furnishe at their own charges. And with
these English Gentlemen, joined for good will in the field, the Scottish
regiment (as I heard.) And the English had an intent to march to the Camp, of
the states. Don John's power having intelligence thereof, made haste to preuente
them, and so the skirmishe began, and lasted a long season, and for
certainetie, had not the English and Scottishe nations done their duty and
very well withal, they had been repulsed, and peradventure overthrown. I
would praise and commend any manne that did well that day, but for that I
am ignorant of that which was truly done, and would be loath to flatter one,
and offend another, I omit al their names, but master John Norrises, for this
present, til my next book of other wars be printed and published, at which
time I shall know the truth of that I treat of.

The Casameer with a great power of horsemen, and footmen, was come at this
present, or in a short while after, and Don John then was to consider and aid
the danger might have followed, for his army was a great deal less in
number than the power of the states, and oftentimes the states were in mind to
besiege Louaine, but never unready to watch for the enemies, and offer the
battle, which was looked for daily: the Burgonions side were also well
disposed, and it was certainly thought, that Don John's side was as gallaunt.
Now were policies and stratagemes to be seen. Now the show of war, and
clattering of arms might be hard. Now the poulder and bullets were prepared,
and stout and manly skirmishes began afreshe, and the soldiers bespredde the
plains, as thick as the black crows, that flies swarming out of the wild
wooddes: and the whole people and commons of Flaunders thought they should be
rid of their enemies, that so long had enpouershed their rich and plentiful
country. For they smarted (poor souls) that often had bin spoiled, and they
felt all the wrong, that knew not how to right themselves, but by Gods grace,
and gaping after victory.

At this present time, victualles began to be marvelous dear, and after the
Rutters and Casemeeres company were paid, money among other bands was hard
to come by, and in that sort, a very long time was spent and consumed, yet
some were relieved with that treasure the States could spare: but in fine,
such scarcity and miscrie came on and fell among thousa^ds, that both
sicknesses and sudden death ensued. And at length, the plague, (of which
many made an end of their lives) was sparkled both in Camp and in Country,
and no one place was free from one disease or other, that either stood near
the Camp, or where the sick soldiers repaired. And some of our English
Ge^tleme^ dropped down in that visitation, as Master Thomas Cobham, and
others, no great number. This sorrowful and fearful sickness as much vexed
and troubled the poor people, as any misery they felt, and made the troubled
conscience more afraid, than the view of all Don John's power.

Much practicing and working there was for a peace by our Princes Ambassadors,
that were sorry to see so much bloodshed and mischief as might fall out upon
a battle. And many times peace was expected, and likely to have happened, if
Don John would have agreed to any reasonable conditions. But in conclusion,
Don John, by a hope he had in some faction or practice (either among Pater
Noster men, a company so called, or others favorers to Don John's doing) would
not agree to the peace, nor do any thing that stood against his
determination. So, continuing in a resolute mind, he thruste diverse bands of
Spaniardes, and other soldiers, into such Towns and Fortresses as he had
possessed, and with such power as he had left, marched toward Namure or
those parties, meaning not, as he made show thereof, to trouble the States any
further for a season. There were some that threw down churches and vexed and
troubled religious persons, against whom rose a company of Wallons, naming
themselves Pater Noster men, and sometimes encountered those that destroyed
religious houses, and made slaughter on the^, as they might make their party
good: and that matter is not yet pacifyed, for about Gaunt and other towns are
many that seek to do mischief, and namely to their own nation and
countrymen. Which is a beginning of sorrow, and a sore dangerous thing to
continue.

The power of Don John in many sorts of services has done what they could,
to vistresse the bands that the states give entertainment too, but the states
and their people are, and have bin too strong for Don John's power. Sundry
skirmishes, and oneof the^ before L^ine, I could a little write of: but, for
that no great thing was achieved by the^, I lap the^ up among other matters,
that I neither have occasion much to dilate off, nor you are desirous to hear.
For, he that shall write of every thing was done, had need to have many
bodies, to be in every place at once, and twice so many eyes, to note in what
order the things fell out, or otherwise he may miss of the troth, as some
have, that were in the field when service was to be seen, whose intelligence
I had, and yet an other in the same company does tell me a contrary tale: For
whiles one is in the skirmishe, and another is a forraging, they are seuecallye
occupied, and will make sundry discourses: and for my own part, I proteste
before God, I had rather follow the truth of the matter, than the flattery
of the time: so that if any error have passed my pen, it ought to be
pardonable, for that I hate to publishe and set out a fable, and love to
prefer the knowledge and understanding of a troth: and speaking of any man or
matter, enemy or friend, I would yield them due praise and commendation, not
only for to win my works the more credit, but likewise to use a kind of
duetifull courteste, and so to pay in report every person living, the debt
that I do owe him.

Now it is to be understood, that whiles Don John was busy about his
wars, the Queens Majesty sent Ambassadors to treat of amity and peace,
(as you have heard before) and the last that went over about these
chargeable affairs, were two most honorable personages, the Lord Cobham, and
sir Francis Walsingham, on whom attended as gallant a train of Gentlemen, as
went from hence to Flaunders these twenty years. And as the true report
goes, these noble Embassadoures held and kept such cheer (in a dear and
scarce season for victualles) that the like has not been seen, neither of
late, nor many years ago. And the bounty that one of the Ambassadors used
(whose deeds shall show his name) out of his own purse and francke
liberality, exceeded, and is to be honored for ever. And when these
Ambassadors had lain there a great while, (and finished that was thought
necessary and meet) they returned to the Court. Since which time (as God
ordaines all things) Don John is dead, and many other noble men more. And the
plague is so hot among the Spaniardes, and the rest that lies in camps (as is
to be proved) that even as a shephearde does point out his sheep^, and ^ulles
out those lambe^s that he sendes to the slaughter house: so God (as it seems)
with his stretched out arm, touches whom he pleases, and by the finger of
his wrath and scourge of plague, ^ings thousands underfoot, and tu^bles the^
in their grave. And this is a thing maruelously to be noted (not specially
abroad, but wisely here at home) that some have no power to go from the
plague, and some, go where they will, the plague does follow them. For it
skippeth over houses and housholdes, and enters in their doors, that makes
sa^e both doors and windows, not brought altogether by infection of clothes
and garments, but sent for foul offenses, by a power past our judgments, and
is to be presupposed a messenger of Gods anger, and an Angel of ire, that
waytes as well on the good, to take the^ from the badde and wicked of this
world, as follows the wicked, to make Gods power known, and man confess his
own faults and folly. Now, if men would look narrowly into the sore
affliction of Flaunders, for the space of thirty years, they would think they
have had plagues ynowe (if God so were pleased) besides the fearful
pestilence it self, which of all things is most terrible, and yet the more is
the pity, there cannot be a worse plague among Christians, than disagreement,
and public dissension, which is to be feared has taken such deep root
in Flaunders, that it will not, nor can not be helped, but by the policy of
puissaunt Princes, and prayers of good people.

Thus far have I gone (Gentle Reader) to make thee conceive how mercifully
God has dealte with our Country, and how sharply our neighbors hau^ bi^
afflicted, in a manner round about us, which I will (God willing) speak of
in an other volume, if fououralby you can afoorde to give this my bare and
barraine Discourse your good report, and at the least (for my study and labor
(although you mislike it) recompense me with silence, or else, as this was
done in little time, so take what leisure you list, and write another work of
more value and weight, which I shall be as glad to give commendation unto,
as I shall be sorry, when I know these pains have not contented you: as
witnesses our living Lord, who multiply his graces among us, and send
concord and quietness to the iarring and troubled state of Flaunders.

Finis quodTHOMAS CHVRCHYARD.

To the World.
GO silly Book to subtle World, and show thy simple face,
And forvvard pass, and do not turn again to my disgrace.
For thou shall bring to peoples ears but troth that needs not blush,
And though Maell Bouch give thee rebuke, care not for that a rush,
For evil tongs do ytch so sore, they must be rubbing still
Against the teeth, that should hold fast the clapper of the Mill.
Desire those men that likes thee not, to lay thee down again,
Till some svveete nappe, and harmless sleep has settled troubled brain.
And when one house does shut thee out, creep to another straight,
And though thy master be but plain, yet look thou use some slight
To purchase love, and credit both, for that shall breed good blood,
And thou with praise, and honest brute, may do thy Master good.
But if they read thee in disdeyne, slip from them if thou may,
Let envy swell, and malice poult, I hear not what they say.
I made thee for to please the best, the vvorst may mend the while,
So wisdom bids thee vvelcome Book, thou may at folly smile.
An ounce of praise from wise men's mouth, vvayes down a pound of fame,
That fools do give, whose slender skill, scarce scannes men's honest name.
If Court embrace thee for my sake, to Country then in post,
Be sure then neither thy bare words, nor my poor work is lost.
Where Souldioures are, advance thy self, for though some faults they spy,
Their martial minds will make them cast on thee a friendly eye.
Among Divines and Scholemen often, come not, but for a change,
For at thy lewd and rubbish phrase, the learned will look strange.
To men of Law do freely go, for they good fellows are,
And can with toys sometimes well ease, the weight of Countries care.
With Merchant men make thine aboade, who loves to hear of Peace:
So shall it be, when bloody broils in Flaunders ginnes to cease.
Thus have I taught thee what good course thou oughtst of right to hold,
Thou art a Book, go where thou vvilte, like Bayard blind be bold.
Thou shall have mates to follovv thee, and help thee if thou fall.
I have vvide scope at will to walk, yea Pen and Muse at call,
And other Books that I must needs commit to Worlds report.
He is thrice blessed that well does work, our time is here but short.
FINIS.

