Two fruitful and godly Sermons, preached at Dorchester in Dorsetshyre, the
one touching the building of Gods Temple, the other what the Temple is.

Haggai. 1.8. Go up to the Mountain, and bring wood, and build this house,
and I will be favorable in it.

Imprinted at London, by John Charle-wood, dwelling in Barbican, at the sign
of the half Eagle and the Key. 1585.

To the right worshipful M. George Trenchard Esquire, one of her Majesty's
Justices of the peace, in the County of Dorset, and one of the deputies
Lieuetenants of the same sheyre. W. Chub wishes the plenty of Gods graces in
Christ Jesus.
THe great zeal of good King Josias, 2. King. 22.
and the singular care he had in repairing the Temple of God, and maintaining
true holiness, was not only prophesied by Iddo 300. years before his birth,
but is now remembered many hundred years after his death, as a most worthy
president for all godly and well affected minds, for in him was first found
lyberality, in disbursing money toward the building thereof, then wisdom in
appointing godly overseers to see it well done, and last of all care, in
having skillful workmen to do it, the which godly disposition of his,
expressed the very fruits of a good mind in as much as he would willingly have
the place erected, wherein the name of God might be glorified, and his laws
and statutes read and exercised, and the people of God taught and instructed:
such dispositions are the very badges and shows of a feeling conscience, and a
godly settled mind.

I may think no less in you (right worshipful) but as a second Josias, have
endeavored your self very carefully for the erecting of gods glory in the
Town of Dorchester, my native town, in that you have not only ben willing
for the exercising of preaching in the same town, but have offered your
liberality for the furthering, continuing, and establishing, thereof, to the
great comfort of the town, and no les joy to the borderers. By occasion
whereof, I was not only moved with a comfortable mind for my native country,
to see the prosecuting of so good a purpose, but was also bent upon the same
argument to preach these two Sermons following, which as well in thankfulness
for your proceedinges, as in signification of mine unfeigned goodwyll, I humbly
present unto your worship, beseeching you to allow of the slender gift, and to
cover the vnwoorthines thereof with your accustomed clemency. And therein, as I
shall think my pains cased, my works bettered, and my travel well bestowed,
even so shall I persuade my self, to be much bound unto your worship for your
loving acceptance. And for the same shall continue mine unfeigned heart in
faithful prayers unto GOD, to bless your days with the increase of his
benefits, to whose merciful tuition I commend you.

Your worships poor countryman ready at commandment. W. Chub. Minister.
Written in Froome zelwood, the xii. of December. 1585.
A Sermon concerning the building of Gods Temple.
Ezra. 4. Cap. 1.2.3. verses. 1. But the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin
heard that the Children of the captivity builded the Temple unto the Lord God
of Israel.

2. And they came to Zerubbabel and to the chief fathers and said unto them,
we will build with you, for we seek the Lord your God as ye do, and we have
sacrificed unto him ever since the time of Esar Haddon king of Ashur, which
brought us up hither.

3. Then Zerubbabel and Ieshua and the rest of the chief fathers of Israel,
said unto them. It is not for you, but for us to build the house unto our God,
for we our selves together will build it unto the Lord God of Israel, as King
Cirus the King of Persia has commanded us.


THe most comfortable doctrine of ye building of Gods Temple, is expressed in
many places of the old Testament, as a notable example how the godly
endeavored themselves, to set up that place wherein the name of the Lord should
always be glorified, and his laws exercised: not that the same place should
simply be the Temple made with lime and stone wherein God should dwell, for God
dwells not in Temples made with stone, but because God had ordained that a
place should be erected for that purpose, wherein his Laws should be read,
published, learned, established, and by God himself heard and allowed. And for
this cause many the godly kings, as Solomon, Cyrus, Darius, Josias,
Zerubbabell, etc. endeavored with all study to accomplish and erecte it, and
which God has specially commanded, having relacion principally unto that
Temple, wherein indeed his name ought to be glorified, his laws established,
and wherein himself as chief patron, is always resident, which is our body,
which by the virtue of our head Christ, is called the Temple. Now for as much
as the people of GOD in those days, were specially known by their great
zeal, pain, and travel, in erecting that holy Sanctuary, as having an only
care for the furthering of holy things, (least they might otherwise be
drowned with profane and worldly matters) every good and godly man endeavored
to se^tt his hand to the building, by which occasion, the godly were discerned
and known from the ungodly: but sithence that time through the weakness of
man's judgment, and the diligence of Satan, the ungodly, (having no other
credit to afoorde Satan's merchandise, and satan having no better means but
by woorking his slights and deceit in the ungodly) they I say, have under the
pretense of holiness, wrought satan's purpose, and deceived many seely young ones
in these days, as appears by this text which I have now in hand, wherein is
showed, how the adversaries of the Church would have builded with the people
of God, 2. verse.
and how they sought the Lord God, and how they had done sacrifice unto him,
which profession of theirs, and joining themselves to the people of God to
build with them, was but a slight to bring their deuilish practices to pass,
as appears in the fourth verse following. Their purpose.
Where it is declared that they discouraged the people of God, troubled them in
their building, and hired counselors to hinder their devise. A common practice
among the ungodly, to pretend some mischief and wickedness under the color
of holiness, such has been the policies of all the wicked and ungodly from
the beginning, to credit their wicked pretenses under the color of
sanctimony. As in these appeared, who said first, that they would build with
them, that is to say, with the godly. This is a notable policy of satan, to
cause the wicked to bring their purpose to effect, the rather to deceive the
weaker sort by counterfeyting holiness, and by making themselves as it were
servant of one household, and sheep of one flock: for this cause does satan
himself, sometimes transform him self into an Angel of light, because by ye
glorious shape he will ye rather beguile and deceive, allure and confound, the
simple true meaning sort, even as the Wolf by putting on a sheep skyn, may
the rather have access to the flock to murder and devour at his pleasure.
After the same sort did Judas salute and kiss his master Christ, which kiss
and salutation was a sign and token of love, but it hatched hatred and treason
The gest without a wedding garment that thrust in among the bidden gests showed
the like effect.
I may very well liken them to a great many in these days, which under the
color of coming to the Church, and frequenting the company of good men with
freendly faces, and bountiful gifts, do further their wicked pretenses, in
overthrowing the estate, and confounding religion. In whom has treason
appeared strongest of late years here in England, but in those that have been
admitted into favor. After that they had protested great loyalty and
freendship? the old saying is verified. In trust is treason, and in the fairest
rose is soonest found a canker. Under the color of a freendly quaffyng, King
John was poisoned by pledging a Friar, such are colors of dissemblers, whose
affections are far from their outward show. Pylate in a fair show of Justice
and favor, could wash his hands from condemning the giltles blood of Christ,
and yet gave sentence on him, such counterfeyted favor is joined in steed of
freendship, and such abomination in steed of holiness, that we may say, the
wood which they bring is wormeaten, and the stones they build withal is as
rubble, not fit for so glorious a sanctuary as the Lords Temple. They have made
estimation of their own houses more then the Temple of the Lord, Agge. 1, 9,
which lies waste, and yet they say, they will join with the true and godly
builders, furdermore they say, that they sought the Lord, but as they did
after a dissembling sort join with the godly, offering to build with them, and
purposing nothing less, even so now do they say, that they have sought the
Lord, whose diligence and industry is judged the weaker, because they have not
found him, for no doubt the Lord is not so doubtful to be found, nor so
strange to be spoken withal, but that if they had sought him with faith, and
with a hearty desire, they might have found him. As our savior Christ himself
says. Querite et inuenietis, seek and ye shall find, and as the Prophet David
faith, Psalm. 119, 2,
Blessed are all they that keep his testimonies, and seek him with their hole
heart, Deu. 4, 29.
and as Moses says. If from thence thou shall seek the Lord thy God, thou
shall find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart: but peradventure if they
sought him, it was (as Christ says) with their lips, but their heart was far
of, wherefore if we behold both their actions that is to say, to join with the
builders, and to bring nothing to the buidling, and to seek the Lord and not
to find him, shows their bad pretenses. Their religion.
But now see further and behold their profession and relygion, which was, that
they had done sacrifice unto the Lord, in the which profession and religion of
theirs, they express how devoutly and orderly they showed themselves, in as
much as they take their original from Esar Haddon, otherwise called
Sardanapalus, who was Senahcrib, his son who worshipped the Idol Nisroch as
his God. 2. Re. 17.26
It does appear in the book of the Kings, how this people at their first
entrance into Samaria, and possessing the Cities thereof, they feared not the
Lord, wherefore God sent Lions to devour them. Then they told the King what
happened, who commanded that one of the priests of the country should teach
them what to do, how be it, every nation made them their Gods, and put them in
the houses of the high places. And this seems was their sacrifice unto their
Gods, that they themselves had made, even a sacrifice agreeable to their
profession, which was altogether as I said before in dissimulation, they were
glad that they had caught the very bare word sacrifice, because it was the
profession of the priests of the law, instituted by God, as a figure of
Christ's priesthood, which signification, was as far from their knowledge,
(I mean of the true use of the sacrifice) as their religion was from good
devotion, or as far as Judas differed from an honest disciple, yet as Judas
gloried of the title of a Disciple, though he used not him self as a Disciple,
so these spoke of sacrificing, 2. Kin, 17. Esra. 4, 4,
yet knew not the use thereof, as appeared by their Idolatrye and dissimulation,
envy, interruption, trouble, and hindering the godly buildings: but as I said
before, so I say still, all the ungodly from the beginning, have had some show
of godliness, the rather to utter their deuilish purposes. The manner of the
Scorpion is, to smyle and show a loving countenance, to them that he will sting
unto death. Honny many times beguileth him that is poisoned, so it happens
always with double consciences, whose conscience is wicked and profession good.

The priests of Baal and Elias, did both sacrifice, but not alike, nor with
the like conscience, for the priests of Baal did it in Idolatry and
superstition. Elias did it in good devotion, and with a pure heart unto the
almighty: therefore the old saying is true, The hoode makes not the Monk.
Hence is it that pure religion is grounded upon a spiritual profession, and
not a ceremonial show, and hence is it, that we should behold the Lord in
truth, and understand him in righteousness, not in a profession whose
signification we know not, otherwise we might reason well, to say the papists
did well to use the word of God in the Latin tongue, because it was the word
of God, but that could not be, because the knowledge and use, and necessity
thereof was hidden from men. But so is the slight and subtilty of the devil,
to color in the wicked their wickedness, and deuilish pretenses, with godly
titles or godly names, or godly ceremonies, without the true use and
signification of them. The Ammonits Ammonits
did offer and use sacrifice, but how? most filthily and abhominably, when
they offered their sons and daughters to Moloch. 1. Kin. 11.
The Jews did put their trust in their Temple, saying: Templum domini, the
Temple of the Lord, and not in the living lord himself, and that with a
faithful heart, as David did in many places, and as is required of all the
godly. This is to be noted, that betwixt the godly and the ungodly, the matter
is all one, but the manner differs, for trust being required of all, is found
in all, but not alike, for the ungodly trust in their Idols, and in stocks and
stones, and the godly in the living Lord, who is their maker, preserver and
governor. Israelites. Iere, 7, 18,
Likewise the Israelites did worship, but whom did they worship? not ye high
and mighty Jehovah, but the Queen of heaven, that is, the Sun and the Moon.
Why? because say they, then had we plenty of victuales, Iere, 44, 17.
we were well and felt no evil. Such was the illusion of satan, to feed their
adoration with a worldly savor of security, as though the true blessedness did
consist in the peace and plenty of this worldly life.

Also the Pharesies did observe yt whole Law in outward show, Pharisees,
they fasted, they truly tythed mynt, annise, and commin, what could the world
see in them, but the whole body of godliness, but yet Christ, who knows the
secrets of all hearts, said they were hipocrits and dissemblers. Who were more
devout, Math, 23,
and more given to fasting then the Manichies, Maniches.
which gave straight order for the observing thereof, and refrained from the
eating of flesh, and yet concerning all other cates and deynties, they so
porred themselves, that they cracked.

And I pray you what greater show of godliness, charity, humility, chastity,
etc was there seen in our Papists, Papists.
in all their actions here in England, and else where, they were full of prayers,
night watches, Dirges, and solemnities, but in what strange tongue, and
strange devise, and in what devotion, the world knows, they were so full of
chastity, that none of them would marrye, and yet few but had his Curtisan:
they were full of charity, and yet Tyrants, yea such Wolves, as did daily suck
the blood of Christ his flock, they gave alms plentifully, but they had
politic devises to extort it from others: they ordained and observed many holy
days, which bredd and hatched many idellers, Idolaters, feasters gamsters in
all sorts, dauncers, incontinent match-makers, and such like abuses great
store, scarce was there one yt could make account of his faith, for the
comfort of the Gospel was hid from them, and all good and godly exercises,
in as much, as if ever the kingdom of ignorance reigned, it flourished in their
days.

And now in these last days, wherein the Gospel (God be thanked) florisheth,
Protestants
and the word of God is daily preached, we see a great many lip Gospellers,
which have the word of God in their mouth, even from the teeth forward, how
they will dispute daily of it, how they will make choice of their companies, and
yet by their works ye shall know them, for some of them are great slanderers,
backbiters, and scornful dispisers of other men, many of the^ great enemies to
the poor, such hold the gospel sometimes, for the favor they bear to their
friends, sometime, for the malice they bear to others, some are so covetous,
that they are become privy usurers, and open extortioners. It is a lamentable
world, to see, in this present age, the very picture of the young man, that
would learn to enter into the kingdom of heaven, but would not forsake and
sell all that he had to follow Christ. An other sort you shall see, to be
like Cleophas, to go with Christ and yet not to know him, these are like such
as S. Paul speaks of, that will come in the latter days, having a show of
godliness, 2, Tim. 3,
but denying the virtue thereof, and as the Apostle says in an other place.
They say that they know God, when as they deem him in their deeds because
they are themselves abominable. The Prophet Esaias does sharply reprove such
hypocrites, saying: Esaias, 48, 1.2
Hear ye this O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and
are come out of the waters of Judah, which swear by the name of the Lord, and
make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth nor in righteousness, for
they are called of the holy cittye, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel,
whose name is the Lord of hosts.

The very like hipocrites does ye Prophet Jeremy recite, saying: Run to and fro
by the streets of Jerusalem, Iere. 5.1, 2,
and behold now and know, and enquire in the open places thereof, if ye can
find a man, or if there be any ye executes judgment, and seeks the truth,
and I will spare it, for though they say the Lord lives, yet they swear
falsely. Thus may ye see in this brief discourse, the heap of adversaries,
which the church always has had, and yet has, woorking under the color of
holiness, by reason whereof, they have not only brought their mischiuous
purposes the sooner to pass, as it is said before, in hindering the building
of true holiness, but by this means the credit and honor of the godly, has
been embased, and oftentimes had in suspicion, yea condemned amongst a great
many of indifferent worldlings: wherefore that the one may the better be known
from the other, even as I have before laid down the manner and behavior of
the wicked, and their hypocrisy, so will I, as my text leads me, lay down
the conversation and behavior of the godly, with their profession, yt as the
one is seen and known by hypocrisy, so the other may be seen and known by
constancy.

In Zerubbabell, otherwise called Barachias, together with Ieshua and the
rest, fathers of Israel was found this godly disposition.

1 That they refused the adversaries offered help, lothing to join with them.

2 They professed themselves to build together.

3 Unto the God of Israel.

In the first fruit of their good profession and constancy, it appears, that
they allowed not of the offered help and assistaunce of the adversaries,
although indeed the present occasion of new repayring their City, Anno mun.
3419.
and laying the foundation of their Temple, required al help and assistance,
yet (their purpose and labor considered) they meant nothing les (being the
children of God) then themselves to do it, that as the Temple was a place of
holy exercises, and a mystery of an everlasting sanctuary, so it should be
erected by none but such as were unfeignedly the Lords workmen, wherefore this
seemed to be a godly purpose in the children of God to refuse these
adversaries, and not to esteem of their labors for two causes. First, for
that they wexed not faynte nor weary in the travel and performance of good
things, dedicated to the Lord. Secondly, that they refused to join themselves
to the wicked knowing the inconveniences of a wicked participation, in the
which two considerations, if Gods people do well consider, of this president
so long laid before their eyes as a good example, it cannot choose but be a
fruitful pattern, for in that they shrinked not at so great a labor, but were
wylling to do it themselves, it is notable for us to learn, specially in
these days, to do our godly exercises, and labors (especially which are
dedicated to ye lord) our own selves, without the care of our own pains, or
the trust we should repose in others, and then we should see how the
Bishop sometimes would refuse his Register, the Justice his Clark, the pastor
his serving priest, the Sheriff his arrant Baylyues, the master his servant,
and so forth of many other professions of great charge, wherein the notable
building of religion, and of a common wealth stands at a stay, (nay at decay)
for lack of those that should take pains themselves, and not esteem the care
of the travel, whereby the building might go forward, for if Zerubbabel and
Ieshua with the Elders of Israel, had been lazy themselves, and committed the
building to others being Infidels, the work had never been brought to pass,
and surely I am persuaded, the small care and great ease that our chief
builders have, is the cause that the work goes not forward, I mean that
christian religion is not substantially erected, and the commonwealth
sufficiently stayed, but true it is that the labourer, that makes more account
of his wages, then of the performance of his workmanship is so hasty in his
labor that the work oftentimes shameth his master, but in steed of shame and
care in these days, is planted covetousness and stoutnes, the one desires
inordinatly, and the other defends impudently. And yet no man can justly
charge any Prelate, Magistrate, patron or usurer in these days, for bribery,
extorcion, simony, or usury, and why? because they themselves commit none of
these offenses, but yet they have factors and dooers for them, therefore
indeed this is their fault, if the building be good, they should do the work
themselves, for if the work be Gods, none is too good to do it, for that
cause whom the Queens Majesty has thought good, either for the room of a
Counselor, Bishop or Justice, is committed to the same place, to use it and
discharge it himself, and not by seely substitution. O how both our commonweals would flourish, if our chief men would by the example of good
Zerubbabell and Ieshua, labor themselves, and not faint at it. And again, I
would they would follow the other example of them, in refusing of them, then no
doubt, that must needs be a pleasant Cup of wine unto the drinker, whose
dregs are purified and cleansed, so that government especially (because in
them consists the cheifest building) must needs be good and profitable,
which do separate themselves from brybers, extortioners, factors, and wicked
enticers, which many times corrupts a whole country, and hinders many a
good mind. The Lord in any wise would not have his people to join with
Infidels, least that by touching of pytch they might be defiled. Eccle. 13, 1
The Prophet David said, with the wicked thou shall be wicked, and with the
froward thou shall learn frowardnes. It is dangerous to lay towe by the fire,
or to join the Lamb to the Wolf, for the wicked do always more forcibly
infect, and corrupt, then the good do or may change or alter, And what
fellowship has Christ with Belial, therefore it is the part of all good and
godly men, utterly to refuse the company of the wicked, although they will
offer their labors, and counterfeyte their simplicity, I mean such as are
given over to work wickedness, and in whom there is no hope of reconciliation
and amendment, of whom S. Paul speaks of saying: 1. Cor, 59, 11
But now I have written unto you, that ye company not together, if any that is
called a brother, etc. An other good and godly example they do show in their
second disposition, Second disposition.
when they will build together themselves in the which is most notably seen
and learned the unity of the builders, in that they will join together among
themselves, when they go about a godly purpose, and not the one to draw
backward while the other goes forward, the one to stand still while the other
labors, the one to sleep while the other watches, and so forth, for that is
ye spynning of Penelope her webb, which was never brought to good end. Hence
is it that the wiseman comme^deth the unity of brethren, Eccl. 25.1
because it is ye fountain of a good disposition, and it is the prick that
sets forward every good work, it is the cause that religion is profited,
the commonwealth profited, and every good and virtuous action commended. For
this cause is it that S. Paul commands, Ephe. 4, 3.
That every one endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit, for by so doing,
the work shall be both the better and the sooner brought to good pass, for
whereas there are several sorts of facultyes in building, as the Mason, the
Carpenter. the Tyler, and so forth, with many other assistants, every one of
them conferring his own profession with the residue, in a full intent to
further the building, shall make the building the better, and bring it the
sooner to an end, whereas they shall lovingly consent together in unity, even
so, among Gods people we have many orders, as the Minister, the Lawier, the
physician, the Magistrate, the private householder, and so forth, and every one
of them a workman, to help further the building of the Sanctuary. If all these
do not consent together in the unity of faith, in the hand of charity, in the
study of godliness, not preferring worldly causes before heavenly, they cannot
further the buildyng with a beautiful show, nor hasten it to a speedy
perfection, and therefore these words We will build together, be of great
importance, and do give a good example to ye godly, to consent and agree
together, for otherwise, as the Mason and Carpenter dissenting, will never
build well, nor bring the work to a good end, even so, every man in his
vocation and calling, some in preaching true religion, some in reforming
manners, some in teaching a godly life, and every man in shaping something or
other for the building of true holiness, if they vary or fall at square, they
do greatly hinder the building: wherefore, as the arms, legs, eyes, feet etc,
in one body do consent in their several offices, to the serving of one body,
even so every calling should in his several vocation, serve in the unity of
spyrite to the buildinge of Gods holy Temple, but as I said, if one be
quick, and an other sloe, if one build up, and an other pluck down, that
workmanshyp will hardly be brought to good pass, no more can it be with true
religion, if one be of this mind, and an other of that, if one go forth and
an other go back. What is it but as S. Paul says, a denying of Christ, and
a hinderance to knowledge. An envious mind, and self will, be great hinderers
in these days, which in deed, do lay their foundation upon affection and
self love, and therefore the buildyng can not be good. Wherefore they that
will be sound, and sufficient builders, must lay their foundation upon Gods
word, and that is the building that is founded upon the rock, and will not
fall by storms or tempests, as our savior Christ says. It is the same
foundation that shall stand when heaven and earth shall fail, Math. 7.
and therefore, all the Prophets, Apostles, and Martirs, builded their
knowledge and profession thereupon, some calling it Deu. 4,
wisdom, some a Psa 119
light, some the Rom, 1
power of God, and some Ephesians, 6
a sword, according to the mighty working and power thereof, from the which
foundation, if any man flee, following his own will or the inventions of men,
let him be persuaded that his workmanship is in vain, for his building will
not stand. The third and last disposition of these godly men, The third
disposition of the godly.
differed far from the purpose of the ungodly, as appears even in the plain
words, for the adversaries said unto Zerubbabell, and the rest, We seek and
do sacrifice unto the Lord your God, and Zerubbabell and the rest said, We
will build unto the Lord our God, in the which let us see even the confession
of ye ungodly, in yt they have not the power to name ye Lord their God, and
again, the confession of the godly in that they hold a firm faith and
assurance to call ye Lord their God, now in yt they are directed, the one by
Ezer Haddon an Idolater, and the other by Cirus a worthy and noble King, it
does appear that the one favored Idolatry, and the other true religion, for
in that Zerubbabel with ye rest builded together unto their God, which they
farther interpreted to be the God of Israel, they showed a good, a devout, and
a godly and christian profession, for as indeed we ought to offer ye sacrifice
unto God, and put our trust in God, as the prophet says so ought we to have a
spiritual care to understand what he is, Psalm. 4, 5.
and whether of right all honor appertains unto him, which we shall easily
perceive, by beholding his majesty, his power, his strength, his mercy, his
love, his omnipotencye, in creating us and all the world, in governing us and
ruling all things, in defending us, in redeeming us, in sanctifying us, and in
calling us, and in giving all things necessary for us, in lightning our minds
with understanding, in refreshing our consciences with good things, whereas on
ye other side, (for ye judgment of Idolatry) we find not the like virtues and
consolations in ye workmanship of man's hands made, to be honored and worshipped
as a god, no nor in any ye creaturs under heaven, nor in heaven, as the sun,
moon, stars, woods, stons, calves, hylls, gold, silver, etc. Wherefore this name
God, being an unspeakable name among the Jews, does minister unto the godly,
so many powers and operations, that when they shall say, Our God, they have a
heap of comforts and consolations in their heart which does work many godly
knowledges and exercises, and extinguishe many ignorant and Idolatrous
opinions. As for example, if we should reason this with our selves, who has
made us? and hitherto preserved us? God, who sustaineth the heavens to give
light, and to power down dewes for ye comfort of the earth? God, who gives
increase on the earth for our sustenaunce? God, who gives all things necessary
for us here on earth? God, who has redeemed us, from the bondage of satan?
God, who has prepared for us the kingdom of heaven? GOD, the same God with
his mighty power, work so in the hearts of all good believers, that they may
so learn him, know him, and follow him in this world, ye in ye world to come,
even in ye kingdom of heaven, they may have life everlasting, to the which, I
beseech God ye father, the son and holy ghost, to send us all. Amen.

A Sermon showing what the Temple of God is.
1, Cor, 6, 19.20. Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost,
which is in you, whom ye have of God: and ye are not your own.

For ye are bought for a price. Glorify therefore God in your body, and in
your spirit, for they are Gods.


THe Temple which is consecrated, and dedicated to an holy use, for the
learning and exercising of holy things, for the reading of the Law, covenant,
and promises of GOD, and for the enriching of our selves in the true knowledge
of Gods word, and ye use of the Sacraments, finally, for all godly uses and
exercises, is the same place where in all the congregation does meet
together, in a devout mind and pure heart, to call upon God, the creator and
maker of all things, to whom he does in the power of his spirit appear, which
place is therefore called the Temple or his house, because of the holy
exercises, and godly services which are there done, and for those exercises
sake, and because it is called Gods house, it ought to be kept clean, and not
defiled, neither ought it to be reserved for any other use, then for the
exercise of holy things: Ioh. 2.15.
and for that cause our Savior Christ did cast out the buiers and sellers out
of the Temple, yet buying and selling is a lawful trade among men. Howbeit,
because of the place it was not allowed, but shaply and with expulsion
reproved by our savior Christ himself. But now, the Apostle speaks not of
a Temple made of stones, lyme, and sand, in this place, but of our bodies
which he calls a Temple, because of the use and exercise which ought to be
therein used, and daily exercised, which is godliness, and therefore it is
called the Temple, or tabernacle of the holy ghost, wherein the holy ghost as a
patron and president of Gods power dwells.

And as on the one side, every manne and woman, should in his heart, read,
learn, exercise, and daily use godly meditations, godly laws, and godly
observations, and also yield the Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and the offering
of righteousness, and daily strengthen the same with a feeling conscience, a
faithful heart, a charitable mind, and an humble devotion. So on the other side
has God given his holy spirit to be resident therein, as a pledge of his love,
which daily works in us, knowledge, desire, cheerefulnes, ioyfulnes,
patience, love, and al heavenly riches assuring our spirits, that we are the
children of God, to our great and endless comfort, for which occasions sake, we
are wylled by the Apostle, not to grieve the same spirit of God, by the which
we are sealed unto the day of redemption, for in that he is dwelling in us,
and remaining as in an house among us, we trouble and grieve him, when we
profane and abuse his tabernacle or dwelling, either with pride, whoredom,
drunkenness, envy, theft, murder, idleness, filthy talk, surfeyting, or like,
because they are not exercises agreeable for the Temple of God, and then, if
buying and selling, which is lawful, be prohibited the Temple, in respect of
the material Temple, much more these filthy abuses, ought to be cast out of
the Temple, in respect that it is our bodies, being of greater price and
estimation then the building of stone. Hereupon the Apostle spoke in this
place, of the abuse of filthy fornication, and incestuous incontinencye, that
it was such a great spot, as greatly defiled and polluted the whole body of the
malefactor, which was the Temple ordained for godly exercises, and therefore
gives this sentence a little before, That he that shall defile the Temple of
GOD, Cap, 3, 17
him shall God destroy: because we are called, not to uncleanness, but to
holiness, not to fulfill the desires of the flesh, nor to satisfy the lusts of
our carnal mind, but to purge our corruptible man of them, and to adorn the
Temple with godly ornaments, that like as the Temple of Solomon, Hagge, 2,
and the Temple of Zerubbabell were garnished, the one with godly ornaments,
and the other with peace, so our Temples, I mean our bodies, should be
decked, and furnished with ornaments, meet for such an inhabitant as the
holy Ghost is, and the ornaments meet for this Temple of ours, is faith,
love, truth, mercy, pity, chastity, knowledge, wisdom, and so forth, which
undoubtedly are already sent down by God to us, to garnish this his Temple in
us, if by our own disobedience and wickedness, we do not defile them, and
banishe them, but I am afraid, and it does partly appear by this present age
of ours, that we so grieve the holy Ghost with worldly affections, and filthy
delights, that we banish both the holy Ghost, and also defile those noble
virtues which are given us, as ornaments to pollish our Temple, so that both
faith, truth, mercy, love, honesty and al, are gone to heaven to challenge the
celestial room, for that the heart of man is so defiled with sin and
wickedness, that all the whole world is corrupted and ouerflowed with iniquity,
and the inhabitants that now do hold the heart of man as a dwelling place,
which are, discord, self-love, carnal pleasure, and worldly love, have
utterly expelled and quite banished, these former noble virtues from the mind
and heart of man, in so much that if we behold them as they are, they work a
great confusion, and overthrow of all christian order, and corrupts every
good conversation, and are set up as Idols in the Temple of God, for if you
look into the first of these inhabitants or Idols, Discord.
which is discord or variance, that is to say, the iarring and secret malice
among householders, cities, provinces and kingdoms, yea even within
themselves, one detracting and slaundering an other, one eating up an other,
one overthrowing an other, one taking away from an other, one robbing from an
other, one murdering an other, and one undoing an other, it is even an hell to
see it, and a lamentable matter to see the renting a sunder of Christ's poor
members, and the putting of love and charity to flight, miserable is that
estate, that shall see such an exile. Satan does work so mightily by
flatterers, and men's ears are so ready to hear them, that discord and
variance being quickly sown, makes a speedy harvest, and it is so contagious,
that it has almost infected all the world, in so much, that it is to be
demanded, who is free from a hateful heart? or from a dysdainfull and
malicious stomach? and our nature is such, that we can hardly sustain it, it
is a token that we are void of good affection, for when our neighbor or
brother has offended us, or trespassed us a small matter, to the value of one
grote, is not our nature ready to spend twentye shyllinges, or twenty nobles
to be revenged by extreme Law, this proceeds not from Justice, to be
restored our wrong, or from patience, as the Apostle says, to forbear one an
other, for then we would look but for a bare recompense or restitution,
according to the measure of the damage, yea and that with patience, but it
appears that we are hateful and malicious, when we can not endure a grote
damage, and yet can afoorde the spending of twenty shyllings, this proceeds
altogether from the rankor of stomach. Besides all this, the manner of this
present world, is to stomach at the happy estate of others, who are either
promoted to wealth, or lyfted into favor, contemning them with a malicious
heart, judging themselves (every man in his own opynion) to be as worthy of the
same happiness, as they that have it. In this thing, they observe their malice,
and look not into the distribution of Gods purpose, gyuing to whom he will,
and taking away from whom he will. God grant that these discordes do not
admit our adversaries boldness and courage, to our overthrow, for if it
should come to pass, I fear me a great many would pray upon their
stomacked neighbors, bending their envious hearts, rather then their country
quarrel. The great city of Numantia, being very strong and populous, was
besieged of Scipid, and he laid siedge unto it a long time, and never could
ransacke it, in the end, the Citizens fell out among themselves, and were at
variaunce, then their force weakened, and themselves drew not together, by
means whereof, Scipio easily took the City, to their great spoil and
overthrow. Salust says, Concordia, res paruae crescunt, discordia magnae
chlabuntur. By concord small things do increase, and through discord, Math,
18.
great things come to decay. Our Savior Christ says. Every kingdom divided
against it self, can not endure. Wherefore, as the prophet David says, O how
good and joyful a thing it is for brethren, Psalm, 133,
to dwell together in unity, for that unity is so sweet and comfortable unto
the^, as the dew that falls upon Hermon, and as the hills have no other
comfort but the dew of heaven, for it has no running Ryuers to comfort the
grass thereof, even so, nothing does make a more prosperous estate among men,
then unity, as it is a fit ornament for the Temple of God, even so is discord
a foul pollution, and a filthy spotte in the members of men. An other
inhabitant or Idol, Self love.
that is placed in the Temple of God, I mean in the heart of man, is self
love, a quality or disposition, altogether purposed to vnfettell good order,
and to vnioynt the society of man, and to extol himself, and to throw down
others, this happens first in those that do insatiably scratch and heap
unto themselves, although they take from others to their utter decay, these men
are vayd of pity, hard of conscience, not fearing God, nor forcing the Law,
if they chance to be touched with the Law, they will always have a shift,
either to cosen the Law, or to blind the Iusticers of law, or to bribe ye
ministers of law, and whatsoever they do among the common sort of people, in
company, pleasure, solace, or travel, they will be sure, if they be dealing of
nutts, How ye shall know them.
they will reserve the kernels to their own share. These men are known,
sometimes by a fair flatteryng face, as a Scorpion, sometimes by groaning, and
making themselves sick, as Achab did, sometimes by a sudden fit of
unusual liberality, in giving a cup of drink, but then beware the Fox. I
have heard it reported, that the Fox will tomble and make sport before the
Connies when he goes about to catch one. Sometimes, by a rare fair
salutation, as the Jews that came to take Christ, said, Hayle master, but
always ye shall know them by the parting blow, for though the Cat play and
dally with the Mouse, yet in the end, she grypeth him to death, and above all
the marks that I have spoken of, to know this sort of selfe-louers, I hold
this the cheifest, that is, they utterly hate and contemn those men, that they
be persuaded they can get nothing of.

An other sort of selfe-louers, are such as carry a proud and a lofty mind,
accounting themselves the singular men of the world, dishabling others, and
discrediting others, to be best accounted of themselves, these have a kind of
secret envy in their hearts, for if you commend this man, or that man, either
for wisdom, honesty, wealth, policy, manhood, comelines, virtue, learning, or
any other good quality, straightway he will find one occasion or other to
dishable some of these qualities or virtues you shall quickly espy these kind
of selfe-louers, either by their seelines, or by their silence, their seelines
I account, a slender wisdom, or a sickly conueiance in their talk and
communication, howbeit, they are full of iolity, and floe with such strange
phrases as they themselves have but borrowed, and are not acquainted withal,
the other trial is silence, which you shall approve by consenting with his
dislikyng, and discommending of al men, in those former qualities and virtues,
but then you must commend it in him, and so if you find him either to stammer
or to be silent upon your commendation, then think no other but you have
found ye fool, for Tully does so call them saying. Qui innititur suae
prudentiae stultus est, he that stands upon his own wisdom, is a fool.

Both of these sorts of selfe-louers are filthy and abominable Idols, unseemly
for the decent temple of god, howbeit, ye whole world almost is combred with
the^ in these present days. 2, Tim. 3,
S. Paul himself speaks of them that such shall come in the latter days,
as shall be lovers of themselves and unnatural An other most horrible Idol that
does much defile and profane ye temple of ye holy ghost, is, carnal pleasure,
Carnal pleasure.
which is such detestable desire of the flesh, as corrupts knowledge,
defiles the conscience, deformeth the soul, imprisoneth the mind, and
polluteth the members. It is that deuilish motion, which does wholly carry us
from God, and swalloweth us up in shame, I say unto you, it is that thing, as
if it were shaped, nothing would seem more ougly or monsterous, for it
translateth men into the form of beasts, and into the nature of devils, and
therefore, an unfit ornament for the Temple of God, whose reward is most
horrible, either with shame, or with most odious and intolerable diseases, or
with extreme poverty, or with the blotting out of a posterity, or with
eternal damnation, the Apostle says. The adulterer and fornicator shall not
inherit the kingdom of heaven. I beseech thee O Lord God of heaven, to give
little England repentant hearts, and feeling consciences, to purge their
Temples of this filthy sin, Amen.

Worldly love.
There is an other Idol in this Temple of ours, to whom all honor in these
days is attributed, and which does only take away the honor due unto God, and
does most abhominably pollute our hearts, which is, the love of the world, This
Idol does so mightily allure, and so strongly provoke, that it does wholly
ravish men's hearts, and altogether withdraw their minds, from the true love of
God, from the estimation and dignity of his word, from the Law of nature, from
mutual love, from the Kingdom of heaven, and from all other good and godly
estimations. In so much, that we may say with ye Poet, Quid non mortalia
pectora cogit auri sacra fames? What does not the cursed desire of money
provoke? It made Judas sell his master Christ, and in these days, it makes
not only a great many to sell their master Christ, but utterly to forsake him,
it is the prouoker of displeasure betwixt man an man, it is the ingenderer of
thieves, it hatcheth cosoners, extorcioners, usurers, pillars, pollers,
periurers, murderers, flatterers, sycophants, it makes officers and
magistrates blind, that they cannot see notorious offenders, it causes many to
make ye ministry their refuge, to the perishing of many a soul by their
ignorance, it has disordered the noble estate of matrimony, provoking many to
marry for muck, and to like for living, whereas afterward in heart they hate all
days of their life. A great many hearts it defiles with dissimulation,
contempt, envy, uncharitableness, hardness, and so forth. It makes the son to
wyshe and expect the fathers death in respect thereof. It makes men to buy
offices, and seek for dignityes, only to have the world, not regarding
Justice or reformation, but commodity, and advantage, which greatly decays a
commonwealth. It causes many a conscience to shut up his compassion from
the poor, and it is the only Porter in rich men's gates, to bar fast the
door. Many a man sets his son to school, not for virtues sake, but for
the worlds sake, many a one prefers his Son to the ministry, not for to
preach, but to have living, many a one prefers his Son to be a Lawyer,
not so much to do equity as to get the world, and so of every faculty, all is
for the world.

How many be there that purchase Heaven for their children, and bring them
up in such order as they may godly behave themselves, as meet members for
the kingdom of heaven, nay rather they seek by all means to purchase the
earth for them, how many seeks to enrich themselves with the treasure of the
kingdom of heaven? Every man seeks by all means to possess the earth, and
yet they see not this difference, the one brings joy, the other sorrow, the
one gives life, the other death, the one joy and felicity, the other penury,
misery, sickness, and calamity.

What reward had the rich man in the Gospel for all his abundance of treasure,
lands, lyuinges, goods and delicate fare, Luke, 16,
yet in the end he was rewarded with a miserable death, at which instant, he
had three attendantly that greedily gaped for his death, that is, The rich man
his executors.
the executor for his goods, the worms for his carkas, and devil for his
soul, and this was ye end and fruit of his worldly greedines and insatiable
desire, such men must needs run to a bad end, whose beginning and
continuance is naught, how can that mann have his part among the godly, that
has always favored infidelity. It is impossible to serve God and Mammon,
they have served Mammon, therefore his servants they are to whom they obey,
whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. Thus I
have briefly showed you, how that we are the Temple of God, and what Idols we
have set up in the same, to the great confusion of our selves, if we repent
not in time.

Second part.
Now, as in the first part I have showed you what we are, so in this second
part I purpose to show whose we are. The text says, Ye are not your own, and
brings in the reason, for ye are bought for a price. In these words are many
excellent and comfortable consolations. In that (our unworthiness, and state of
damnation considered) we are translated from darkness to light, from death to
life, from mortality, to immortality, from a miserable world, to an everlasting
world, replenished with all joy and consolation.

Again, so much the more is our comfort, in that we are no more our own, or
resting in our own power, for if we were, such were our weakness, that we
should fall again to damnation, and such were our insufficiency, that we could
not rise again of our selves, but should be utterly lost, wherefore, we are
now his that can sustain and uphold us, that will preserve and keep us, and
who in this life has sealed us with grace, and in the world to come with life
everlasting, and none else can do it, or could do it, but ye only and blessed
God which already has done it And again, in that we feel the force of shine
always working in our bodies, and continually suffer the tyranny of satan,
howbeit, it shall not be imputed unto death, for the blood of Christ Jesus,
has taken away the force of the Law, and the sentence of guiltines, into whom
we are now graffed and united. So that now to see our translation, out
adoption and estate to be changed into the sons of God, and we our selves as
children in his service, are in a most comfortable estate, in yt we are his
who will not lose but preserve us.

Now, in that the Apostle says, Ye are not your own, but that we are bought
for a price, it does appear whose we are, and who has bought us, for we are
as I said, the sons of God, and members of Christ Jesus, purchased by his
precious bloodshedding, as appeared to the Ephesians. But now in Christ Jesus,
ye which once were far of, Ephesians 2.13.14.15, 16.
are made near by the blood of Christ, for he is our peace, which has made
of both one, and has broken the step of the partition wall in abrogating
through his flesh the hatred, that is the Law of commandments, which stands
in ordinances for to make of (...) one now ^an in himself, so making peace,
and that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by his cross, and ^^t
hatred thereby. And as touching that we are not our own, neither have ^^wer
(...) our selves but translated into a better estate and into a surer
safegarde, it does most comfortably appear in Saint Paul to the Romans,
Rom, 14, 9
where he says. Christ therefore (...) and ^ose ^^^^^e, and revived, that he
might be Lord both of the dead and the ^ui^ke, so that our service and all that
ever we have, be in^^^^erely bought by his precious blood, is subject to his
dominion and rule, wherein we may (to our great comfort) behold our safety; in
that we are im^^^ked in so strong ^a^tell and defense, as he is, against whom
the power of hell, cannot prevail. And in that we are alienated and changed
from our accusable and damnable estate, to become (by ye righteousness of
Christ,) the acceptable children of God, in this co^^isteth our honor and
nobility above all the creatures that God has made, which change, we find in
ye Apostls words to ye Galathians, saying, Wherefore ye art no more a servant
but a Son, if thou be a son, Gal, 4, 7,
thou art also the heir of GOD through Christ. It is a most excellent comfort,
where this alienation or change is found among men, especially where God
himself does it, for he does it always for the better.

We find that the name of Abram, was changed into the name of Abraham, the
name of Jacob, into the name of Israel, and the name of Saul, into the name
of Paul, the significations of which named, are bettered in their exchange.

And so does it happen in us, in that our exchange is for the best, for now
we are beautified with grace, that were deformed by the accusation of the Law,
and for that we are the sons of God, the riches of grace is bestowed upon us,
as S. Paul says, By whom, (that is by Christ) we have access through
faith unto this grace wherein we stand, Rom, 5.^
for this occasions sake, we are called the temple of god, because we are
incorporated by grace into Christ Jesus, who is the very pure and undefiled
Temple in whom his father is truly glorified, we had been a filthy and
polluted temple, if we had stood of our selves, and depended on our own power
without this gift of grace, but because we have access through faith into this
grace, having apprehended grace, the spirit of God does work mightily in the
faithful believer. Therefore it is a necessary doctrine proceeding out of this
text of ours, Ye are not your own. For us to learn and see, first what ye
power of man is, and what free will he has, and the^ what merit he deserves
before God. In the which considerations, we shall find so great knowledge of
our imperfection, that by the view thereof, we shall attribute the more honor,
glory, and thanks unto God, who works all in all. As touching our power, it
is so small and so slender, that we are not able of our selves to think one
good thought, we are not able to do any good thing, we can not strengthen
our weakness, we cannot make our selves to grow, we cannot lengthen our days,
nor yet can we resist death, neither purchase unto our selves life. As the
Prophet Jeremy says, Iere, 10, 23
O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man to
walk and direct his steps, and as S. Paul says, 1, Cor. 11,
what have thou that thou have not received. If man has any good thing in him,
it proceeds from above, as the Apostle James says, Iam, 1.
Every good and perfect gift comes from above, whether it be knowledge, life,
strength, faith, honesty, etc, it is all from God, and by God. Job. 7, 1,
Job speaking of man's time, says. Is there not an appointed time to man upon
earth? and are not his days as the days of an hyreling? Our Savior Christ
says, we cannot add one ynche unto our stature. And therefore, as we have no
power of our selves, to do what we list, as appeared by Balam, Numb. 22.
who was hired by Balake to curse the people of God, and he and his Ass were
interrupted by the way, and were not able to go forth. And as s. Paul in his
blindness of mind, was stroke^ with blindness, and inhibited to persecute Gods
people, wherein his power was weakened, and the strength of his will was
discouraged, there is it that Christ says, Ioh. 5.
Without me ye can do nothing. Even so have we no will of our selves, that is
aualiable to do any thing, unless it be given from above, Math, 16, 17.
as appeared by Peter, when he made his confession of Christ; it was told him
by Christ, that flesh and blood had not revealed that unto him, but his
heavenly father. Likewise, in the tenth of Matthew, Mat, 10, 20,
our savior Christ says. It is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your
father which speaks in you And in a great many more places in ye scriptures
it appears that mann has no power or will at all of himself to do any
thing, unless it be given him from above, and it stands in great reason, and
to the godly seems very comfortable, for if we should have will, A reason why
we have not free will,
we must be free from sin (which cannot be) whereby our will might tend unto
good, or else in this state of sin wherein we stand, how can we but yield
sin and wickedness, according to the original of nature, and then is our will
polluted, and the effect nothing worth, therefore we have the help of Gods
spirit, which works in us by ye virtue of our head Christ, who has sent the
same spirit unto us, by the which spirit, we work goodness effectually, and
necessary it were, that God should have his prerogative of working in us,
because he knows what we have need of before we ask, and he gives better
then either we can desire or deserve, and his grace is not in vain in us for
his (...) neither ought we to use it in vain for our part, and therefore we
may be assured of the best nearest and right, when we hold of God and not of
our selves, I^ is said that one hear of our head shall not perysh, which
undoubtedly is spoken because God preserves us, and therefore is God, among
many of his virtuous names, called Adon, in the Hebrewe, which is custos, or
seruator, a keeper or preserver.

It we he that preserved. Daniniell from the hungry Lions, and Sydra^. Misac,
and Abednago, from the hot Oven: when the Martyr Stephen had much a do,
Acts. 6, 10,
and great disputation with the Libertines and Cirenians, and them of
Alexandria and Cicilia and Asia. These adversaries were not able to resist the
wisdom and the spyrits, by the which he spoke, and thus to our great
comfort we see that the worthiest works, and that is effectual, if we
should work our will, it would he so weak and so wicked, as would be
accounted nothing worth. And therefore is it, that to our comfort it is spoken,
that we are not our own, but his that cares for us, and has the ability to
provide for us, even the best. Now therefore let us examine our selves farther,
Man's merits.
and see our merits and deserts before God, which many have preached and
allowed to the great overthrow of the estimation of Christ his death and
passion, as though there were an ability in men to deserve any thing at Gods
hands, which is contrary to the Apostles doctrine, who says, When we have
done all that we can do, yet we are unprofitable servants. But for the better
trial hereof, let us examine all our deeds, be they never so good, as
continual prayer, unfeigned love, pity, daily feeding of the poor, the
preserving of our bodies in chastity and honesty, forsakyng the world, the
flesh and the devil, or what else may be commendable in a man, is it able to
match one of Gods gyfts? as our understanding, our sight, our health, our sound
lymmes, our nourishment, our life, our children, our peace, with a great many
more blessings, can it deserve any of these, nay rather does not one of these
blessings, deserve and require all those good deeds at man's hands? yes no
doubt, how say ye then to a greater blessing then all this? who has given
Christ Jesus to shed his precious blood, to purchase unto us the kingdom of
heaven, and life everlasting? even he undoubtedly, that can never be justly
recompensed by a sinful ma^s observation, and conversation, be it never so
holy, and therefore is it that we are always in debt unto the Lord, and for
that cause is it that our Savior Christ has taught us to desire God in our
prayer, that he will forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, and then
how can we deserve any thing at Gods hands, when we can not make recompense
for the smalest things that we have had already, and do daily receive.
Wherefore it seems to be a very comfortable doctrine unto us, in that we are
not our own, and in that we are boughte for a price, for if we were our
own, we should perish as men that are wicked sinners, and as men that can do
no good thing, nor deserve any good thing, therefore of all creatures we are
happy that we are bought by his blood, who has made us acceptable before his
father, and by whom and in whom, the father is well pleased, and h^ whose only
means the kingdom of heaven is purchased for us.

Wherefore this last part remains for us, Our duty
and is required at our hands, as duty, that we glorify God, which is as
much to be understood, that we attribute not only the power, superiority,
and excellency unto God alone, but also that we serve him, love him, thank him
and obey him, according to his worthiness, and that undoubtedly, is so much as
can never be fully performed at our hands, how be it, so far we must
endeavor our selves, and so far stretch our selves, as the measure and
ability of Gods spirit is given unto us, and because we should neither be
weakelings in the power of the holy ghost working in us, nor yet dissemblers,
in outward holiness, having no inward taste, we are wylled to be servant, both
in spirit and in body, because they are both Gods, that is, God has purchased
them both to set forth his glory in them, as in a holy place or Temple, and to
glorify God, is (as well in spyrite as in body) to give the excellence, or
superiority unto him, and therevppon in the same spirit and body to all things
that are required at our hands, and are best agreeable for our calling, which
is far more to be apparent in us, then in any other creatures, by how much we
are more excellent then they. The prophet David says. Psalm, 19,
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
work, which is as much to say, as these creatures, that is, the heavens and
firmament, do show their order, course and effect, as is appointed them by
God, and they do their obedience according to his will and pleasure, the sun,
moon, and stars do shine and keep their order and course, and have done
from ye beginning, the clouds have powered out their moisture, and yet these
are not reasonable creatures, but ordained as servants unto man, and because
God has appointed them in their several offyres, they have performed it
according to his will. Now much more should man setforth the glory of God, that
is to say, to perform that which God wills to be done in him, namely, to
show the effects of his creation, and the effects of his vocation, for he is
made a man, he should not behave himself as a beast that has no
understanding, either in filthy lust, as ye swine, or in devouring one an
other, as the Wolf, or in subtilty, as the Fox, or in envy, as the dog, or
in flattery, as the Scorpion, or in hypocrisy, as the Crocodile, or in
slothfulnes, as the Ass, but to use himself as a man, which is a state above
all these creatures, and as we are endued with reason, so we should vary from
the brute beasts in the difference of things, that is, to use the good and
refuse the bad, and especially because we are called by God, redeemed by his
son Jesus Christ, and sanctified by his holy spirit, we should therefore
show our effects of Gods power working in us, that as the Sun is made to
shine, and in shyning does glorify God, because he performs the effect and
end of his creation, so should man perform and do the effect of his creation
and vocation, the rather because he has the power of sanctification, and is
made the vessel of holiness, and this effect is to live godly, not only in
outward show, (as I said) least he might dissemble, nor alone in inward
show least he might be fruitles, but as well in body as in spirit, that ye one
might be done in knowledge and understanding, and the other in facto, for if
the inward spirit have no understanding or knowledge, how shall the dum and
senceles body, which is but a corrupt thing, utter any thing else but
corruption, wherefore, the glorifying of God in man, does consist in true
knowledge, in sure faith, in perfitte mortification, and in a godly
conversation, that so we might behave our selves in duty to God, in love to
our neighbors, in honest and godly conversation among our selves, that so
much we should surpas all other creatures in our duty, behavior, and calling.
By how much we have a superiority above them. Math. 5, 16
Our Savior Christ said, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven. 1, Pet, 2, 22
And likewise the Apostle Peter says. Have your conversation honest among the
Gentiles, that they which speak evil of you, as of evil dooers, may by your
good works which they shall see, glorify God in the day of the visitation. So
that now, to acknowledge God as he is, and to behave our selves godly and
honestly, according to Gods will, is to glorify God, and to beautify his
temple, in which doing, as we shall show our selves meet tabernacles and
tempels for ye holy ghost, so I beseech God, with the strength of the same his
holy spirit, to cleanse and purge our inward man, from al corruptible motions,
and desires, and strongly to defend it from all fantasies, and illusions of
satan, that exercising all godly and honest conuersations and studies: we may
only be settled and established to set forth the glory and excellency of
almighty GOD, that in ye end we may be rewarded with the crown of glory, in
the glorious kingdoms of God, us the which I beseech God the father, son,
and holy Ghost in send us all. Amen.

FINIS.

