MISCEL^^^^^ PHILO-THEOLOGI^ OR, GOD, and MAN.

A Treatise compendiously describing the Nature of God in his Attributes, with
a lively pourtraiture of his Wisdom in ordering, and disposing of the
Celestial, and terrestrial Bodies.

Containing much variety of Matter Theological, and Philosophical; wherein
many secrets in Scripture, and in Nature, are unbowelled, with solid Proofs,
and apt Applications singular for brevity, and perspicuity.

By HENRY CHURCH.

Joell 2.28. I will pour out of my Spirit on all flesh.

Psalm. 8.1, 3, 4. O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the world,
w^^ have set thy Glory above the Heavens, etc.

When I consider the Heavens, the Work of thy Fingers, Moon, and the Stars,
etc.

What is man, etc.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN ROTHWELL, and are to be (...) the Sun, in Paul's
Churchyard. M.DC.XXXVII.

TO THE LEARNED READER.
I Humbly desire your Charitable Construction of my poor endeavors: being
willing to be convinced, and reformed. I confess my impotencie, and desire my
errors may be purged, and all truths allowed.

TO ALL whomsoever.
I Confess my spare time has been this way employed in methodicall
Meditations, the Reason why I so much exercised my pen, was, because a
drowsinesse fell on me, when I did read: and wrighting kept me awake: if any
be offended, I writ not to offend them: if any be in the least measure edified,
for their sakes I have taken this pains, and think my labor well bestowed.

HENRY CHURCH.

Imprimatur,

THOMAS WEEKS.

An Advertisement to the Christian Reader, concerning the scope of the Book,
with some passages of the Life of the Author.
TRVE, and solid knowledge lays its foundation in God; he that will know
himself, and the sublunary Creatures, as they are, must first see, and know
him (by faith) that is invisible: The study of the knowledge of God in his
Attributes gives a man a possession of heaven, on earth, Its life eternal to
know thee, etc. This knowledge is the basis, and foundation of that precious
Faith the Apostle speaks of: They that know thee, trust in thee: So that
before a man can with the wise Builder, build on the Rock he must believe that
God is. This godly Man Mr. HENRY CHURCH began here; his maine study was this
saving Knowledge: and this he did not by starts, and fits; but daily (as his
calling did permit him.) Great was his wisdom, and his industry in the
husbanding of his time, for as he chose Mary's Part, so he was careful of
Martha's; a good Christian, and a provident Husband. Those that knew his
Employments, many urgent in the world, and wondered, how he could spare time,
or find time for these Contemplations. I may answer for him, he loved much, and
therefore with Marie was resolved to do much. He denied himself in his
pleasures, in his diet, and in his sleep, he bare the yoke of the Lord in his
youth, I have heard, that when he had liberty to sport himself, as others,
his pleasure, his delight was, in his Closet, with the Law of GOD, he
prevented the dawning of the day, and with DAVID meditated of GOD in the
night-watches, he could not intend to be idle, he had learned of his Master
CHRIST, who went about doing good, he filled-up his vacant hours either with
doing, or receiving good; as if he had exactly learned that charge of the Lord
by Moses, These words which I command thee, thou shall Iunius Whet them or
p^int them in m^morie.
rehearse them continually to thy Children, and thou shall talk of them, when
thou tariest in thy house, and as thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. He knew not only for himself, but for
others; his light was on a candle-stick, not under a bushel, he did not with
the Idle Servant, hide his Talent, but improved it to a good increase. He was
greedy of all advantages to glorify God: if he was covetous, this was his
covetousness, he coveted the best things. He was of a compassionate spirit,
ready to do good both to the Souls, and Bodies of others. He lived as lent
to himself, and given to others. How sedulous he was to instruct the Ignorant,
to reclaim the wandering, to releeve those that were in want, to settle the
unstable soul, those that knew him, can judge. He withstood errors; he was
an Enemy to error, for he received the truth in the love of it. He was a
Friend to truth. He endeavored to comfort afflicted Consciences, for by
observing his own heart, and Conference with such, he attained a singular
dexterity this way. In his Book you may hear him yet speak, that is now
dead. His Religion lay not in Tongue, but in his Heart; not in a form of
godliness, but in power; as if he had learned to do what once Minutius said,
Non multa loqui, sed vivere. The scope, and end of this good Man's studies (I
suppose) in this Book was chiefly for himself, and his Family that it might
like a fruitful Spring, supply himself, and them.

Again, his friends knowing his desire he had to the public good, as also
the favorable acceptance of his two former Books in the hearts of good men,
viz. The Good man's treasury Divine letters.
already printed, gives us good encouragement to adventure again on a public
Censure.

Read it through before you judge, I hope you shall find it profitable, and
abounding with much variety; under brief Heads drawing on the Reader to
delight to study God in his Attributes, and to enlarge them in thine own
Meditation: as also he represents God to thee in the glass of the Creature,
and among the rest, Man the Epitome of all; that while thou art poring after
curious speculations, and secrets of Nature, he endeavors wisely to divert
thy thoughts, by apt application heavenward. To satisfy the Judicious.

If thou shall except against any thing, consider its a Posthumus issue, then I
hope you will pardon both the Author, and the Printer.

For Censorious Critics I care not to satisfy. The Blessing of the Almighty
be with it.

Imprimatur, THOMAS WEEKS.

A TABLE OF THE SEVERAL Heads, contained in this ensuing Treatise.
I. OF Saving Knowledge, page 1 II. What GOD is, p. 6 III. What it is to
glorify God, p. 11 IIII. Of Admiration, p. 12 V. Of Praising God, p. 15 VI. Of
Gods Subsistence, p. 18 VII. Simpleness, p. 20 VIII. Eternity, p. 25 IX.
Omnipotency, p. 32 X. Immutabilitie, p. 39 XI. Infiniteness, p. 45 XII.
Omni-science, p. 47 XIII. Omni-presence, p. 51 XIV. Perfection, p. 56 XV.
Invisibilitie, p. 62 XVI. Wisdom, p. 69 XVII. Truth, p. 77 XVIII. Mercy, p.
82 XIX. Justice, p. 88. XX. Life, p. 95 XXI. Blessedness, p. 101 XXII. Hatred,
p. 107 XXIII. Love, p. 112 XXIV. Patience, p. 122 XXV. Will, p. 130 XXVI.
Grace, p. 136 XXVII. Glory, p. 143 XXVIII. Of the Lord of Hosts, p. 148 XXIX.
How God is made an Idol, p. 153 XXX. How to conceive of God in Prayer, p. 158
XXXI. Of the Works of God, p. 161 XXXII. Of Angels, p. 168 XXXIII. Of the
Heavens, p. 174 XXXIV. Of the Sun, p. 180 XXXV. Of the Light, p. 186 XXXVI.
Of the Moon, p. 190 XXXVII. Of the Stars, p. 201 XXXVIII. Of the Air, p. 211
XXXIX. Of the Clouds, p. 220 XL. Of the Rainbow, p. 225 XLI. Of the Rain, p.
231 XLII. Of the Earth, p. 238 XLIII. Of the Water, p. 249 XLIV. Of the Fire,
p. 251 XLV. Of Meteors, p. 270 XLVI. Of the Winds, p. 274 XLVII. Of Man, p. 1
XLVIII. Of the Soul, p. 3 XLIX. Of the Souls Immortality, p. 5 L. Of the
life of the Soul, p. 6 LI. Of the death of the Soul, p. 6 LII. Of Gods Image
on the Soul, p. 12 LIII. Of the Body, p. 18 LIIII. Of the Mortality of the
Body, p. 20 LV. Of the Immortality of the Body, p. 22 LVI. Of the Head, p.
24 LVII. Of the Eyes, p. 28 LVIII. Of the Ears, p. 37 LIX. Of the Mouth, p. 43
LX. Of the Neck. p. 55 LXI. Of Arms, and Shoulders, p. 59 LXII. Of the Hands,
p. 62 LXIII. Of the Fingers, and Thumb, p. 65 LXIV. Of the Back, p. 66 LXV. Of
the Breast, p. 68 LXVI. Of the Belly, p. 71 LXVII. Of the Thighs, Legs, and
Feet, p. 74 LXVIII. Of Mediums. p. 81
FINIS.
Of saving Knowledge.
1. What Knowledge is.

2. There is a Knowledge saves not.

3. What saving Knowledge is.

1. What Knowledge is.
Noscere, Intelligere. Percipere.
to comprehend: Knowledge is the eye of the Soul: we shall the better perceive
what Knowledge is, by the contrary to it, and by comparisons. Contraries to
Knowledge.
The contrary to Knowledge and Understanding is Ignorance, Jer. 4.22. Luke
19.42. The Comparisons may be to compare it with Prudence and Discretion.
Knowledge is to perceive to discern: Prudence is to dispose of things known;
both we do read of, Colos. 1.9. Understanding to conceive, wisdom to order,
to act, to put in execution; discretion is to moderate, it is exercised in
measure, and time; Discretion, it mitigates, and qualifies, and observes
circumstances about the execution of things.

So then, Knowledge is a discerner, a receiving light, a seeing, a taking
notice; it is to perceive, and to understand.

Difference of knowledge.
Difference of Knowledge.
THere is Knowledge that saves not: as first, the Knowledge of Devils. Secondly,
the knowledge of Heathens. Thirdly, the knowledge of Hypocrites. First, of
Devils, they must be knowing creatures, having so much means, as all humane
learning; and having so great experience for above 5000. years; yet their
knowledge is not saving.



Causam causarum: There must be a cause of causes, which must be God. Secondly,
they know this God must be worshipped: Thirdly, they know the creatures, being
good Astronomers, Geographers; they know the immortality of the Soul, and
could anatomize the body of man. Their knowledge was not saving:

Reasons why heathenish knowledge is not saving.
1. Because though they knew God, yet they knew him not in Christ; so came short
of saving knowledge, John 17.3. Acts 4.12.

2. They knew God was to be worshipped, but knew not how, for a right manner.

3. They knew the creatures to their conviction, Romans 1.20. but not to their
salvation.

4. They knew man in the faculties and members, and so did magnify man, and
exalt him: Whereas saving knowledge does abase man, being both a guilty, and a
filthy creature.

Thirdly, there is the knowledge of Hypocrites, who do know there is a God,
and can distinguish the persons in the Trinity; they know the two natures of
Christ, Law and Gospel, the differences in Religion; they are able to teach
others; their knowledge is not saving.

1. Because it is attained by art, industry, reading, Reasons why Hypocrites
knowledge is not saving.
but not from the regenerating Spirit.

2. It sinkes not in their hearts, to humble and reform them; but rests in
their brains, to puff them up. Heb. 6 4. 1. Cor. 8.1.

3. They hunger not, thirst not for knowledge, because they think they are
rich, and have enough: or if they do, it is for base and carnal ends; as
first, to please themselves with their speculations, and to satisfy their
curiosity. Secondly, to be able to discourse, and so get applause at feasts,
and other meetings. Thirdly, to handle disputes and controversies, so to get
them a name. Fourthly, to censure the Preachers, to contradict their Sermons;
to cavil, and pick faults, that so they might be esteemed men of Judgment.
Fifthly, to gather Sects, and to make schisms, that they might be in some more
esteem, or get some contributions, and make a gain of those silly ones they
have deluded.

3. What saving knowledge is.
SAving Knowledge is a work of Gods Spirit on the faithful, opening their
eyes to know God, and themselves.

1. It is a work of God Spirit; He is the Spirit of Revelation, Ephesians. 1.17.
By this Spirit we know the things of God. 1. Cor. 2.12.

2. On the Elect, or faithful; for it is the saved ones prove knowing ones, 1.
Tim. 2.4. John 5.15.
Others have not that light as they have. Mat. 13.11.

3. Their eyes are opened by the preaching of the Gospel, Acts 26.18. As the
Manna fell down in the dew, so the Spirit is conveyed by the Word. Isai. 35.5.
By the preaching of the Gospel, the eyes of the blind shall be enlightened.

4. They are brought to know God; in ignorance and darkness we did not know
God. 1. Sam. 2.12. Ephesians 5.18. but being wrought upon by the Word, and Spirit
of God, then they knew him savingly, as that God will be merciful to their
sins. Ier. 31.34. Heb. 8.11.

5. They know themselves savingly; first, in their guiltiness. Romans 5.12.
Secondly, in their corruption of nature. Job 14.4. Psalm. 51.5. Thirdly, in
their actual sins. Psalm. 40.12. Fourthly, in this estate they know
themselves lost. Luke 19.10. Fifthly, they know the only remedy is by Jesus
Christ.

This knowledge is in the Elect.
The Concomitants with saving knowledge.
1. With application. 2. Tim. 1.12. 2. With renovation and change. 2. Cor. 3.18.
3. With great humility. Job 42.5, 6. 4. With charity. 1. Cor. 13.2. 5. With
practice. John 13.17. 6. With consolation. Jer 9.24. 7. With contempt of the
world, Phil. 3.8. 8. With satisfaction, 1. Cor. 2.2. It satisfies as much, yea,
more than all Arts and Mysteries, or secrets.





How saving knowledge is attained.
1. We have it not by Nature. 2. We are attainers, and receivers. 3. The answer
how we do attain it.

First, we have it not by Nature: for the image of God consisting in Knowledge,
Col. 3.10. we have lost by Adams fall; and though the Ox knows his owner, and
the Ass his Masters crib, yet those natural men that have most means of
knowledge, living in the visible Church, are ignorant of God, Isai. 1.3. Ier.
4.21. As for Pagans, they are more remote from saving knowledge, and are said
to be darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. full of darkness, Romans 1.21. and to be without
the Knowledge of God, 1 These. 4.5.

Secondly, we are receivers of saving knowledge, being destitute of it in our
selves: It is given us from him, who both gives every good giving, and every
perfect gift. James 1.17. It is the Lord opens our eyes, Acts 26.18. and gives
us the spirit of Revelation: Ephesians. 1.17. It is God shines into our hearts, to
give us the light of saving knowledge. 2 Cor. 4.6.

3. How we attain saving knowledge.
1. We attain it freely, without merit; Gods Will is the cause we know him,
and partake of mercy. Ier. 31 33, 34.

2. We obtain saving knowledge; by virtue of the new Covenant, God has
promised this blessing to his people. Heb. 8.11.

3. We obtain it by the Word published and preached: Ier. 3.15. We are fed
with knowledge, not starved with ignorance.

4. By our union with Christ, in him are all the Treasures of knowledge, and
we are enricht by our union, and conformable to our Head in knowledge. Col.
2.3.

5. By the cohabitation of the spirit, he brings saving light with him: 1.
John 2.20. As the Spirit is an unction for our honor, and life, and quickening:
so he is a Teacher, to give light and direction.



How its preserved.


2. It is preserved by exercise, exercising our understanding to know: studying
heavenly things, keeps knowledge from decay, and adds to it.

3. By committing our knowledge, and our souls, and all, to keep to him is
able to preserve us: where we make a surrender, there God is a Preserver.

4. We tie things that we fear to lose; tie the knowledge to the Rule; and let
the Knowledge and the Word be united, as the Cause, and the Effect.

5. Fasten something to knowledge that it may abide; fasten to it Humility,
Love, and Practice, then it will remain.

6. Confer with others, communicate what you know, partake of others
knowledge; mutual exchange makes a combination, so we are more firm.

7. Esteem of knowledge, as of your greatest treasure, then your care will be
to keep your Jewel, lock it up in a good conscience, and it will be safe and
sure.

8. Delight in knowledge, and take pleasure in understanding, then no price can
buy it, and we shall still be conversant with it, and never let it depart from
us.


This is one of the deepest questions in Religion: It is reported of the
heathen he required three days to answer, then three days more, still three
more, for the more he studied, he found his weakness to answer.



1. Because some will question, Where is your God? Psalm. 42.10.

2. To stay our own thoughts which are restless, till we can conclude
something concerning God; our satisfaction is the more to know a glimpse of
God, and to perceive him, we may have this knowledge increased a little here,
and much hereafter.

3. In respect of the worship of God, We must worship that we know, John 4.22.
it is reproved to worship an unknown God, Act 17, 23.

1. To speak what God is, the safer way is to declare negatively what he is
not: He is not Mortal, Corporal, Corruptible: thus we ascribe to him all
excellency.

2. To know what God is, let us search the Scripture: for his word can best
testify of him, Psalm 138.2. John 5.39.

3. We must conclude, all we can know of God, is but in part here in this life:
We hear of him but a little portion, Job 26.14. We know in part, and see but
darkly, as through a perspective glass, 1. Cor. 13.12.

4. The end of our study to know God, should be for to glorify him, by our
acknowledgement of him to be the only and absolute Lord: admiration of his
excellency, praising of him in our speeches, actions, sufferings: of which we
shall consider in the next place.

It will the better be answered if we consider.

1. What he is not. 2. What he is.
First, God is not, 1. Created. 2. Visible. 3. Comprehended.


1. God is not created but the Creator, Genesis 1.1. 1. What God is not. 1. not
created.
All we can conceive of or number, is comprehended under two heads, the
Creator, and the Creatures. God is the Creator, all besides himself are
Creatures, both the Angels, the heavens, the earth, and all things in them
whatsoever.

2. God is not visible, our bodies cannot see a spirit, 2. Not visible.
God is a most pure and spiritual Essence, therefore cannot be seen.

3. God is not comprehended, our capacity is too shallow to conceive of him; he
is invisible to our bodies, 3. Not comprehended.
and incomprehensible to our souls.

Quest. What mean you by Incomprehensible?

Answ. The word Incomprehensible, signifies that which cannot be found out or
numbered. Tremelius and Junius use a word in Psalm 145.3. Pervestigationem
esse, which is a finding out: To show the meaning of Gods
incomprehensiblenesse, he says, Magnitudini ejus non esse pervestigationem,
his greatness is incomprehensible, that is, cannot be found out. Wilson
expounding Incomprehensible, says, it is that the World cannot contain, nor
man's wit conceive.

2. What God is.
Secondly, what God is.
1. He is the Creator of all things.

2. Invisible to the eye.

3. Incomprehensible to the mind.

1. He is a Creator.
First, he is a Creator of all things, therefore is to be separated from the
creatures in our distinctions, and is above the creatures in priority of
dignity and time.

To create, is to work without instruments, or materials. What it is to create.


Applications.
1. To conceive of God as a Creator, above all created Natures whatsoever. Romans
11.36. Of him, through him, and for him are all things. Of him, as the first
Cause; by him, as the Preserver; for him, as their End wherefore they were made.
Of him, without any mover; by him, without a helper; for him, and none other
cause.

2. Not to contend with^^^ our Creator about his Decrees, or proceedings: this
is to bring a woe upon our selves, Romans 9.20.
to strive with our Maker. Isai. 45.9.

3. To praise and glorify him for this, because he created all things. Revel.
4 11.
Thou art worthy to receive glory, and honor, and power; for thou have created
all things.

Secondly, God is invisible to the eye: John 1.18. No man has seen God at any
time. 2. He is invisible.


The persons, No man:

The time, at any time.

Never man at any time saw God: we cannot see a Spirit; but God is a most pure
Spirit, excelling the Angels. First, the Angels have many perfections, but God
has all perfection. Digressio.
Secondly, the Angels receive all from him; he has all from himself. Thirdly,
they are finite, and limited; but God is infinite.

Thirdly.
God is Incomprehensible to the mind, as well as invisible to the eye, no
created Nature can comprehend him in his Essence nor his Attributes; whatsoever
we conceive it is but in part, there is much more we perceive not, nor can
comprehend.

In respect of his Eternity, Eternity.
our capacity is like the Sun, which shows things under it, but darkens all
about it; we can look back to the beginning, if we look forward, we
cannot conceive after time shall be no more.

Concerning Gods being before time, or after time, Revel. 10.6.
we have but a glimpse, a general notion; we can conceive but little, our
comprehension fails us.

Who can behold the Sun in his glorious shining? Glory.
much less can we comprehend the glorious Majesty of God: who has beheld it,
that he may demonstrate it? not the Angels, for they are feign to cover their
their faces, Isai. 6.2. much less we that dwell in houses of clay, who have
that ignorance and guiltiness, that those glorious Zeraphims are freed from.

Nor can we comprehend his greatness, Psalm. 145.3. Greatness.
no not by all our industry and searching, Job. 11.7. The heaven of heavens
cannot contain him, 1 King. 8.27. We are capable but to see his back parts
in this life, Exodus 33.23.
so much of God, as can be perceived in his word and works: his greatness is
such, that the Nations are as the drop of the Bucket, and the Islands as a
little dust: Lebanon has not wood enough for fire, nor the beasts enough for a
sacrifice for him. Isaiah 40.15, 16.

Also his wisdom is unsearchable, Wisdom.
a deep we cannot fathom, Romans 11.33. the foolishness of God is wiser than
men, 1. Cor. 1.25. It is only the Spirit of God that searches the deep
things of God, 1. Cor. 2.10. and although vain men would be wise, Job. 11.12.
yet he is but a beast by his own knowledge, Jeremiah 10.14. and we must be
constrained to confess our darkness, Job. 37.19.

Applications.
1. Is God invisible to the eye, and incomprehensible to the mind? let us then
lay by our sense and reason, and labor for faith, though we cannot apprehend
nor demonstrate what God is; yet we are to believe that He is: Heb. 11.6. He
that comes to God must believe.

Note three things.
1. Our felicity, is to come to God. 2. The means is, by believing. 3. God is,
that we must believe, which we cannot see nor comprehend,
2. By this it is easy to distinguish the Eternal Jehovah from all false Gods,
being some of them visible, all comprehensible, those that adore them are more
honorable then that they worship, those Gods were but titular gods, no
Creators, but created, live less in being, and perishing in conclusion. Ier.
10.11.


3. No man was ever a perfect Artist in the contemplation of God: How little a
portion do they hear of him? Job 26.14. long in studying but little in
fruition: deep conceits, but poor conclusions: Hoc solum scio, Arist.
me nihil scire: This only I do know, that I know nothing.

4. Yet are we to be diligent to study the knowledge, of God, and although we
cannot find him out in his perfection, Job 11.7. yet we must learn to know
him to our salvation, John 17.3. and to increase in the knowledge of God. Col.
1.10. though we cannot see his face he reveals his backe-parts to us: Exodus
33.23. we are to know him by his works: Romans 1.20. in his Son, 2. Cor. 4.6.
it is a shame living under the preaching of the Word to be ignorant of God, 1.
Cor. 15.34. and we are fools before the Lord, Jer. 4.22. Therefore let us cry
for wisdom, and call for understanding, search for it as silver, and dig
for it as for gold, then shall we find the knowledge of God. Prove. 2.3, 4, 5.

Quest. What is it to glorify God?

Answ. To glorify God, is not to add any thing to him to make him glorious,
but to acknowledge and demonstrate that glory is in him already; God glorifies
us by putting glory on us, adding that unto us we are destitute of: We do
glorify him, by taking notice, admiring, and praising of him, setting forth
his glory.

That is done by Acknowledgement.

Either To himself, or to men.


To himself by Admiration. Praises.


To others by Speeches. Actions. Sufferings.


First, we glorify God by acknowledgment, which is more than knowledge, Romans
1.21.

The Wise Heathens that knew God did not acknowledge him nor demonstrate him
accordingly: they knew God, verse. 21. but regarded not to acknowledge him,
verse. 28. then to our knowledge of God, we must join an acknowledgment,
whereby we shall glorify him.

This acknowledgment must be free, Mark 1.24. Judges 1.7.
else we differ not from the devils, which acknowledge God upon constraint; so
wicked men may acknowledge God by constraint.

The truth of this free a knowledgment will appear by our Admiration and
Praises.
What is Admiration?

Answ. To Admire, is to wonder, to marvel.

Consider, 1. The subject is the Admirour. 2. The Object admired. 3. Then how
to attain admiration of God.








Ephesians. 1.17.

David in the 8. Psalm falls to Meditation, then to Admiration. So in Psalm
104. his Meditation concludes in Admiration: Psalm. 104.1.24
Oh Lord, how wonderful are thy works.

3. We must learn to silence our Reason; we must admire where we cannot
comprehend; as Romans 11.33. Oh the deepnesse of the riches both of the Wisdom
and Knowledge of God.





1. In his Essence, having his being of himself; absolute, independent,
blessed, immutable.

2. Also, that there are in the Divine Essence a Trinity of Persons.





First, admire the largeness of it; for he knows all. Prove. 15.11.

2. The perfection of his knowledge; he knows the Causes, Concomitants,
Fruits, and Effects, insides; he knows the motions and inclinations of all men,
of all things. Acts 15.18.

3. Admire the manner of his Knowledge; not by Doctrine, Relation, Experience,
but without means.

4. Admire the celerity and swiftness of his Knowledge at once, in a moment:
He knows things past, present, and to come.

5. The certainty of his Knowledge; he cannot be deceived; he foresees all
inconveniences, he knows things and persons as they are: no apparitions, nor
pretenses, nor fainings, nor dissemblings can delude him.

6. Admire the Eternity of his Knowledge, before all time, before there was a
World: He knew himself to be most perfectly happy, and blessed; and knew that
he would make a world, and knew all that man should act on the stage of this
world; and as he did purpose, so all things must come to pass, Acts 4.28.
Ephesians. 1.11.
according to his foreknowledge and Decree.

7. Admire the Efficacy of the Knowledge and Wisdom of God: From his
Knowledge he decreed, then did work: so the Heavens, Earth, Seas, and all
their ornaments were created, are preserved: the variety of his creatures,
argues his unsearchable Wisdom; and their order, uses, and ends app^inted
them, calls for our Admiration.

By this we may see, what c^^se we have to admire God; and if one of his
Attributes do cause such Admiration, what would it work on us, to meditate on
the rest, as his Power, Glory, Holiness, Justice, Invisibility, immutability;
this requires a large Volume, but I intend brevity.



Christ incarnate, how he is the begotten Son of God. Psalm. 2.7.

1. Admire it in this; he was begotten of the Father, yet is not after the
Father in time: Men beget those that come after them, but here it is not so;
therefore to be admired.

2. Men beget children, which may be divided from them; but Christ is so
begotten, that he is undividuall; He and the Father are one. John 10.30.

3. Men so beget, that there is a diminution of their substance, and a
conveighing of the corrupt Nature: But Christ is begotten without diminution of
the substance of the Father, Acts 4.27.
and free from all corruption: He is the holy Son of God.

4. Men beget children, which are their inferiors: but Christ is begotten,
Equal in Eternity.
yet equal with the Father. Phil. 2.6.

1. The Father is eternal: Psalm. 90.2. So is the Son eternal. Isai. 9.6.

Glory.
2. The Father is glorious: Acts 7.2. So the Son is glorious. James 2.1.

Power.
3. The Father did create: Genesis 1.1. So the Son created. Col. 1.16.

4. Angels do honor the Father: Isai. 6.3. So Angels do honor the Son.
Adoration.
Heb. 1.6.

5. A Father begets a Son, but yet communicates not his whole Essence to him:
but Christ is begotten, yet partakes of the whol^ Essence of his Father,
therefore admirable.

6. A Father begets one that is another person, another thing distinct from
himself: But the Lord Christ is begotten, another person, yet not another
thing; he may be distinguished, but not divided. Thus we acknowledge God by
Admiration.

Psalm. 50. last verse.

Here consider, 1. Who they be do praise him. 2. How they praise him. 3. For
what they praise him.


First, who praise him:

It Is the Saints praise him. Psalm. 145.10.

1. It Is they have the most cause. 2. And the best abilities. 3. And the only
acceptance.
Secondly, how they praise him:

1. They praise him freely, and cheerfully. Psalm. 63.5.

2. Uprightly, and sincerely. Psalm. 119.7. Hence it is, they praise God with
their Souls, Ps. 103.1. with their Hearts. Psalm. 9.1.

3. They praise God frequently, on all occasions. Ps. 71.6. Psalm. 119.164.

4. They praise him constantly. Psalm. 145.2. Hence it is, when they lose their
comforts, yet God loses not his praises. Job 1.21.

Thirdly, for what they praise him.

1. For his own Excellency. 2. For his glorious works. 3. For his mercies.
First, for his own excellency.

1. He is the sovereign Lord God over all, Romans 9.5. the ruler of the world,
Zach. 4.14. Hence it is, that Greatness, and Glory, and Power, and Victory,
and Praises, is attributed to him who is head over all, 1 Chro. 29.11. He is to
be praised as the only potentate. 1. Tim. 6.15. He is to be praised that is
high and excellent. Isai. 57.15. He it is, is glorious in Holiness, Exodus
15.11. and worthy to receive Honor, and Glory, and Power, and Praise, Revel.
4.11. Revel. 5.13. All his glorious Attributes, both Communicable, and
Incommunicable, calls for our frequent praises.

Secondly, he is to be praised for his works.
For they demonstrate his eternal Power and Godhead. Romans 1.20. Hence it is,
that he is praised for creating all things. Rev. 4.11. His works both of
Creation and Providence, do show his Wisdom, Power, Goodness, etc.

Psalm. 139.14. Psalm 136. Psalm 194.
The works of God stirred up David to praise God, both for the making of
himself, and for the making of other creatures, and for the government of the
World.

Thirdly, God is to to be praised for his mercies, Psalm. 100.4. Psalm 136.1.
To quicken us to this duty, consider:

1. The freeness of his mercies, they are bestowed without our deserts: his
will is the cause of his mercy. Romans 9.18.

2. The multitudes of mercies, of all sorts, temporal and spiritual, on every
faculty of soul, and member of our bodies, mercies on our names, estates,
families, friends, those near and dear to us.

3. The constancy of his mercies, they are renewed every morning, Lament. 3.23.
We are laden daily with benefits, Psalm. 68.19.

4. Consider mercies comparatively; we are in health others are sick; we have
sight, others are blind: we have the Gospel, other sit in darkness, etc.

Thus we see God is glorified by Admiration, by Praises.

Lastly, he is glorified by acknowledging him to Men: In our Speeches. In our
Actions. In our Sufferings.


First, in our speeches to men.

1. By declaring his works, Psalm. 105.1.

2. To instruct our Children that they may praise God, Psalm 78 4.

3. To make public confession of our sins, if they have caused public
scandal, Ioshuah 7.19.

4. To make public confession of Religion, being called, Psalm 119.46. Read
the marginall Note 1 Pet. 3.15.

Secondly, We must glorify men before God in our Actions.
1. By our godly conversation; in the general, to do good works before them,
to urge them to glorify God, Matthew 5.16. to cause men to say, it is a good
God, a good word preached, a good Religion professed, because they do see good
works expressed.

2. In particular, to honor God with our riches, Prove. 3.9. to maintain Gods
Worship. Exodus 35.22. Also to do good to his ministers, 2. King. 4.10. that
they may be encouraged in the Law of the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 31.4. to to do good to
many poor, Ecclesiastes 11.2. that thanks may be rendered by many, and God may
be praised and glorified. 2. Cor. 9.12, 13.

Thirdly, We must glorify God among men by our sufferings
1. In holding on our course.

2. Being patient and meek.

3. Praying for our Persecutors.

4. Laying down our lives for the truth: thus suffering we shall glorify God.
John 21.19.

Of Gods Subsistence.
1. What Subsistence is.

2. That God does Subsist.

3. The manner of his Subsistence.

4. Uses to Edification.

First, What Subsistence is.
AS there is a being, so there is a subsistence in that being, which
subsistence is to be upheld in a well being, without decay, diminishing, or
declyning: he that does so, does honorably subsist. There may be a
declining, yet body and soul may hang together: so the subsistence is weak:
but he that declines not, but holds his own, falls not back, nor decays,
that person subsists happily, not only in being, but also in a well being.

2. God does subsist independantly, immutably, without decay or diminution; he
is Jehovah, and changes not; he is as Holy, Powerful, and Wise, and Rich and
Glorious, and every way Perfect and Blessed as ever he was, Heb. 1.3.
without interruption: he depends not on second causes as we do; all creatures
subsist by him, he bears them up and continues them therefore they subsist.
Psalm. 119.91. He himself subsisted when there was no w^^ld, John 17.5. and can
subsist if all were dissolved again: He can put an end to the Creatures, and
give them subsistence again: so then he subsists of himself, and all
Creatures do subsist by his will and power, and no otherwise.

3. The manner of subsisting. Time.
The Father subsists first, not in time, but in order.

In the manner of working, Manner.
the Father works from himself, the Son from the Father, the Holy Ghost
from them both: Proprieties.
they differ in their Personal proprieties: The Father subsists unbegotten,
the Son begotten, the Holy Ghost proceeding.

The Uses are these.
1. To show us the difference of Gods Subsistence, and ours: He subsists of
himself, we by him: He before time, we in time: He subsists independent, we
depend on him: He subsists without composition, and is immutable; we are
compounded of the four Elements, in regard of our bodies; of body and soul,
in regard of our persons: He subsists without means, we by means, and his
blessing on means: He is always the same subsisting, we must be dissolved,
buried, raised, glorified, and subsist eternally by him.

2. Use. This shows the happiness of Gods servants; he ever does subsist, to
direct them, to protect them, to enrich them, and to reward them. Great men on
earth do not subsist always, sometimes their wealth decays, sometimes their
breath decaies; they decaying themselves, their followers cannot honorably
subsist: But it is not so with the Lord, he cannot decay in riches, nor time;
he subsists always, his years fail not. Psalm 102.28.

3. Use. In our decays let us have recourse to God; he always subsists, and
bears up the whole World: we need prayer more than shifting, and using
unlawful means in our decays; God can make us subsist in life, Psalm 66.9.
and in grace, Psalm 41.12. Let us therefore in our decays have recourse to
him, that we may subsist.

Of the Simpleness of God.
THere are properties attributed to God for two causes: one to make himself
the better known to us; the other to distinguish him from other titular gods,
and from all other things.

Simpleness is one of the incommunicable properties of God: It Is a
Theological word, used for demonstration, or distinction.

Consider: 1. What is meant by Simpleness. 2. That God is of a Simple nature.
3. Conclusions drawn from it. 4. Questions answered. 5. Uses for Edification



TO be simple among men is a want of wit and capacity: A want of discretion.
Prove. 1.4. To give to the simple sharpness of wit: Hierom reads it a child.
Iunius reads it a fool; because both Children and Fools are simple: of such,
it is spoken Prove. 9.16. Who so is simple let him come hither. These simple ones
are both unskilful, and easily persuaded.

2. Simple, is to be plain hearted, void of wicked plo^s and devices: The
Lord preserves the simple ones, Psalm. 116.6. These are simple concerning
evil, Romans 16.19. These are, as if they knew not how to deceive; this is a
commendable simplicity. Thus we see that simpleness is to be void of parts, or
to be void of the abuse of those parts of Wit and Knowledge that is bestowed on
us.

3. Simpleness is a singleness without composition, or mixture, opposed to
that is double, or of several kinds, or sorts. Water is a Simple, but put into
it Salt, or Wine, it is a Compound; because there are more kinds than one. To be
a Simple, we take it to be without guile, fraud, or deceit. 2. Sam. 15.11.
There were with Absolon men simple in heart, or upright in mind. Integro animo.


Secondly, That God is of a simple Nature.
GOD is of a simple Nature; He is a pure Essence, called I am that I am.
Exodus 3.14. Light, and is without all darkness. 1. Ioh. 1.5. There is in God no
mixture, or composition in the least degree: He is one God, Light without
darkness, strong without weakness, wise without folly, pure without the least
spot, upright without guile, etc.

Thirdly, Conclusions drawn from Gods Simpleness.
1. WE gather hence, that there is perfection in him: He is simple of himself,
without any addition.

2. Being a pure simple Essence, he must needs be invisible: Our eyes are not
able to behold a Spirit that is created, much less him that is a most pure
Spirit, excelling them all in the simpleness and purity of his Nature.

3. He must be eternal, and everlasting; it is Compositions do bring a
dissolution. God is simple without composition, therefore uncreated, and
incapable of dissolution.

4. Hence we may gather, that God is immutable: That which changes, is by
adding to it, or taking from it; but God is a simple E^sence, so pure, and
perfect, that nothing can be added to him, nor taken from him.

Fourthly, Some Questions answered.


John 5.7. These three are one: one in Nature, Time, Operation; distinguished,
not divided.

Paul says, The foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of
God is stronger than men. 1. Cor. 1.25.

Paul shows, it is Gods Wisdom, and Gods Power: Let them in their madness
account it foolishness, yet the foolishness of God is wiser than men: let
them account it weakness, yet they shall find Gods weakness stronger than
men. All their Philosophy in their Wisdom and strength of Arguments, cannot
open men's eyes, and convert men's souls, and bring them to Salvation, which the
Gospel can do. Acts 26.18. James 1.18 Romans 1.16.



Tim. 3.16. Great is the mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh.
After Christ became man, h^e lost not his Godhead: For he knew men's thoughts,
wrought miracles, had Divine Adoration given to him. He was said John 3.13. to
be in Heaven, and to be equal with God. Phil. 2.6. and in St. John he says,
He and the Father are one. So still the simple individual Essence remains
entire, and immutable; though by the purpose and consent of the Trinity, the
second person became incarnate.





Simpleness, nor Property, nor Trinity: why then does the Church make use of
them?

Aristotle.
and marks of things faith the Heathen. And another says, Whosoever is
ignorant of words, shall never judge well of things. If in the Scripture we
find not words, nor since, w^e are not to use them.

2. They are used for Exposition, Explination, Interpretation; to make hid
things more obvious, and dark things more perspicuous.

3. They are used for Confutation, that the truth may be cleared, and errors
confuted. If that Heretics did affect the Truth, they would embrace the
phrases of the Church, and Theological Terms, which do unfold, and
demonstrate the Truth.

Fifthly, Uses to edify.
approves to be simple. Concerning evil, the less we contrive evil, and the
more untoward we are to act it, the better Proficients we shall prove. And as
we should be simple in committing evil, so should we be simple in doing good:
Romans 12.8.
and as among other good Duties, so in our Alms, to give with simplicity; that
is,

1. Faithfully, if we be trusted.

2. Humbly, without vain glory.

3. Gently, giving good language.

4. Impartially, where needs are equal.

5. Approving our selves to God.

6. Remembering God sees us.









Psalm. 32.1, 2.

2. Get the strongest persuasions we can of Gods presence; this will make us
upright, without doubling, and dissembling. Genesis 17.1. Genesis 17.1.


3. Look to all God Precepts, commands of Piety, Mercy, and Sobriety: look to
both Tables, to all duties: Not to pick and choose, and take liberty where we
may gain praise, or pleasure, or profit. Psalm. 119.6.

4. Examine often the temper of the inner man, observing our aims and intents,
and our manner of performance of duties.

5. Pray often and earnest to be purged from guile and hypocrisy; and seeing
we bring not with us uprightnes, integrity, simplicity, and godly pureness, let
us labor, that not in carnal wisdom, but by the grace of God, 2. Cor. 1.12.
we may have our conversation here among men, and so resemble God, as the drop
does the Ocean.

Of Gods Eternity.
1. What eternity is.

2. God is only Eternal.

3. Some Quest. answered.

4. Applications to edify.

First, What Eternity is.
synechdochially, a part for the whole: men speaking of Eternity, rather look
forward than backward; and it is more easy so to speak of Eternity, because we
guess at something to be done, and enenjoyed when time shall cease; but are
dark if we look to that part of Eternity which is before time: time parts
Eternity in the midst: there is an everlasting, Psalm. 90.2.
from which time issued; there is an Everlasting when time ceases; distinctions
may help us, if we consider Eternity and Time: Eternity is before and after
time: Time has a beginning and an end; then comes Eternity again: by this we
see, Eternity is not only (in saeculum) for ever, or everlasting; but we must
look both ways, as well to the part of Eternity that is before time, as that
which is to come; all is one Eternity, only it is parted by Time, which Time in
the midst of Eternity, is as a spark of fire in the midst of the vast Ocean.

Secondly, God is Eternal.
Dan. 7.9. There his Eternity is set down to our capacity: He is said To be
from everlasting. Psalm 90.2. The God of Antiqui^y, or the eternal God. Deuteronomy.
33.27. A King of old. Psalm. 74 12.

In respect of his eternity after Time, he is called The everlasting God. Rom
16.26. An everlasting King. 1. Tim. 1.17. To live for evermore. Revel. 10.6.

Thirdly, Questions answered.


Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God made the Heavens, There was a beginning.
and the Earth: Before that time nothing did appear. Heb. 11.3.

Of nothing comes nothing: therefore the World was eternal?

Psalm 33.9.
because he is a Creator, and his Word gives a being to that which had no
being: and his command produces substances, and real things; so they appear,
and are in being, though they were formed of nothing.



The maker thereof is God. Heb. 11.10. It was made without hands. 2. Cor. 5.1.
Heaven is a glorious and excellent place, yet a created place: It Is called Gods
dwelling, Psalm 2.4. 1. Kings 8.27.
because he is manifested there in glory: Yet the Heaven of Heavens, the most
excellent Heavens cannot contain him. He had glory and excellency before
Heaven or t e World had a being: Himself is eternal, who had no beginning.
John 7.5.
The Heavens are not eternal, which had a beginning.

Genesis?

It Is spoken of inclusively, though not so plainly: Gen 2.1. The Heavens and
Earth were finished, with all their Hoasts. In the Host of Heaven the Angels
are not excluded: for elsewhere they are called the Lords Host, Genesis 32.2. So
Ps. 103.20, 21. Praise the Lord ye his Angels, praise the Lord ye his Hoasts.
And that the Angels were created, read Psalm. 148.2. Praise the Lord ye his
Angels: verse. 5. For he commanded, and they were created. Col. 1.16. By him
were all things made, things visible, and invisible; whether Thrones, or
Dominions; Principalities, or Powers. Angels are not eternal, but were
created, and had a beginning.

Jude speaks of eternal Fire; Jude verse. 7. Had that Fire no beginning, as it
shall have no ending?

Jude calls eternal, Christ calls Everlasting fire. Math. 25.41. Math. 25.41.
It Is eternal in a future relation; it is prepared says Christ, for the
Devil, and his Angels: being prepared, fitted, Jude 7. verse.
and made ready, proves it had a beginning. Note, that Eternal, and
Everlasting, one word is used for both.





Esau, we will have the present pottage, with loss of the future blessing





2. He that had glory before there was a World, and decreed, and purposed
before the foundations of the World were laid, must be eternal: But God had
glory before the world, John 17.5. 2. Tim. 1.9. and purposes and decrees before
the world; Ephesians. 1.4. and therefore is eternal.

3. He that can give eternal rewards, must be eternal; But he can give
eternal rewards: Romans 6. last verse. ther^ore is eternal.

4. To be eternal, is to have no beginning, no mutation, no end. God had no
beginning, with him is no shadow of change, nor possibility of end.

Christ the eternal Son of God?

He was before the mountains: (a Synechdoche) a part for the whole;
Mountains put for the World. Prove. 8.25. And for the future, None can declare
his age: Esaias 53.8. For he lives for ever. Rev. 1.18. The Heavens have a
duration without life: The devils have an everlasting being without joy: The
Angels have an everlasting joyful being, but their being is dependant, and by
participation, and their joy successive. The Saints in Heaven have a blessed
everlasting being, but not perfect till the Day of Judgment: But Christ is
eternal, and has with his eternity and everlastingnesse life, joy,
perfection, fullness at once; so that he is eternal as God.

Heb. 6.2. called Eternal Judgment.

to the Elect eternal life, and to to the reprobate eternal destruction.

2. It Is Eternal judgment, in opposition to temporal judgments here; then
time is out, and we have nothing to do with it: all we have to do, is about
Eternity.

3. As a Malefactor, when he goes to the bar, we say he has received his
death; notwithstanding the execution follows after: so then men receive their
eternal sentence: it is eternal judgment.

Fourthly, Uses to Edify.


2. Time is measured by ages, years, months, days, hours, minutes: Eternity
has no measure, nor portions, nor limits; it passes and out-strips the bounds
of our thoughts; nor can our reason gage it, nor our understanding fathom it.

3. Time is always in motion, as the spring of a Watch, never stands still
till it be consumed, and brought to an end: Eternity has no motion, it ever
stands still, its always the same.



Therefore, when we think or speak of Gods Eternity, we should conclude as
St. Paul. To the King Everlasting, Immortal, etc, to him be glory for ever,
Amen.

lessons; considering we have time, and are swittly passing to Eternity.

1. Consider the brevity of Time. 2. Take the opportunity of time.
1. The brevity; Time is short; whilst I am in thinking, some of it is gone:
man's whole life is numbered by days; compared to a spanne, a bubble, to a wind
that passes away, etc. If we could seriously alter our thoughts, to think more
of the shortness of Time, it would alter our minds to do the second thing:
which is;

2. To take the opportunity of time: Men may have time, yet want the
opportunity: as sick men, and old men: but we that have the opportunity of the
Gospel, and of health, and Christian society, and other sweet and seasonable
opportunities; to have communion with God, to exercise mercy, to further others
in godliness: Oh, let us be wise for Eternity, and make an holy advantage of
the opportunities of Time as much as we can, and more than we have done.

Isai. 57.15. And that we may be humble indeed and enjoy his presence:

1. Let us draw near to him with our understanding, striving for clearer
apprehension of him: This made Isaiah humbly to cry out, woe is me, I am undone,
I am a man, of polluted lips: Isai^h 6. Job. 24.
and Job to abhor himself; the sight of God made both of them humble.

2. In all the good we enjoy, of graces or natural abilities, or riches, to
look on both ends as well as on the middle; we are receivers, and must be
accomptants; and great receipts must have great accounts: this well thought on
will humble us.

3. Keep a constant confession of sins daily, and often judge our selves,
for our sins worthy to be stripped of all our excellencies, Ezekiel. 36.31.
and to be cut off with infamy.

4. Carry about us in our minds two, or three, or four of the grossest sins
that ever we committed in our lives; look on them with their circumstances,
and it will be a powerful means to humb^e us.

5. Compare our selves with them which are more sound in judgment, soft in
heart, poor in spirit; which are more spiritual in prayer, more heavenly in
disposition, more zealous and diligent, and fruitful in good works. The Cloth
that is fine compared with haire-cloth, or sack-clot^: is but course if ye
compare it with Cambricke or Lawne.



1. To increase as much as we can in saving knowledge: for those that God
brings to eternal life, he illuminates with his Spirit; so that those which
were dead, begin that life which ends in Eternity; or rather concludes, and
is perfected in Eternity, John 17.3.

2. Get the faith of Gods elect, so to lay hold on Christ, and rest upon ^im,
that by believing we may come to eternal life. John 3.16.

3. By patience to continue in well doing; learn patiently to forbear sinful
pleasures and profits, and patiently bear oppositions, incombrances, and
crosses; and do well; looking to the rule, the manner, and our aims: join to
all constancy; then shall we have Glory, and honor, and Eternal life, Romans
2.7.

Of Gods Omnipotency.
1. What Omnipotency is.

2. God is Omnipotent.

3. The witnesses of his Omnipotency.

4. Questions answered.

5. Applications to edify.

First, What Omnipotency is.
TO be Omnipotent, is to have all power, to have all might and strength. There
is Power, and Omnipotency; Power can do much, but Omnipotency can do all:
Power may be suppressed by a greater power; Omnipotency is above all, and all
subject to it: Power is communicable, Omnipotency is incommunicable. To have
Omnipotency, is to have all power, all strength, all might, all sufficiency, to
do what is willed, to preserve what is do^e, to produce out of nothing.
Omnipotency has no difficulties, no lets, or oppositions; it works freely,
and perfectly, without co-workers, or materials: If that any time it uses any,
yet it is most certain it needs neither. So then Omnipotency, first, it can do
all: secondly, it can have no let: thirdly, it is above all: fourthly, it is
incommunicable: fifthly, it works freely.

Secondly, God is Omnipotent.
1. HE is able to do whatsoever he will, Psalm. 115.3. and more than he will.
Math. 3.9.

2. Nothing can resist him, his power being supreme. Job 9.4. Who has been
fierce against him G. B.
, or hardened his mind against him Trem.
, or struggled with him Hier.
, and prospered?

3. His power is above all the Angels which excel in strength. Psalm. 103.20.
They are at his command, Psalm. 104.4. and are subject to him. 1. Pet. 3.22. The
devils apprehend this power of God: Do tremble. James 2.19. Men have their
power given them from him. John 19.11 Romans 13.1. For other creatures, He says
to the deep, be dry. Isai. 44.27. He commands the Earth, and it opens her
mouth. Numb. 16.30, 31, etc.

4. His Omnipotency is incommunicable: the creature may do much by permission,
or commission; but Gods power is his strength and honor. He is the strong God
Trem.
, Genesis 33. last verse. Or the most strong God Hier.
: the mighty God G. B.
: His strength being his glory, he will not give it to another: Isai. 42.8.
Therefore is incommunicable.

5. He being Omnipotent, works freely, without compulsion, without assistants,
without materials.

Without compulsion; His own Will was the cause that he made all things. Rev.
4.11.

Without Assistants; He alone spread out the Heavens, Job 9.8. And alone
stretched out the Earth by himself. Isai. 44.24.

Without materials; He formed all things out of nothing. Heb. 11.3.

6. He works perfectly; Deuteronomy. 32.4. Perfect is the work of the Lord. So that
He made the Heavens, and the Earth, there is the work; and finished them with
all their Hoasts, there is the perfection. Genesis 2.1. Called All their Ornaments
in the Prayer of Manasses.

Thirdly, The witnesses of Gods Omnipotency.
Genesis 17.1. I am God Almighty.

2. Testimony of Angels; Revel. 4.8. Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, thus
they cry.

3. The Testimony of men: Job 25.2. Power and fear is with him. 1. Chron.
29.11. Thine O Lord, is greatness and power.

4. The frame of Heaven and Earth: Romans 1.20. The Creation does witness his
eternal power.

Fourthly, Questions answered.




He cannot lie? Titus 1.2. He cannot deny himself. 2. Tim. 2.13.

God cannot disable himself.
from his glory, because he is Omnipotent.





2. God gives us example, to go about our work with deliberation.

3. He affords us matter of Meditation by several days works.

4. He gives us an example to keep the Sabbath, in resting the seventh day.

Heb. 1.1. by whom he made the Worlds?

Idea of more worlds.



Chron. 21.20. therefore they have wings to cover their feet; to signify we
cannot behold them, Isaiah 6.2.

2. God tries our subjection, whether we will submit to his ordinance. Peter
must teach Cornelius, Act. 10. Acts 8.
not an Angel: Philip must instruct the Eunuch, not an Angel.

3. The weakness of the instrument is the glory of the worker. God exercises
his power in those earthen vessels, that his strength might be magnified in
their weakness; though the vessels be earth, yet the treasure they bring us is
heavenly, 2. Cor. 4.7. Though Ministers be weak instruments; yet they are
Gods Ambassadors, and the glory of Christ, 2. Cor. 8.23. which he has chosen
to set forth his glory in the world.





2. Because they must by long afflictions, be soundly humbled, and fitted for
deliverance.

3. To exercise their faith, hope, patience, prayer, and subjection.

4. To show his power in supporting them in long afflictions.

5. To make deliverances the more sweet and welcome.





2. Because it is his pleasure we should be humble here all our days.

3. Because we prize the Lord Jesus highly, our sins tells us we need a
Savior.

4. Because our corruptions are for our exercise, as the Canaanites to Israel:
we must be in war here, for we have an enemy within us.

5. Though sin remain within us, yet by the power of Gods grace it does not
reign in us: though sin be in us as a scullion for a base use, it is but as
the Gibeonites exercised about hewing wood, and drawing water: we are daily
mortifying, yet not at the command of it.



Hebrews 9.27. and his decrees must stand. P^ul 33 11.

2. God deals favorably with us, though we dye temporally; because he frees
us from eternal death.

3. The curse of death is taken away by Christ: Now death is asleep, Act. 7.6.
1 Thessalonians. 4.13.

4. That we might all learn to hate sin that brought death into the world.

5. Christ dyed, and entered into Glory; it is fit we should follow our
Captain.

6. Though we dye, yet God he loves us. Romans 8.38, 39. and shows us the
greatest love, presently after that he has taken away our lives, for then he
receives us into joy.

Fifthly, the uses to edify.
Revel. 4.11. Worthy art thou O Lord to receive honor, and glory, and power:
Not that God receives from us the thing, but the praise, honor, and
acknowledgement. 1. Chron. 29.11. Thine, O Lord, is greatness, and glory, and
power.

Psalm. 145.10, 11. What others do extraordinarily on a sudden motion, being
amazed, as Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.33. and Darius, Dan. 6.27. Let us do
constantly; that is, to make Gods power known.

Ier. 5.21, 22. God calls us to fear him; because by his power he keeps the
Sea within his bounds: when Job considers it, he says, The Pillars of heaven
quake at his reproof. Job. 26.10, 11. and verse 14. Who can understand his
fearful power? Matthew. 10.28. Fear him that can cast both body and soul into
hell.

John. 4.18.



2. St. John speaks of the judgment day; then our love shall be perfect, and
we shall have boldness without fear.

3. Love casts out tormenting fear and perplexity.

4. The perfect love of God apprehended by us, Calvin Comment. on Epistle John,
page 83.
casts out fear, and quiets our minds: so Calvin on the place.

To learn to depend on the Almighty for preservation, who can preserve without
means: as Elias forty days; by small means, as the widows little oil and
flower in her cruse: Against means, as Daniel in the Den: And for ordinary
means let us desire his powerful blessing on the means; else we shall eat
and not be satisfied. Hag. 1.

Ezra 8.22. The consideration thereof is terrible to the very Devils. Jam. 2.19.

Here is matter of Consolation.
Ephesians. 3.20. He that we pray unto, can quicken the souls of our wives, and
children, and servants, John. 5.21. He quickens whom he will. Ephesians. 2.1.

2. Comfort in regard of perseverance: our strength shall be renewed, we shall
run, and not be weary; we shall walk, and not faint, Isaiah 40 31. because
God upholds us in our intigrety, Psalm. 41.12. the Garrison that kepes us, is
the power of God, 1. Pet. 1.5. and none can take us out of his hand, that is
himself greater than all. John 10.29.

3. Comfort in temptations: our strength is in the Lord, and in the power of
his might: Ephesians. 6.10. it is he does stre^gthen us in the inner man, Ephesians.
3.16. and when God helps us with a little help, Dan. 11.34. then our
strongest temptations shall not prevail, but we shall be more than Conquerers:
Romans 8.37. a vehement speech.

4. Comfort in afflictions: he that is almighty orders them for the kind,
whether on our souls or bodies, names or estates, Amos 3.6. Js there evil in
the City and the Lord has not done it?

2. For the measure, he orders them to be great, of small: Jer. 30.11. I will
correct thee Moderately, or sparingly.
in measure.

3. He orders the time; sometimes he will have it but an Evening. Psalm. 30.6.
Sometimes 10. Days. Revel. 2.10. Sometimes our sorrows shall be for Years.
Psalm. 90.15.

4. He orders the deliverance: There is an appointed time. Psalm. 105.19. The
prisoners shall be loosed out of their pit. Zach. 9.10. And though our troubles
be many and great, yet at last comes the Lord in his strength, and delivers us
out of them all. Psalm. 34.19.

5. Here is consolation in respect of Death, our bodies shall not always rot,
and consume; we must awake, and sing, though we dwell in the dust. Isai. 26.19.
And our vile bodies shall be changed, Luke 1.37. Psalm. 115.3.
and made like to the glorious body of Christ by this mighty power, which is
both an absolute power, and an actual power. Phil. 3.21.

1. Proper. Ephesians. 6.10. 2. Exceeding. Ephesians. 1.19. 3. All power is derived
from him. 1. Chron. 29.12. 4. All power is subordinate to him. 2. Chron. 14.11.


Of Immutability.
1. What Immutability is.

2. That God is immutable.

3. Proofs by Scripture, and answers.

4. Applications to edify.

First, What Immutability is.
THe word signifies a Constancy; it is to be without change, or alteration:
where Immutability is in perfection, there must be no beginning. Beginning
argues mutation from a not being to a being. Secondly, there must be no
dissolution. Thirdly, no addition nor diminution. Fourthly, no weakness.
Fifthly, no dependancy on another. Sixthly, there must be Omnipotency to
overcome all impediments that may hinder, and Omniscience, to foresee all
inconveniences, to prevent all errors that may cause a mutation.

Secondly, God is immutable.
IN his Essence He is Jehovah, and changes not. Mal. 3.6. He is eternal in
being, nothing can can be added to him, nor taken from him: He is independent,
omnipotent, and omniscient; his Decrees stand. Psalm. 33.11 and his purposes and
actions have a constant course, and have not any possibility of change or
alteration.

Thirdly, To prove Gods Immutability.
IT may farther be proved by Scriptures, and Answers to Objections: By
Scriptures, James 1.17. With him is no variableness, nor shadow of change. So
in Numb. 23. God is not as man, that he should change. God is both infinite,
and perfect.

repent. Genesis 6.6. 1. Sam. 15.11.

Isai. 1.14. a Heart, 1. Sam. 13, 14. An Ear, Psalm. 34.15. An Hand. Jsai. 59.1.

2. When men do repent, they change their actions: God threatened Niniveh, and
tells Hezekiah, he shall dye; there was included, Except Niniveh do repent,
or Hezekiah pray. God wills a change, he changes not his Will. Phineas had a
Covenant of the Priesthood, yet Ely's sons by sin cut it off. God would
establish David's Throne, yet for sin ten Tribes fell to Iereboam, from
Rehoboam, Solomon's son, David's Grandchild. Inpromises and threatenings which
are temporal, we are to look to something included, as well as expressed: So
then the mutation is in us, not in God; as to those in a Ship near the shore,
the houses seem to move, and the trees; but they stand firm, and the motion
is in the Ship.

The Spirit of God moved on the waters. Genesis 1. Is there not mutation where is
motion?



the ancient of days. Dan. 7. Was he not once young, and so changed to be
ancient?



Sodom to see if their cry were true; that is, the cry of their sins. Genesis
18.21.
Did not he change his place to come down?



2. God teaches us by this manner of speech, not to believe too hastily the
reports of gross sins: We too often, and too lightly presume to give
credit, and pass censure without probation.

It is a lesson for Magistrates, gravely and deliberately to pass sentence,
and punish, after they have by inquiry found out the fault. Job 29.16.

Fourthly, Uses to edify.


Luke 13.5.

Ierem. 13.23. They are dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1. and cannot
change unless to more rottenness.

Nothing is too hard for him. Ier. 32.27. The Lord has changed others, and
will do much for those that seek to him. Ezekiel. 36.37. We must use means for
our change, and true conversion: we must hear the Word; For by it men are
chang^d. Acts 26.18. We must pray often and earnestly. Ier 31.18. This changed
Christ into a glorious estate. Luke 9.29. Prayer is a means of obtaining the
Spirit of God. Luke 11.13. The Spirit of God being obtained will change us. 2.
Cor. 3.18.

1. The God we serve is immutable. 2. The duties and services we do perform.
3. In respect of his love and mercy.


1. The God we serve is immutable: but false Gods are subject to mutation, and
perishing; our God is the same: Psalm. 102.27. good, wise, holy, constant in his
promises Heb. 6.22. This should add to our consolation.

2. Here is comfort in regard of our duties which we do perform: we have the
immutable God to assist us, to accept us, to reward us: He that had respect to
Abel, has respect to us, coming in faith as he did: he is the same to us, as
to Moses, David, Hezekiah, to our exceeding comfort.

3. In respect of his love and mercy, he is immutable; his love is an
everlasting love: Ier. 31.3. His mercy is an everlasting mercy, Isai. 54.8. He
may for a moment hide his face, and for our sins correct us with the rod^ of
men, Psalm 89.33. but his loving kindness he will never take from us: this
is our comfort, his love is immutable. John 13, 1. Romans 8.37, 38, 39.



1. Let us be soundly humbled, and broken in our hearts for our sins: firm
building have good foundations.

2. Let all our resolutions be conditional: if the Lord assist me, if the Lord
be present with me by his grace, I will forbear such a thing, perform such a
duty, bear such a cross patiently: Peter here failed, and so fell.

3. We must be well catechized, and soundly grounded in the principles of
Religion: It Is the uncatechised professors prove unstable, and as empty boats,
are tosted about with every wind of Doctrine. Ephesians. 4.14.

4. We must be practicke Christians, to do what we hear; then shall we be
stable, as those that build on a Rock. Matthew. 7.24.

5. Our constancy is much furthered, by looking to the recompense of reward;
this does encourage us in our Race, to look to the joy before us; this keeps
us from perturbations within, and makes us overcome impediments without. Heb.
11.26. Heb. 12.2. 2. Cor. 4.17.

6. We must delight in goodness: we are constant in that we delight in; men
come to outward performances without inward delight, so the duties prove
tedious, and they give over: therefore we must pray for a free spirit, that we
may come with willingness, Psalm. 51.12. Psalm. 110.3. Psalm. 122.1.

7. Take heed of four maine impediments to constancy.

1. Take heed of infidelity, for we live by faith, and walk by faith:
Infidelity makes men to withdraw themselves, Heb. 10.38. and to depart from
God: Heb. 3.13. This root has two abominable branches; the one to say, I
shall one day perish: 1. Sam. 27.1. the other to say, it is in vain to serve
God. Malak. 3.14. When men believe not Gods assistance, acceptance, nor reward,
how can they be comfortable or constant.

2. Take heed of ill company: Peter changing his company, lost his constancy:
those that hold dangerous errors in judgment, or else live in gross errors in
practice, their selected society will either hinder us in our way, or turn us
out of it.

3. Take heed of over-affecting the praise of men; for then we shall
over-affect the reproaches of men, and so we may be brought to cease from those
godly courses that God and our own consciences do call for, through base and
cowardly fear of reproaches.

4. Take heed of omitting good duties: as to neglect Preaching, Prayers,
Sacraments, Conference, Meditation, Humiliation, Thanksgiving: we rise by the
use of means, and fall by the neglect of means: Demas, says Paul, has
forsaken me: the next news we hear; He has embraced this present world. He
that would forsake good company, no doubt but he forsakes good duties, and so
turns Apostate: Take heed of coldness of disposition and affection, so shall
you prevent inconstancy in action.

Of Infiniteness.
1. What Infiniteness is.

2. No Creature is Infinite.

3. God is Infinite.

4. Applications to edify.

First, what Infiniteness is.
IT is to be without bounds, to be unmeasurable, to exceed reason or
capacity,; it is opposed to finite which is, to bound or limit, to define, to end
or conclude: Infiniteness has respect to Essence, or Properties: that which
is Infinite, must fill all places, it comprehends all things, and is
comprehended of nothing: the center is every where, and the circumference no
where: Infinitenes has respect to time, place, power, wisdom, justice,
mercy, etc.

Secondly, no Creature is Jnfinite.
NOt Angels, for they are finite Essences: If an Angel be in heaven, he is not
in earth: Nor Angels are infinite in time, for they were created, Col. 1.16.
nor in knowledge. Mark. 13.32. The heavens are not infinite, nor can they
comprehend Gods Essence. 1. King. 8. As for man, he is finite, it is quickly
resolved what are his compounds: For the gifts of his mind, or abilities of
body, he has his measure and limits; his body is anatomised, his soul defined
in essence and qualities, and confined in his earthly prison, his days
numbered; there is no resemblance of Infiniteness in man, unless it be in his
desires.

Thirdly, God as infinite in his Essenc^ and Properties.
He has an Infinite being, independent, incomprehensible: the Heaven of
Heavens cannot comprehend him; the Angels admire him: when we do think of his
Infiniteness, our apprehensions prove too weak, our capacity fails us, our
thoughts return as dazeled: Finite cannot comprehend Jnfinite: our meditation
turns to admiration: he is infinite in time, being eternal: infinite in
place, filling heaven and earth: infinite in power, he can do all that stands
with the honor of power to do: he is infinite in wisdom, knowing with one
view all things past present, and to come, most clearly, and fully, and
perfectly, with their originals, natures, uses, and concomitants, issues, and
conclusions.

Fourthly, Uses to edify.
Psalmist, Lord there is none like thee. Psalm. 86.8. There is no comparison
between finite and infinite, Matthew. 19.17. There is none good but God: In
comparison of the infinite goodness of God, none is good; yet simple men are
said to be good, as Matthew. 12.35. Act. 11.24. So in regard of Gods infinite
purity; the stars are impure, Job, 25.5. in comparison of his infinite
greatness, the Nations are as nothing. Isaiah 40.17.

creatures, and all is in vain. Isai. 55.2. There is an emptiness in the
creature, which made wise Solomon after all his search to conclude, All is
vanity. Eccles. 1.1 The Be flies from one flower to another, because she
seeks satisfaction: So vain man has many inventitions, but still is
unsatisfied. It Is this infinite God that gives it, his mercy can satisfy us
betimes. Psalm. 90.14. Himself fills our hearts. The World is a Globe, our
hearts a Triangle; there are still three empty corners for the Trinity to fill:
Our infinite desires are plenarily satisfied with him alone that is infinite.
Hence it was, that Paul and Silas having God, did sing in the Dungeon; when
Belshazar wanting him, did tremble at his Feast.

A using one thing often.
Battology.

Of Omniscience.
1. What Omniscience is.

2. No Creature is Omniscient.

3. God is Omniscient.

4. Proofs by Scriptures and Reasons.

5. Applications to edify.

First, What Omniscience is.
IT is gathered from a compound word, Omnis scientia.
all and knowledge: To know all requires infiniteness; all must be included,
nothing must be excluded.

Secondly, No Creature is Omniscient.
NO Creature made all, no Creature is Omnipresent, to know what is done in all
places: No creature knows all thoughts 1. Kings 8.
, no creature knows Gods Essence, no creature knows the Day of Judgment, no
creature knows the certain events of things, nor the certain causes of all
things: Therefore no Creature is Omniscient.

Thirdly, God is Omniscient.
God knows things past. Ps. 90.8. act. 15.18. Present, Psalm. 139.2. To come. 1.
Sam. 23.^^ God knows al things in Heaven, earth, and hell. Pr. 15.11.
GOD is Omniscient, knowing himself, and all creatures; He being infinite,
knows himself to be an infinite Essence. He knows the Creatures in their
being potentiall, in their production, existence; He knows their motions,
inclinations, intents, actions, progress, declensions, ends, and conclusions:
He sees all with one view, without experience, or disputes, or events, or
Reasons, or Similitudes; He sees them distinctly, unchangeably, Without the
least sinful motion.
sacredly, eternally, and perfectly.

Fourthly, Reasons, Arguments, and Probations.
1. Positive. Acts 15.18. Ier. 17 10. Psalm. 94.11. 2. Negative. 3.
M^taphoricall.
FIrst from Scripture; the Scriptures prove it 3. ways, first, Positive:
secondly, Negative: thirdly, Metaphorical. Job 28.24. For he beholds the ends
of the world, and sees all that is under Heaven. Heb. 4.13. All things are
anatomized before him.

There is no thought hid from thee.

1. He made al, 2. Else he were not perfect. 3. He must judge all: Ergo knows
all things.
God is said to have eyes. Prove. 15.3. To be light. 1. John 1. God is light; to
see, is to know; we borrow from the Mind, and give to the Eyes: As I see your
purpose, I see your love; that is Metaphorically, I know, perceive, or discern
it. When we say God has eyes, we mean, he knows, discernes, understands. So
God is light; ye know, it is light makes all manifest, it discovers, and makes
things obvious.

Fifthly, Uses to edify.
1. THis confutes two sorts of men, the Heretics and the profane: First, those
Heretics which hold, that God sees no sin in the justified, are ignorant of
God in his Omniscience; plain Texts are against them, Psalm. 90.8. Thou have
set our iniquities before thee, and our secret sins in the fight of thy
countenance. So Heb. 4.13. All things are anatomized before him. We have sin,
we see sin, and our neighbor sees our sin: God corrects us for sin, his
Spirit is grieved by sin: therefore God sees sin. God saw sin in David,
in Peter, in the Churches in the Revelation: He sees our sins more perfectly
than our selves, and convinces us for them, and causes us to bewail them,
confess them, and loath our selves for them.

2. This confutes Atheists, and profane men, which go about to hide their
counsel from the Lord: Isai. 29.15. And judge carnally of God, Job 22.13. as
if he being in Heaven, had eyes as a man, and could not see through the dark
cloud.

Here is direction, to take heed of secret sins; Secondly.
God knows them, and sees them with all their circumstances. Job 42.2. No
thought is hid from him.

2. Take heed of false pretenses, as Iesabels Fast, Absolons Vow, and Judas
Kiss. God sees the intent, though man sees only the pretense.

3. This shows, that it is not in vain to lift up our hearts: The Lord knows
our desires, Psalm. 10.17. and the meaning of our spirits. He knows a priory
from the first rise; therefore ejaculations are with him real prayers.
Nehemiah 2.4.

Thirdly.
Here is matter of consolation:

1. In regard of our frailty; The Lord knows whereof we are made, he
remembers we are but dust; so that from this his knowledge we may expect his
compassion. Psalm. 103.14.

2. In respect of our troubles, we know not which way our deliveranc^ shall
come; But the Lord knows how to deliver the godly. 2. Pet. 2.9. Let us labor
to be godly; when God knows us to be so, he knows then how to end our
miseries, and to give us deliverance.

A fourth Use may be, to aggravate the misery of the impenitent: They sin
before a God that sees all things: their enmity against him, their hatred of
his children, their despising his Ordinances, and taking their fill of sin,
is all known to him that shall judge them at the last day.

Use 5. To admire the knowledge of God, and to abase our selves, and confess
our ignorance as The wise man, Prove. 30. Surely I am more foolish than any man.
And Psalm 73. So fo^lish was I, and ignorant, and as a beast before thee.

Use 6. To believe, and acknowledge that there shall be a righteous Judgment
at the Great day; because the Judge cannot be deceived: He knows all men's
causes, and will separate men's persons; he knows his Sheep from Goats, and
will re^ard every one according to that he knows they have done in the body:
He needs no informations, but will judge according to perfect knowledge.

Of Omnipresence.
1. What Omnipresence is.

2. No Creature is Omnipresent.

3. God is Omnipresent.

4. Reasons and Scriptures to prove it.

5. Objections and Question, answered.

6. Applications to edify.

First, what Omnipresence is.
IT is a word from a compound of two words, all and present; expressed in
another phrase, called Vbiquity, a being every where at once.

Secondly, no Creature is Omnipresent.
THe Creatures are limited and bounded; Angels are not in heaven and earth at
once: man has his being in a little room, and is present but in one place at
once: the Sea has her bounds, the air has his Region, and every Creature
has his appointed place.

Thirdly, God is Omnipresent.
IN heaven is his glorious presence: he is in earth by his providence, in hell
by his judgments; though no place can contain him, yet no place can exclude
him.

Fourthly, Reasons and Scriptures to prove it.
Genesis 17.1.

How is it possible for all his servants at once to walk before him, were he
not omnipresent?

The Scriptures prove it clearly. Genesis 10.9. Nimrod a mighty hunter before the
Lord in Gods presence, Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I fly from thy presence? Ier.
23.24. Do I not fill heaven and earth, says the Lord.

Objections.
CAine went out from the presence of God. Genesis 4.16.

Caine went not from Gods presence, as he is universally present with his
creatures, but he went from the presence of his grace and favor. 1. Chron.
16.29. To come before God, is expounded, Psalm 96.8. to come into his Coures.
Cain went from the presence of God, from his Church and family in Adams house,
who taught his children religion, and to offer Sacrifice; he went from that
sweet communion that Gods children have with him in his worship and service.

Ephesians. 2.12. the Gentiles were without God in the World: how was he then
present?



2. They were without the knowledge of God.

3. They had no interest in God as his people.

4. They did not enjoy God as his people do, to fly to him in all need, to
worship him, to be conversant with him.

Psalm 16.11. it is said, in his presence is fullness of joy, and his presence
is every where; how is this joy then wanting in earth and in hell?

His presence and favor causes joy in his kingdom of glory:

In hell his presence is terrible to the damned, because his presence and wrath
there goes together. A Kings presence is joyous to those that shall be
pardoned, enriched and honored; but terrible to Traitors that are condemned
and to be executed.







Romans 9.22.

2. He lets wicked men alone till their sins be full. Genesis 15.16.

3. He keeps sometimes a little Sessions here, and executes vengeance, to
show there is a God.

4. He has a great day to reckon with them for all.

Psalm. 2.4. Psalm. 115.3. Our God is in heaven.

by his providence and omnipresence. Ier. 23.24.

Numb. 14.42. he withdrawes himself from them. Hos. 5.15.

Genesis 10.7. to restrain them: he is so near them, as he puts his hook in
their Nostrils. Isaiah 37.39. He is not with them in grace and favor; yet he
is with them by a general providence, to over-looke them, and curb them, and
disappoint them, as the places before quoated do show.

Sixthly, Applications to edify.
1. THis shows them to be very sots that go about to do their wickedness in
secret; they are notably blinded and seduced; for sin where they can, they
sin in Gods presence: as Nimrod was a mighty hunter before the Lord: so it
may be said, men are great usurers before the Lord, great swearers, great
liars, grievous drunkards, notorious thieves before the Lord, though they
think God is in the Circle of heaven, Job 22.14. and say who sees us? Ezekiel.
9.9. There is a God sees, and is present, who is the witness, and will be the
Judge.

2. This may teach the godly.

1. To be sincere, because they walk before God. Genesis 17.1.

2. To fear and reverence Gods presence. Ierem. 5.22.

3. To be comforted: he is present in our troubles. Psalm. 91.15.

4. To come prepared to holy duties; God is present. Psalm. 26.6.

5. To approve our selves to him whom we are before.





1. We must approve of the things that are excellent, esteem, and mind the
persons and things that GOD does affect.

2. We must approve our selves to God by avoiding secret sins as Joseph. Genesis
39.

3. By making conscience to perform private duties, Math. 6. approving our
selves to our Father that sees in secret.

4. We must make conscience of those sins wh ch the world accounts small
sins, as petty oaths, ^^le talk, following the fashions, gaming,
wantonness etc.

5. We must approve our selves to God in holy courses of life and conversation,
though the world scoff at us, as they do at those that run not with them to
the same excess as they do.

6. By doing Gods work after his own mind, looking to our preparations,
temper of heart, our reverence, simplicity, aims, etc. that we may mainely
strive for Gods approbation in all our performances.

To show us the excellency of God in his Omnipresence: He is present every
where, because infinite; Thirdly.
always, because ettrnall.

2. He is present without local mutation, or succession: He is not included by
any place, nor excluded from any place.

3. He is a most fit Judge to judge the world, because he needs no Jury, nor
Evidence: He is a witness himself, and so will give a righteous Sentence, and
will bring to light the secrets of the just done before him, to their
everlasting honor; and the secret sins of the wicked, to their everlasting
shame.

We should be stirred up by all means, to desire Gods gracious presence, where
our joys shall be full, Fourthly.
and our pleasures everlasting. Psalm 16.11.

Of Perfection.
1. What Perfection is.

2. That God is perfect.

3. Questions about perfection.

4. Applications to edify.

First, What Perfection is.
Perfect^^.
TO be perfect, is to lack nothing, to be absolute, and entire; to be all,
whole, full, without the least defect: to have all excellency in the
superlative degree in every good, to the utmost, so that there can be no want,
nor addition: This is Perfection.

Secondly, God is perfect.
GOD is perfect in the superlative degree, to the utmost; to whom can be no
addition, he is so completely perfect in his Essence, Attributes, and all his
Works.

1. In his Essence, having a perfect, blessed, absolute, and independent being;
richly, gloriously, joyfully, immutably.

2. His Attributes which demonstrate him, are all perfect: He is perfectly
eternal, without beginning, or end: perfectly Almighty, working without
materials; perfectly wise, knowing all secrets; perfectly merciful, in
forgiving fully, giving freely, liberally, abundantly, etc.

3. Perfect in his works: Perfection is to accomplish and finish, so is he
perfect: He finished the work of Creation. Genesis 2.1. He then beheld his work
as complete and Willet on Genesis 2.1. page 15. Ainsworth.
perfect. He finished, that is, he perfected; Ainsworth on Genesis. So Moses
says, Perfect is the work of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.4. That is, without blame, or
blemish.

Thirdly, Questions and Answers.




2. For his Wills sake all was created: It was his pleasure, that is answer
sufficient. Rev. 4.11.

Christ perfect, seeing many of his mystical body are not yet gathered to him,
and many are unborne?



2. He is perfect in his Humane Nature in glory.

3. He is perfect relatively, as he is a Head, having perfect Wisdom, Glory,
and Holiness; so that of his fullness we receive our measure: John 1.16. from
him which has not the Spirit of measure. John 3.24.

4. He is perfect in his body in regard of Decree, growth, certainty; and the
accomplishment daily draws on. It Is decreed, growing daily, and increasing,
certain, as good as done. God calls things that are not, as though they were,
etc.





2. All imperfections in Nature are from sin and punishments.

3. There may be a perfect work in the womb, yet some secondary cause may
hinder perfection in the birth.

4. We are to conclude, that the works of God are perfect, though we cannot
find out a Reason of his doings: He is not to account to us.

Concerning defects of understanding in natural fools.
1. The Creator may give wisdom, and deprive of knowledge as he pleases, and
measure to every one after his own Will.

2. It is just that we should be all borne fools, having lost our wisdom by
Adams fall.

3. The Parents may be punish with foolish children for diverse Causes.

1. Having over-eagerly desired children, they may have a child, but a fool.

2. For neglect of God and his service, and the heaping up of wealth as the
chief good, they may be punished with a fool for the Heir.

3. Some children are fools to teach us wisdom; that as we mislike their
natural folly, so we should detest our own spiritual folly; and to teach us
thankfulness, by seeing his Judgment on others, and well to use our Wit and
Reason which he has given us, and exercise our mercy; as to help them that
are defective.



Grace in their apprehension.
, and they are to ^^^rease more and more. 1. These 4 1. And the best had need to
grow in grace. 2. Pet. 3.18.

Mat. 5.48. Philip. 3 15. Heb. 6.1.



2. These precepts should put us in mind of our original perfection, and
humble us: God calls for what he gave us, but we have lost it.

3. These precepts are for excitation, to stir us up to be better, and to
press forward.

Mat. 5.48. We are bid to be perfect as God is.







2. There is perfection of parts, and perfection of degrees: A child has
perfection of parts, a man or In his body.
growth.

3. His perfection is in desire and endeavor; a man may aim at the Sun,
though his Arrow ascend but forty Else upwards.

4. He is perfect comparatively, as Noah was a perfect man in his generation.
Genesis 6.9.

5. He is perfect in Gods account being justified, and Christ's perfection
imputed.





1. Which have sound experimental knowledge.

2. That with most freedom of Spirit, and the least distractions do perform
holy duties.

3. That are most conversant with God in their inner man, and are most heavenly
minded.

4. That are most patient, and ready to forgive an acknowledgment of a wrong,
yea, James 1.4.
without acknowledgment, and pray for persecutors; and are sorry when evil
befalls their particular enemies, and are ready to help them.

5. That are most in charity, doing the works of their callings, with love to
others, that are least censorious, because of the largeness and soundness of
their charity.

Isai. 5.





Justification.
and in other virtues to the example of others.





2. Keep close to the rule of the word.

3. Mind our particular duties in our places, as soldiers in the army keep
rank, and letters in the line are of an evennesse.

4. Forget that's behind, endeavor to go forward against corruptions,
temptations, persecutions.

5. Use the holy means with holy preparations and affections.

6. To do all good better than before, with more heedfulnesse reverence, and
better aims.

7. Examined daily the temper of the heart, and be ever weeding that garden.

8. The more we bridle our tongues, the more we grow toward perfection James
3.2. Therefore we are to have a special care that our words, 1. Be fewer for
number of them. 2. Better for the nature of them.


1. That we speak of God with more reverence.

2. Of men with more charity, of our selves with modesty.

3. Of the World for necessity.

4. Of Religion with alacrity: We must labor for more salt of grace to season
our words, and for more Rules of Wisdom to order them; then joy shall come to
us from our Answers, and piety and sanctified reason will issue out of our
mouths, and it will appear we are proficients in the school of Perfection.

Fourthly, Applications to edify.
1. IT is an approved way to humble our selves to look on Gods Perfections,
and our own manifold imperfections: God is light, we darkness; he is
Almighty, we impotent; he is eternal, we but a moment, in the condition of
mortal life; he is good, we evil; he is holy, we are polluted; he is most
wise, we are foolish and ignorant, and as beasts before him; he has all
perfection, we have all imperfection.

2. To serve God who is ^^rfect, and alsufficient; he has sufficiency,
selfe-sufficiencie, sufficiency for others, and sufficiency for all things; he
can enrich his servants; he is a perfect and alsufficient God, Genesis 17.1.

3. To admire and wonder at the perfection of the Lord, who is

1. Perfect without comparison in the superlative degree; none is like to him.

2. He is without imperfection: light without darkness, strength without
weakness, wisdom without ignorance.

3. God cannot lose his perfection, not in the least degree.

4. He is a perfect Essence, not having best and worst, he cannot have addition.

5. He needs nothing to keep him as he is, or to augment his perfection: but
our perfection admits of comparison, it is accompanied with imperfection: we
are capable of ecliples, desire addition, and means to support us: therefore
admire Gods Perfection, that so far does excel us.

4. Desire and long for that place where all imperfections shall be abolished,
and such perfection as we are capable of shall be obtained.

Of Invisibility.
1. What Invisibility is.

2. How God is said to be Invisible.

3. How creatures are invisible.

4. Questions answered.

5. Applications to edify.

First, What Jnvisibility is.
THe word signifies that which cannot be seen: A thing may be invisible two
ways: the one when something is between the eye and the object, or the object
is too near, or too far off. The other, because the object is so pure,
clear, and spiritual, that no secondary help can make it obvious.

We see not when a Curtain is drawn, or if a thing be behind a wall or a
mountain; the object may be visible in it self, but occasionally, by reason
of some medium, is hid from us.

Also a thing too near the eye we discern not; we cannot see our eyelid,
because it is too near.

Again, we see not that is far off, and a great way remote from us; as a
mountain, twenty, thirty, or forty miles, because our natural view, and
prospective view has his bounds which we cannot exceed: all this while the
defect is not in the eye, but the object is either hid, or too neeare, or too
far.

In respect of the object there is an invisibility, which being thin, pure,
and spiritual, all advantages cannot make it visible.

That which makes a thing visible is light, for in the dark we see nothing;
also it must be convenient light: for if the eye be in a perfect Sunne-beam^,
it would see nothing, therefore it must be a convenient well-qualified light:
in the Moone-light we see only gross things; in the day light we see all
colors, forms, and shapes; but there is a more exact light that Ingravers and
Jewellers use through a glass of Water from a Candle.

Take the best advantage from Nature and art, take the best sighted man in the
best qualified light, natural, or artificial, yet he cannot see a Spirit,
because of the pureness and thinness of the matter whereof it is made. So
much what Invisibility is.

Secondly, God is Invisible.
There. of Tim. 1.17. To the King everlasting, immortal, Invisible: No man ever
saw him, John 1.18. nor can see him, and yet live. Exodus Chap. 3^.20.

Thirdly, The Creatures are invisible.
1. THe glorious Heavens are invisible; if the Element were drawn away as a
Curtain, the imperial Heavens are of so exceeding brightness, that the glory
of them cannot be discerned but by a glorified eye. In his light we shall see
light hereafter, not only of knowledge, joy, and comfort, but the light of
vision. Psalm. 36.9. But whilst we be here it is invisible.

2. The Angels are Spirits, Heb. 1. ult. of a pure substance, not compounded of
the four Elements: so are invisible.

3. The Wind is invisible; the same word that signifies a Spirit, signifies
the Wind; so that we may hear the sound, but cannot see it. John 3.8.

4. The Soul of man is invisible both in conveyance, in being and in departure.

1. In conveyance; some think we have our Souls conveyed to us by
participation, as one Candle lights another: some think that our Souls come
by propagation, as a man to beget a man body and soul: some think that the
soul comes by infusion; when the body is formed, then God infuses the soul,
and so the child is alive. But when all is disputed, little is concluded; it is
an invisible work, and hid from us: Eccles. 11.5. Thou know not the way of
the Spirit.

2. The Soul is invisible in being, and continuance in the body; men hear it
speak by the tongue, and work by the hand, and go by the feet; as in a
Watch, the spring within moves the wheels, and we do see the point of the
Dyall: So it is with the Soul; we see it is, but how it is we know not. It is
a Spirit, Psalm. 31.^. Heb. 12.23. and therefore invisible.

3. The Soul is invisible at the departure: No dying man's soul was ever seen
when it went away, because it is a spirit.

Fourthly, Questions answered.
Moses saw him face to face. Exodus 33.11.

Moses more familiarly than with the people; to whom he spoke from the Mount:
Exodus 20. yet Moses stood between God and the people. Deuteronomy. 5.5. God spoke to
him without a mid-man. Numb. 12.8. As for his sight of God, it was but of his
back-parts. Exodus 33.23. He saw so much as he was capable to conceive. The
Prophets had visions, Isai. 6. Ezekiel. 1. Dan. 7. not of Gods Essence; that the
Seraphims cannot behold. Isai. 6.2. but such apparisions and similitudes as
they were able to behold, and capable to conceive.



Isai. 6.2.
much less can man with his bodily eyes.

2. God is a Spirit, John 4.24. therefore invisible.

3. If God were visible, we should see nothing but God; for he fills Heaven
and Earth.

Job says, With these eyes I shall see him: And Christ says, The pure in heart
shall see God. Math. 5.

Job in Heaven with a glorified eye shall see Christ in his Humanity, and the
pure in heart shall see God with the eye of the body to satisfaction, but with
the eye of the mind more clearly; in neither they shall comprehend his
Essence, in both they shall have a fullness of vision, far beyond that we can
conceive in this life. He that goes to the Sea may fill his vessel, yet leave
the Ocean behind him. We shall see so much, as we shall say we have enough;
our vision shall be so great, that it is called the beatificall vision.

they never saw each other on both sides?

John 17 24. on the Sons demand. Psalm. 2.8. There is the pledge of our faith
at Baptism, and the Lords Supper; and he promises in the Covenant of Grace to
be our God, there are reciprocal affections, and the conjunction is real,
yet spiritual. As for sight, he sees us with his all-seeing view; we see him
with the eye of faith, Heb. 11.27. which sight of faith makes us to rejoice. 1.
Pet. 1.8. Our joy proceeds from our Union, without the which we had no sound
consolation.



Deuteronomy. 4.23.

2. It is unprofitable. Isai. 44.10.

3. The Image draws the mind down; for the mind does much follow the eye.

4. ^t is against Gods nature who is a Spirit.

5. It is not possible to make an Image of God.



Colos. 3.10. and Holiness, and Righteousness. Ephesians 4.24. That was the
image, not the Substance of the Soul; for that is not lost, but Gods Image was
lost. The souls of the wicked are without Gods Image till they be renewed. So
then the Image are divine qualities, which Pa^^^ers and Carvers know not how to
cut out, or draw.



species to know his like; and ^ngels have combats with them: Revel 12
therefore see each other.



for their substance is spiritual, and not obvious to the bodily eye.





2. His temptations are to the ruin of nature, as for a man to kill himself
causelessly.

3. The temptations come rushing suddenly, our corruptions entice by degrees,
by mental contemplation, or outward obje^ts.

4. He resists holy duties, by injecting false reasonings in the mind, that
God is dreadful, we sinful, unworthy, and shall have no assistance nor
acceptance.

5. He works discomforts in the heart, by hiding the consolations, presenting
judgments to the mind, and threatenings, to make us give over a godly course,
or walk heavily.



Eve; or may use the four Elements to form and apparition, as in the body of
Samuel, or rather the likeness of Samuel: or he can delude the senses, as the
Serpent cast down before Pharaoh; Moses Serpent was true, the Magitians was
but a delusion, a deceiving of the senses.

Where is your God, seeing he is invisible, and cannot show we him?

We can answer them thus.

1. Their question comes from gross ignorance.

2. We can tell them where our God is: He is in heaven. Psalm 115.3.

3. We retort to them; where is your God? if they can show him to the eye, he
is no true God, because he is visible, and shall be perishing. Ier. 10.

Fifthly, Applications to edify.
1. TO praise God, as for other excellencies, so for his invisibility. 1. Tim.
1.17.

2. To learn to walk by faith as if we saw him, who is invisible. Heb. 11.27.

3. To remember him, though we see him not; to remember him with affection; to
love him, though we have not seen him, and to rejoice in him as we are
believers. 1. Pet. 1.8.

4. Would we see the Invisible God? then let us behold his invisible power, and
Godhead in his works Romans 1.20. Would we see him hereafter? then let us
labor for pure hearts, that we may be rewarded with the vision of God. Matthew.
5.8.

5. Here is comfort against invisible enemies; we have the invisible God, and
invisible Angels to help us; we have promises of invisible things to
encourage us, we shall have invisible rewards to recompense us.

6. Let us mind more invisible things, desire more invisible favors: send up
invisible desires; let the glory of all visible excellency be blasted, and let
us raise our minds to things more excellent and invisible.

7. Observe Gods works they are invisible in operation, but visible in
manifestation; they are hid and unseene in operation, both the works of nature.
Eccle. 11.5. thou kn^wst not the way of the spirit, nor how the bones are
fashioned in the womb, and the work of grace. John 3.3. These works done
secretly are manifested in man's birth and regeneration.

If we will follow God, let us strive to get the inward work of grace to be
wrought in the secret parts of our hearts and souls: to be inwardly adorned
with humility and wisdom, and heavenly mindedness, with love, zeal,
patience, and contentment. Then outwardly to manifest the same, by gracious
speeches and good works, that the invisible graces of God may have a visible
declaration among men; thus shall we resemble the invisible God, as the drop
does the Ocean.

Of Wisdom.
1. What Wisdom is.

2. Of the wisdom of creatures.

3. Of the wisdom of God.

4. Applications to edify.

5. Questions answered.

First, What Wisdom is.
IT is the better perceived, by comparing it with those virtues which are near
to it, and like it; as Knowledge, Prudence, and discretion.

Knowledge is to perceive, to comprehend, or see; Scientia.
it is gained by the eye, or ear, or taste, or smell, or touch, and
ordinarily, gained by experience.

Prudence is to eschew things hurtful, Prudentia.
and is exercised in safe guarding and defending our selves and ours: a maine
imploiment of it is in government.

Discretion is exercised in separating, and choosing, Discretio.
in pondering, measuring, and dividing.

Wisdom is exercised in all these, Prudentia.
it does comprehend and see; it eschewes things that are hurtful: it provides,
for present and future safety; it distinguishes, and measures, and divides, and
chooses, and applies home things convenient and profitable.

Secondly, Of the wisdom of creatures.
Wisdom in the unreasonable creature is their nature, in man a quality: the
Serpents wisdom is his nature, by which he saves his head if you smite him,
and stoppes his ears (...) he be charmed; and if ye wound him, he seeks
medicinable herbs, and heales himself: so the Be, if the winds do blow,
poyses himself with a stone, which he carries home to make his flight steady
and ponderous: The Weasell roules her self in Bettony, or herb of grass,
that the snake may not abide the sent of her: the Grasshoppers go forth by
bands: the Cran^^ keep centinell, and the Wild-geeseflying over where Eagles
are, carry a Peeble stone in their mouths, that they make no noise, nor be
discryed: how curiously does the Spider weave and express great art, and the
Pie and Wren do build, as if they had (...) been nstructed in Architecture.

But a^ong the creatures, men and Angels are inricht with wisdom: Man in his
first creation was very wife, and could give all the creatures suitable names:
but by sin we lost our wisdom, and have in steed thereof, a guile or
wiliness, and our wisdom is from beneath: Jam. 3. earthly, sensual,
divellish.

1. Eart^ly, when it is exercised primarily about earthly co^gs: this is
called, our Wisdom: Prove, 23.4. as if we accounted it our Wisdom to get
wealth: this wisdom prizes earth as the maine it pleades for security, it
admires the rich, it abhorres poverty as the greatest evil: this wisdom
labors to get, to increase, to keep riches: it is earthly wisdom, it is wise
for earth.

2. It Is a sensual wisdom, it makes a man accucurate and industrious to
please his senses: In eating and drinking, this wisdom can invent means to
force appetite; this wisdom invents sawces, and compounds; this wisdom
invents shows to please the eyes, and is studious to satisfy the lusts: it is
sensual wisdom that is employed to satisfy the senses.

3. It is a divellish wisdom; Satan works on the mind, as in magical
studies, or arguments for Atheism, or to cause divisions. This wisdom
^nvents abominable things to be acted by Players, or sung by Ballad-men, or
printed in books: This wisdom sets nicknames on good men, and sets false
glosse^ on vices; as to call pride handsomnesse, drunken^esse good fellowship,
covetousness good husbandry: This wisdom causes Schisms, brings in
heresies, burns the Martyrs, upholds profaneness and impiety; this divellish
wisdom is employed for the devil and it makes men like the devil, in
straining their wits, and acting their parts in that which is in opposition to
all good, and in supportation of that which is naught and wicked.

Thirdly, Of the Wisdom of God.
HIs Wisdom is essential; whatsoever is in God, is God; He is Wisdom it
self, he is uncreate Wisdom, he is the fountain of Wisdom, he is
unlimited in his Wisdom; his Wisdom is infinite. Psalm. 136.5.

Gods Wisdom is manifested,

1. In the work of Creation.

2. In the work of Redemption.

3. In his preservation.

First, in the work of Creation: In Wisdom he made the Heavens. Psalm. 136.5.
In wisdom he laid the foundations of the Earth. Prove. 3.19. In wisdom he
made all his works. Psalm. 104.24.

His Wisdom appeared

1. In the beauty of the Creatures.

2. In the order of them.

3. In their variety.

4. In the making of contraries, to join and unite one to another.

The beauty of a picture, or building, does argue the wisdom of the Workman:
the order of things argues wisdom, when things keep their stations, ranks,
and places. The Sun, Moon, and Stars keep their own Spheres and
seasons, the Sea keeps within his banks, the beasts and fishes their places
appointed.

The variety argues wisdom, as if a Painter made a costly frame, and within
it painted variety of objects; here is a pleasant meadow, and beasts feeding;
there a Mountain, with a flock of sheep, with a Shepherd, and his dog at
the bottom; here a crystal stream gliding, and a flock of Swannes
swimming; here a man at plough, there a man a fishing; here a chimney
smoking, there two Armies fighting; here a footman running, there a Table
furnished, and men and women feasting; here a child sucking the breast, there a
man lopping a Tree; here a Ship with full sails, there a Church with a
Steeple, and birds flying about it: All these being artificially performed, and
set out in lively colors, would both delight the spectator, and commend the
Actor. Even so the most wise God, having in such variety made his works, does
demonstrate his abundant wisdom.

Some creatures have matter and form, and are generated and corrupted, as men's
bodies: some creatures have matter and form, but are not generated, as the
Sun and Moon; their matter and form is peculiar.

Some creatures are bodies without spirits, as beasts; some creatures are
spirits without bodies, as Angels; some creatures are bodies and spirits
united, as men; some creatures are vegetives, as roots: some have motion, as
trees and herbs; some are sensitive, as beasts fowls, and fishes: some are
rational, as men.

The vegetative creatures do serve the sensitive: the sensitive do serve the
reasonable: the variety of the creatures with their imploiments, uses, and
opperations, do declare openly to all the unsearchable wisdom of God.





1. In preserving all the creatures; it is great wisdom to preserve a few;
but such great variety of creatures as God preserves in heaven, earth, and Sea,
argues infinite wisdom.

2. He gives to each Creature fit nourishment; he nourishes and preserves the
earth with rain, and the Sun: he preserves sheep with grass, men with
bread, babes with milk.

3. He makes contraries to preserve the whole: thunder and tempests do clear
the air: the selling of Joseph preserved the Church; the crucifying of Christ
saves our souls. Our bodies are compounded of four contrary elements, yet all
do concur for our being, and well-being; the good and bad are mixed
together: the badd do exercise the good: the good converts the bad, both are
useful one to the other: these contraries God makes to concur together, so
the world is preserved.

Here it matter for admiration, demonstration, exhortation, consolation.

Oh the deepnesse and riches of the wisdom of God. Romans 11.33. His wisdom
is uncreate and perfect, not attained by relation, observation, or experience,
or events; but it is eternal, infall^ble, and effectual, and worthy of our
admiration; especially we should admire the work of our Redemption,
accomplished by Christ, (the wisdom of the father) which the Angels desire to
behold.

His Wisdom appointed such a Redeemer, as was begotten of the fat^er, yet not
after the father; begotten yet individual.

Cor. 3.19. and turn their council to foolishness. 1. Sam. 15.31. Also this
demonstrates the happiness of the godly, they have the most wise teacher, Job
36.22. no teacher is like to him.

1. He not only teaches and gives rules, but also gives power and ability to
keep them.

2. He never does err in his teaching.

3. He rewards his scholars with eternal rewards.

4. None of his scholars can ever excel him.

5. He ever lives to teach one generation after another. No teacher is like him.

for wisdom, it is he that gives it: James 1.5. and because it is the
diligent which prevail with him the most; therefore we should cry for
wisdom and call for understanding, and take great pains for it, as men do,
that dig and search in the bowels of the earth for silver and gold. Prove. 2.2,
3, 4.



1. In affliction his wisdom teaches them to look to his hand and
providence, to submit, to repent, to pray, to be more humble.

2. In tentation his wisdom teaches them to discern a tentation, to
struggle, and to cry to him for help, to take the sword of the spirit, which
is, the word of God; to forbear something, to deny themselves, to resist, to
look to the reward promised to those which conquer.

3. In prosperity his wisdom keeps them from being hurt deadly, though they
are corrupted dangerously: his wisdom tempers their prosperity with some
losses, or sicknesses, or outward molestations, or else their indisposednesse
to good troubles them, or Satan is let loose to buffet them; or God affects
them, and makes them sensible of other calamities, to sympathize, and condo^e
with them; or God gives them abundance of grace and heavenly sweetness, that
so their prosperity may not be to their ruin, nor they clogged with earthly
mindedness.

Furthermore, his wisdom is so profound, that he can turn poison into
physic, and our maladies into medicines; he can turn our sins and
corruptions to an advantage, of that dung he can make soil, to cause us to be
more fertile; our very sins, when we are instructed by the Lord, do make us
the more humble and broken in heart, and poor in spirit: we do see our need
of Christ to save us, and to prize him above 10000 worlds: we do pray more
earnestly, and watch, and strive, and long for heaven, and bear with others
the more, knowing our own guiltiness, and feeeling our own infirmities.

Sect.
Fifthly, Questions answered.






Ier. 8.9. Men may study Philosophy, so as they may be spoiled by Philosophy,
when men use it as a mistress, not a handmaid; when nothing is received, but
must come to Philosophy as the rule; when things are embraced contrary to the
Scripture; as that of nothing comes nothing. Colos. 2.8.







for the beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord. Prove. 1.7. this fear
is to stand in awe of God, as a child of a loving father.

2. Fear makes men bestirre themselves, and seek their own safety: those
that do seek for favor and safety by faith in the Lord Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.15.
these are wise to salvation.

3. Those are wise that lay aside their own wisdom and carnal reason; They
become fools that they may be wise. 1. Cor. 3.18.

4. The wise do take the opportunities of saving grace, they take opportunity
to get oil in their Lamps; they get grace in their hearts, and are ready for
Christ's coming. Math. 25.4.

5. They are obediently wise, and practice what they hear taught them in the
Ministry of the Word: so they are as wise builders, that do build on the
Rock. Math. 7.

6. The wise do mind their mortality, and think of their end: They number
their days, Psalm. 90.12.
and so apply their hearts to wisdom.

Of Truth.
1. What Truth is.

2. Of the Truth of creatures.

3. Of the Truth of God.

4. Applications to edify.

5. Questions answered.

First, What Truth is.
TRuth is that which has reality and substance, contrary to shadows and lies:
There is Truth, and Trueness; an Harlot is a true woman, but wants the
trueness of a woman. A copper-shilling silvered over may have a true stamp,
yet want trueness of the metal. Moses Rod was turned into a true Serpent, the
Magitians rods were seeming Serpents; Truth deceives not, nor dissembles, it is
that it appears to be.

Secondly, Of the Truth of Creatures.
THE Angels are true substances, not motions, or imaginations, as some do
think. The Sun is a true light, and the Moon a true Substance, though
mutable: Man was made with true faculties of the soul, and true members of the
body, and a true conformity in both to the Will of God: Man fell by falsehood,
but is redeemed in Truth, and renewed again in Truth. Ephesians. 4.24. The earth
is real earth, the water is true water; all Gods works are done in Truth.

Thirdly, Of the Truth of God.
HE is the essential Truth, Truth flows from him; He is the only true God,
John 17.3. He is a God of Truth, Psalm. 31.^. The Father is Truth, so is the
Son John 14.6.
, So is the Holy Ghost John 16.13.
. God is a true Essence, true in his Attributes; he is truly Eternal, truly
Omnipotent, Daniel 10.21. John 17.17.
truly invisible, and incomprehensible: * His Scriptures are the Scriptures of
Truth, being true in the precepts, promises, and threatenings, not a jot shall
fail. Here is the heavenly verity, 2 Cor. 1.20. Math. 5.
above nature, sense, and reason; Nature and Sense are Reasons servants, and
Reason must stoop to Truth, and Truth must be believed by Faith beyond Nature,
Sense, and Reason: for as the light availes not, unless we have eyes to see:
so God and his Word are not rightly discerned but by faith, without which a man
still is ignorant, and demands with Pilate what is Truth. John 18.


Fourthly, Applications to edify, distributive.
FIrst, this distinguishes the true God from false Gods, In respect of God.
as Idols, which are not true Gods, for they are no Gods. Ier. 2.11. Our God is
the living and true God. 1. These. 1.9. And the only God. John 17.3. As for
Angels, or Magistrates that are called gods Psalm. 8. and Psalm. ^2.
, because the Magistrates execute the Judgments of God, 2. Chron. 19.6. And
God has given them his Word, John 10.34, 35. And Angels are Princes, Dan.
10.13. Yet the Angels are messengers, Heb. 1. last, And Magistrates are
mortal. Psalm. 82.6. The eternal Jehovah is the true God, and these are his
servants.

Secondly, is the Word the Truth? In respect of the Word.
then we should 1. Buy it. Prove. 23.23. 2. Keep it.


In buying are three things: first, we see our need: secondly, we go where
the commodity is to be had: thirdly, we give something for it by way of
exchange.

Thus we must buy the Truth:

1. We must see our need of it; without the Truth we are in bondage, and in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, and miserable. The Truth will make us
free set us at liberty, give us light and life; it will direct us, and enrich
us; these considerations should cause us to prize it, because it is of worth,
and we need it.

2. We must go where it is to be had, not to the Jewish Talmud, nor Turks
Alcoran, nor the Papists Legend; but got to God who gives it, who is the Author
of Truth; go to the holy Bible, where it is printed; to the congregations where
it is preached, unfolded, and applied: go to the society of the godly, where it
is professed, and the power of it expressed; read Commentaries and Expositions,
labor, and enquire; dig, and search, be studious, and industrious; let spare
hours here be spent, and vacant time be this way employed.

3. We must part with something for the Truth; we must part with some sleep,
with some pleasure, with some gain; nay, if we part with all that we have for
the Truth, we shall be wise bayers, and great gainers; we shall be wise
Merchants, and obtain the best bargain.

Secondly, as the Truth is to be bought, so it is to be kept, with Mary, to lay
it up in our hearts. John 2.51. Psalm. 119.10. The Word is kept by witnessing to
it, John 18.37. and by professing it: for by professing it the Truth is known,
and spread abroad in the world.

We should witness in our profession three things of the Truth:

1. That it is able to work a through change James 1.18.
, and to bring a man to a holy frame of heart and life John 17.17.
, that the Word has a regenerating power to make us new men.

2. That the Truth has a power to govern and guide a man in his place, to
make him a good Father, or master; a good servant, a loyal subject, a loving
Husband, a kind neighbor, a faithful friend, a merciful Christian, a just
dealer, etc.

3. That the Truth is able to support him in reproaches, under crosses, and
troubles; that there are consolations to be had in the Scriptures for every
condition, in all changes, and alterations.

Thus shall we show our selves children of the Truth, begotten by the Truth,
James 1.18. Nourished by the Truth, 1. Pet. 2.1, 2. And those that have the
Truth dwelling in them 2. Joh. 2. verse.
, whereby they are enriched, guided, quickened, emboldened, strengthened, and
rejoiced.

Fifthly, Questions answered.


John 17.3.

2. To give him a true worship. John 14.24.

3. To commend our souls continually into his hands. Psalm. 31.6.



John 17.3. Secondly, when we know him our God that loves us. Thirdly, when we
so know him, that we do fly to him in all our needs and troubles Psalm. 9.11
. Fourthly, when this knowledge increases more and more.







David knew that he had chosen the way of Truth. Psalm. 119.30. 1. John 5.
And St. John says, We know that we are of God. The highway is light, the
by-ways are dark and doubtful.



Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses. 4. They are not in the same tale in their
chambers, and in the Pulpit, to their followers, and to others. 5. They boast
of illuminations and revelations. 6. They challenge Dispures, in which they
falsify the Scriptures, and learned Authors, pretending they are on their
side. 7. Their followers bewray them, the hollow hypocrite, the idle, that live
without a Calling, or negligent in a Calling; the unstable, and giddy-headed;
they make a troop on a sudden to follow them, especially women, and youth. 8.
They are most bitter against them that oppose them. 9. They ever make a gain
of those silly ones which they seduce. 10. Observe them awhile; they come to
disgrace and deny what they held, or else cast it in a new mould, and mince it,
and alter it, and tell us they were not rightly understood: when the Truth
meets with them, then they are put to their shifts, and silenced by the
verity, or authority, or both.





Of Mercy.
1. What Mercy is.

2. The mercy of the unreasonable creatures.

3. The mercy of men, both had man and good men.

4. The mercy of God.

5. Applications to edify.

6. Questions resolved.

First, what Mercy is.
MErcy is a pitying of them that are in misery: Mercy and Misery are
Relatives; were there no want, nor trespass, there needed no mercy; mercy is
in the affection, or expression; in the affection it is termed bowels of
mercy, in the expression, works of mercy.

Secondly, of the mercy of the unreasonable Creatures.
THey have a kind of mercy in their natures to their own kind, or to other
kinds. First, to their own kind, so every Creature with a tenderness
nourishes their young: the Dragons nourish their young, and the Bears lick
their whelps to their own shape, and suckle them. 2. The creatures show mercy
to other kinds: Some say, the Lion preyes not so soon, or not at all on the
yielding creatures: the Thunder passes over the yielding Reed, and rends the
sturdy Oak D. Bartas.
: The Hawke resting all night by the Lark, flies another way in the morning,
being gratefully merciful to the little bird: Those that read in natural
Histories can say much of this.

Thirdly, the mercy of men.
NAturally we being children of wrath, have lost the disposition to mercy:
wicked men are cruel, not merciful. Prove. 12.10. One man is a Wolf to
another, unless God restraines us. Cain and Absolon did kill their own
brothers, Hazael and Ravilliack Ravilliacke killed Henry the fourth.
their Kings; Judas betrays his Lord and Master, Saul kills all the Priests,
etc. Some are restrained for the good of humane society; but all the mercy of a
natural man is for bad ends, or constrained.

The truly merciful man is the regenerate man; these have found mercy from
God, and are merciful to others; these by meditation or visitation are moved
to mercy, and exercise it by counselling the ignorant, comforting the dejected
soul, relieving the needy; and sometimes their mercy is exercised in forgiving
as well as giving.

Fourthly, of the mercy of God.
MErcy is essential in God; He is the fountain of mercy, the Father of
mercies. Here we may for method consider,

1. The cause of Gods mercy, no cause in us, no cause out of himself; he has
mercy on whom he will. Romans 9.18. His own good pleasure is the cause.

2. The kinds of mercies; his mercies are general to all, or special to his
elect. Math. 5. 1 Timothy 1.15.

3. The effects of his mercy is all the good that the Creature does enjoy, all
is of mercy, not merit.

4. The largeness of his mercy; He is great in mercy, Psalm. 119 156. Rich in
mercy. Ephesians. 2.4.

5. The seasonablenesse of his mercy; He shows mercy in due time. Ps. 9. In the
Mount he will be seen. Genesis 22.14. When our feet slip, his mercy will help
us. Ps. 94.18

6. The variety of his mercies on every faculty of our souls, and member of
our bodies: His mercies are multitudes. Psalm. 51.1.

7. The constancy of his mercy, it is for ever. Psalm 136.1. Isai. 54.8. Psalm.
52.1, 2.

Fifthly, Applications to edify.
From the unreasonable creatures.
1. IF unreasonable Creatures do show mercy to their young ones, it condemns
the cruelty of those Harlots that make away their young children, or lay them
in the street, and leave them; they add to their filthiness cruelty, and are
to be, ranked among those vile sinners, Romans 1.31. that are without natural
affections. Also the Storke and The young Heart carries water in the mouth to
give the old one, D Bartas says.
Heart show mercy to their old Dammes and Sires, condemning churlish children,
which are cruel to their old Parents.

From the wicked:

2. If the mercies of the wicked be cruel, then never trust to their mercy,
for there is no assurance thereof: pray to God that we fall not into their
hands. Zedekia's eyes were pulled out, so were Sampsons: they rip up women with
child, they burn and destroy where they get the upper hand.

3. We may guess at a sound professor by his mercy; many have great blazes,
but no mercies: pride, and pomp, and belly-cheere, and vanity takes up their
hearts and purses: they are much for curiosity, but little for mercy: but a
good man is merciful. Psalm. 37.

1. He considers the poor and needy; he judges wisely of their estates. Psalm.
41.1.

2. He has thoughts to do them good, he devises how to be liberal. Isaiah
32.

3. He considers his own ability. Acts 11.29.

4. He considers his brothers necessity. Romans 12.

5. He looks to his relation; beginning at his center, and working toward his
circumference: as first, Among them.
the household of faith. Gal. 6.13. Secondly, our families. 1. Tim. 5.8.
Thirdly, our Countrymen. Psalm 122.8. Fourthly, the stranger: we must do good
to all, using discretion in our doing good. Psalm. 112.



1. To praise God for his mercy. Psalm. 136.1. above all mercies for our
redemption: this mercy was promised, Luke 1.72. and in tender mercy performed.
Luke 1.78. by this mercy we that were blind and ignorant are helped by Christ,
who is our wisdom: we that were guilty are justified by him he is our
righteousness: we that were polluted, have him for our holiness, we that were
captives have him for redemption. 1 Cor 1.30.

2. We should imitate God by being merciful, Luke 6.36. the more mercy, the
more like God.

3. We are to be humble, because we need mercy; for we are poor, and need
mercy. Rev. 3.17. we are transgressors and need mercy. Isaiah 48.8.

4. We should labor for those qualifications, that we may be under the
promises of mercy, and be assured of mercy. As these following.

1. To confess our sins, and forsake them. Prover. 28.13.

2. To fear God: his mercy is on them that fear him. Luke 1.50.

3. To love God: he shows mercy to them that love him Exodus 20.6.

4. To trust in God, then mercy shall compass us, Psalm. 32.10.

5. To think on good things, then we shall have mercy. Prove. 14.22.

6. To be merciful, then we shall obtain mercy. Matthew. 5.7.

7. To keep close to the rule of Gods word. Galat. 6.16.

Sixthly, Questions resolved.




1. To have a disposition to forgive without acknowledgement.

2. To forgive willingly upon acknowledgement.

3. To pray for the offender.

4. To be grieved if any cross befall him.

5. To do him good cheerfully if we can.



a rule to do good to all: Gal. 6.9. and God causes his Sun to shine on the
evil and good. Matthew. 5. They must be weaklings, not sturdy rogues; such as
are ready to perish, though they be evil, their persons must be nourisht, not
their evils maintained: it is mercy to instruct them with our relief.





2. He must look on miseries: the heart is much affected by the eye.

3. He must put himself in the condition of the sick, the prisoner, the
captive, the oppressed, the hungry, the troubled in mind.

4. He must be often in the acts of mercy, that by degrees there may be
obtained the greater disposition.

5. Look on the example of the merciful, see how mercy does beautify them,
and make them amiable.

6. Lay Gods commands to heart: Luke 6.36. Be ye merciful.

7. Consider the estate of the unmercifull: They shall have judgment
merciless. James 2.13.

8. Lastly, pray to God to incline the heart to mercy and compassion: Ask, and
ye shall have. Matthew. 7.



Luke 6.36.

2. The merciful have many a prayer for them, and they cause God to be praised
by many. 2. Cor. 9.12.

3. The merciful are under the promise. Matthew. 5.7, What the broken heart
seeks, the merciful heart finds at last; that is, mercy.

4. The merciful heart has a merciful hand: so he sowes seed, and hereafter
shall have a loyfull harvest. 2 Cor. 9.6.

5. Whenever he goes to prayer, he shall be sure to be heard. Isai. 58.7, 8,
9, 10.

Of Justice.
1. What Justice is: how it is defined.

2. Of the justice of men.

3. Of the Justice of God.

4. Applications distributive.

5. Questions resolved about Justice.

First, what justice is.
Justice is to give to every one his own; it is to do right, to keep equity:
Justice is either distributive in dealing, so it is communicative justice; or
distributive in punishing, so it is corrective justice.

Justice is to give neither too much, nor too little; it is to be exact, as a
man that shootes, which neither shoots over the mark, nor short of it, nor
besides it, but hits it just in the middle.

Secondly, of justice in men.
Justice in men, is either justice before men, or justice before God: Justice
before men the heathen attain, to pay that they owe, not to wrong their
neighbor in dealing: A heathen buys a commodity of a Christian merchant, and
going away, opens his wares and finds money, he brings it back to the
Christian, and says, I bought the wares, not the money, it is unjust to me to
keep it. Justice before God is legal or Evangelicall: Legally just was never
any, but Adam in innocence, and Christ, that just one, who fulfilled all
righteousness. Evangelicall justice is that, when a sinner being justified by
imputation of Christ's justice, labors for inherent justice by the virtue of
the regenerating spirit in him, the endeavoring after justice is called
justice through Gods acceptance.

Thirdly, of the Justice of God.
GOd is Justice, it is essential with God to be just. The Lord is just: Psalm.
92.15. Zephaniah 3.5. He is just in his decrees, just in the execution of his
decrees; just in his government of the world; just in all his punishments and
judgments. He is the judge of all the world, the Lord of all, just in
himself, just in his Laws, just in his rewards, just in his punishments.

His Justice in punishing may be considered five ways.

1. His justice past, on Angels and on men: on Angels his justice fell totally
irrecoverably: on men, a world of them felt his justice at once, only Noah and
his family excepted: Cities have been punished, as Sodom, Gomorra, Admah,
Zeboim: Families, as Achans, and Ieroboams: Persons, as Ananias, Zaphira, and
Herod.

2. His justice present, for no age escapes without some demonstration of
justice: we, or others feel Plague,, War, or Famine, decay of trade,
fearful fires, inundation of waters, earthquakes, civil combustion, and
uproares among the people etc.

3. His justice to come in this world or the next world; there shall be a great
Sessions, and justice shall be executed without all evasions, bribes, or
shirts.

4. Consider Gods justice sp^rituall: as a blind man, Isai 6.10. A hard heart,
Psalm. 81.12. A Reprobate sense, The spirit of slumber. Romans 11.8.

5. His justice and judgments are temporal on our bodies, goods, or names.
Deuteronomy. 28. Levit. 26.

Fourthly, Applications distributive.
1. IF j^stice be to do right, then away with all injustice; if we do not, God
will away with us: Mat. 7.23. discedite a me. Awa^ from me ye that work
iniquity: the unjust, like ^ewd sons, shall be dis-inherited. 1 Cor. 6.9. It Is
a plain case all know it. Know ye not (says St. Paul) the unjust shall not
inherit the Kingdom of heaven?

2. This should provoke us to labor to be just, to get faith, that so we may
be just before God, clothed with Christ's righteousness. To get an honest
heart, and good conscience, that we might practice justice: To honor
superiors, this is right. Ephesians. 6.1. To pay what we borrow, and what we
bargain for, to slander no man: to be diligent in our places, faithful where
we are betrusted, to sell a pennyworth for a penny, to keep just weights and
measures, to k^epe promises as we are able, to love our wives with a
matrimonial love above all, to exercise our gifts in our families, to be
courteous to strangers, a comfort to the afflicted, to be grateful for
favors received, to be peaceable among neighbors: all this is right to fit
our actions to the occasions, to live within our compass preserve the mean,
it will preserve us: this is just equal, and right.

That we may be quickened to labor for justice in dealing, take these motives.

1 We shall be conformable to our head, Jesus Christ, who was that just one.

2. The Lord delights in them that deal justly.

3. It is the way to honor: Justice is of an exalting nature and makes a man
to flourish.

4. The fruit of Justi e is peace Isay 22.

5. The righteous shall be saved, and have glory in heaven, Matthew. 13.

Lessons from Gods Justice.

1. God is not all of mercy, as some presumptuous persons imagine: but he is
also just, not clearing the wicked, Exodus 34.

2. We shall be sure to have Justice at the great Sessions: for the Lord is
just that judges, Romans 3.

From Justice past, learn,

1. To declare the same to our children, Psalm 78.5. to 66. verse.

2. Take heed of the like sins that were punished before, lest we be also
punished: 1 Cor. 10.11.
the same causes have the same effects.

3. We are the more inexcusable before God, and deserve to be made examples,
that will not take examples.

When judgments are present, learn,

1. To acknowledge God the author of them. Amos 3.6. Is there any evil in the
City, and I have not done it?

2. To confess God is just in his dealing, Psalm 119 137.

3. That he deals not with us in extremity, Lament. 3.22.

4. We should work our hearts to repentance, Jeremy 18.11.

5. Our hearts should be moved with fear, Psalm 119.120.

6. We should humble our selves, and pray, 2 Chronicles. 7.14.

From the great judgment to come, learn,

1. To esteem highly of the Lord Jesus, who saves us from wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.

2. Not to be rash in censuring: things that do lie hid now, shall be
manifested then, 1 Cor. 4.5.

3. To use our talents well, for then we must give up our accounts, Matthew.
25.19.

4. To persuade others as we are able, that they may escape with us at that
day, 2 Cor. 5.11.

5. To be frequent in the works of mercy, for that will stand us in stead at
that day, James 2.13.

6. To make conscience of every sin, for then every secret shall come to
judgment, Eccles. 12.14.

7. Watch and pray now, that we may escape then, Luke 21. compare verse 27 with
36.

8. To repent speedily, and seriously, because there is a day of judgment,
Act. 13.30, 31.

9. To grow in love now, that we may have boldness at that day, 1 John 4 17.

10. To account all things dung, that we may win Christ, and at that day be
clothed with his righteousness, Phil. 3.9, 10.

From sp^rituall judgments, learn,

1. They are not most happy, that do escape temporal judgments only.

2. Labor for eye salve, and inward moisture, and softness of heart.

3. Pray most against spiritual judgments.

4. Honor God with that light you have received lest he give you over to
spiritual judgments, Romans 1.21.

From temporal judgments, learn,

1. Sin brings these evils, Psalm. 107.34.

2. Let us judge our selves, this is the best way to escape, 1 Cor. 11.31.

3. The worst members are wicked men in a Church or State; it is they that do
pull down judgments.

Thus I have declared, the Lord my rock is just, and no iniquity is in him,
Psalm. 92.16. and I farther conclude from his Justice,

1. That no good shall go unrewarded, for God is not unjust to forget it, Heb.
6.10.

2. Our sins shall be pardoned, if we confess them, 1 John 1.9.

3. Our prayers shall be heard, Psalm. 143 1.

4. Our wrongs shall be revenged, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.

Fifthly, Questions answered.


Mat. 20.13.14
Friend, I do thee no wrong: had he given less then he bargained for, he had
done him wrong. This pinching of poor men, and abating them, is from
covetousness and cruelty, and a beginning of oppression.







Prove. 3.27.
he is the owner that bought it, not the workman that keeps it.



and seldom and parcimonious in alms, then it is not just.











Romans 12.19. Because,

1. Vengeance does belong to God, Psalm. 94.1.

2. He takes vengeance without perturbations.

3. He being the Judge of the world, will take vengeance justly, being most
wise, and most righteous.

4. We revenging our wrongs, may cause the Lord to spare our enemy, and punish
us.



with a sociable love and familiarity; I must respect none equal to my wife.





Of Life.
1. What Life is.

2. Of the life of Creatures.

3. Of the life of God.

4. Applications to edify.

5. Questions answered.

First, What Life is.
LIfe, is to have motion and activenesse, opposed to deadness and
lumpishnesse. There is a living Spring, a live Tree, a live Man. Life is
operative, and excellent; a live worm is more excellent than all the Gold in
the World, though gold be more useful: A live Dog, says the wise man, is
better than a dead Lion, one live soldier is more excellent than an Army of the
dead, and slain. It was the live Child that the two Harlot strove about; it is
life that we all strive to maintain, and prolong; life is as the first figure
in Arithmatick, number as much as you will, it is the greatest.

Secondly, of the life of the creatures.
THere is a vegetive life of Trees, and Roots, and Herbs, part in the Earth,
part in the Air: there is a sensitive life of Beasts, Fowls, and Fishes;
there is a rational life of Angels, and Men: the Angels life is most excellent
of all Creatures being spiritual, holy without weariness, or want, or labor,
or misery; a glorious and immortal life. The life of man has three degrees:
first, in the womb; secondly, in the world; thirdly, in Heaven. The life in
the womb is secret in the conveyance, and secret in the continuance.
Ecclesiastes 11.5. The life in the world is a life of action: Rom 2.6. The l^fe
in Heaven is a life of vision, or contemplation. John 17.24. Matthew. 5.8. Then
shall we be as the Angels, Mat. 22.30. which do behold the face of God. Mat.
18.10. The life in the womb is secret, and little can be said of it: The life
in the world is either common to all, being a life of nature; or special to
the Saints, called a life of grace.

Of the the life of Nature.
The life of Nature is exercised about such things as the strength of Nature
can act: All men attain not to the same operatio^s, nor is the same man
always alike: some men excel others in their actions, and the same man
excells himself in time by exercise and experience. This natural life is
exercised in the several faculties of the soul, as Understanding, Will,
Memory, and Affections. Some by study and industry attain to the knowledge of
the heavenly Spheres, and celestial Orbs whi h we do call Astronomy. Some
have knowledge of the terrestrial Globe, which is called Geography: These say,
that the World is divided into four parts, Africa, Asia, Europe, and America.
Some attain to Arithmaticke, others to Music isntrumental and vocal, and
excel the melodious birds: Some attained to Printing after they had long used
Writing. First men wrote on ashes with the Finger, as some report; then on
barks of Trees with Knives, then on stones with Iron, then on Parchment with
Canes, lastly, on Paper with quills. Their Ink at first was the juice of a
Fish, then the juice of Mulberries, then they used Chimney-soote: now men use
Gum, Gauls, and Copperas. Man in this life of Nature acts on the Stage of
this World diverse acts of Wisdom, Art, and Invention; many Martial
inventions, and warlike exploits; rares Cures in Physic, and shows great
cunning in Navigation; policy in governments, curious Art in Workmanship,
profoundnesse in Rethoricke, deep Arguments in Logic; I give a Compendium,
it requires a Volume.

Of the life of Grace.
The life of grace none live, but those that are quickened from a spiritual
death. Ephesians. 2.1. Natural men are spiritually dead: When God converts a
soul, he puts a new life into it; that now a man lives to God intentially,
spiritually, and constantly.

1. Intentially, a man intends and purposes to live to God, whose servant he
is. 1. Cor. 6.20.

2. Spiritually; this life of grace is godly and religious, holy, heavenly, and
spiritual. Romans 8.1. This life of grace makes them spiritual minded and
affected, spiritual and heavenly in duties, as in prayer, hearing, reading,
and receiving the Sacraments, etc.

3. Grace makes us to live to God constantly; against this life of grace
heresies, nor afflictions, nor pleasures can prevail: Acts 11.23. they cleave
fast to the Lord. A man that lives to God, would not change the condition
thereof with a worldly man, though he were a Lord, or Prince. This life of
grace is a life of knowledge, which does change him: 2. Cor. 3.18. A life of
joy, which does strengthen him: Nehemiah 8.10. A life of hope, which does purge
him. 1. John 3.3.

This life of grace is most excellent, most honorable and most comfortable.

1. Most excellent in conveyance, they have it derived from Christ: He is the
fountain from whence spiritual life comes: Prove. 12.26. Psalm. 16.3.
It is the life of the most excellent persons. This life makes Gods children
excel others; others live only a life of nature, but they live a life of
grace; they have grace to restrain them, grace to renew them, grace to comfort
them, grace to strengthen and quicken them.

2. The life of grace is most honorable: Two things do bring honor, one, to
do that is hard; the other, to do that which is profitable. He that lives a
life of grace, does hard things; he subdues himself, works out his salvation,
increases daily his assurance, edifies his brethren, and in this employment is
honorable. He that lives to God, is one of his servants, has admittance into
his favor, is beautified with graces and virtues, such honor have his Saints.

3. This life of grace is most comfortable; the comforts of natural men are
but as the light of the Moon, inferior at the best, and always mutable.
Those which do live to God, are near him, and the light of his countenance
shines upon them: And hence it is, that they have more joy than worldly men.
Psalm. 4.7. They have communion with God, this makes Heaven joyful; their
actions are godly, and be as seeds of joy; they are the most comfortable
people, and have the greatest grounds of joy; they have a sweet possession, and
a large reversion.

Of the life of glory.
The life of grace ends in a life of glory: the people of God shall be
glorious, and shine in the Kingdom of their Father. This life is called
Eternal life. Mark 10.30. John 3.16. This life the Scriptures reveal; we are
to believe it as an article of our Creed, we believe everlasting life: were
there not such a life, the professors of the Gospel, and the Martyrs had been
of all others most miserable. 1. Cor. 15.19. The Heathen Poets ghessed at it,
comparing it to the Elizean fields.

This life of Glory is a blessed life, having the enjoyment of God the chief
good, the only good: There is joy, pleasures, riches, rest, blessed company;
there is no interruption of happiness, no sin, no sickness, no want, no
sorrow, no tears: It Is a glorious life.

Thirdly, Of the Life of God.
THe Life of God is essential; God is life. This life is eternal independent,
full of joy and felicity; the fountain of life, all life is derived from him,
both natural, John 1.
spiritual, Ephesians. 2.1.
and eternal. Romans 6. ult.


The testimonies of Scripture. Deuteronomy. 32.40. I live for ever. Psalm. 42.2. My
soul thirsts for God, for the living God. Dan. 6.20. The servant of the
living God. 1. These. 1.^. To serve the living and true God. Heb. 3.12. To
depart from the living God. Heb. 10.11.

Fourthly, Applications to edify.
1. EArnestly to desire the living God, to thirst after him. Ps. 42. A thirst
has three things: first, a vehement desire. Secondly, a present supply.
Thirdly, a little will not satisfy.

We must desire to enjoy the living God with a great desire, a restlesnesse
till we enjoy him, and have the light of his countenance to shine abundantly
upon us.

2. We should adhere and cleave to the living God, Heb. 3.12. Never depart from
him, who is the fountain of life: we must cleave to him by faith, and not
depart from him by infidelity.

3. To take heed we provoke him not to wrath; he is not as the dumb Idols nor
as the earelesse magistrates, he is the living God, lively to pierce into our
hearts to find our faults, and lively to punish us; it is fearful to fall
into his hands. Heb. 10.31.

4. To learn to trust in him for a supply of al our wants; it is the living God
that gives us all things we do enjoy.

5. To labor for his favor which lives for ever: great m^n die, and their
servants are left to shift for themselves; but this Lord lives for ever, and
when his servants end this life, he gives them eternal life. Romans 6. last
verse.

Fifthly, Questions resolved.




2. Nature abhorres a dissolution.

3. Life is a blessing promised in the word.

4. Life is our time to lay our foundation for happiness.



Revel. 20.6. Secondly, let him learn Gods providence, and be persuaded all
shall work together for the best. Thirdly, unloose his affections from the
world, and set them on God.



Adam quickens none but his members of his mystical body.







us for tentation, distrust, and despair.

2. Consider the benefit of a lively and cheerful condition; it makes us
strong to perform duties it sweetens our life, and heartens our brethren, and
makes others to approve of our religion.

3. There must means be used to be quickened: think how happy we were in a
cheerful temper, endeavor to regaine that estate by earnest prayer, lay to
heart Gods promises, Gods presence and rewards, the example of the Martyrs,
their zeal, and courage, the force of their faith, the invinciblenesse of
their patience, their contempt of the world; let us warm us at their fires.





2 More often to lift up our hearts to God.

3. To make it our maine work to please God.

4. To prepare better for holy duties.

5. To out-grow our personal infirmities.

6. To be persuaded we are before God wheresoever we be, and whatsoever we do.

Of Blessedness.
1. What Blessedness is.

2. God is most blessed.

3. Of the Blessedness of Creature^.

4. Applications to edify.

5. Questions resolved

First, what blessedness it.
TO be blessed, is to be happy, to be in felicity, ^o have a well being in
honor, safety, and prosperity.

Blessedness is opposed to misery; he that is happy, is not weary, not in
want, nor in pain: Those that are happy do renew their strength, and of their
happy abundance do relieve others; they are healthy, joyful, honorable,
wise, virtuous, successful, victorious, and this their happiness is settled,
established, increased, enlarged, and no alteration comes, but makes for their
happiness.

Secondly, God is most blessed.
Psalm 119.12. Blessed are thou O Lord. Mark 14.61. Art thou the son of the
blessed? 1. Tim. 16. At the commandment of the Blessed. God is most blessed
and happy: the fountain of blessedness, most happy in himself: All creatures
cannot add to his felicity; only we acknowledge that he has already, and
it is our felicity to know and acknowledge the same: our humane conceits reach
to this, that he is happy:

1. In his possessions.

2. His Apparel Psalm. 104.1, 2.

3. His Attendants, the Angels.

4. His freedom; he does what he will. Psalm. 105.3.

5. All his happiness is perpetual.

6. All blessedness is derived from him, as streams from the fountain.

Thirdly, the happiness of the Creatures.
1. THe Angels happiness is a confirmed happiness, they were created happy,
and so continue by confirmation.

2. The happiness of men, is a restored, a recovered happiness: we had
happiness at first, but we lost it; and a ^emnant regaine it by fore-election,
effectual calling, faith, and repentance.

3. The other creatures have a happiness in their kind, and their happiness
is that content and delight which suites with their desire, as food and rest,
and delight, and pleasure, which the reasonable creatures desire, and look no
farther: The vegetatives happiness is full growth, and honorable use, that is
the end, and consummation of their happiness.

Applications.
1. THis should provoke us, and stir us up to use our best endeavors, to
attain to the view of the blessedness of God. The Queen of Sheba took a
long journey, and was at great cost to see the wisdom; happiness, and royalty
of Solomon, and afterward she saw more than she expected: So if we contemplate
the blessedness of God, we shall perceive more at the last, than at the first.

2. We are to acknowledge this blessedness of God as David did; Psalm. 119.12.
else we shall be worse than the wicked Priests. Mark 14.6^. All Gods
excellencies are to be acknowledged, and published; this will cause those that
are miserable to fly to him, because he has enough for himself, and all
that do come unto him.

3. To sue and entreat for his favor: All desire to be happy, and they sue to
have relation to great ones, whom they judge to be in felicity; and if they can
get to be retemers, or household servants, they think themselves in a happy
condition, especially if they can get the affection of their Lord toward them
above others: Gain this, and gain all, namely, the favor of this blessed
God; then all that we have shall be sweet, all that we want shall be supplied
with the sense of his love: wheresoever we are, we are happy; whatsoever we
do, we shall be blessed in our deed, doing it in way of obedience.

4. This shows us, who are the truly blessed and happy ones, those that are
the children of the blessed God: A blessed Father he is, and his children must
needs be blessed. They are the blessed of the Lord that made Heaven and Earth.
Psalm. 115.15.

1. They are all of them blessed. Psalm. 128.1.

2. They are assuredly blessed. Psalm. 128.4.

3. Sometimes they are apparently blessed, which is evident by their unexpected
conversion, their eminent graces, and famous deliverances.

4. Sometimes they are sensibly blessed, this is known to themselves by their
sweet consolations, and to others by their fervent praising of God.

5. They shall be eternally blessed; the perfection and consummation of
blessedness shall come upon them to their happiness. Mat. 25.34.

Fifthly, this should inform us to seek blessedness after a right manner.

1. Let us lay the foundation of our happiness in the pardon of our sins.
Psalm. 32.1, 2.

2. Seek blessedness by believing, Luke 1.55. Blessed is he that believed.
Galat. 3.9. They that are of Faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham: No
faith, no Christ; no Christ, no blessedness. Happiness is by being united to
Christ by faith.

3. Labor for divine qualifications, to evidence to our selves, and others,
that we are blessed here, and prepared for blessedness hereafter: As these,

1. Poverty of spirit.

2. Pureness of heart.

3. Meekness to bear wrongs.

4. Patience to suffer.

5. Spiritual hunger and thirst, Matthew. 5.4. the beginning.

6. The fear of God. Psalm 128.1.

7. Meditation in Gods Law. Psalm 1.2.

8. Diligence in our places. Mat. 24.46.

9. Obedience to the Truth preached to us. Luke 11.28

10. To be raised from our sins. Revel. 20.6.

11. To give to others. Acts 20.25.

12. To do that our consciences call for, and avoid that which our
consciences cry against. Romans 14.22.

13. To struggle with our tentations to victory. James 1.12.

14. To be very watchful and circumspect. Rev. 16.15

Fifthly, Questions resolved.




2. They last but a season.

3. They shelter us not from wrath.













2. They may be in the work of mortification.

3. They grieve for others sins and miseries.

4. Some infirmities lie upon them, as the sickness of their souls, which
hinders their joy.

5. They find themselves soon to err in external mirth, and then they are
grown more circumspect, yet not malcontent, nor uncheerefull.





2. They are ignorant that the same Spirit that seals them, does qualify
them; as the same fire that gives heat, gives light.

3. They do want qualifications themselves, and in their frenzy oppose them in
others, out of their grossness and ignorance.

4. They have qualifications among themselves, as

1. The qualification of Vagrants; for they will be boundless, and know no law
for rule.

2. The qualification of Atheists, they say, God sees no sin in the justified.

3. They have the qualification of devils, to accuse the brethren, and oppose
faithful preachers.

Thus they can admit of qualifications of abomination, but cannot endure
qualifications of sanctification.



Isaiah 38.

2. That we have kept the faith.

3. That there is prepared for us a Crown. 2. Tim. 4.8.





2. Our bodies shall be raised at the last day in glory.

3. Both body and soul shall be freed from sin, and ill company, and all
misery, and we shall enjoy the presence of God, the fullness of joy with the
Angels and Saints, and so be made immortally happy and blessed, beyond that we
now can comprehend.

Of Hatred.
1. The description of it.

2. The distinctions of it: In persons, in things, in causes, in degrees.

3. Of Gods hating.

4. Applications.

5. Questions resolved.

First, What Hatred is.
IT is a disliking, detesting, and avoiding things contrary to us, to our
nature, liking, and welfare. Hatred is of things contrary to us; as God hates
sin, being contrary to 1. His Nature. 2. His Law. 3. His Honor.


Man hates contrary to fight and feeling, as stripes, and torments, and death,
and sickness, contrary to our being, or wel-being. So then Hatred is a
disliking, a desire of separation, a detesting, a flying off that which we
apprehend to be against us, and our good.

Secondly, the distinctions of Hatred in persons.
IN God it is most pure and holy: what he does, is good; his will is the rule
of righteousness: nothing is in him, or that proceeds from him, but that is
most righteous, holy, and good.

Hatred in man is sometimes a lawful affection, Psalm. 97.11. Ye that love the
Lord, hate evil.

Again, there is hatred causlesse; as some hate cheese, some hate some fruits
which in themselves are lovely; but the contrariety and hatred is in their
natures: this is in vegetables in beasts, and in fowls, and fishes, as between
the Vine and the Colewort, between the Serpent and the Spider, etc.

So men of accursed natures, hate God, Romans 1. hate Light, John. 3. hate good
men, Psalm. 34. hate goodness without just cause, as Caine hated Abel.

And there is a cause makes men hate; as Joseph's brethren hated him, because
they thought his fathers love would be removed from them to him.

So Ahab hated Michaiah because he reproved him: so the Dove hates the Hawke,
and the Lamb the wolf, because they know them their enemies, and come to
devour.

3. There is hatred of enmity, when we hate the evil, and the party, wishing
him punishment or death: so evil men do hate superiors punishing. And there
is an hatred of abomination, when we, loving our selves or others, hate those
evils of sin or punishment that may be hurtful to us or them.

4. As there is a distinction in persons or causes, so in things: as

1. Envy and hatred differ in the kind; hatred is in a kind in other creatures,
envy is only humane.

2 Envy arises from some good befalne to our enemy, hatred from some ill he
does to us.

3. We hate Toads and Serpents, but envy not beasts for strength, swiftness,
or beauty; only we envy men.

4. Some hatred is lawful; but no envy is lawful.

So there is a difference between hatred and anger.

1. Hatred reaches to many, but anger to few most usually.

Anger, the older it grows, the weaker it is: but hatred the older it grows,
the stronger it is.

3. The angry man would have the party he is angry with, to know he is angry:
but he that hates, conceales his hatred often times.

4. Anger ceases, if we see misery with submission; but hatred is often cruel
and brutish, and unsatisfied, unless it see the ruin of the party.

5. Anger is more painful for the present, because of vehemence: but hatred
is more quiet, yet does watch an opportunity.

There is a distinction of degrees: there is dislike, hatred, and abhorring;
dislike breeds hatred, and hatred grows to an abhorring, to a deadly hate.

Thirdly, of Gods hating.
1. WHom he hates.

2. What he hates.

First, whom he hates.

1. He hates them that love sin. Psalm 11.5.

2. He hates Liars. Psalm. 5.6.

3. He hates the proud. Prove. 16.5.

4. Those that deal Hypocritically. Isaiah 1. My soul hates your new Moons.

6. Those which deal falsely, under a pretense to give to God. Isaiah 61.8. I
hate robbery for burnt Offering.

Thirdly, what God hates.

1. He hates iniquity. Psalm 45.

2. He hates the prayers of the wicked. Proverbs 15.

3. He hates Idolatry. Psalm 78.59.

4. He hates false weights. Prove. 11.1.

Applications.
1. THis shows the misery of the wicked, the hatred of God is their portion.

2. This should stir us up to do the best we can, to work our affections to
hate sin, and abhor it.

1. Because it is that dishonours God. Romans 2.23.

2. It Is painful and grievous. Romans 7.24.

3. It separates between God and us. Isaiah 59.2.

4. It makes us captives. Isaiah 61.1.

5. Sins are our debts. Matthew. 6.12.

6. They are our burdens. Psalm. 40.12.

7. They poll^te us. 2. Cor. 7.1.

8. They wound us. Psalm. 41.4.

And we should manifect our hatred,

1. By being censorious of sin.

2. To shun the places where it is committed.

3. By contending with it, seeking a divorce.

4. By seeking the destruction of it.

5. By rejoicing in the ruin and decay of it.

6. By being irreconcilable with it.

Fifthly, Questions answered.




2. He his contrary to them in his nature.

3. They look on him, as a Judge that will puish them.





2. They serve several Lords.

3. They have several dispositions.

4. The Godly by virtue get the credit from them; the difference of works
breeds hatred, as in Caine and Abel.

5. They are provoked by the devil to hate them.





2. Those that prove Apostates from that they professed.

3. Those which are busybodies, and tale-carriers.

4. Those which live idly.

5. Those which make no conscience to pay their debts.

6. Those which for private gain do spoil a Commonwealth.

7. Those which bring in innovations in Religion.

8. Those which live basely, having great means.

9. Those which oppress the poor, and vex the widow and fatherless.

10. Those which take base courses to enrich themselves.





2. Look on it in the effects in the end, and conclusion.

3. The more we love God, the more we hate evil, and abhor it.

4. Humble confessions of our sins with aggravation, increases hatred.

5. Substract from the hatred of poverty, of affliction, and death, and add to
the hatred of sin.





2. Hate them as they are Gods enemies, not as they are our enemies.

3. Our hatred must be with hope of their conversion, not with despair.

4. We must hate them as they dishonor God, and would pollute us; but not with
a seeking their d^struction.

5. So hate them as to pray for them; not plot against them that are evil men
amongst us.

Of Love.
1. What Love is.

2. Of Gods love.

3. Of Man's love to God.

4. Of Man's love to man.

5. Applications to edify.

6. Questions resolved.

First, What Love is.
LOve is an affection of liking, a well-wishing: Love seeks union, and desires
to enjoy the object loved: if it obtaines, then there is a joy, delight, and
complacency; if the object of love be lost, or separated, then there is a
sadness and discontent; if there be hope of regaining, then Love studies,
inquires, labors, and is industrious to have former enjoyment and possession.
Amor vincit omnia.
Love is a strong affection in us, it labors, and endures, and forgives; it
will be victorious.

Secondly, Of Gods love.
GOds love is essential; He infinitely loves himself, his Son, and Spirit,
and his love is extended to all his children. 1 John 4.8. God is love; he not
only has love, but is love, as it is said, I am understanding, Prove. 18.14.
As the Sun is light, so God is love, the Fountain of love.

Farther, consider four things: 1. The objects of his love. 2. The liberty of
his love. 3. The extent of his love. 4. The duration of it.


1. The objects of Gods love.
The objects of Gods love are, first, Christ: secondly, the Elect.

First, Christ; Isai. 42.1. His soul delights in Christ. Matthew. 3.17. In him
he is quieted, well pleased; he only pleases him.

Secondly, in Christ he loves the Elect: Colos. 3.12. They are beloved ones,
elect, and beloved.

2. The liberty of Gods love.
It is free; no cause in us, no cause out of himself. Benevolentia.
Hosea 15.5. I will love them freely.

3. The extent of his love.
It was large and great. John 3.16. So God loved the world. 1. John 3.1. Behold
what love, behold it with admiration, with acclamation, with gratulation: To
love them dead in sin, Ephesians. 1.2. To love enemies, Romans 5.10. To those that
did manifest enmity by evil works. Colos. 1.21.

4. The duration.
It is an everlasting Love. Ier. 31.3. Troubles deprive us not of his love,
Psalm. 91.15. for he will be with us. Infirmities cannot quench his love; for
he will spare us. Mal. 3.17. Death cannot separate us from his love. Romans 8.38,
39.

Thirdly, Of Man's love to God.
Man's love is either natural, or sinful, or spiritual: Our love to God must
be spiritual; but before we can thus love God, ourselves must be regenerate.
1. John 4.19. We love him, because he first loved us, and gave us grace: this
love of ours to God, is a constrained love; 2. Cor. 5.14. not a constraint, but
by a sweet influence; as the Sun shining on Herbs and Flowers, does
constrain them to grow, and smell sweet. The love of God to us, is love
active; the love of God in us, is love passive; he is loved of us.

2. From whence love comes; surely the Fountain is God. 1. John 4.7. Love
comes from God: The root is the Spirit, the fruit is love. Gal. 5.22. Gods
love is manifested to us by the Holy Ghost. Romans 5.5. Then We love him which
first loved us. 1. John 4.19.

3. The marks of our love to God.

First, love earnestly desires his presence. Psalm. 42.2. This desire is
compared to a thirst; we thirst for God as the chief good, the only good.
This thirst requires, 1. A suit^ble satisfaction. 2. A present satisfaction. 3.
A large satisfaction.


1. A suitable satisfaction: To offer a thirsty man a garment, or to tell him a
^leasant tale, or let him hear Music, it is not suitable; it is drink that
he desires.

2. It is a present satisfaction: he desires not drink to morrow, or next
week, but presently.

3. It is a large satisfaction; a drop, or a spoonefull satisfies not, he
desires a large draught: Thus love, it desires God, and none else; to enjoy him
sweetly, and speedily, and largely; this is the first mark of love.

Secondly, love bewayles the absence of God, it is as death to the soul,
having once enjoyed him, to want him. Psalm. 77.10. In the want of all things,
we want God above all if we truly love him. Psalm. 63.1.

Thirdly, love rejoices in his presence; by prayer we draw near to God, Isai.
55.6. and then joy increases. Psalm. 43.4. Prayer brings us into his presence
with a holy gladness. Phil. 1.4.

Fourthly, love makes us obedient to God: John 14.15. If ye love me, keep my
Commandments. The more love, the more duty, obedience, and conformity to his
Will.

Fifthly, when we love God, we do love the children of God: If we love him
that begat, we do love them begotten. 1. John 5.1.

4. The promises made to them that love God.

First, they shall have mercy showed to them, and their posterity, pardoning
mercies, relieving mercies. Exodus 20.6.

Secondly, they shall share in Gods affection: Ioh. 14.21. The Father will love
them, the Son will love them that love Christ.

Fourthly, all shall work for the best unto them. Romans 8.28. What can be more
comfortable?

Fourthly, they shall have a crown of life, James 1.12. and a kingdom. James
2.5. This is the portion of them that love the Lord.

Fourthly, Of Man's love to man.
THE love of man to man, is either natural, or spiritual: the natural love
is grounded on natural Causes, either beauty, or bounty, or consanguinity;
something we judge to be love-worthy that draws the natural affection.

Spiritual love is a peculiar among the regenerate; they love God for his own
sake, they love their enemies for his commands sake, they love his children for
his Image sake: The more holy, and righteous, and heavenly minded men are, the
more they love them.

Of this love to the godly, consider 1. The necessity of it. 2. The excellency
of it. 3. How it is exercised. 4. The marks of true love. 5. How it is
preserved.


First, the necessity of this love to our brethren.

1. Without this love we can have no sound evidence that we are the children of
God. 1 John 3.10.

2. We can do no works that God accepts without this love. 1. Cor. 13.1, 2,
3. 1. Cor. 16.14. All our things must be done in love: If love be wanting, the
work is lost: love is as the salt that seasons all.

Secondly, the excellency of love.

1. The Divine Essence is love; and it is excellent to resemble God:

2. Love is an excellent badge of a servant and scholar of Christ, whereby
they are manifested and known. John 13.15.

3. It Is an excellent fruit of faith: Ephesians. 1.15. Faith in Christ is fruitful
in love to all the Saints.

4. It Is an excellent testimony of a sound convert: By this we may know we are
changed from sin to grace. 1. John 3.14.

5. It is excellent to have God to dwell with us: Where love is, there God
dwells. 1. John 4 12.

6. It Is as the anointed above the rest for excellency. 1. Pet. 4.8. Above all,
have fervent love. Col. 3.14. Above all, put on love.

Thirdly, how love is exercised.

1. Love seeks to be united; as soon as we love Gods children, we endeavor
to join with them. Act. 9.26.

2. Love enjoying the objects, turns to delight. Psalm. 16.3.

3. Love casts the garment of charity to hide our brethrens infirmities. 1.
Pet. 4.8.

4. Love edifies others. 1. Cor. 8.1. To edify, is to build. Love builds
artificially.

1. By pulling down the old wall of natural corruption.

2. I aying a sound foundation of faith and repentance; it will confer with
young ones, and weak ones, to help them, not puzzel them. Romans 14.1.

3. It brings new materials from the word, and raises the building higher and
higher, and strives to add practice to knowledge, wisdom to zeal, mercy to
justice, patience to diligence, reverence to assurance.

4. Love is excercised in relieving the necessities of our brethren: Love
ministers to the necessity of the Saints. Heb. 6.10.


Fourthly, the marks of love to our brethren.

1. True love is unfeigned, 2. Cor. 6.6. without dissimulation. Romans 12.9.

2. It Is fervent: there is heat in true love, and haste to do them good:
heat has motion. 1. Pet. 4.8.

3. It Is diligent: Love nor hatred will be idle. 1. These. 1.3. Love is
laborious for them beloved. Heb. 6.10.

4. It Is constant, it is not as carnal lust; hot lust is soon cold, as Ammon
to Tamar; but true love continues. Heb. 13.1.

Fifthly, how love is preserved.

1. Labor for real, sound, effectual love, then it will last and hold out. 1
Cor. 13.8. Love does never fall away.

2. Avoid groundless surmises: Love thinks none evil. 1. Cor. 13.5.

3. Interpret doubtful things charitably, as old Jacob did, when he saw
Joseph's coat.

4. Harken not to every tale and report of the faults of others; the words of
tale-bearers sink deep, and embitter our affections.

5. Give loving answers, for sweet speeches preserve love. Judge. 8.2, 3.

6. Sometimes let us lay aside our authority, and use entreaty to preserve
love. The Epistle to Philemon the ninth verse.

Fifthly, Applications to edify.
1. TO admire the love of God: 1 John 3.1. both for the freeness, greatness,
and continuance: we admire that we cannot comprehend; such is the love of
Christ, Ephesians. 3.19. that it passes our knowledge.

2. If God has so loved us, we ought to love him again with all our heart,
and mind, and strength. Deuteronomy. 6.6. Matthew. 22.37.

3. Let us endeavor to preserve our love to the Lord.

1. Take heed we look not on the worlds excellency too much, and neglect
divine meditations.

2. If we will preserve our love, we must preserve our acquaintance with him by
daily prayer, reading, hearing. Job 22.21.

3. Daily consider the worth of his love; it is better than life it self: Psalm.
63.3. and of the effects of his love, in giving his Son, his Spirit, his
Graces, his Promises, his consolations, this world, and the next world; this
will revive our love to him.

4. It Is great impiety to decline in love to God; we make as if he were not so
amiable, and love-worthy as once we thought him, or that we have found
something that deserves our affection more than himself.

If we preserve our love to God, we preserve our assurance of his love to us,
we preserve our strength to perform duties, to bear crosses; we preserve in
our selves a fitness to live, and a promptness to dye; preserve this, and it
will preserve us.

Fourthly, concerning love to men.

1. Let us think of things that pertain to love, such thoughts are both
comfortable and profitable. Phil. 4.8.

2. Pursue love, follow after it, as men that hunt, do pursue the hare, let us
follow hard to catch it, not to kill it, but enjoy it. 1. Cor. 14.1.

3. Let our trading, and employments, all our business and affairs be done in
love. 1 Cor. 16.14.

4. Let us endeavor to be sound in love. Tit. 2.2.

This duty is 1. Commanded. 1. John 3.23. 2. Commended. 1. Cor. 13.13. 3.
Approved. Rev. 2.19. 4. Rewarded. Heb. 6.10.


And our love should be thus ordered.

1. To love God above all as the supreme, and chief good.

2. To love our own souls next, as being more worth than all the world.
Matthew. 16.6.

3. To love my neighbors soul, for that may partake of God; after that manner
the body is not capable, but by participation with the soul.

4. To love my own body above all other men's.

5. The bodies of my brethren, among them;

1. Those which are most godly.

2. Those that are of my own nation. Gal. 6.13. Psalm 122.8


3. Those that are my kindred.

4. Especially those of my family. 1. Tim. 5.8.

5. Above all my wife. Genesis 2.24.

Sixthly, Questions resolved.






We may; Ephesians. 5.29. And we must love our souls, and labor to save them.
Acts 16.30. Matthew. 16.26.



Acts 8.2.

2. Moderate mourning. John 11.33.

3. R^spect to their posterity, as David to Jonathan. 2. Sam. 9.45.

4 To speak of their good works. Acts 9.39.

Rev. 2.4



Loss of love to God.
2. They take too much worldly contentment.

3. They neglect the means of grace, as reading, hearing, and prayer.

4. They change their company for them that are less zealous.

5. They look on the graces of others with envy, or discouragement.





2. Because they see men perfidious, unjust Apostates; so abhor them.

3. Some look only on the evils of men, not their good parts.

4. They find arguments to cool their love, but none to kindle it.

Luke 14.26.




2. They should see us so slight them in opposition to Christ, that they should
think we hate them.

3. Though we honor and love them simply, yet we are to hate them
comparatively.



Cor. 5.19, 20.

2. A love of maintenance, as they are painful.

3. A love of attention, as they are teachers.

4. A love to stand for them, as they are opposed by heretics and profane men.

5. A love of piety, to pray for them. Colos. 4.3.

6. A love of courtesy, if we be able, to invite them home. Acts 16.15.

7. A love of complacency, to delight in them as the excellent ones. Psalm. 16.3.

1. Excellent in their function, being the Lords Tribe.

2. Excellent in their gifts of holiness and learning.

3. Excellent in their employment, the saving of souls. 1. Tim. 4.16.

4. Excellent in their reward, a great reward. Mat. 10.41.





1. Observe how godly Ministers do agree, follow them; some differ in
judgment, yet walk in love.

2. Let us look on the good we see one in another.

4. If we meet, let us confer of those things wherein we do not differ.

5. Let us pray one for another, so love may be preserved.



1.

2. Look on the good that we see in our brethren, ponder their virtues, cover
their infirmities.

3. Labor to feel the comfort of love. Phil. 2.1. How does love sweeten our
pilgrimage? To meet, and confer in love, to comfort one another in love,
makes our presence acceptable, it adornes our profession, and Religion
abundantly.

Of Patience.
1. What Patience is.

2. Of the patience of God.

3. Of the patience of man.

4. Application to edify.

5. Questions resolved.

First, What Patience is.
THE word signifies sufferance, or forbearance. In patience are three things:
First, a promptness, or readiness to bear. Secondly, the act of patience in
bearing. Thirdly, the duration, which is called long-suffering.

Secondly, Of the patience of God.
THE patience of God, is his slownesse to anger, his sparing of sinners, and
giving them space to repent. Romans 2.4.

There is patience and long suffering which flows from his goodness: Men
daily do provoke God, yet he forbeares.

1. Because he would bring men to Repentance. Romans 2.4. 2. Pet. 3.9.

2. To leave wicked men inexcusable, having so long forborne them.

3. That men might be encouraged, and not despair: thus God was patient
toward Paul, for the example of others. 1. Tim. 1.6.

Thirdly, Of patience in good men.
PAtience is a gift of God, whereby they bear evils present, and look for
good things absent.

1. It is a gift of God. James 1.17.

2. Whereby they bear evi^s at Gods hand, being corrections, or chastisements:
Or at men's hands, being wrongs and injuries.

3. A waiting for good things absent, as the sense of Gods favor, the
accomplishment of Gods promises, the consummation of future happiness; these
with patience we do wait for.

Patience may be farther considered.

1. In the contrary to it. 2. In the causes of it. 3. In the effects.
First, in the contrary of it.

The contrary to patience is fretting, murmuring, despairing, cursing.

1. Fr^tting, as Hammon, because Mordecai bowed not to him. 2. Murmuring, as
Israel for want of water. 3. Despairing, as Cain and Judas for want of grace;
to pray for pardon and patience, to wait for an answer. 4. Cursing, as Goliath,
who could not refrain, till he came wit^in the stroke of David; but being
impatient, cursed him before he came at ^im. 1. Sam. 17.

Secondly, consider patience in the Causes of it.

1. Patience arises from the knowledge of Gods Sovereignty, being persuaded of
his disposing things below. Psalm. 39.2.

2. From the persuasion of Gods Wisdom, and love, that he will turn the
event and conclusion to our good. Romans 8.28.

3. From hope of glory; Hope makes us patiently to wait. Romans 8.25.

Thirdly, consider patience in the effects of it.

1. It quiets the heart in the time of trouble, making those things easy,
which murmuring, fretting, and impatience, do make irksome and tedious. The
same David that was so vexed at Nabal, was by patience calm at Shemei.

2. Patience makes us to persevere when we find not the present good we
expected; yet by patience we hold out, when others by impatience draw back.

Fourthly, Applications to edify.
1. GOds Patience should lead us to repentance; God is patient toward all,
some are bettered by it that have grace, they make a holy use of his
gentleness and patience; others are licentious, because God deferres his
punishmentts, and their hearts are set in them to do evil, so they heap up
wrath for themselves. Let us be wise, and in the sunshine of his patience
procure our own peace, get assurance of his favor, that Gods patience may be
prolonged, our wisdom commended, and our happiness established.

2. Admire Gods patience, he came to Adam at the cool of the day, showing his
patience: He spared the old world 120 years, he has spared us a long time.

3. Let us be followers of God as dear children: he is a God of patience.
Romans 15.

It Is the Devil has great wrath, and his instruments are given to rage. Psalm.
2.1. The Saints are commended for their patience: and though we be converted,
and know God, yet we do need patience. Heb. 10.

There is a passive obedience to suffer, it is patience must help ^s: If we
bring miseries on our selves, then we should exercise grief; if God lay them
on us, then use patience.

Are we troubled in mind? we must be patient, and wait.

Are we scandalized in our names? we must be patient.

Have we lost our goods? we must be patient.

Are our bodies sick? still we must be patient.

Patience is physic for all maladies, a plaster for all sores, a horse to
bear all burdens.

Job kept his patience and thankfulness when he lost all outward things.

4. Here see the misery of the impatient; they are as soldiers without armor,
as travelers without shoes, still they are wounded and pricked: every word
makes them take exception, and every small cross becomes heavy unto them.
Their ignorance and pride works them more woe than all their miseries, and
they vex themselves more than their enemies can do. A glass, or a knife
broke, or their dog kicked, or a scoff cast on them, torments them, and they
are in their minds in an uproare like the Beare-garden: they are like a sore,
ever aching, and must not be touched: they are unfit for the Cross, and far
from consolation: they cannot enjoy themselves, and are miserable wheresoever
they are; always in danger to be baited with the Cross, and meet with
vexations.

5. Here we may try our selves whether we have attained patience. Has the head
aked? or the child died? or the Customer broke? or the servant proved false?
has some censured, or falsely accused us? have friends proved perfidious? is
trading decayed? how do we behave our selves? do we vex, and fret, and look
to secondary causes, complain^ng of the wickedness of men, and wish evil to
them, and fret at God under the name of hard destiny, ill fortune? do we
seek revenge on men, by word, or writing, or law? if we do, we are not yet
patient.

Patience will make us say, it is the Lord, let him do what seems good to him.

Patience opens not the mouth discontentedly, but graciously. Psalm 39.2.
Patience blesses God in loss of all: Patience quiets us in God at the worst: 1 Samuel 30.6. Patience makes us, with Saint Stephen, pray for enemies.

Fifthly, Questions resolved.


Romans 15.4.

Philosophical patience was sometimes Stoicall, to submit to that is
inevitable; they wanted divine consolation and sound hope, wanting the ground
thereof, the holy Scriptures.





1. Those small wrongs which do displease us, it is our honor and credit to
pass them over. Prove. 9.11.

If small briars take hold of our garments, let us loosen them gently, and go
on our way.

2. A second sort that do somewhat harm us in our persons, goods, and
reputations; these we may take notice of, yet patiently bear them, and forgive
them. John 8.49.

A third sort of violent injuries of adversaries, both malicious and cruel;
we may patiently submit to God, yet use means by Law, or force of Arms to
defend our selves.





2. Distinguish of faults of infirmity, the faults of improvidence,
carelessness, and obstinacy.

3. Give warning first, and win them by gentleness.

4. Use correction with prayer and moderation in the last place.





2. It may be, yet they have not learned to speak well.

3. Be not impatient, but use their accusations and scandalls for preventions.

4. Praises may prove more dangerous than scandalls, they are better that
speak evil of us, than they that flatter us, and better to us.

5. Christ was evil spoken of, though an innocent.

6. Our patience will more vex our adversary, than our returning word for word.

Jobs did?



2. Labor to get a further interest in God, then all shall be supplied; and we
having lost all, may be patient and quiet, because we enjoy him that is better
than all: The fruition of God is the maine good, the only good; matchless,
changelesse, always, everywhere with us, above all casualties and
uncertainties.

3. Be not insensible as a block, nor impatient, as without faith and hope: be
patient as a Christian, that though he be molested be enjoyes himself: By
patience we possess our souls. Luke 21.19.

4. Labor for a rectified judgment, look not with a wrong eye on others
prosperity. The Jews were impatient to hear the children cry Hosanna, Matthew.
21.15. and impatiently murmured at a supposed fault, when Christ went in with
Zacheus. Error in opinion does much wrong others, and disquiet our selves; we
having blinded eyes, shall have impatient hearts: Ignorance makes us full of
mistakes; we see not good in evil. Our crosses are as Sampsons Lion, there is
honey of instruction in them; bitter Alloes may prove medicinable.

5. Impatience cures us not, it is not the remedy of a misery, but a procurer
of a judgment. The Jews murmured, and were impatient, their carcasses fell in
the Wilderness. Achitophel and Judas in their impatience hanged themselves.

Ezekiel 36.
6. Set up a Sessions in the conscience, and let us judge our selves worthy of
all the sorrows of this life, and the life to come: thus abasing our souls
before God, will breed in us patience and submission in all our afflictions.

7. Meditate in the Law of God continually, search the Scriptures, then we
shall learn this lesson, to be patient. Romans 15.4.

8. Learn Gods providence, he disposes of all things: to be grieved at Gods
ordering things, is great impiety; all creatures submit, Man only disquiets
himself, and is impatient.

9. Abhor sin, the cause of crosses; remember that crosses should prevent
sins, and make us to forbear pleasures, and endure troubles the more
patiently.

10. By patience the Will of God is ^one by us, Heb. 10.36. and the promises
inherited. Heb. 6.12. Go on therefore, suffering his will, and waiting with
patience for the inheritance.

11. Let our troubles cause us to cry to our Physician, who will hear us,
though not according to our will, yet according to our good.

12. We suffer not alone; the same afflictions, yea, worse it may be, our
brethren do endure. The grief of the Saints being indifferent, it is the
easier borne; if it be great, the glory shall be greater: If it seem hard, let
us blame our tenderness; most commonly, if it be long, it is the lighter; if
it be violent, it is the shorter: None are exempted; I shall not escape that
which never any did before me. God had but one Son without sin, but not one
without affliction.

13. Look to Christ's coming to Judgment; then the troubled shall have rest.
2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. Be patient therefore, for the coming of the Judge draws
near. James 5.7, 8.

14. Affect no earthly thing overmuch; for we impatiently part with that which
we inordinately affected. Jonah too much rejoiced in his Gourd, and David too
much affected his son, which made the one exceeding angry, and the other cry
out, O Absolon my son, my son.





2. Be less disquieted at the smaller crosses that daily befall us: small
wheales ache, and small dust flies in our eyes; learn to say, My God will
enable me to bear more than these.

3. Look to the most noble examples, Christ endured. Heb. 12. The Prophets are
examples. James 5.

4. Resolve for the worst, our preparations are as Armor; learn to take up
the cross by stooping for it, as well as bear it, if it be laid on us.

5. Grow daily less and less in our own eyes, then shall we be more patient,
and willing to suffer.

6. Be sure that we affect not the praise of men, then disgraces will be less
irksome.

Of the Will.
1. What it is to will.

2. Of the will of God.

3. Of Man's will.

4. Lessons to edify.

5. Questions resolved.

First, what it is to will.
TO will, is to choose, or refuse, to desire, to wish, or consent. Phil. 2.13.
God works the will; that is, the motions and purposes W^lson.
: When we do pray, we do will something (optando) by desiring: when we will
have a servant do any thing, we will it (jubendo) by commanding. The will is
free, and freely wills without compulsion: we will by nature, we will well by
grace; we are free to evil, but bound in respect of grace: Will properly
belongs to the reasonable creature: ubi non est ratio, ibi non est voluntas:
Where there is not reason, there is not will. So much what it is to will.

Secondly, of the Will of God.
THe Will of God is Essential, whatsoever is in God is good: Also the will of
God is his decree, Ephesians. 1.11. after the counsel of his will. Romans 9.15.

We apprehend his will two fold; secret, and revealed. Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret
will of God we admire as a great depth, Psalm. 36.7. which cannot be found out
Romans 11.33.
. This will of God is free, absolutely free; he wills without interruption, and
with delight. Also his will is the rule of Justice, therefore things are just,
because he wills them: his will is simple, with one act he wills all: his will
is immutable, he alters not by accidents: his will is holy, he is not carried
by corrupt reason.

Our thoughts pitch on three things concerning Gods will: The first, what he
will do with us: The second, Note.
what he will do for us: The third, what he will have us to do: But we should
mainely look to the last, what he will have us to do; then he will do this
with us, he will make us vessels of mercy; he will do this for us, he will
bless us here and hereafter.

What he will have us to do, is revealed in the Law and the Gospel: In both
he wills three things.

1. He wills us all to repent.

2. He wills us to believe in Jesus Christ.

3. He wills us to lead a holy life.

The will of God is, that we should repent: Acts 17.30. The word is a
returning, a waxing wise, a recovering a man's self: Repentan e is a change of
the mind, Prove. 1.23. ^zek. 18.
a turning from sin to God: Repentance makes a man come to himself; it ma^es
a man as it were another man, a new man.

The will of God is, that we should believe in Jesus Christ: he is lifted up to
save believers. John 3.16. Ioh. 6.40. By faith we receive him, John 1.12. as
our Priest, to satisfy divine justice; as our Prophet, to be taught by his
word; as our King, to be subject to his government: faith believes him the
only Savior, the all-sufficient Savior, a Savior to me.

The will of God is, that we should live a holy life, eschewing evil and doing
good, separating our selves from wickedness, and wicked company, dedicating
our selves to God and godliness, to walk circumspectly, to learn piety,
devotion, heavenly mindednes: 1 These. 4. This is the will of God, our
holiness. 1. Pet. 1.16. 2. Cor. 7.1.

Thirdly, of Man's Will.
MAn is so wholly corrupted by the fall, that he understands not the things of
God, 1. Cor. 2.14. and his desires are opposite to Gods will: 1. Pet. 4.2.
being spiritually dead, how can he will spiritual things? Ephesians. 2.1. God
offers grace, men refuse. Prove. 1 25. so that we have by nature no strength.
Romans 5.6. We have no sufficiency to think, which is less than to will. 2.
Cor. 3.5.

Fourthly, Lessons to edify.
FIrst, we should labor to know Gods Will.

Secondly, we should endeavor to do Gods will.

We attain the knowledge of Gods will,

1. By getting into the estate of grace, and being believers: for knowledge is
a peculiar gift to such. Matthew. 13.11. The Devil blindes unbeleevers. 2. Cor.
4.4. The book is closed to them. Isaiah 28.11. or if it be opened, they have
not judgment. 1. Cor. 2.14.

2. For the desire of it, we must separate our selves, Prove. 18.1. separate
from needless studies, idle books, which are not meat for children, but
scraps for whelps; separate from vain company, excessive worldly business,
carnal pleasures, needless journies, let spare hours and vacant time be
spent this way to get it.

3. We understand by books: Dan. 9.2. Therefore we should search the
Scriptures, John 5.39. there is the fountain of saving knowledge, there we
should labor hard. Prove. 2.2, 3, 4.

4. We must frequent the faithful ministry of the word, there we shall be fed
with knowledge and understanding. Ier. 3.15.

5. Be sure prayer be not omitted. Psalm. 119.18. we must cry for knowledge,
and call for understanding. Prove. 2.2, 3. pray earnestly for the Spirit
promised. Luke 11.13. that Spirit is the Spirit of revelation. Ephesians. 1.17.

6. We must labor to be such vessels as knowledge is put into, and get these
qualifications.

1. To fear God; for his secrets are revealed to them that fear him. Psalm. 25
14.

2. To obey him, then we shall know. Ioh. 7.17.

3. To give up our selves wholly to his service, and to be at his disposing;
then we shall know what is his good and acceptable will. Rom 12.2.

7. We should propound our doubts to them able to resolve us: the Disciples
gained knowledge by questioning with our Savior apart: also Expositors,
Commentaries, Dictionaries are helps, and as buckets whereby we draw waters
out of the Well of knowledge.

We should do the will of God:

1. Because then we shall differ from Hypocrites, which speak that is good,
but do it not. Matthew. 23.3.

2. We shall be like the Angels, which execute the will of God. Psalm. 103.20.

3, We shall be the children of wisdom, and differ from fools: he that
hears, and does, is as a wise builder that built on a rock. Matt. 7.24.

4. We shall be honorable, being in affinity to Christ: those that do his
will, he accounts as his kindred. Matthew. 12.50.

5. We shall be under the promises.

First, temporal, Isaiah. 1.19. If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the
good things of the Land.

Secondly, spiritual; The Spirit is promised to them that ask, but is given
to them that obey. Acts 5.32.

The eternal promise is made to the obedient, Mat. 7.21. He shall enter into
heaven that does the will of God. Romans 2.7. Heaven is for them that by
patience do continue in well-doing.

The manner of doing Gods Will.

1. It must be done speedily: must and haste is for the great King. Psalm. 119.
I made haste.

2. It must be done sincerely, looking to Gods command, and presence, and
reward. Psalm. 51.8. God loves truth in the inward parts.

3. It must be done constantly; for the former part of our life yields to the
latter: If we do leave our righteousness, it was but seeming righteousness,
and we shall perish in wickedness. Ezekiel 18.24. Again, it is an indignity to
the Lord to leave his service; and lastly, we lose the promise which is made to
perseverance. Revel. 2.10.

4. Gods Will must be done cheerfully; for we served sin with great delight:
God is the better Master, his work and wages more honorable. Secondly,
cheerfulness will evidence us to be Gods people, who are a willing people.
Psalm. 110.3. Thirdly, God accepts the will without the work, as in Abraham
offering Isaac, but never the work without the will. Fourthly, cheerfulness
is acceptable, like ripe fruit soon shaken, pleasant to the eye and taste.
Fifthly, uncheerefulnesse is a diabolical service, a beastly service; we make
them obey with whips, goads, and spurs. Sixthly, there is a special command
of cheerfulness, Deuteronomy. 16.14 and a fearful threat against uncheerefulnesse.
Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.

Fifthly, Questions resolved.








You said, Vbi non est Ratio, ibi non est Voluntas: What say you to Romans 8.20.
speaking of the unreasonable creature, he says not of his own will?

There is will proper, Inclinatio Naturae, A natural inclination, called a
Will.



Deuteronomy. 29.29. but we know not the secrets of that will; but when it is
manifested, then we know it either by revelation, or events.



Tim. 3.16, 17. If Revelations may be followed as a rule, then they may be
written: for others, then comes another Bible, and new Penman.



Isai. 59. the last verse. 2. Those which are agreeable to our callings. 3.
Those which are circumstantially good for time, and place, matter, manner, and
end.



and his whole Sermon may be very true, yet not in the express words of the
Text.



Dives in hell had a devilish disposition, and he would cross Gods
Ordinance, to leave Moses and the Prophets, and to have his brethren instructed
by one that came from the dead. Peter, not an Angel, must instruct and teach
Cornelius. Acts 10. Philip, not an Angel, must preach to the Eunuch. A^ts 8.
In former time God spoke by his Prophets; in these last days by his Son.
Heb. 1.1. All merit belongs to his Priestly Office, all Doctrine to his
Prophetical Office, and all efficacy to his Kingly Office: As Prophet he
taught personally in the days of his flesh, being among us: when he ascended
on high, he gave gift^ to men, (not Angels) to the gathering of his Saints,
and edifying of his body. Ephesians. 4. And men, (not Angels) are Ambassadors to
reconcile us to God. 2. Cor. 5.19, 20.

Of the grace of God.
1. What is meant by grace.

2. How we may obtain the sense of his grace.

3. How we may know we are in Gods favor.

4. How the sense of Gods favor is preserved.

First, What is meant by grace.
Tim. 1.9. which was before the world, called the good pleasure of his Will,
Ephesians. 1.5. or the effects of his favor in our Justification and
Sanctification. Romans 5.15. 2. Pet. 3.18. To have the grace and favor of God,
is to be accepted. Luke 2.22. Jesus grew in favor with God, id est, was
accepted. Genesis 4.4. God had respect to Abel. Genesis 6.8. Noah found grace in the
eyes of the Lord, he had Gods favor showed him. There is Gods grace toward
us, and Gods grace in us; the first in his own breast, the other we have by
donation; the first is his grace, love, and good will, the other the gift of
his Spirit, regenerating, changing, and sanctifying; the first is the Cause,
the second the Effect: Of the former I intend, Gods grace and favor to us.

Secondly, How to attain the sense of Gods Favor and grace.
WE must know that his favor is free, Hosea 14.^. and none can give to him
first. Romans 11.35. yet we are to use means for our own good, that we may get
some evidence to our own souls that we are in his favor.

1. We must have respect to knowledge.

2. We must labor for faith.

3. We must look to our course of life and conversation.

1. That we avoid evil. 2. That we do good. 3. That we suffer and bear the
cross.
First, we must have respect to knowledge; Knowledge.
for the ignorant are no favorites, but rebels; Hosea 4.1. and though they be
Gods creatures, yet they are excluded from Gods favor, Isai. 27.11. and shall
feel Gods vengeance. 2. These. 1.8.

Ignorance is not the mother of devotion, but the mother of error, Matthew.
22.29. the mother of bloodshed, Acts 3.17. the mother of blasphemy,
persecution, and oppression, 1. Tim. 1.13. the mother of filthy lusts. 1. These.
4.5.

Faith.
Secondly, those who are in favor with God, must be believers: Without faith
we cannot please God. Heb. 11.6. Unbeleefe brings Gods displeasure, and they
are so far from favor, that they are cast into the lake of fire. Revel. 21.8.

Thirdly, we must look to our course of life and conversation, in both active
and passive obedience.

First, in avoiding evil; we must shun the love and affection to sin.
Evil avoided.
God favors not, but hates them that love iniquity. Psalm. 11.5. We must also
take heed that we do not flatter our selves in sin. Deuteronomy. 29.19. Take heed
of forgetting God, Deuteronomy. 32.19. Take heed of all unrighteousness: Romans 1.18.
These sins bring wrath, and are contrary to Gods Nature; 1. Pet. 1.16. Romans
7.12.
He is a holy God: contrary to his Law, a holy Law: contrary to his Honor.
Romans 2.23.

Secondly, something must be done if we will find and feel the favor of God.

1. We must humble our selves; this way Manasses found favor. 2. Chron. 33.12,
13.

2. We must pray earnestly. Dan. 9.22.

3. Be often and serious in thanksgiving. Psalm. 69.30.

4. Get our hearts broken. Psalm. 51.17.

5. We must reform and amend our lives. Isai. 1.17.

6. Do good, and distribute. Heb. 13.16.

7. Use a Mediator for favor. Acts 12.20.

Thirdly, something must be suffered: Sufferings are twofold, the sufferings
for the Church, and the sufferings of the Church: The sufferings for the Church
are for expiation, or confirmation; of expiation, so Christ only suffered, to
satisfy Justice, to pacify wrath, to purge and cleanse us from sin. Heb. 9.26.
Sufferings for Confirmation, were the sufferings of the Martyrs; others were
strengthened by their death.

Sufferings of the Church are chastisements or trials, these are internal or
external: internal, as Satan's buffetings, or trouble of conscience, because
of transgressions, or else because of desertion: external, are in body, or
name, or goods.

To have sense of grace and favor in Martyrdom.

1. We must get assurance our persons are accepted.

2. We must look to our calling to suffer.

3. Have a care we trust not in our selves.

4. Be sure the cause be good and warrantable.

5. Labor for fit qualifications, as patience, and boldness, and prayer for
adversaries, hope of glory, cheerfulness, and perseverance.

In chastisements and trials.

1. We must not slight them, nor be Stoicall.

2. We must strive against fainting. Heb. 12.5.

3. We must not make desperate conclusions. 1. Sam. 27. 1. Psalm. 31.22.

4. We must not use unlawful means; as to go to Witches, etc.

5. Trust not in the means too much with Asa.

6. Fret not, nor murmr, but be silent. Psalm. 39.9.

7. Limit not God means or time to deliver. Psalm 78.41.

These are Negatives: Add these affirmatives.

1. Return to him that smites. Isaiah 9.13.

2. Power out a prayer to God. Isaiah 26.16.

3. Be more zealous. Revel. 3.19.

4. Learn to pity others. Heb. 4.15.

In Satan's buffettings to keep the sense of Gods favor,

1. Pray earnestly.

2. Labor to see your unsufficiency.

3. Being pricked and restless, look on Gods sufficiency. 2. Cor. 12.7, 8, 9,
10.

In desertions, 1. Resolve to walk by says. 2. Cor. 5.7. 2. Prize favor
above all things. Psalm. 63.3. 3. Wait patiently for the Lord. Psalm. 40.1. 4.
Expect consolation. Isaiah 54.8. 6. Resolve to cleave to God. Job. 13.15.


Thirdly, how we may know we are in the favor of God.
1 BY our Vocation: those he favored before time, he calls in time: Romans
8.30. He calls them to holiness here, 1. These. 4.7. and glory hereafter. 2.
These. 2.14.

2. He manifests himself and his will to those he favors. Matthew. 16.17. He
gives them the Spirit of revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. whereby they perceive those
mysteries which are hid from the world. Matthew. 13.11. John 15.15.

3. The mollifying of the heart, is a token of his favor. Romans 9.18.

Fourthly, how is the sense of Gods favor preserved?
1. BY our esteem and prizing his favor.

2. By our carriage, in regard of relation to him.



Psalm 119.127, 128.

2. If we oppose Gods favor against man's malice, the one swallows the other.

3. Our esteem appears by our desires, Canticles 1.1. We desire tokens of his
love and favor.

4. We lament the loss of his favor. Psalm. 77.10.

5. We receive his favors humbly, as of favor.

6. We desire nothing which stands not with his favor.

7. We keep and use his blessings as favors.

8. We will not break with him for others favor.



Adam in Paradise when he enjoyed it? how happy were the Martyrs that felt it?
how comfortable are our lives when we do taste it?

2. Consider the necessity; we cannot be strong to perform duties, nor patient
to bear crosses without it: the Devils are nimble and active, potent and
vigilant; but what good does all this to them, they wanting Gods favor? it is
this which adds wings unto our duties, and is as oil to our souls. Nehem.
8.10.

3. Consider the benefit of Gods favor; it makes us presently happy, and like
to the angels in heaven, it makes us accepted; the sense of Gods favor
quickens our spirits, enlarges our hope; hope makes us industrious, we hope for
perseverance, and go on comfortably. The persuasion of Gods favor, is as the
great wheel that moves all the rest; it is so beneficial, that it is better
than life, excelling life; being a peculiar, and durable, over-topping all
miseries, and bringing to all felicity, to our full satisfaction at last in
heaven, where the beams of his favor will make us glorious.

Lastly, his favor is preserved by our carriage, in regard of our relations to
him: we have relations to him diverse ways.

1. As he is a King. Matthew. 5.35. 2. As he is a Master. Col. 4 1. 3. As he is a
husband. Hosea 2.19. 4. As he is a head. Ephesians. 5.23. 5. As he is a husbandman.
John. 15.1.
First, as he is a King, and we his subjects.

1. We are to rejoice in our King. Psalm. 149.2.

2. To keep his laws, laboring to know them, and justify them to be good, by
loving them, and obeying them.

3. We must fight his battles.

4. We must keep the Kings peace: By yielding to others in some cases. Matthew.
17.27. By gentle answers. Judges 8.3. By endeavoring to be like minded. Romans
15.5.


Secondly, as he is a Master, we owe to him 1. Reverence, both inward and
outward. 2. Faithfulness, both serving our time, using his talents for his
own advantage, and doing all his works after his own mind.


Thirdly, as he is a husband united to us: 1. We should diligently observe his
nature. 2. Humbly acknowledge his free grace that took us, who had neither
beauty nor dowry. 3. Express duty to his commands from our love. 4. Affect him
with content and satisfaction. 5. Labor to imitate him as we are capable. 6.
Endeavor to be cheerful with him and before him.


Fourthly, as he is a head, and we members: 1. To acknowledge both life and
wisdom is from him. 2. Follow his directions, let the head be guide. 3.
Confirm to his death and resurrection. 4. Harm not, but love the poorest
member.


Fifthly, as he is a husbandman: 1. Take heed of barrenness. 2. Labor to
abound in fruit. John 15.8. 3. Let your fruit be seasonable. Psalm. 1.3. 4. Let
your fruit be lasting. Psalm. 92.14.


Of Glory.
1. What Glory is.

2. Of the glory of the creatures.

3. Of the glory of the Creator.

4. Questions resolved.

First, What glory is.
GLory is excellency, dignity, honor, splendour; as the Crown on the head, as
the light to the world: we may see it by contraries and comparisons.

1. By contraries: so darkness is opposed to glory, for light is glorious:
Weakness is contrary to glory, it is strength is glorious and honorable: Also
shame and death are contrary to glory; but nothing more than sin, for that
deprives of glory, of endowments and excellencies, which we had originally.
Romans 3.23. or thus we are by sin deprived of the glory of Communion with God,
of acceptance, and by desert deprived of the glory of heaven: sin brings on
us that which is contrary to glory; as weakness, sickness, shame, death, and
darkness.

2. We perceive glory by degrees: there is the glory of the Morning, the glory
of the Moon, the glory of the Sun: The Stars differ in glory, men differ
in dignity and glory. So much what glory is.

Secondly, Of the glory of Creatures.
WE may consider the creatures, either celestial or terrestrial: the
celestial are the Angels, or the heavens; the heavens either invisible or
visible, and elementary, as is above our heads with their ornaments.

1. Of the glory of Angels; the Lord is the God of glory, Acts 7.1. and these
do stand as his host round about him, and the rays of his glory shines on
them, and makes them exceeding glorious: These Angels have six wings, with two
wings they cover their faces, not able to behold Gods glory; with two they
cover their feet, so that we that are mortals cannot behold their glory; with
the other two wings they fly with a glorious swiftness. They are said two
have four heads, and the one is as a man, for they are most honorable for
wisdom; the other as a Bull, for they are glorious for strength; the third is
as an Eagle, for they have a glorious expedition and celerity in their
messages: the fourth head is as a Lion, for they have a glorious courage.

2. Of the glory of the invisible heavens: It outstrips our conceits,
capacities, and inventions. It Is the Court of the glorious God: compared to a
City whose gates are pearls: whose walls precious stones: the streets gold:
the inhabitants are Kings, there is the glory of Gods presence: all is light
and day, and no darkness nor night; it is the kingdom of glory, there are
Crowns of glory laid up for vessels of mercy prepared for glory.

3. Of the glory of the visible heavens: the heavens have the pre-eminence, and
are the most excellent; the waters excel the earth, the air excells the
water, and the heavens for largeness, clearenesse, pur^nesse, excel all under
them: and have this honor to declare the glory of God, Psalm. 19.1.

4. The ornaments of heaven are glorious: the sun is glorious in magnitude,
brightness, swiftness, efficacy, and operation: enlightening and heating the
air: exhaling the waters: quickening the earth, and making fruitful the earth,
with trees, herbs, and plants, etc.

The Moon has her glory, though it be borrowed, and her excellency appears
in the dark, when we most need her light: in the Canticles her fairness is
commended, 1. Cor. 15.
and she is one of the glorious works of God.

The Stars have glory differing one from another: and adorn the heavens with
their bespangled brightness, like a curious embroydered Canopy: glorious to
our eyes.

The Earth has the glory of stability, riches, and variety: among all that are
taken out of it, man is a glorious piece of workmanship, whose foundation (...)
the dust: young men's glory is their strength, and the glory of the aged is the
gray-head, Princes have their glory, and great men according to their dignity;
but among men none have the glory and honor like to the regenerate man: he is
honorable by faith, John 1.12. and is glorious within, they are changed from
glory to glory, 2. Cor. 3. they have a glorious head, James 2.1. a glorious
guard, Heb. 1. last verse. glorious food, Gods ordinances: glorious apparel,
Christ's righteousness; they are called the glory, Isai. 4.5. the spirit of
glory rests on them, 1. Pet. 4. they are heirs of glory.

The Sea has his glory, for largeness, and terriblenesse, and strength,
carrying the mighty ships: there sports the great Leviathan, and there are
fishes innumerable; The sea has his proud waves of great height and quantity,
yet is honorable for this, that it keeps within his bounds at the Creators
command.

Thirdly, Of the glory of the Creator.
HIs glory is essential, he is clothed with Majesty and glory, Ps. 104.1. so
glorious is the Lord that the very angels cover their faces before him: The
Father is called the God of glory, Acts 7.1. if the whole Trinity be there
meant, the Father is not excluded; Christ is called our glorious Lord Jesus
Christ, James 2.1. The holy Ghost is called the spirit of glory, 1. Pet. 4.14.
all the g^ory in the creatures is but as a drop compared with the Ocean: he had
glory before there was a world, Ioh. 17.5. and all creatures can add nothing
to his glory, for it is not capable of addition; he does manifest his glory to
the creatures, and we give him glory by taking notice of his excellency, and
r^ndering praises and acknowledging that is in him already.

Fourthly, Questions resolved.


Ier. 9.23.



Cor. 8.1. cognitio inflat: knowledge makes them swollen and filled with wind,
they look on their bulk and bigness, and do forget they want the substance
of faith and love.

2. They think by their wisdom to do great matters, to suppress those they
would not have rise, Exodus 1.10.

3. When they effect their enterprises, and get into favor, or prevail
against those they hate, that they applaud their wits like those that sacrifice
to their nets, Habbak. 1.16.





2. They overmaster others and command them, and glory in that strength and
power which subdued them.

3. They think to prevent and withstand those which dare oppose them.





2. Because of the supposed evil they think riches will free them from, Prove.
11.11. therefore it is said riches in their imagination is as a strong City and a
high wall to shelter them.

3. They have thoughts of the perpetuity of their riches to their posterity,
Psalm. 49. contriving to assure them to their childrens children.

4. Because they see others sue to them, stand with cap and knee before them,
run and go at their beck, afraid to displease them; these causes make them
glory in riches.



Psalm. 33.21. so the word signifies, Laetatur.
and Psalm. 34.2. my soul shall glory in the Lord, 1. Cor. 1.31. That he that
glories, may glory in the Lord; we must not arrogate to our selves, but all to
God: he is wisdom to our understanding; righteousness to justify us,
sanctification to renew us, and redemption to our bodies and souls.

1. God is our wisdom to teach us knowledge, and give us light, 2. Cor. 4.6.

2. God is our strength, Psalm. 59.17.

3. God is our riches, and our portion, Psalm. 119.57. therefore we should
glory in him.



John 7.18 He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory. Prove. 25.27.
To seek diligently Pervestigari.
our own glory is no glory; glory and honor may be enjoyed, but we must not
seek it earnestly from men, then it is vain; if we seek it, then it must be
in the second place moderately, orderly, else it is vain, a fruit of the
flesh, and it is sought from vain men: it is most uncertain, and gives no
sound satisfaction being vain.



Pet. 5.6.

2. To grow stronger in faith. John 1.12.

3. To practice good works. Matthew. 5.16. Acts 10.4.



Revel. 16.9.

2. To give to the poor. Prove. 3.9.

3. To sanctify the Sabbath. Isaiah 58.13.

4. To praise the Lord. Psalm ^o last verse.





2. We are content to lose, that God may gain honor.

3. Though our outward contentments fail, yet we will seek Gods glory, and
serve him.

Of the Lord of Hoasts.
1. What is meant by Hoasts.

2. Why God is called, The Lord of Hoasts.

3. Which are his Hoasts,

4. Questions resolved.

5. Applications to edify.

First, What is meant by Hoasts.
THe word is a Military word: many Soldiers make an Host: Sabbath is an army,
and the army being well ordered, is not only exercitus an Host; but also
ornatus, it is an ornament; when the Soldiers keep their rank, there is a
comeliness: so then an Host is an ordered multitude fit for employment.

Secondly, Why God is called, The Lord of Hoasts.
HE is so called because he is the sovereign Lord over all: the Creatures are
in beautiful order at his command. Genesis 2.1. He finished heaven and earth with
all their Hoasts, and they continue to this day, and are his servants. Psalm.
119.91.

Thirdly, which are his Hoasts.
1. IN general all creatures; God is the great general, and all creatures are
his hoasts to execute his will. Genesis 2.1.

2. In particular, Angels are his host: Genesis 32.2. The Angels met Jacob, and
he said, This is Gods Host. Psalm. 103.21. Bless the Lord all ye his Hoasts.
1. Kings 22.19. The Hoasts of heaven stand round about the Lord: These are
exercituum Caelestium, heavenly Soldiers.

3. The Sun, Moon, and Stars are his Host. Deuteronomy. 4.19. Herein Manasses
transgressed. 2. King. 21.3. This is Gods Host to serve us, we are not to
serve them.

4. Men are his Host: Exodus 12.41. The same day departed the armies of the
Lord from the Land of Egypt, the same day, in the body of the day, openly: for
God had said to Moses and Aaron; Bring out the sons of Israel according to
their armies, Numb. 33.3. Exodus 6.26. 1. Sam. 17.45. Goliath railed against the
host of the living God.

5. The unreasonable creatures are his host, as Frogs, Lice. Exodus 8. So
Caterpillars, and Cankar-wormes, Grasshoppers, etc. are his host.

Fourthly, Questions resolved.


Kings 19.35. Wisdom and strength are for the war: and these soldiers are
admirable for wisdom, 2. Sam. 14.20. and excellent for strength. Psalm.
103.20. God has of these two myriades: twice ten thousand. Psalm. 68.17. Twice
ten thousand thousands. Dan. 7.10. For number they are numberless. Heb.
12.22.

Heb. 13.20. Romans 16.20. how is he then the Lord of hoasts?

Psalm 46.7.



Deuteronomy. 20. and approved a Stratagem of war. Iosuah 8.4, 5, 6. compared with
verse 18. Abraham rescued Lot by war; and the Judges of Israel saved the
people often by war: God is styled a man of war. Exodus 15.3. John Baptist
taught soldiers to cast away their violence, not their weapons: there are the
Lords battles, 1. Sam. 18.17. therefore war is lawful.



Adam corruption came into our hearts, and from men's lusts came wars. Jam.
4.1. Caine was the first builder of Cities: Genesis 4.17. and no doubt the wicked
would not only defend themselves, but offend the godly; and the godly must
labor to defend themselves from Nimrod and his fellow hunters: and after the
flood the sword was put into the hand of the Magistrate to shed the blood of
the murderer: and as he must look to the Fold within, so he must look to the
Wolf without, and as a nursing father, preserve his people from foreign
invasion. We guess thus wars begun.





2. That we prepare to be assaulted.

3. That we turn not our backs on Satan, for there is no armor for the
back.

4. We should be courageous; it is for the Lord, and for our salvation that we
fight for.



Tim. 2.22. Fly the lusts of youth, 2. Pet. 1.4. fly the corruptions of the
world: but with Satan I must fight with resistance: James 4.7. 1. Pet. 5.8.
with both enemies I must fight praying. Ephesians. 6.18.





2. Idle and delicate persons are no good Christians.

3. We should not be entangled in our affections with earthly contentments.

4. He that flies at scoffs and reproaches will never fight to blood.

5. Ignorant persons are untrained, and unfit for service.

6. We must walk in our places and keep rank and order.

7. We must labor for unity, for united forces are strong.

8. We must follow our leader and great Captain, Jesus Christ.

Fifthly, Applications to edify.
1. THis shows the Sovereignty and Majesty of the Lord of Hoasts, who excels
as head over all; all Creatures in heaven and earth are subject unto him.

This Lord of Hoasts differs from all other generals.

1. They command a few, he commands all.

2. They command only men and beasts, as horses and elephants: he commands
winds and seas, thunder, and tempest; yea the devils.

3. They command a little time; he for ever.

4. They cannot preserve an host made to their hand: he makes his hoasts and
keeps them.

5. They command for him; he is independent.

6. They often command unjustly; he always justly.

2. Miserable is the condition of all natural men which are not reconciled to
the Lord of Hoasts: he the sovereign Lord is against them, they may fear he
will send one of his host to punish them: they may fear the fire will destroy
them, the water drown them, a beast goare them, their meat choke them, the
tile-stone kill them, the iron weapon slay them, and all creatures war
against them.

3. We should admire his wisdom that orders the multitudes of his armies, and
causes them to keep their appointed places, and imployes them for their
several uses.

4. There shall be deliverance on mount Zyon, for the Lord of hoasts is with
them, they shall not always lie under the oppressor.

5. We are to bow and bend our hearts and souls to this high and absolute
Lord: his infinite greatness and sovereignty requires a suitable subjection and
submission.

6. We should seek to him who is the Lord of hoasts, to go with the armies
into the field, that he will be with them, and make them wise in counsel,
and valorous for his cause, that he would crown them with victory, and spread
his own praises, by using instruments to suppress the pride of the enemies,
and by spreading his Gospel.

7. Let us in all the victories we hear of, that are for the Churches welfare,
give God all the honor and glory that we are able, by looking beyond the
instruments to the Lord of hoasts, that imployes them. The horse may be
prepared for the battle, but salvation is of the Lord; therefore to him let
us bow, and worship, and acknowledge his right hand, and say, the Lord has
triumphed valiantly, to him let us sing, it is the Lord of Hoasts to whom we
should give the glory and the praise, as we have a pattern. Exodus 15. Judges 5.

8. Here is comfort against Principalities and powers, the mighty enemies of
our souls, the Lord of Hoasts is with us, mighty to save, through him we shall
do valiantly.

How God is made an Idol.
1. What an Jdoll is.

2. How men make God an Jdoll.

3. Their punishment that make God an Idol.

4. Questions resolved.

First, what an Idol is.
AN Idol is an unlawful representation of a false God; an Idol is a
resemblance, figure, or shape: the making of an Idol of a false, or Image of
the true God: either molten, carved or painted, is unlawful, for no man ever
saw his shape, Deuteronomy. 4.15. Isai. 40.
if it be to make us to mind God, it is condemned, Exodus 32.8. and God was
displeased, 1. Cor. 10.5.

Secondly, How men do make God an Idol.
It Is impossible to turn the essence of God to an Idol, but men are said to
make God an Idol in imagination, and in conversation; in imagination, that
conceive of God to be like an Idol, that think God will do neither good nor
evil: that God sees not, Zeph. 1.12. Ezekiel. 9.9. Psalm. 94.7. they could
conceive no otherwise of an Idol.

Men make God an Idol in his worship.

1. When they prepare not their hearts, nor fit their affections for his
presence; they could do no otherways, were they to come before an Idol that
could take no notice of their hearts.

2. When all their religion is in the Temple, there they leave their God: if
they served an Idol in the Temple he could not see their behavior in their
houses, nor have they communion with him at home, these men carry themselves as
if God were an Idol, only settled within the walls of the Temple. This is
indeed the principal, but not the sole place of Gods worship.

3. When men invent ways to worship God: and follow their own devices and
imaginations, they make God like an Idol which cannot direct his worshippers,
but they will teach him how he must be served; they could do no more to an
Idol.

In conversation men make God an Idol.

1. When they say it is in vain to serve God, and to walk humbly before him:
that think God will not reward his servants, they could think or say no more
of an Idol, which receives all and gives nothing.

2. When men commit horrible sins in secret, were God an Idol they could do
no more, as if he would never call them to a reckoning.

3. That opposes the godly and persecutes them: were God an Idol then they
might trouble his servants without fear or danger.

4. When men scrape together abundance of wealth by wicked means, then on
their sick bed they think by some dead works to satisfy for all; as if God
were an Idol that for a few scraps of that is evilly gotten, would be dumb
for ever.

5. When men forswear themselves and call God to witness to a lie: were he an
Idol that could not see their abomi^ation, nor be revenged, they could do no
more against him.

Thirdly, Their punishments that do thus make God an Idol.
1. GOD has a base esteem of them, 1. Sam. 2.30. those which despise him
shall be despised, they shall find him no Idol but a living God, when they
fall into his hands, Heb. 10. and a seeing God when he sets their sins in order
before them, Psalm. 50.

2. They think he sees not; he punishes them with blindness, Isai. 6. so they
have eyes and see not, they come to his worship with no more preparation, then
to come before an Idol; and go away with no more blessing then if they had
bin before an Idol.

3. They will bring in humane inventions into his worship, and prescribe rules
out of their own brain, he rejects all their services, and makes them loose
all their cost and pains, and tells them their worship is vain, Isai. 1.
Isai. 66. Mat. 15.

4. They sin freely as if he were an Idol; God lets them alone, throws the
raines on their necks, so they being let alone, do live most abominably, and
fill up the measure of their sins, Note.
and heap up wrath thus God abhors them, and gives them over to spiritual
judgments; he accepts not their services, he reserves wrath for them, and
reserves them for wrath; this is their punishment, it is most bitter.

Fourthly, Questions resolved.






Cain it did first arise; Cain he left the true God and his service, and it is
probable he would worship somewhat.





2. They being mingled with the heathen, learned their ways, and were enticed
by their example.

3. Sometimes their Princes were idolaters, then they turned for fear.

4. The idolaters had glorious deckings of their Images, this did moove the
carnal to be won.

5. The zeal of idolaters to cut their flesh, and burn their children, was
powerful to allure them.



Gal. 4.8. Ignorance is the mother of idolatry not devotion.

2. Consider Gods law, negative and affirmative; negative, he forbids all
divine adoration to be given to Creatures, Exodus 20.4. whether in heaven, as
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, Deuteronomy. 4.17. or the Angels, Revel. 22.9. or any
Terrestrial creature whatsoever: Affirmative, Gods Law binds us to worship
him, and him only, Matthew 4.10. to call upon him in the day of trouble, Psalm.
50.15. it is the Lord of hoasts must be worshipped, Zach. 14.17.

3. Consider the judgments have befallen idolaters.

1. They are punished in their souls with blindness, and a reprobate sense,
Jsaiah 6. Romans 1.24.

2. They are punished first or last in their bodies, God lets in the enemy,
Judges 5.8. Judges 10.14, 15.

3. In the life to come they are shut out of heaven, 1. Cor. 6.9.

4. To prevent idolatry, we should shun their society, and converse with them
only by constraint and necessity, not to choose them for lodgers in our
houses, but we are to abhor them as vessels in whom is no pleasure, and to
manifest our detestation as we have power in our hands, Deuteronomy. the 13.6, 7, 8,
9, 10, etc.

5. Te endeavor to give God a spiritual and sincere worship, by these means
idolatry will be prevented.



Psalm. 26.6.

2. From the help of Gods spirit to worship him.

3. From the inward affections, spiritually.

4. Lively, fervently, cheerfully.

Spirit and life is required in the service of the living and true God.

The contrary is.

1. To come carelessly without reverence.

2. To perform spiritual duties only from a natural carnal heart.

3. To give only an external worship.

4. To perform the duty with deadness, coldness, and lumpishnesse.

How to conceive of God when we pray
1. What it is to conceive.

2. How we must not conceive of God.

3. How we may rightly conceive of him.

4. Questions resolved.

5. Applications to edify.

First, What it is to conceive.
THe word signifies, a gathering things together: to conceive is to apprehend;
conceptions they have copulations: By the way we may observe, unless Gods
spirit do join with our spirit, our conceptions will prove but abortives or
monsters: The foundation of the right conceiving of God must be by a better
spirit then our own, and by better light then nature affoordes us. To conceive
is to apprehend, to roll in our minds, and to conclude to understand, and in
some measure to know.

Secondly, How we must not conceive of God.
1. WE must not conceive him out of the Trinity of persons, as the Turks do.

2. We must not conceive of him after any bodily shape, as the Anthropomorphits
did.

3. Nor conceive of him shut up in the Circle of heaven: as some kind of
Atheists do.

4. Nor a God all made of mercy as some ignorant persons do.

5. Nor all of Justice as some despairing persons do.

6. Nor as a God regardes not what is done here below, as some do that deny
his providence, Ezekiel. 8.

7. Nor as a forgetful God, Psalm. 10.8.

8. Nor must we conceive of a multitude of Gods as some heathen did.

9. Nor of a superiority or inferiority in the Trinity, in respect of essence
or time.

10. Nor must we conceive of God, as of a thing we can comprehend in the
scantling of our thoughts or imaginations.

Thirdly, How we may aright conceive of God.
1. WE must endeavor to conceive of him, as an infinite essence in Trinity of
persons.

2. We must conceive of him in his attributes, as absolute, incomprehensible,
eternal, immutable, invisible, omnipresent, etc.

3. We must conceive of him as a God that will become unto, through a
mediator; in himself he is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. last: through Christ we
have acceptance, Heb. 13.15.

4. We must conceive of him as good, gracious, loving, merciful, a God hearing
prayers, Psalm. 65.2. delighting in prayers, Prove. 15.8.

Fourthly, Questions resolved.


Moses, Heb. 11.



we conceive of him with admiration, adoration, subjection, divine reverence,
etc.

May we not conceive of him in some shape?
shapes, and representations. Ezekiel. 1. Dan. 7?

He appeared to the capacity of his servants, yet forbids adoration to any
shape. Deuteronomy. 4.

Paul says, God is Christ's head: is there not superiority in the Trinity?





Isaiah writes of Trinity. Isaiah 61.1. and David. Psalm. 33.6. The learned
Rabbis speak of it.



Kings 21.3. The Persians worshipped the Sun, the Syrians worshipped
Ashtaroth, the Philistims Dagon, the Moabites Chemosh, the Amonites Moloch, the
Egyptians a Calfe, the Babilonians an Idol named Bell, the Athenians Appollo,
Carthage worshipped Juno, the Ephesians Diana, the Moors the governors of
their Country, the Papists the Virgin Mary, the Indians (it is said) do
worship the devil: all men do worship something.





2. Man naturally is foolish, and beguiled with pictures, and bables, and
Images.

3. Man naturally is sensual, and desires first to see, then to worship.

Fifthly, Applications to edify.
1. THis shows it is hard to conceive aright of God when we do pray.

2. There must of necessity be some competent measure of knowledge in a true
Worshipper.

3. Let us always mind Christ our blessed mediator when we come to pray.

4. We should come with all reverence we can unto the Lord, and labor in our
prayers to conceive of him, as he has revealed himself.

5. So let us conceive of God that we move toward him, and desire after him:
Prayer is a compound of heavenly graces; if ever we apprehend Gods favor in an
espec^all manner, if ever we have rapture of Spirit, joy, the light of Gods
countenance, or strong assurance, it is in prayer.

Of the works of God.
Six reasons why we should meditate on the works of God.
1. BEcause his works do show forth his power, Romans 1.20. and his glory.
Psalm 19.1. By steps we ascend from the creature to the Creator, and so
gain knowledge of him.

2. It is a duty to search out the works of God, and cheerfulness is
required in the duty. Psalm 111.2.

3. Because Gods children should differ from wicked men, who regard not the
works of the Lord. Isai. 5.12.

4. There is danger of ruin and destruction, if men regard not Gods works,
Psalm. 28.5, 6.

5. Examples go before us of the godly that have meditated of Gods majesty,
and of Gods works: as in the book of Job at large, and David. Psalm. 145.5.
This is a true sign and mark of a wise man: Psalm. 92. there it is negatively
set down, an unwise man will not consider; and it is affirmatively set down,
Psalm. 107.43. who is wise, he will observe these things.

6. God has made his works for this end, that we should behold them Isaiah
40.26. and have them in rememberance. Psalm. 111.4. Thus we shall be able to
exalt God in our hearts, and declare his works to others; so God will be
glorified, others edified, our souls much delighted, and a weighty duty
discharged, and God will recompense us with revealing his loving kindness to
us. Psalm. 107.43.

Of the work of Creation.
1. Who created all things.

2. Whereof all things are made.

3. The time when they were made.

4. For what end all things were made.

First, who made all things.
THe maker of all things is God: it is his prerogative to create. Genesis 1.1. God
made heaven and earth. Col. 1.16. his works are visible and invisible.

1. Creation is a work of the whole Trinity.

2. All was made by the power of his word.

3. In wisdom all was made.

First, creation is a work of the Trinity: as appears.

1. The Father created, Ephesians. 3.9. who created all things by Jesus Christ.

2. The Son created. Colos. 1.16. Heb. 1.10.

3. The Holy Ghost created. Job. 26.13. Job. 33.4.

Secondly, all was made by his word: Gods word is either, first substantial,
or secondly written, or thirdly operative: Though God made all by his
substantial word, yet that is not meant, when he says, let there be this, or
that; for the operative word was in time, the substantial word was eternal:
Psalm. 33.9.
the word was a willing things to be, not a sounding of syllables: so that
without toylsomnesse, with great facility God created all things: he spoke the
word, and it was done.

3. In wisdom all was made, Prove. 3.19. Jehova sapientia fundavit terram,
statuit coelos intelligentia. Psalm. 104.24.

1. God makes the creatures without sense: these are superior: as the light,
the firmament, and ornaments of heaven: as Sun, Moon, and Stars: or
inferior, as the seas, earth, trees, and plants.

2. He makes the s^nsitive creatures, as beasts, fishes, and fowls: then the
reasonable creatures, man and woman: Some creatures have matter and form and
generation, as men: some no generation, as the heavens, and sun, etc. some
have distinct forms without matter, as Angels: some are bodies without
immortal spirits, as beasts: some are immortal spirits without bodies, as
Angels: some are immortal spirits and bodies, as men.

Reflections.
1. Let me lift up mine eyes, A desire of 1. Contemplation.
and behold who has made all these things, Isai. 40.29
and brings out their armies by number, and cal^eth them by their names: then
shall I see his eternal power and godhead by his visible works; Romans 1.20
and let me cast my thoughts on the sea where go the great ships Ps. 104.26
and are creatures innumerable: there is the great Leviathan that sports
himself in the waters, which God has kept in with banks by his decree: Job
38.11
let me look on this earth hanging in the air Job 26.7
the footstool of my Creator, Isai. 66.1.
and then break out to admiration and say:

2. Admiration.
2. O Lord how wonderful are thy works? in wisdom have thou made them all: Ps.
104.24
when I behold the heavens, the works of thy hands, the moon, and the
stars, Psalm. 8.3
then I think thou have got thee an excellent name, and renown in all the
world: and for my own part, I give glory to thee, and acknowledge none is like
to thee, none can do thy works. Psalm. 86.8.

3. Supplication.
3. O Lord my Creator, enable me to remember thee now in my youth, before the
evil day does come; Eccl. 12.1
with such a remembrance, as to turn to thee; Psalm. 12.27
and do thou remember me with the favor of thy people: Psalm, 106.4
thy hands have made me, and fashioned me: oh give me understanding; Ps. 119.73.
and thou which first did create me, do thou new make me; grant that I may
be a new creature: 2 Cor. 5.17
Create in me a new heart, Psalm. 51.10
and renew me in the spirit of my mind, Ephesians. 4.23
that I may serve thee with gladness and cheerfulness, for thou have made
us, and not we our selves: Psalm. 108.2, 3.
I am thine by creation: oh make me thine by redemption and grace.

4. Gratulatio^
4. Fill my heart with thy praises, that thy noble works being in my eyes, thy
high acts may be in my mouth, and I may often say, thou art worthy to receive
honor, and glory, and power, for thou have created all things: Rev. 4.11.
let me ever be resolute to praise thee: as for the works of creation in the
general; so for forming my self in particular: Psa. 139.14.
thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and united my bones and sinews:
(Job 10.11
I praise thee for my being, for my well-being: O let me praise thee in an
everlasting well-being.

5. Resignation
5. Thou have made me and put a living soul within me, and set me on the earth
to live, and breath a short time, and then thou will bring me to death, the
house of all the living: Job. 30.23
dust I am, and to dust I must return Genesis 3.15
so thou have ordained all must dye, Heb. 9.27
because all have sinned: Romans 5.12
grant that all my days I may wait till this change come, ^ob 14.14
and so become wise to consider my latter end: Deu 32.29
wheresoever I die, or howsoever, grant I may in much assurance commit my soul
into thy hands, as into the hands of a faithful Creator. 1. Pet 4.19


Secondly, Whereof God made all things.
HE made all things of nothing: to create, is to produce something out of
nothing, to work without materials, Heb. 11.3. the things we see, were not
made of things which did appear.

Reflections. I desire 1. Faith.

1. Had I been trained up only in moral Philosophy, I had learned that of
nothing comes nothing: Indeed it is so in man's work: but in my Bible I learn
that of nothing come all things, it is so in Gods work.

2. 2. Reverence.
What cause have I to fear and reverence this great Creator: I my self once
was nothing, now have life, and being, and substance: oh cause me to repent,
and to prize thy favor, or else I shall be at last worse then nothing.

3. How easy is it for God to help his Church: 3. Dependence
he can work without materials; if he wills the good of his people, no adverse
power can hinder him.

4 In me is nothing that is good; 4. Regeneration.
Lord create in me that may make me acceptable in thy fight, which may be to me
a pledge of thy love.

Thirdly, The time when all things were made.
THey were made in the beginning, Genesis 1.1. there is first, eternity, secondly,
time, thirdly, beginning is the entrance of time, fourthly, there is end,
fifthly, there is everlasting, being indeed eternity; again, eternity is
before and after time; time we do live in; beginning brings forth time, end
consummates time, everlasting swallows up time.

Reflections.
1. Discerning
1. I see the difference of the Creator and the creatures, none is eternal but
God: he had no beginning, nor shall have ending, Psalm. 90.2. he is from
everlasting to everlasting.

2. Consideration.
2. Once there was no time, and an end will come, and time shall be no more,
Revel. 10.6. In this my day cause me O Lord to consider the things belong to my
peace: on this moment depends eternity; cause me well to spend my space of time,
and to take advantage of the opportunities of time, that doing thy will in this
world, I may in the next world be eternally happy.

3. Preparation
3. My beginning of time, was my birth; my measure of time, is my life, my end
of time, is my death, my account for time, is my judgment: Oh that my ways
were direct and straight, that the midst might agree with both ends; I was
borne humble and meek, and so I must dye: So let me live, O Lord, remembering
the shortness, swiftness, preciousnesse, and irrecoverablenes of time: that
is past is gone; that to come, is uncertain; time present is min^, which I
desire so to spend, that it may appear I had grace and time together.

Fourthly, for what all things were made.
THe blessed God made all things for his own sake: Prove. 16.4. He made them
not because he needed them; he was essentially happy without them, nor do the
Creatures add to his glory, only we acknowledge that is in God already: the
end God aimed at in the cretion was to make himself known to the creatures,
and that the Creatures should acknowledge him, and give him glory.

Reflections.
1. What cause have I to seek his glory 1. Seek the glory of God.
as my utmost end? by such means as his word teaches me. Cause me oh Lord to
confess my sins, and so to give glory unto thee; to turn from sin, that I
may repent and give glory unto thee: oh work faith in my heart, and let me be
strentghened therein, that I may give glory to thee; and let my light so shine
before men, that they may be stirred up to glorify thee: grant that I may
honor thee by sanctifying thy Sabbaths, and by being fruitful in grace: let
my praises glorify thee, and my wealth, and my death, if I be called to
suffer for thy truth.

2. Of all sins, to take heed of pride 2. Beware of Pride.
and vain glory: glory belongs to God, to us shame and confusion: God will not
give his glory to another, if man do take it, it will be his destruction.
Lord purge out all pride and selfe-seeking out of my heart, and whatsoever I
do, let me labor to give thee all the honor and glory I am able.

3. God aimed at his glory in the first place, 3. How to aim at glory.
in his works: I am to aim at my glory in the last place, in all my works:
First, Gods glory must be my aim, next, I must mind my duty, and lastly, my
glory, my reward: when I begin, I must look to the glory of God; when I
work I must look to the rule; if I faint, or be discouraged, or indisposed,
Heb. 12.2.
I may look to the joy before me: the glory prepared for me being the
recompense of reward. So much in general.

Of Angels.
1. Of their Nature.

2. Of their number.

3. Of their office.

4. Diverse errors concerning the Angels.

5. Why Christ is called an Angel.

First, of the Nature of Angels.
NAture is the quality, and disposition, and motion which God variously gives
to the creatures: to the heavens a firmness, to the sun a brightness, to
the water moystnesse: the stone descends, the fire ascends: men have reason,
and Angels have swift motion; all by nature: the Toad is poisonous, the Serpent
is wise; the Dove is meek, all by nature. The Nature of Angels is spiritual,
incorporeall, Luke 24.39. without flesh and bones.

They are 1. Substances. 2. Excellent, being Spirits. 3. Invisible, being
Spirits.


1. They are substances: though we cannot make dimensions to measure their
length and breadth, yet we learn they are spiritual natures, real
substances, having a true being, a distinct essence.

2. They are excellent natures, excellent for holiness, Mark. 8.38
excellent for beauty, Acts 6.15
excellent for strength, Ps. 103.20
excellent for wisdom, 2 Samuel 14.17.
excellent for swiftness: being said to have wings, to declare their swift
motion, celerity, and ex^edition. Isai 6.2.


Thirdly, they are invisible; their matter and nature is so pure, that our
sense is not able to discern: if an Angel were before our eyes in the
brightest light, with the best advantage we could not see him. For a corporeal
view cannot apprehend a spiritual object of such an excellent nature.

Reflections.

If the nature of Angels be so excellent, Note. 1. To admire Gods nature.
what is the Nature of the Lord of Angels?

1. His Nature is uncreat; theirs is an excellent, but created Nature.

2. His nature is independent, the Angels nature is by participation.

3. Gods nature is his essence, and eternal; theirs is begun, once they had no
being.

4. Gods nature is every where at once; theirs is by local mutation and
limitation.

5. Gods nature is Omnipotent; Angels can do much, but they cannot do all
things.

Secondly, let me look to Christ, 2. To look to Christ.
and there see my advantage; he has advanced our humane nature, uniting it to
the Godhead; so that those Spirits and holy natures are content to be
Ministers for the good of the members of Christ. Our flesh is carried upon
high: and now Christ, which is both God and Man, all the Angels of God do
worship him. Heb. 1.

Thirdly, 3. Information.
I am informed by the Word of God concerning my behavior toward the Angels,
both by a negative and an affirmative rule.

1. Negatively, I must not worship them, for it is forbidden. Colos. 2.18. Rev.
19.10.

2. I am not to make Angels my Mediators; for there is one God, and one
Mediator, which is Christ; by him we are to offer our sacrifices. 1. Pet. 2.5.

3. Nor am I bound to put my trust and confidence in Angels, nor to depend on
any particular Angel for my Angel guardian.

4. Nor am I to busy my head about the Hierarchy of Angels, concerning their
degrees and orders.

5. Nor am I to look for audible voices from Angels, nor visible apparisions,
least I fall to fantasies and delusions; preachers, not those Angels are our
instructors.

Affirmatively,

1. I am bound to believe the Angels are excellent creatures, of excellent
natures.

2. That they are holy, pure, and perfect.

3. That they willingly do service to the heirs of salvation. Heb. 1. last
verse.

4. We are to pray for the protection of Angels, and in thanksgiving to praise
God for them.

We should be like the Angels.

1. To rejoice at the conversion of sinners. Luke 15.

2. To reverence the divine Majesty like the Angels, who cover their faces
before him. Isai. 6.2.

3. To stand ready pressed to execute the will of the Lord, as the Angels do,
Psalm, 103.20, 21.

4. To execute the will of God for the manner as the Angels do; with
cheerfulness, with sincerity, without weariness.

4 Consolation in Angels readiness.
Fourthly, here I gain comfort in respect of the Angels, five ways.

1. In respect of the Angels readiness: they do stand before the face of God,
ready to receive a commission to take vengeance on the enemies of the Church,
or to do some service for the heirs of grace: from which number I exclude not
my self.

2. I have comfort in respect of solitariness: when like Jacob I am alone,
then the blessed Angels are with me: Jacob had the presence of Angels, being
without humane company: Faith is the evidence of things not seen: my comfort
is, I believe this, though I see it not with my bodily eyes.

3. Comfort in respect of my own weakness; the Angels are supporters, and as
nurses to uphold me, and keep me from dangers.

4. Comfort in respect of contempt; if worldlings contemn me, yet God honors
me, and the Angels guard me, and I can oppose them, and despise their contempt
with this honor.

5. Comfort, though evil spirits of the worst nature do malign me, yet the
good Angels which are of the best nature, are with me, and for me.

Secondly, of their number.
THe Host of Angels is exceeding many: twice ten thousand, or two myriads:
Psalm. 68.18. they cannot be numbered, because they are innumerable. Heb. 12.
Applications.


1. The glory of God is in the multitude of his heavenly host: this requires
my admiration. 1 Admiration


2 Innumerable are with us, 2 Consolation
though the like for number be against us: this requires consolation.

3. When I go hence, I shall have abundance of society with these innumerable
Angels: 3 Expectation.
this calls for my expectation.

Thirdly, of the office of Angels.
THeir Office is to stand before God, and to execute his will. Psalm. 103.

1. The Angels are employed in praising of God. Isai. 6.3. Psalm 103.21.

2. The Angels are employed about mankind, in the way of punishment, or doing
good.

First, in the way of punishment to wicked men.

1. To blind them that they cannot see. Genesis 19.11.

2. To stop them that they cannot go. Numb. 22.26.

3. To slay them that they cannot live. 2 King. 19^5. Acts 12.

Secondly, the Angels do good to the godly.

1. They defend from dangers, Psalm. 34.8.

2. They comfort in troubles. Luke 22.23.

3. They encourage in duties. 2. King. 1.15.

4. They reveal hidden mysteries. Daniel 9.22, 23, 24.

5. They carry their souls to heaven Luke 16.22.

Reflections.
1. If Solomon's servants were happy that stood before Solomon? How happy are
the Angels that do stand before God? that I have by faith, they have by
vision: they have both height and delight; the height of honor, as the great
Kings servants, and are full of delight and satisfaction in his presence, where
is fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore. Psalm 16.15.

2. I will not disdain to do service to the poorest and lowest Christian: The
Angels are ministering Spirits to heirs of salvation. Hebrews the first, and
the last verse: It is unlawful to worship Angels, but herein it is good to
imitate them.

3. In my service for God I must not seek my own glory: the Angel would not
suffer Saint John to worship him, but bids him worship God. Revelations 22.9.
God will not give his glory to another, Isai. 42.8. nor should Angels or men
take it from him, but say, not to us Lord, not to us, but to thy name give the
praise. Psalm. 115.1.

Fourthly, diverse errors concerning Angels.
1. SOme held there were no Angels at all.

2. Some tell the Hierarchy and orders of Angels, so fall to errors and
fancies, not having their ground from the Scriptures.

3. Some held Angels were to be worshipped: Colossians 2.18. confuted
Revelations 22.9. See thou do it not etc.

4. It is said the Indians paint the Angels black, because themselves be so;
but they be Angels of light.

5. Some make them their mediators to pray for them: confuted 1. Tim. 2.5.
There is one God, and one mediator, the man Christ Jesus.

Fifthly, how Christ is called Angel. Mal. 3.1.
1. ANgels are near God: Christ is nearer being God.

2. Angels are beloved: Christ is more beloved.

3. Angels are glorious: Christ is more glorious.

4. Angels give glory to God: so does Christ. Ioh. 7.18.

5. Angels have appeared in humane shape: so has Christ.

6. Angels have brought us comfort: so has Christ.

7. Angels are called servants: so is Christ. Jsaiah 42.1.

8. Angels are the sons of God: Job 1. so is Christ. Matthew. 3.

9. Angels have freed us from enemies: 2. King. 5. so has Christ. Luke 1.

10. Angels are beautiful, Act. 6. last verse: so is the Lord Christ. Psalm
45.

11. Angels are very happy: so is Christ blessed for ever. Romans 9.

12. Angels love the elect, and guard them: Christ loved the elect, and dyed
for them.

Of the Heavens.
1. The diverse ways heaven is taken for.

2. Of the clearenesse of the heavens.

3. Of the height of the Heavens.

4. Of the largeness of the heavens.

5. Of the firmness of the heavens.

6. Of the motion of the heavens.

7. Of the heavens dissolution, or redintegration.

First, of the diverse ways heaven is taken for.
1 THe aerie region we breath in, is called heaven, and the things which live
in the air, are said to be of heaven: the Clouds of heaven, Dan. 7.1^
the winds of heaven, Dan. 7.2.
the Fowls of heaven. Mat. 13.32


2. The elementary heavens, where the Sun, and Moon, and Stars are. Genesis
1.17.

3. The Imperial heavens, where the Angels are, Mat. 6.9. called the third
heaven. 2. Cor. 12.2.

4. The visible Church. Matthew. 25.1. Rev. 12.7.

5. God himself. Luke 15.21. Luke 20.4. Dan. 4.26.

6. A great height is called heaven. Deuteronomy. 1.28.

Reflections.
The first heaven I breath in, the second heaven I look upon, the third I do
believe. In the first heaven are birds and clouds; in the second, the Sun
Moon and stars; in the third, are Angels and Saints. The first heaven is for
my sustentation. I live, and breath in it: the second is for my contemplation,
I see, and admire it: the third is for my expectation, I strive and wait for
it.

In the visible Church I begin my Heaven, in communion with God I have a Heaven
below: in the height of glory I look for a Heaven above. First, let me be
heavenly eyed, to read; secondly, heavenly minded, to contemplate; thirdly,
heavenly changed, to believe, to convert, to be renewed.

Secondly, Of the clearenesse of the Heavens.
IT is the elementary Heavens I now think upon; they are for clearenesse and
purity compared to molten glass. Job 37.18. And the blewnesse of them to our
view, is because of the far distance between the eye and the object.

Reflections.
1. If Heaven be so pure that we see, Deuteronomy. 26.15.
how pure are the invisible Heavens, that is a pure place, called Gods holy
habitation?

2. Gods dwelling is pure: He will not abide in a sinful soul, nor with a
profane heart. I must be purged, cleansed, and humbled, if I will have God with
me. Isai. 57.15.

3. If Heaven be so pure, then God himself is a pure and holy God. 1. John 3.3.

4. A pure conscience, a clean heart, a sanctified soul is a kind of Heaven
on earth. When I look toward Heaven, and consider the pureness of the
Element, let me desire to be pure; it is heavenly, and excelent: A legal
purity I can never obtain here, an Evangelicall purity I must endeavor after,
to be cleansed from my guiltiness by Christ's blood, and from my filthiness by
his Spirit.

Thirdly, Of the height of the Heavens.
HEaven is the Throne of God, Matthew. 5.34. and Thrones are on high. Solomon had
stairs to ascend to his Throne, because he sat as Judge above the people. 1.
King. 10.18, 19. So Gods Throne is on high: The Heaven is high above the earth,
Psalm. 103.11. as the large circumference to the little Center: the distance is
very great; men may guess at it, but not certainly conclude how far it is.

Reflections.
1. Fear.
1. What cause have I to fear the Lord? for as far as Heaven is above the
earth, so large is his mercy to them that fear him. Psalm. 103.11. This should
enlarge my endeavor after the fear of the Lord.

2. Circumspection.
2. God sees all our actions here below; for he dwells in the high Heavens,
and from thence beholds us. Psalm. 33.14.

3. Heavenly mindedness.
3. Though the visible Heavens be high, yet our humane flesh is carried higher.
Heb. 4.14. and 9.24. Christ is ascended far above all Heavens. Ephesians. 4.10.
There I hope to come, there I desire my heart may be often. Colos. 3.1.

Fourthly, Of the largeness of the Heavens.
THE Heavens for their largeness are said to be spread out. Job 37.18. Psalm.
104.2. Ier. 51.13. The largeness may be demonstrated three ways.

1. By a visible apparision; for we can see on our Horizon but half of the
Heavens. In the Month of March, when the Sun rises at 6. and sets at 6. we
then may make a trial.

2. By an Astronomicall relation, or Geometrical collection, the Earth is
large, yet it is but as the Center to the Heavens circumference.

3. By a divine conclusion, Heaven is the dwelling of the great God, and the
receptacle of the Saints. Psalm. 2.4. John 14.2. Therefore the visible Heavens
be large, though not so large as the invisible.

Reflections.
1. God is a great God; great Princes are known by their great Palaces: so I
know God is a great God by his dwelling place.

2. I perceive a progress from little to great, from the little womb of my
Mother, to this great world the habitation of mortals. I trust I am going from
this little Terrene Globe to the large Heavens, the habitation of Angels.

3. Though the Heavens are large, yet they cannot contain God. 1. Kings 8.27.
God comprehends all, and is incomprehensible himself.

4. I may be straightened, and put in prison on earth; but when I leave earth, I
shall come to a large place above the large visible Heavens, called for
largeness a Kingdom. Luke 12.32.

Fifthly, Of the firmness of the Heavens.
THey are called Firmament for stability: Psalm. 19.1. Our bodies are generated
and soon corrupted, but the Heavens continue to this day. Psalm. 119.90, 91.

Reflections.
1. These Heavens we see continue a long time, but the Heaven I hope for,
continues without alteration to eternity. A Kingdom it is that cannot be
shaken. Heb. 12.28.

2. Gods Work is excellent, being out spread, and firm. If a Brazier or
Goldsmiths stretch out his metal, it loses firmness, and grows to
weakness. Gods works are admirable.

3. Heaven is firm, but the Word is more firm. Mat. 5.18. Those that look so
much on security, do teach me where to look for it. 2. Pet. 1.19. We have a
sure word of the Prophets. Psalm. 93.

Sixthly, Of the motion of the Heavens.
THe earth is fixed and has foundations, Micha. 6.2. and hangs on nothing,
Job 26.7. but the heavens have a yearly, monthly, daily revolutions:
Astronomers hold an opinion of diverse sphaeres; the nearest is the sphaere of
the Moon, the next where Mercury is, the 3. has Venus, the 4. the Sun. the
5. Mars, the 6. Jupiter, the 7. Saturn, the 8. the other Stars, the 9.
Compasses the rest, and turn about every day: this is above common capacity;
but certainly the earth turns not round as meat on a spit, but is fixed and
stands still and the heavens are in motion.

Reflections.
1. I now have found who can make the perpetual motion: men would do it, God
has done it, I honor his work, I blame man's folly.

2. It is heavenly to be in motion; it is earthly to be dull and sluggish: I
desire to be ready to every good work, Tit. 3.1. and to run the way of Gods
Commandments, Psalm. 119.32.

3. I shall be of swift motion at last, 1. Cor. 15 44. at the resurrection.

Seventhly, Of the heavens dissolution or redintegration.
AT the last they shall wax old as does a garment, Psa. 102.27. and at the
last day shall pass away with a noise, 2. Pet. 3.10. and be folded up as a
book or role, Isa. 34.4. He^. 1.12. and shall be disolved. 2. Pet. 3.12. the
Angels have form, not matter, so are everlasting: we have matter and form,
generation and corruption: the heavenly sphaeres have matter and form of long
duration, but not for ever, whether they shall be annihilated or redentigrated;
whether brought to nothing or refined and remain with the earth, as monuments
of Gods eternal power and wisdom: I am ignorant of it, and leave it to them
more wise to judge.

Reflections.
1. Oh with what detestation should I think of sin; It is sin has tainted
this great fabric and will bring a dissolution.

2. There is something will stand me in stead and is of great consequence, at
that time when all my silver and gold is melted, and the world burned; that is
holiness which now I must prize at a high rate, and pray and labor for it, 2.
Pet. 3.11.

3. If heaven m^st be disolved that is so firm, then my frail weak body will
soon come to a dissolution: I am earth and must return to the e^rth, my time
is short, I am like to the Ice which was, is, and shall be water again

4. Oh that my aff^c^ions were above these perishing he^vens, had I a lea^e of
land as long as the heavens endure, at last my lease would burn, and the
heavens fail: let me O Lord more meditate on my eternal estate, and and
affect things most durable.

5. I perceive the excellency of God beyond all created nature, the heavens
wax old as a garment, and shall be changed, Psalm. 102.28. but thou Lord art
Iehova and changest not, Mal. 3.6. James 1.17. so much of the heavens.

Of the Sun.
The Sun is the chief of the Planets, the fountain of light, the mirth of
the world, the measure of time.

1. The Sun is great and large. 2. The Sun is swift in motion. 3. Of his
exceeding brightness. 4. Observe the order of the Sun. 5. Consider his
operation. 6. His eclips.
Fist, the Sun is great and large.
SOme hold the Sun is 166 times bigger than the earth: Some say he is
greater, some lesser, but God says in his word; He is a great light. Genesis 1.16.

Reflections.
1. If ever I should be great in the world, yet I am not excluded from doing
service, if I will be taught by the Sun, who serves little creatures, though
himself be great.

2. This Sun is great, and of a burning light, yet is so ordered, that he
heates us, but not consumes us; which were he near us he would do: for in
some places he burns more than a furnace: Ecclesiasticus 43.3, 4.

3. Great is the Lord that made the Sun. Ecclesiasticus 43.5. The glory of
God appears in his works.

Secondly, the Sun is swift in motion.
SO swift, that he runs his race. Psalm. 19.5. No arrow, nor bullet flies so
swiftly, for in twenty four hours he turns round the celestial globe: the
earth is many thousand miles about; then what are the heavens?

1. I admire Gods wisdom to make a creature so exceeding large, and yet so
swift in motion.

2. Considerations
If the Sun that is visible and material be so swift? what are those
invisible immateriall swift winged Seraphims?

3. Though the Sun be swift in motion, yet he does good wheresoever he comes;
to teach me, so to dispatch my affairs in such haste, that I be useful and
profitable; so may I, like the Sun, be good and swift both at once.

Thirdly, of the brightness of the Sun.
IT is so bright and shining, that our eyes cannot endure it; it communicates
light, and it sends the beams downwards: whereas the fire flames upward: light
and brightness makes one stone more precious than another, and a star to
excel a stone, and the Sun excels them all.

Reflections:
1. Let me look higher than the Sun, to that blessed God who gives light to
the Sun: oh father of lights, send thy light into my dark soul, and turn
me from darkness to light, that I may walk as a child of light.

3. I am bound to communicate to others, according to that I have received: I
learn this of the Sun, who benefits others with his light.

3. If I can obtain righteousnsse imputative and inherent, I shall shine as
the Sun in the kingdom of God.

Fourthly, of the order of the Sun.
THe Sun keeps order, and moves in his appointed place, from the end of the
heavens, to the end of the same. Psalm. 19.6. Astronomers say he moves in the
Zodiac, called the twelve signs, keep^ng his order.

1. Apparently, in open view of the world.

2. Constantly, without standing, or going back, unless God bid him: as Ios.
10. 2. King. 20.11.

3. Profitably, for true distinctions of time, and powerful influence on the
creatures here below.

Reflections.
1. My Religion teaches me to be like the Sun, to travail in my own
circle, to understand my own way, Prove. 14.8. to meddle with my own
business. 1. These. 4.11.

2. I may urge my self by consideration of the comeliness of order, and the
benefit of it. A brick out of the wall, makes the place deformed, and more
weak: Cities, and Countries, and families, and ships, and armies, are
preserved by order.

3. I may from the Scripture learn to keep a constant order; as to awake with
God in the morning, to send up my praises before him. Psalm. 59.16. to speak
graciously, Colos. 4.6. to frequent godly society, Psalm 16.3. To apparel my
self as becomes religion, 1 Timothy 2.10. to be just in my dealing, Mich. 6.8. to
be merciful, Colos. 3.12. to instruct my family. Genesis 18. Thus from year to
year to keep in my circle apparently, constantly, profitably: others will
rejoice in this order, and approve it.

Fifthly, the opperation of the Sun.
IT works in the heavens, in the air, in the earth, and water.

In the heavens Heavens.
it conveighes light to all the inferior Orbs: as the Moon and Stars.

It heates the air Air.
which is cold of it self, and enlightens it which is dark of it self.

It exhales vapors from the water, Water.
which the winds do carry; so it falls in rain, or hail, or snow upon the
earth.

It causes herbs, and trees, and men, and beasts to grow and live on the
earch. Earth.


A Reflection.
I must reflect on my self, and stir up my self to be opperative.

1. Toward God, by confidence, reverence, and prayer.

2. Toward the S^riptures, by esteeming them, ^eading them, hearing them
preached, by loving the word, rejoicing in it and subjecting to it.

3. To the Godly I must be operative; by acknowledging them, joining with them,
delighting in them, praying for them, releeving, comforting,, and edifying of
them.

4. To the world I m must be operative; by the withdrawing my affections, by
the bearing of reproaches, and flying the corruptions thereof.

5. To Satan I must be operative; by watchfulness, faith, prayer, diligence,
and resistance.

6. To friends I must be operative, by gratitude, lovingnesse keeping their
secrets.

7. To enemies I must be operative; by forgiveness, love compassion,
well-wishing.

8. To superiors; by reverence, faithfulness, obedience,

9. To inferors; b^ example, kindness, and Counsel.

Oh that I could give light to some, heat to others; dra^ some upwards, and be
a means to provoke to ^ruitfulne^^e and growth, that I may in some measure be
oper^t ve: Do thou O blessed lord, work pow^rfully upon me by the operation
of thy blessed Spirit.

Sixthly, Of the Eclips of the Sun.
1. THe Eclips is foreknowne.

2. There is a cause of the Eclips.

3. It is but a short time.

4. How men do look upon it.

Conclusions.
First, the Eclips is foreknowne for the time, the horizon, the continuance.

1. There is an order in the course of nature, else it could not be foretold.

2. There is a lawful Astronomy, differing from a conjecturall Astrology,
which is but a busy vanity.

3. The foretelling of the Eclips is usual, and not so wonderful as the
simple would make it; it is yearly known, and by many Fox told.

Conclusions.
Secondly, the cause of the Eclips is the interposition of the Moon between
the Sun and the Earth.

1. As the Moon hinders for a time the light of the Sun, so inferior things
Eclips our joy, and hinder grace, though for the present they are sensible
objects, and have a kind of luster and beauty on them.

2. If those we show favors unto shall at any time disparage us: remember the
Sun is Eclipsed by the Moon, notwithstanding all her light is from it
received.

3. Let me learn to recompense injuries with favors: the Moon darkens the
Sun: but the Sun conveyes light to the Moon, and makes it bright and
glorious.

Conclusions.
Thirdly, the Eclips is but a short time.

1. We perceive blessings best by their want: how welcome is the light unto us
after we have been a little deprived of it.

2. How good is God in giving so excellent a Creature as the Sun, and keeping
the use of him from us not every day nor week, and never but a short time.

3. The darkness at the death of Christ was not an ordinary Eclips from the
sixth hour to the ninth: from 12. to 3. of the clock, Mat. 27.45. The Sun
was then long hid.

1. As ashamed of their great wickedness.

2. Or darkened because the Sun of righteousness was Eclipsed.

3. Or to show the darkness was to come on the Jews, this Eclips was more
then ordinary.

Fourthly, how men do look on the Eclips.

We look on it not so much with an eye ascending as descending, by a basin or
pot of water men use to look upon it.

1. As the beholding what is done above, Conclusions.
is to look in another Element beneath: so I am not to look up into Gods
secret counsel for my predestination: but descend into my heart whether it be
regenerated and changed, as men look on the dyall, not the Sun, to know the
time of the day.

2. When the Sun is bright shining, men take no especial notice; but in the
Eclips, they then are prying, and observing, consulting, and talking: so is it
with a Christian, if by mutable accidences he be Eclipsed of his excellency for
a time, then the cause is pryed into, and he is most spoken of.

3. I look in water below to see what is done in heaven above: I look to my
baptism with water, and there s^e my remission by that which water signifies,
which is the blood of Christ: I look down there is man's baptism, I look up
there is Gods baptism, I see below what is done above.

4. The pot of water which gives me a demonstration, can give me a clensing: so
the same word that gives me light and discerning, can give me a clensing and
refreshing.

5. To look on the Eclips, I do not with a direct view, but through a
Cipresse or five, or by a pot of water I look with a descent view, all ways
are by secondary means: so in divine mysteries I must use the prospect of the
word, the teaching of the Minister, and learn by experience in use of means.

6. As it is with him that despises a secondary means, but gazes on the Sun
in the Eclips, does dazell his eyes and perceives not so clearly, as another
that uses secondary helps: so he that will have immediate revelations and
infusions, sliting the ministry, proves not so sound in judgment as others
who use the means.

Of the Light.
Having meditated of the Sun, I cause my thoughts to look back to that light
which was before the Sun, wherein I consider: 1. What Light is. 2. What the
Light was before there was a Sun.


First, What Light is.
LIght is either uncreate or created: the uncreate light is God, and in respect
of his Majesty, brightness and glory, wisdom and knowledge, he is called
light: 2. Ioh. 1.4, 5.
((...)) God is light.

The created light is 1. natural, 2. metaphorical, 3. supernatural, 4.
glorious.

1. Natural, such was the light before the Sun and the Moon, Genesis 1.14.
Genesis 1.3. or the light that is in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, called
lights.

2. Metaphorical is the light of reason and understanding, Ioh. 1.8.

3. Supernatural is the light of grace, when God shines into our hearts giving
us saving knowledge, 2. Cor. 4.6. this inward light has outward manifestation
by godly actions, which are called light that shines among men, Mat. 5.16.

4. The light of glory is the estate of glorified souls in heaven; there the
Saints are said to be in light, Col. 1.12.

Secondly, What the Light was, which was before the Sun.
THe learned have diverse opinions of it; one thinks it was a spiritual light,
another thinks it was the Element of fire, a third thinks it was a bright
cloud, another that it was a dispersed light put after into the Sun, another
thinks it was a great light which could not be beheld now whole, but after
dispersed.

A light it was, but how it moved, how it was placed, the scriptures are
silent; we may be too curious to search, and take great pains to lose our
labor.





Secondly, we must distinguish between the creation and the gubernation of the
world: in the first creation God made a light to divide the day and the night,
in the gubernation of the world the Sun does give the light.





Secondly, it cheares and comforts the creatures here below.

Thieves do hate the light, and those which have sore eyes do shun it, and
Owls and Bats do hide themselves from it.

Thieves do hate the light, not simply but accidentally, because it discovers
their evil deeds; and sore eyes are weak, and cannot behold that they rejoice
in: the Owls and Bats are night birds, and though they shun the daylight, yet
they like the moone-light.

Thirdly, light is for action, we work in the light: in the dark we are
unfit for action, and like the Egyptians sit still.









Conclusions.
1. God is the cause of causes: He is not tied to secondary means: he can
give light without the Sun.

2. God makes a separation between light and darkness, sometimes they meet, but
always do strive to separate: so should the sons of light separate from
Infidels and Idolaters: true Professors ought to be Separatists, not to
separate from public assemblies in the reformed Churches, but from the
corrupt society of those who walk in darkness.

3. God is the most excellent transcendent light. First, other light was made,
but he is uncreate. 2. This light gives way to darkness, God is not capable of
any Eclips. 3. This light is common to all, but God is enjoyed of a peculiar
people. 4. This light discovers outward things, but God discovers inward secret
things.

4. Christians should walk as the children of the light; with the children of
light. For them,

First, as children of the Light.
1. Take heed of sleeping in security: sleeping is for the dark and for the
night. 2. Take heed of stumbling in gross sins and errors, because we have
received light, sleeping and stumbling are for the dark. 3. As the children of
the light we should, first labor to distinguish between good and evil, truth
and falsehood; because we have the light. Secondly, to be cheerful and
comfortable: it is the light breeds comfort. 3. To be diligent and industrious:
when the light comes, men awake and stir and are active. 4. Let our light shine
before others, let us not be like those which carry it in a darke-lanthorne:
our light should direct others, and heat them, and discover the truth to them,
and rejoice them, and quicken them,

Secondly, we should walk with the children of light.
1. With them to separate from Idolaters, Heretics, and profane men.

2. Join with the children of the light, delight in them, and seek their good
always: say of them, as Ruth to Naomy: Thy God shall be my God; where thou
dyest I will dye.

3. Walk in their way, though they be few, though they be despised, desire to
share with them here and hereafter:

Thirdly, we should walk for the children of the light.
1. If we have any authority or power, let it be exercised for their good.

2. If we have any gifts of learning, knowledge, or memory, or courage, or
prayer; use all for their edification and encouragement, direction, safety, and
comfort.

3. As we are able, let us hinder all accusations against them, and remove all
false imputations laid upon them.

4. Let us so order our lives and carriage toward all, that they may not be
disgraced because of us, or upbraided by our faults.

5. If we have wealth, let us releeve and succor them, and refresh them in an
especial manner, because they be children of light.

6. We should be of like affection toward them in all their troubles, to be
troubled for them, in all their comforts to rejoice with them; humbling our
selves for their miseries, praising God for their prosperity, then are we for
them indeed.

7. If we be called, we should suffer for them: there are sufferings of
expiation, so Christ only suffered; his sufferings are satisfactory, and are
meritorious to take away sin: our sufferings are for confirmation of the
truth, and for the good of the Church; for the people of God we must endure,
not only words, but blows, yea death it self, that our example may confirm
the truth, and manifect the power of religion, and holy love. So much of the
light.

Of the Moon.
Of the Moon consider these five things.

1. Of her brightness.

2. Her borrowed light.

3. Her blemishes.

4. Her mutation.

5. Her gubernation.

First, of the brightness of the Moon.
FOr brightness, she is called light; Genesis 1.16. and is said to be fair,
Cant. 6.9. and is often mentioned with the Sun, Genesis 37.19. Deuteronomy. 4.19. 2.
King. 23.5. and is said to walk^ (...) her brightness. Job 31.26.

This brightness may be considered four ways.

1. It is an inferior brightness. 2. It is a brightness useful and
seasonable. 3. It discovers only gross things. 4. The nearer the Sun, the
darker to the earth.
First, it is an inferior brightness.

The Sun is the greater, the Moon is the lesser light. Genesis 1.16. Cant. 6.9.

Five considerations from this inferiority.

Prove. 4. thus we are light as the morning: then we proceed to be fair, as
the moon. Cant. 6.9. Thus we go from strength to strength, Psalm. 84.8. by
degrees we are strengthened in faith, Romans 4.20. and do grow in grace, 2. Pet.
3.18. daily increasing more and more. 2. Pet. 3.18. At last we come from grace
to glory, to the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.24. then shall we
shine as the Sun in the kingdom of our father. Matthew. 13.43.



Thirdly, inferiors do make their superiors to appear more honorable the
light of the Sun is the more glorious being compared with the moon: The people
compared with Saul, made his tallenesse and height to appear more obvious, The
spies were as grasshoppers before the sons of Anaak: my littleness does
honor my superiors greatness, my government of my family honors the Kings
government of whole Realms: my teaching of my family honors my preacher, that
teaches a whole congregation: Thus honoring my superiors in judgment and
practice, they will shine on me with protection and doctrine, and my
littleness makes their greatness appear, and I give them honor for
conscience sake.

Matthew. 18. men may have inferior gifts yet honest hearts; I must love them
for their sincerity, and not despise them for their inferiority. Benaiah was
honorable though he attained not to the first three, 2. Sam. 23.23. I desire to
honor all Christians, and not to despise the least of them, and so to
reverence great ones which do bear Gods Image, that I may not despise little
ones as though they had none of his Image.



2. The brightness of the Moon is useful and seasonable.

Things are beautiful in their season, water to the thirsty, and the Moon in
the night, I may learn from the Moon to be useful, seasonably, and to take
the opportunities offered me to do good in them: to give and forgive, to bear
and forbear, to speak and to be silent, seasonably, makes me like a tree
planted by the rivers of water that bringes forth his fruit in due season.

Thirdly, the Moon discovers only gross things.

The estate of nature is as the Moone-light, the estate of grace is as the
Sunne-light: of wicked men it may be said: Nescierunt neque intellexerunt, they
know not, Psalm 82.5.
nor understand, but of the godly we may say, Blessed are your eyes, for you
see, Mat. 13.16. The Moon light discovers houses, trees, and beasts. The light
of the Sun discovers in his beams the smallest moates.

3. Considerations from hence.

1. I must labor to get out of a natural condition, and I must pray for that
blessed spirit of God which does convince; that seeing my misery, I may relish
the mercy of God, O how sweet is mercy to a self condemning broken hearted
sinner.

2. By this I know God has given me a better light then my own, which I have
by nature; I once thought that if I abstained from gross sins; (made known
to me) as blasphemy, murder, adultery, theft, etc. it was a great matter, but
being farther convinced, I see idle thoughts and idle words to be offensive
evils, I see that omissions of good duties is dangerous, and am troubled not
only for my ill disposition, but for my indisposition, want of zeal for God,
want of sorrow for other men's sins, not shunning the occasions of sin, it
disquiets me since the Sun of righteousness has appeared on my horizon.

3. Those which cannot see trees, nor houses, nor mountains, have not so much
as Moon light, sometimes it is so dark in the air, that men cannot see their
hand held up before them. Some men want the light of grace, and of nature, and
reason, these men are darkness Ephesians. 5.8. and walk in darkness, Ioh. 8.12.
and their wages is (in Tenebras exteriores) it utter darkness, from the
estate of darkness, the work of darkness, and the wages of darkness, O Lord
deliver my soul.

Fourthly, the nearer the Moon is to the Sun, it is darker to the earth.

The Moon being nearer, the Sun is the brighter above, but darker beneath:
So the nearer my soul is to God, the more it is bright upward, and of a
heavenly disposition: God shining on me my glory is real, though invisible to
others: my light and life being with God, men may look on me, as one not to
be desired without form or beauty: so they looked on my Savior; Isai. 53.2.
to some he was veiled, yet to some he was revealed: So it is with Christians,
the world sees their infirmities and afflictions, but there is a bright side
they see not; Exodus 25.5.
there is a curious Arc, though covered with Badgers skins: the world sees
the black side, but not the best side; they cannot see invisible things, till
they have obtained faith. Let me be light to God, though dark to the world:
when God shines on me, then am I bright upward, and then I resemble his light
as the drop does the Ocean.

The Moon more remote from the Sun, is bright downward; so the less
portion of grace, and the more remote from God, the more welcome to the world:
It is my Lord Esau, though profane; and Agrippa, and Bernice are seen with
great Pomp, Absalom and his foote-men, Belshazzar and his Captains, and
Concubines, Herod and his royal aparrell have terrene glory; yet these are
remote from the Sun of righteousness: Oh that I could neglect that splendour
is had, with a neglect of communion with God: Let me never be so shining
toward the earth, that I may be dark toward heaven: Let me not flatter for
favor, nor fear contempt; but let me draw near to God, that he drawing near
to me, the rays of his light shining on me, shall make me both honorable and
satisfied.

Secondly, of the Moons borrowed light.
1. THe light of the Moon is received. 2. The light of the Moon is
communicated. 3. The Sun lending his light has not the less.
First, it is a received light.
She has light in her, but it is not of her: the streams that came into
Paradise, had not their spring in Paradise; the graces the Church has, are all
received. 1. Cor. 4.7.

Applications.
1. Let me humbly acknowledge I am a receiver from God, and deeply ponder this,
great receipts must have great accounts: he that has two talents must account
for two; he that receives five, must answer for five: a day will come when I
shall be called to give account of my stewardshippe. Luke 16.2.

2. I must beware of pride, I am but a receiver, and must be called to a
reckoning. Pride grows from this, we look on the middle, and neglect both
ends: men enjoy some present excellency, which breeds pride, as Iron does the
rust. Remember thy original, remember thy account, thou swollen dust and ashes;
I came naked into the world, without a ragge of clothes, or dram of grace;
shortly I must descend into the grave, and carry nothing with me, and must
stand at the bar to answer how I have employed my gifts, my wit, my wealth,
my time, my strength, and abilities; all I have is but lent me, why should I
be proud of that the Lord betrusts me withal? Let me labor to use it well,
and learn to be humble.

Secondly, the light of the Moon is communicated.
She receives light, and we partake of it: the Moon receives not light only
for her self; we receive not our talents to hide in a napkin; we must
disperse and sow abroad of our wealth, Psalm. 112.9. Heb. 13.16. and be as good
stewards of Gods manifold graces, to the edification of others. 1. Pet. 4.10
Let the little I have be well employed; let my gifts edify, encourage, and
comfort others, always endeavoring to be distributive and communicatiue.

Thirdly, the Sun lending his light has not the less
Nor has God the less for giving largely to others; he gives abundantly, yet
is not the poorer: the wise Virgins could not spare oil for others; but God
has suf^iciency for himself, for others, for all. Lord if thou give me
wisdom, it diminishes not thy own: open the treasures of thy blessings, and
let the fountain of thy goodness overflow, and run into my soul, so shall
thou pleasure me a poor creature, and not disparage thy self, my blessed
Creator.

Thirdly, of the Moons blackness and blemishes.
1. THe blemishes are real. 2. The blemishes are apparent. 3. They are
continued and remaining.
First, the blemishes are real, not feigned, or imaginary; so are the
blemishes of my soul true and real blemishes; I am really guilty and
polluted, and need a real satisfaction by Christ, and a real renovation by
Gods holy Spirit.

Secondly, the Moons blemishes are obvious and apparent, so are the sins of
Gods people apparent to him, Psalm 90.8. and apparent to others, as were the
sins of David and Peter: apparent to our selves. Psalm. 51.5.

Lord let my iniquities be forgiven, and my sins covered; not from thy
omniscience, (that is impossible) but from thy judicial view: Lord look not
on my sins to take vengeance; and let me so look on the apparent faults of
others, that I forget not to look on their apparent graces.

Thirdly, the Moons blemishes are continued; so are the blemishes of the
regenerate. St: Paul had a law in his members: these Canaanites are left for
our exercise; perfection is for the next world, here we are as the Moon with
blemishes.

Applications.
1. Alas poor soul that I am, not only in a place polluted, Mich. 2.10. but
my very soul is polluted, and my pollutions stick fast upon me, Heb. 12.1. so
that much Nicer and Soap will not wash them away.

2. Yet there is a fountain opened for sin and uncleanenesse, Zach. 13.1.
There is a blood that can cleanse from all sin, 1. Ioh. 1.7. and make me
whiter than Snow.

3. Death is not to be abhorred as the greatest evil, for it puts an end to
my pollutions: He that is dead, is freed from sin: Romans 6.7. Death takes away
our sins as well as our lives, then perfect holiness and happiness shall meet,
our blemishes shall be done away, and we shall shine as the Sun. Mat. 13.43.

Fourthly, Of the Moons mutation.
LIke the English people, she ever changes her form and shape, and has a
diverse light, sometimes like a bow, and sometimes like a globe; she is called
(...): when she is new and seems horned, she is (...), be-in half at the full
at eight days old, she is (...), when there is doubt of the full roundnesse,
she is (...), shining at the full, going from the Sun she has horns toward
the East; coming toward the Sun, her horns be toward the west: the side
toward the Sun is always the bright side.

Considerations.
1. As the Moon is always mutable, so are all things under it; the Winds
change, the waters ebb after flowing, the earth lies dead in the winter, but
buds, springs, blossoms, and bears fruit in the Summer: generation and
corruption is acted on this terrestrial globe.

Oh how mutable a creature is man? first an embrion, then a living creature,
growing till he be borne: Then he cries at his birth, and is restless till his
death: First he changes from an infant to a child; from a child to a youth,
from a youth to a man; from weakness he changes to strength, and from strength
to weakness again: In youth he is more strong and less wise, in age more
wise, but less strong; every step he treades he is mutable; now he goes,
anon he runs, then he sits, then he eats, anon he is weary of eating; he
desires his bed, and in short time is weary of it; he would be rich, then
honorable, then he longs for pleasures; he will marry, and if he could he
would again be unmarried; he will to sea, and shortly desire the shore: Man is
made of composition, and always subject to alteration: now he laughes, and
anon is mad angry; now embraces, anon he strikes and stabbes; to day he is at
his recreation, to morrow groaning on his sick bed; to day in a Bower
feasting, to morrow in the field fighting: he desires, he rejoices, he fears,
he sorrows, now patient; anon vexed; now zealous, anon cold. Ahasueros loves
Vashtai, but anon hates her; he honors Haman, then he hangs him. Ammon lusts
for Tamar, anon despises her. A man is an unsettled thing, he never leaves
tumbling till he comes to the pit, and there he does change to dust, whereof
he was made.

2. If there be a necessity of an unavoidable mutation, let me labor to change
for the better; to change from Adam to Christ, from nature to grace, from sin
to sanctification: Those which be never changed cannot be saved; those which
are in the flesh cannot please God. Romans 8.8. Except we repent we must perish.
Luke 13.5. Let me labor to be renewed and changed. Romans 12.2. This will
evidence that I bear his Image. 2. Cor. 3.18.

3. All my little changes are but forerunners of my great change. Job. 14.14.
Death will come, let me prepare for it, by seeing his approaching, and pulling
out his sting, which is done by faith in Christ his blood, and serious
repentance: the thoughts of my end should be the end of my thoughts, and my
thoughts of death should be as a bridle and a spur; so death would be to me
not a ruin, but an advantage.

of the Moons gubernation.
HEr Regiment is over the waters, a moist government: the flood and ebb is
according to the increase and wane of the Moon: what power she has on our
brains or blood exceedes my knowledge: but this is plain, the Moon draws
the Ocean, as the Adamant does the Iron. At new moon and full moon the tide
is highest.

Considerations.
How is my condition like the Moon: as in my mutation and blemishes, so in my
calling and condition, being Clerk and Steward to the Water engines; like the
Moon I cause the waters to flow abroad by my direction.

1. The Moon was appointed among the rest of the Planets for this office: so I
was chosen from the rest to my place.

2. The Mooone is under the Sun, and an inferior, yet over the waters as a
governor: So am I under my superiors; yet, as the Centurion, have sevants
under me.

3. The Moon is faithful in her Regiment, and was never known to stop a
tide, or take a bribe to pervert order, to teach me my duty to keep order and
Justice.

4. The Moon is sometimes clouded, yet still has relation to the waters; so is
my inclination that way; when other occasions keep me away, I forget not my
relation that I bear toward the water-workes.

5. The Moon is less welcome to thieves, who love the dark, because their
deeds are evil, and I find my self most maligned by them, whose falsehood I
discover.

Secondly, the Moon over the waters, is as the King over the people.
1. As many drops makes a River, many rivers an Ocean; so many people do
make up a Nation, or an Army.

2. Waters are sometimes calm and quiet, and sometimes troublesome: so are
people, sometimes quiet, sometimes raging and furious.

3. Water are for ornament and defense, profit, and refreshing: so are people
to the Prince.

4. Some waters are salt, some are fresh, some are bitter, some are for
healing: so are the people, some are tart, biting, and censorious; some are
sweet loving, amiable; some are good, merciful, and religious.

5. Some waters are more obvious, some are more obscure, and run under the
ground: so some people have places of eminence, others are more obscure and
retired.

Conclusions.
1. If waters be governed by the Moon, it may teach us not to despise
government: it is nature that is refractory, grace submits.

2. United forces are strong: many drops make a Sea, and carries great ships.

3. Let me pray for the waters of the Sanctuary, the saving graces of the
Spirit, that I may be cleansed from my natural pollutions: for water
cleanses, that my tentation may be allayed in respect of their heat: water
cools, that I may be made fruitful in all goodness: water causes
fructification, thus I have a little digressed from the moon to the waters, it
being an element I am much conversant withal. So much of the Moons regiment.

Of the Stars.
1. Of the time of their creation.

2. Of their exceeding greatness.

3. Of the multitude of the Stars.

4. Of their use and service.

5. Of the glory of the Stars.

6. Other Questions resolved concerning Stars.

First, Of the time of their creation.
THe Stars were created in the beginning of time, in the fourth day of the
world. Genesis 1.16.



Chaos; then comes conviction as the first light; but when I come toward
perfection, and endeavor to separate my affections from my sins, and there
is a Firmament of heavenly mindedness in my upper region, now there is
knowledge, and judgment, and sanctified reason set up by the Lord to shine
orderly in my hemisphaere, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars.








TO leave all Astronomicall conjectures, I may conclude the Stars are of an
exceeding greatness; else it were unpossible to see them, they are so far
above us.

Applications.
1. Greatness and Goodness may be together; God is great and good, so are the
Stars, so have some men bin great and good; as Job, David, Josias; such men are
honorable alive, and being dead, men speak of them, and their goodness both
together. 2. Cron. 32.32
2 Chronicles. 32.32.

2. The Stars are great in quantity, yet do seem small to the beholders: so are
the godly, great with God, small in account of the World; greatly dignified with
heavenly graces, protected with Angels: yet slighted of the World, and of
little account.

3. The Stars are small to our sense, yet great to our reason: the senses are
no fit Judges of the things a far off, or above us, he that walks by sense
only, is a sensual man; he that is guided by reason is a rational man; he
that has the light of faith, excels them both.


THey cannot be numbered. Jer. 33.22. If we look up, we may behold the army of
them, and conclude they are exceeding many. But how many that exceedes our
humane capacity, here the best Arithmetician is at a nonplus.

Applications.
First, seeing I cannot number the Stars, for it is impossible; it is my wisdom
to number my days, for that is profitable, to humble and weane my heart from
pride and wordlines.

2. As the multitude of Stars discovers to us our impotency, so it discovers
both Gods wisdom and omnipotency: his wisdom Psalm 147.4.5. verses, He
counts the number of the Stars, and calls them all by their names: his
wisdom is infinite: his power Job 9.9.10. he does great things and
unsearchable, yea maruailous things without number: these considerations are
raised on his making of the Stare.

3. It may comfort us in this, that many shall be saved: Gene. 22.17. Believers
shall be as the Stars for multitude. Though compared with Reprobates, they are a
little flock, yet in themselves they are innumerable.

4. The spacious Heavens are al over bespangled with Stars, to show the
perfection of Gods works with glorious ornaments, and it shows Gods bounty to
us below, which at sea and land every where enjoy the stars for profit and
delight.


FIrst they are for ornament. 2. They are for distinction of day and night. 3.
To show the seasons of the year. 4. They be signs of weather. 5. They have an
influence on the inferior things here below.

Considerations applicatory.
First, the Stars are for ornament, and ornaments are for welbeing, and do come
from riches. First, God gives a being, then a welbeing; he gives a being in
grace, and says to the Soul live: then he gives endowments, and comely
ornaments, Ezekiel. 16.11. If once I have a being in grace, I shall have an
honorable being at the last, therefore I must hope and wait.

2. I am to admire Gods riches and bounty he has made for himself, and does
enjoy the Heavens, earth, and the seas, with all their ornaments. Rich men have
great variety, and every room is furnished, we admire them too much; let us
admire Gods magnificence and riches his royalty and bounty in all his works.

3. Ornaments are not unlawful; Solomon had his Throne with carved Lions by
the stays, which were for ornament: soft raiment may be in Kings houses.
Joseph had a party colored coat. Genesis 37.23. and a ring, and a chain of
gold, Genesis 41.42. people may use them according to their dignity.

These Cautions are needful.
1. That they be rather cast on us by some act of Gods providence, not eagerly
cared and sought for.

2. That we avoid garishnes, and neglecting modesty.

3. That we in cost on them exceed not our abillity.

4. That we mind them not so much, as we do the inward graces and ornaments of
the soul.

5. That we take the ornament God gives, that we take heed of the pride God
hates.

6. That every day we be not brave like Dives, we that are inferior people.

7. That we lay them aside in times of humiliation. Exodus 33.4.5. verses.

Secondly.
The Stars are for distinction of day and night: the Sun does rule the day, the
Moon and Stars do rule the night.

1. Distinctions are lawful, God teaches them both by his word and by his
works, we may distinguish and separate, choose and refuse: the Anabaptists
which refuse them, and call them turning of devices, do speak out of their
ignorance and emptines.

2. Distinctions are not only lawful but useful, and of absolute necessity:
we must distinguish of persons, times, places, things of matter, manner, end,
etc. Qui been distinguit, been docet: He which distinguishes well teaches well.
Go preach the Gospel to every Creature, says our Savior; we must distinguish
between reasonable and unreasonable Creatures: some have mistaken, and preached
to fishes, as it is reported. God hears not sinners. John 9. there are
repentant sinners, and unrepentant sinners: Separate your selves, 2. Cor. 6.
There is a separation from Infidels, which is a duty; and a separation from
Christians (holding the same Creed with us) which is a Schism.

Thirdly, and fourthly.
The Stars do show the seasons of the year. Job 38.31. There is mention of
Pleiades and Orion. Job 9.8. There is Arcturus, a Star near Vrsa major, by
us called Charles-waine. Pleiades is the stars which do bring in the Spring
with their sweet influence: Orion brings in the winter, and has his bands,
the frost binds in that season. Arcturus is seven Stars; and Canicula
betokens heat, beginning the 15 of August, and ending fifty days after. Thus
the stars show the season of the year, and are useful.

Applications.
1. Here is great wisdom and Art to learn effects by causes: the Jews
could discern the face of the sky: Astronomers observe the course of the
heavens, and the conjunction of the Planets: and Religion fore-sees the frost
of misery, the tempests of indignation, the heat of judgment.

1. When sin is universal. Genesis 6.11. Ier. 6.13.

2. When faithful Ministers are mis-used. 2. Chron. 36.37.

3. When God takes away the stay and strength of a nation. Isai. 3.

4. When men are incourageable, and reform not by former judgments. Amos. 4.6.

5. When the divorcing sin of Idolatry is acted. Judges 2.11. Judges. 5.8.

These evils fore-shew judgments, as the Stars do fore-shew the seasons.

2. There are some seasons I am to have an especial respect unto.

1. The time of youth to be well seasoned. 2. The time of the Gospel to
steeeme it, and submit. 3. The company of the godly for edification. 4. The
time of prosperity to gain saving grace. 5. The time of adversity to gain
humility.
Fifthly,
The Stars have influence, but the knowledge thereof is very obscure: the
influence of the the Sun and Moon is more apparent: The safest way is to
consider the influence of the Stars negatively.

1. Things cannot be foretold by the stars, by casting men's nativities, how
long they shall live, and what death they shall dye.

2. Nor do the stars foretell inevitably the daily weather long before it
come to pass: their strength that so studdie, is but conjectures.

3. Nor can men by the Stars find out things that be lost.

4. The Stars work not the wills of men in the least degree.

Their exhalations, their heat and light far exceeds my capacity: I admire
them that gives them their operations.

Applications.
1. Those men are too blame, which out of pride and curiosity, abuse the
stars, perverting them to a wrong end, groundless predictions, and casting
nativities.

2. Let Ministers, who are Stars in the visible Church, have by the word they
preach a sweet influence on my soul, that I may have the light of Knowledge,
the heat of zeal, the exhalation of heavenly mindedness; this influence
shall make me both fruitful and joyful.

Fifthly, of the glory of the Stars.
THeir glory is their bright shining. 1. Cor. 15.44. They have glory.

They differ in glory.

There is difference of contrariety; so black and white do differ: There is a
difference of degrees; so the stars do differ: all have excellency and
glory, but all have not equal glory.

Considerations.
1. Gods works are glorious* and do deserve our consideration, our praises
our a^miratjon. Psalm. 92.5.

2. Variety proves Gods wisdom and sovereignty.

3. As there is difference of Stars, so there is difference of Christians in
the hemisph^re of the Church.

4. There shall be degrees of glory at the resurrection, 1. Cor. 15. and those
which convert many shall have the greatest glory. Dan. 12.

Sixthly, Questions resolved concerning the Stars.
Judges 5.20.

E suis aggeribus. Trem.
Some think the course of the Heavens and Stars, in regard of storm and
tempest, was against Sisera in the battle, the Stars fought from their
bulwarks or trenches: the influence of heaven was against him.

Obad. 4.



Psalm. 148.3.



1. Perfectly without distinctions: so the Angels in heaven and Saints praise
him.

2. Sincerely: so the Church on earth do praise him; yet has Infirmities.

3. Declaratively: so the Stars do praise him, and declare his excellency.

Rev. 22.16.

John 8.

2. Men rejoice when the Morning-starre does appear: so the Angels in heaven,
and men on earth rejoiced when this appeared. Luke 2.

3. The Morning-starre communicates his light: so Christ communicates his
graces: of his fullness we all receive. Ioh. 1.

4. The Morning-Starre is excellent for brightness: so Christ is the chiefest
of ten thousand, and anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows.
Psalm 45.





2. The Angels are glorious: so are the Stars.

3. The Angels are innumerable: so are the Stars.

4. The Angels do service to man: so do the stars.

The disparity.
1. The Angels shine in the invisible heavens: the stars in the visible.

2. Though the stars be swift in motions, yet the Angels excel them for
celerity.

3. The stars at the end shall fall from heaven, Matthew. 24. 1. Tim. 5.21.
but the Angels (as Gods elect) stand for ever.





2. The stars are lights, so are true preachers.

3. The stars have degrees of brightness; so have preachers diversity of gifts.

4. The stars do comfort us; so do the Preachers. Isaiah 40.1, 2.

5. Stars fore-shew the seasons: the Preachers are (...) forewarne us.

6. (...) ^tars do shine in the dark; and the Preachers are shining among the
profane and sinful people.

^ The stars shine, though some regard them not: so the preac^^^ do exercise
their function, though some regard (...).

8. The stars are most honored of the Astronomers and learned that know their
virtues, influences, and operations: so Preachers are most honored of them
which do know the dignity of their calling, the end of their ministry, the
necessity of preaching the benefit that is gained by their labors.

9. When the Sun appears, the stars do then veil their glory: so the true
preachers give glory to Christ, and lay aside their own glory.

The Disparity.
1. The stars are made of pure matter, and contiue: the Preachers be made of
composition, and dye, and have succession.

2. The stars teach by the eyes: the Preachers teach our eyes by example, our
ears by doctrine.

3. The stars keep a great way above us: the Preachers eat and drink and
converse with us.

4. The stars put no difference between good and bad, but shine equally to
all: but the Preachers do make a difference between the precious and the vile,
Ierem. 15.19. and teach the people to distinguish as it is. Ezekiel. 44.23.

5. The Stars have a concordiall harmony; but preachers sometimes dis-agree.
Acts 15.29.






2. Not to envy one another: the little stars do not envy the great ones.

3. To stand for the truth when it is opposed: the little stars do shine in
the dark.

4. To keep our places, without aspiring, or negligence: the stars abide
where God has placed them and keep their courses.

5. To do good to them a far off: the stars do communicate their light to
us, though they be exceeding far above us.



Luna the Moon which is next to us: her race is finished in twenty eight days.

2. Mer^urius, which accompanies the Sun, and is never but thirty degrees
from the Sun.

3. Venus a bright star: her course is 348 days.

4. Sol in the midst of the Planets his race is run in three hundred sixty
five days and six hours.

5. Mars, a hot and dry Planet; his course is two years.

6. Jupiter, hot and moist: his course is twelve years.

7. Saturn cold and dry, the highest of all the rest: his race is thirty
years.

Of the Air.
1. Of the clearenesse of the Air.

2. Of the softness and pliablenesse of it.

3. Of (...) largenes and unive sallity of it.

4. Of the usefulness and commodity of it.

5. Of the continuance of the air.

6. Questions resolved.

First, Of the clearenesse of it.
THe Air of it self is clear and pure; of a thin and invisible nature:
when we say the air is clarified and purged, it is not from any malignity that
is in it self, or any pollution; but it is from the addition of fogges and
vapors, which by exhalations arise from the earth into the pure air. The
lower reigion of the Air is not so clear as that above, yet the air is all
one, simply, and singly, pure, and clear as the Cristall.

Conclusions.
1. Pure is he that made the Air. 1 John 3 3. God is pure: yea, so pure, that
in comparison of ^od, Coeli non sunt mundi, the heavens are unclean in his
sight.

2. I am impure, although the air be pure: impure in my nature, Job. 14 4.
impure in my life, therefore am commanded to cleanse my self. 2. Cor. 7.1.

3. I suck in the pure air; why should I not labor for purity, and so answer
the pasture I feed in.

2. The Religion we profess is, (...), a pure Religion. James 1.27.

3. The Catholic Church: we in our Creed believe to be holy.

4. The ordinances are for this end; the Word and Sacraments, the whole Church
liturgy; all reading, meditations, godly conference, tends to this end: none
will deny this, unless some unclean spirit, or unclean person.

5. No impure person shall attain to happiness. Revel. 21.27.

Secondly, of the softness and pliablenesse of the Air.
EVery wind moves it, and every substance causes it to give place: it yields
to every thing, and seldom resists any thing.

Conclusions.
1. It is excellent when purity and pliablenesse do meet together; to be soft
tenderhearted, and pliable to that which is good, and of a yielding
disposition.

1. It is commanded. Tit. 3.2. Ephesians. 4.32.

2. It is commended. Ier. 35.14.

3. It is rewarded. Genesis 13.14, 15. After Abraham had yielded to Lot, God came
to him, and gave him all the land of Canaan.

We must yield
1. To the commands of God. Psalm. 27.8.

Titus 3.1.
2. To the commands of men which cross not God.

3. To taxes imposed, though we might argue against them. Matthew. 17.27.

4. To the weak. 1. These. 5.14.

5. To Gods disposing providence. 2, Sam. 15 26.

We must not yield.
1. To Idolatry, though secretly tempted, or strongly urged. Deu. 13.6.7.8.

2. To men's commands which cross God. Act. 4.19.

3. To the examples of the wicked. Ephesians 5.7. ver.

4. To Satan's tentations. 1. Peter 5.9. verse.

Again we must yield.
1. To God for his own sake. 2. To men for the Lords sake. 3. To the
passionate for peace sake. 4. To the weak for Conscience sake. 5. To the poor
for their needs sake. 6. To them that offend us for mercies sake.
To yield.
1. To the good that we may incurage them. 2. To the bad, that we may silence
them. 3. To friends, that we may rejoice them. 4. To enemies, that we may win
them. 5. To all, that we may edify them.
Again, not to yield but withstand.
1. The Apostates, that we may shame them. 2. The Heretics, that we may
convince them. 3. The Schismatics, that we may regaine them. 4. The
Innovators, that we may escape them. 5. The beastly profane, that we be not
corrupted by them.

IT has a large Circuit, a spacious being, yet limited; if we go up to the
Clouds it is there: if we descend to the vaults and Caves of the earth, it is
there: if you go beyond the Seas, it is there; it has a kind of vbiquity: God,
our Consciences, and the Air are every where present, shut the Windows, bar
the doors never so close draw the Curtains together, yet these three cannot
be kept out.

Conclusions.
1. If the Air be present every where, much more is God, the Air is limited
his place; but God his center is every where, and his circumference no where:
the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him: he is in Heaven in his Majesty, 1.
King. 8.
in Earth by his providence, in Hell by his judgments: his omnipresence should
teach me reverence and sincerity.

2. The Air is like to God, in this: it is present every where, but seen no
where.

3. The Air in some places is dark and terrible: in some places light and
comfortable: So is God, to some terrible in his judgments, to some comfortable
in his presence and promises, mercies, and favors.

4. If a man do but open his mouth, the air fills it: so if we open our mouth
to God, and pray in faith, God has promised to fill it. Psalm. 81.10.


5. If a man be buried in the earth, the air leaves him, and he putrifies and
rots: so those men are wholly earthly minded, suncke under earthly cares, buried
in earthly desires, and in worldly hopes, God leaves them and they rot, decay,
and perish.

6. A man that has good air, is in possibility of health and chearefulnes:
but he that enioyes communion with God, has certainty of souls health, and
shall have so much comfort first or last, as shall exceed worldlings.


IT is so useful, that we live in it, and cannot live without it: it is more
useful then fire and water, friends or money: with the air we do eat and
drink and sleep, work, walk, play, and refresh our selves: air is useful
in prison, in sickness, at all times, in all places: the air is with us in
contempt, in disgrace, in all miseries, the air will visit us, abide with us,
offer it self to go down to our Lungs and refresh us.

Conclusions.
1. How good is God that makes the Air so common; the poor Plough-man has a
better portion in it, than the rich Citizen: The Air is Gods doale to the
world, all share in it; the dog, the horse, the swine are not deprived of it:
yet it is more precious than the gold of Ophir: the Rubies and Pearls are not
to be compared with it: were it not to be had without price, a man would part
with all his substance for it, and purchase it with his chiefest treasure; yet
God in bounty makes it common, and more plentiful than the stones of the
street: O bless his name for ever.

2. The Sun is the cause of the usefulness of the air, for of it self it
is both cold and dark: so (...) my soul without grace, both dark and cold,
till God do shine on me with light and heat.

3. Let me learn of the air to be useful, that others may have benefit by
me: endeavoring to behave my self so toward my governors, my family, my
kindred, my neighbors; toward the poor; the weak, the strong, that I may be
useful to all; so shall I not live without being desired, nor dye without
being bewailed; my enemies will wish to be like to me, and my friends will
rejoice to speak of me, and my conscience will speak for me.

Fifthly, of the continuance of the Air.
THe air and all things are continued by an upholding providence of God, Psalm.
119.90.91. Good things in their want do breed desire, in their enjoyment they
bring delight, comfort, and contentment.

Conclusions.
1. As the Air is constantly continued, so is the love of God to his people;
our sins, if we repent, deprive us not of it. Psalm. 89.33. nor our
afflictions, Psalm. 91.15. nor yet death it self, Romans 8. ver. 38. The love of
God compasses us, and continues with us, as surely and as sweetly as the air
we do breath in.

2. God takes not away this useful Creature, but continues it, I must learn of
him not to take away from men that which is most useful, that which they
cannot well be without: To take a poor man's tools to pawn, or his
bed-cloathes or garments, and keep them, is somewhat harsh: To withdraw
maintenance from my teacher, to take away the good name of my brethren, to be a
means to keep bread from the Market, or preaching from the people, is not the
Divine, but the diabolical nature.

3. The air is continued (amongst others) to them that are evil, and sin
against God, and blaspheme his name: To teach me, not to do the worst I can to
those which are evil, and do me wrong, but to be patient toward them, and to
strive to overcome them by supplying their wants and necessities.

4. At night the air has his being* though it wants the well-being to me,
that is, it does want light and heat: so grace may give me a being, though I
want the comfort and exercise for my well-being: but the sunneshine of favor
brings feeling, comfort, and joy.

Sixthly, Questions resolved about the Air.


Mat. 13.3^. which heaven is the aerie region. When God made the Firmament, he
made the aerie region.

John 8. Ye are from beneath: ye are of the Devil, says Christ. Yet in
Ephesians. 2.2. he is the Prince that has his power in the air.













Mammon is, that taskes them so hard, and makes such drudges of them? for the
fresh air cheeres their spirits, farthers their health, increases their
appetites; abroad, near the City, or far off, as they go, they eat of the
fruits of their labors, rejoice their children, encourage their servants: if
they have grace, glorify God in his works; do good by conference and example
amongst the country people; return to their home, and with a fresh Career,
with cheerfulness, and activenesse they fall again to their trades and
callings, their whet proves no let, they bless God for the good air, and the
good creatures, which with good conscience they have used, having taken their
liberty, and not abused it.





1. That find time to go out of the City for air, but find not time in the
City to go to Church.

2. That being poor, and their families want.

3. That being abroad fall to gameing, or drunkenness, or excess.

4. That mind not, nor speak of God and his works in their refreshings.

5. That suffer not their wives and children to be refresht, but are all for
themselves with their companions.

6. That are too lavish in expenses by vainglory, or liquorish appetites:
sweet mouths, as we call them.

7. That take the air for pleasures sake, not for healthes sake; men do not
whet a knife but for use.

8. That working hard on the week days, do take the Sundaies to be days of
sensual pleasure, feastings, drinkings, and excess.

9. That over work and over watch their servants to maintain their pleasures
and expenses going abroad.

10. That so accustom themselves to take the air, and take their pleasures,
that their hearts are stolen away, and their trades and callings be as bonds
and cords, burdens, and as prisons: in stead of being refreshed, these men are
spoiled. So much of the Air.

A Postscript concerning the Air.
1. I see there is no vacuity in nature; every vessel is full of air, or of
other materials.

2. My head is in the air, which is the first heaven; my eyes look up often
to the element, the second heaven: O that my heart were more often with the
Lord in the 3 heaven, that I might set my affections on things above Col. 3.1.
and have my conversation in heaven. Phil. 3.

3. The air is the meeting place of the Lord Christ, 1. These. 4.17.
and the Saints, (as St. Paul says) we shall meet the Lord in the air: (id
est) the last living Saints: if the air does so much refresh us now; what
shall then the refreshing be? then is the time of refreshing. Act. 3.19.
Tempora refrigerationis.

4. I cannot live a natural life without the Air, but the life in heaven
needs it not; there needs no Temple for worship, Sun for light, or air for
breath; then God will be music without instruments, sweetness without sugar,
wealth without money, health without food, and life without the air.

Egyptians?

Exodus 10.21.



Full of obscurity. Read Wisdom 17.
for it was tenebrae caliginosae.

2. They remained in their places, as in chains.

3. They were horribly affrighted.

4. Their terrors, it is probable,

1. Kept them from sleeping. 2. Caused fainting and sowning. 3. Brought famine
and death to some. 4. They were more terrible to themselves than the darkness.
5. This was an earnest of darkness to come.

Of the Clouds.
1. Of their cause and production.

2. Of their progress and transmigration.

3. Of their success and renovation.

4. Of their kinds and variety.

5. Of their usefulness and service.

6. Of their dissolving and dissipation.

7. Of the Rainbow in the cloud.

8. Resolves concerning the clouds.

First, of the cause and production of the clouds.
THe prime cause is God; the isntrumental cause is the Sun; the Sun he
raises out of the water vapors, and out of the earth exhalations: A vapor is
a watery thing, The Clouds are called v^pors. Psa. 135 ^. ^aciens ^t ^scendunt
vapores ^b extremitate terrae.
an exhalation is an earthy thing, yet is not earth: vapors have a warmth and
moisture, and rising in the middle Region of the arey, (which is cold) become
more thick, and are clouds: exhalations being hot and dry, come not to clouds,
but to meteors, and if they prove clammy, and cling together, and become fiery,
they have diverse forms and apparisions in our sight: so then the clouds are
produced of moist vapors drawn up by the Sun or Planets: which appears,
set a saucer of water in the hot Sunshine, it will in short time be drawn
up; now that which was something, is not annihilated.

Considerations.
1. Two contraries may agree for a common good; the Sun and water produce the
Clouds; some men are of contrary dispositions, and cannot agree; yet in
advancing the Gospel, maintaining the truth, releeving the poor, let them
join in this, and be like the Sun and the water, which differ in nature, yet
meet, and do good together.

2. I learn to deny my natural disposition, to obey the higher powers; the
nature of the water is to descend, but by a heavenly influence it ascends: I
will deny my self in that may offend a weak brother, equal to me, and will
not be refractory in an indifferent thing, to yield to my superior which is
above me.

3. I see what a sweet influence does; it causes the vapors to come from below,
and mount up on high: a sweet disposition gains a voluntary service; let me
shine on them below me with the beams of favor, and warm them with
kindnesses, and win their affections; then they will begin to bethink
themselves of motion toward me, and I shall prevail with them more than by a
stern carriage, threats, or stripes.

Secondly, of the progress of the clouds.
THey have their progress in the middle region of the air: the air has 3
regions; the highest is very hot, being next to the eleme^t of fire, there are
generated commets, blazing-starres: the lower region is by reason of the
reflection of the Sun beams, of a temper somewhat warm By reason the Sun
leaves us at night.
: here are dewes frosts, ^oare frosts, mists, etc. The middle region there the
cold is kept in, and the reflective beams of the Sun reach not to it; there is
the place where the clouds have their residence, and walk their circuit.
Consideratio^s


1. As soon as the clouds are produced, they have their progress, all things
are full of labor; I learn from them not to stand still: Homo ad molestiam
editur, ut scintillae prunarum in altum evolant, Job 5.7. Man is brought for to
travail, as the spark of the hot coal flies up hastily; we are produced, we
have a progress, and shall come to a dissolution like to the Clouds: dust we
are, and to dust we shall return: when our progress is finished.

2. The clouds are carried on the wings of the wind to their places
appointed, so am I carried by the providence of God to those places where I
must do service.

3. If the clouds went to the upper region of the air, we should never have
rain, for the extreme heat would dry it up: and if they should be carried
down to the earth they would be troublesome to man; but are useful in the
middle region their proper place: so if I should meddle in things above my
calling, I should waste my self and my time unprofitably, if I do things
below my place (uncalled) it is baseness not humility, but in my own place
and station, I am most prompt and useful, most seemly and commendable.

Thirdly, Of the succession and renovation of the Clouds.
THe things of short duration have a succession, else their kind could not
continue; the Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars have a continuance without
succession, but things of an inferior being and habitation, ^re subject to a
change and renewing, and are continued by generation and dissolution: the
clouds are renewed because they return not again in clouds, but come to a
dissipation.

Considerations.
1. This may provoke me to spend my time well, and to be diligent in
well-doing: shortly I must to the grave, another succeed me; one generation
passes, another succeeds: my care should be to leave tokens of virtue and
godliness as an inheritance to my successors.

2. When I see any worthy man decease in the Church or Commonwealth, to
bewail him, and go in secret and pray to God to double his spirit on his
successor, that still there may be a supply of good men.

3. What thanks do I owe to the Lord for renewing the clouds by whom we have
rain? but above that, Lam. 3.
he renewes every morning, every meals meat his mercies, Psalm. 40.
how should I renew my praises and come before him with a new song of
thanksgiving?

4. Let me wait on the Lord, Isa. 40.
then my strength shall be renewed: let me call on the Lord, to renew my heart
with such motions injective, that my words may be renewed effusive, and my
works diffusive, that as a renewed man my purposes may grow to resolution:
from thence to actions, with a perpetual succession.

Fourthly, Of the kinds and variety of the Clouds.
THere are diverse kinds of clouds, some are clouds without rain, some are
full of drops, some are great, some are small, some are higher, some lower,
some are dark, some are bright.

Considerations.
1. All are clouds, all carried of winds, all are obvious; yet the difference
is great: so is it with men in the visible Church, all have their Initialls, a
like enter in by Baptism, yet differ much in disposition and behavior. Some
will be aloft above other; yet is it observed, the highest clouds have the
least or no moystures: the great Andiam^s bear least, the chafe in a heap
will most commonly be upmost.

2. As in these heaps of clouds some are good, some are bad; so in the
Church, some are solid and sincere, some are show without substance, clouds
without rain, as St. Jude says.

3. Some answer men's hopes and yield them drops are for shadow and refreshing:
so some by faithfulness and fruitfulness rejoice men, and are a refreshing to
others.

Fifthly, Of the usefulness of the Clouds.
THeir use is twofold: for judgment or mercy, Job 36.31. thereby he judges
the people, and gives meat abundantly: In judgment these bottles were opened
when the old world was drowned: in mercy at the prayer of Eliah.

The Clouds are the water pots to water the world: the spouts of heaven to
refresh the earth, and make it fruitful.

Considerations.
1. Let us ask of God the rain of mercy, to be given us from these windows
of heaven.

2. We have cause to fear him which can open these bottles in wrath to consume
us.

3. To pray for our Governors, that they may both refresh us and protect us,
as the clouds do, that visit us with moisture, and shadow us from the Suns
heat: this shall be prosecuted in the meditation of the rain.

Sixthly, Of the dissipation of the Clouds.
AFter a production progress and employment, comes a scattering and
dissolution, they ascend, they swell, they threaten, they refresh, they
disappoint, they give shade, they punish, they cause plenty, at the last they
dissolve.

Considerations.
1. I see in them the estate of great ones, they ascend, they have many
spectators, they have their time, they act a part, they dissolve, and are
forgotten.

Heb. 9.27.
2. This is the condition of all men of all sorts: all must die; because all
have sinned, the high and low, the holy, the profane; which teaches me.

3. To expect that is in inevitable: there are 7. brethren one will slay me,
they are the 7. days of the week, which is the day is hid from me, that I
should prepare every day: by mortifying my sins which are deaths sting: by
resting on my Savior; (more fully) he is deaths Conqueror, by dying in my
affections daily, which is deaths coolor, then shall death be but my sleep, my
dissolution my conjunction with my head and Savior.

Seventhly, Of the Rainbow in the Cloud.
1. THe cause why the Rainbow was made. 2. The matter whereof it is made. 3.
What use to make of the Rainbow. 4. Resolves concerning the Rainbow.
First, the cause why the Rainbow was made.
After the deluge God gives the Rainbow; the cause was his goodness, his
compassion: God gives the Rainbow undesired, unsought for; there is his free
goodness; he gives a bow, for singularity none is like it; for dignity it is
his bow, the bow of God, he gives it as a sign of his Covenant, which for
latitude, is not only between God and man, but (inter omnem animantem ex omni
carne:) between all living Creatures of all flesh, for longitude, the Covenant
is for ever. Reflections.


1. His goodness teaches me, to love him, to praise him, to fly to him, to
reverence him, to repent and turn to him, Psalm. 136.1. Hosea 3.5. Romans 2.4.

2. His compassion teaches me to fear him, Psalm. 103.13.

3. His Covenant teaches me to trust in him, and to resemble him in keeping my
covenants.

Secondly, the matter of the Rainbow.
Here four things may be considered.

1. The Rain-bowes generation. 2. His Piguration. 3. His situation. 4. The
time of his apparision.
First, his generation is from the watery Cloud, when the Sun shines on it:
the cloud being spungy and full of holes, the beams of the Sun reflecting,
causes the Bow to appear in his colors; the red arises from the upper part of
the cloud, the green from the lower part, the bluish from the midst of the
cloud, as some observe.

Secondly, his figuration, a Semicircle or merciful Bow, for the back is
upward, the two ends down toward us; it is made not to kill us, but to
comfort us.

Thirdly, his situation, it is always opposite to the Sun, therefore not
seen in the South; but if the Sun be in the East, then the Bow is in the
West, etc.

Fourthly, the apparision; the time is the day, never in the night, unless
twice in 50. year, as some gather from Aristotle: if the Bow appear in the
morning, foul weather follows, if in the evening it is a sign of fair
weather.

Thirdly, what use to make of the Rainbow.
1. We seeing the Bow should praise God with fear, he will not drown the
world, therefore praise him; but he will consume the world with fire; therefore
fear him; there is the blue color which signifies water, the red which
signifies fire, we may sing of mercy and judgment, Psalm. 101.1.

2. To acknowledge his truth, God has kept his covenant since the beginning;
Isai. 54.
he keeps his covenant with all creatures, he will not fail his covenant with
his elect children.

3. The Rainbow has being and beauty from the Sun: so have Christians all
their excellency from Christ.

4. We should at the sight of the Rainbow admire Gods mercy, he for a moment
was angry, but his mercy is continued, and shall continue for ever; the deluge
was but a little time, the Rainbow for long time, yea till the end of time.




It is probable there was, because there was Sun and Clouds, whence it is
generated; but now it is a sign of the covenant.

Noah when he sees the Cloud?











2. The Cloud makes it somewhat obscure, so Christ was veiled under our flesh.

3. The generation of the Rainbow is wonderful, so is the generation of
Christ.

4. In the Rainbow are three colors, so in Christ are 3. offices, King,
Priest, Prophet.

5. The Rainbow comforts us against the fear of waters, so Christ comforts us
against the fear of Gods wrath.

6. As the Rainbow compassed the Throne in Rev. 4. so Christ compasses his
Church by his divine providence.

7. As the Bow is in the Cloud to the end of the world; so Christ is manifested
in the word and sacraments to the end.

Eighthly, Resolves concerning the Clouds.




2. To remember Christ's ascension, he ascended in a Cloud.

3. His coming to judgment, which shall be in the Clouds.

4. To hate sin which hinders our apprehension of Gods favor, as the Clouds
hinder the light of the Sun.

Jude 12.




1. They pretend immediate revellations, when it prooves fantastical
delusions.

2. They often pretend great reading and learning, but being tried, prove very
shallow and ignorant.

3. They seem lowly and can carry themselves with a smooth modest like
behavior; but are conceited, and of Luciferian spirits, (provocations like the
steel smiting the flint) makes them to sparkle.

4. They pretend great love, and draw novices to their lodgings: but their
intent is to gull them and make a gain of them.

5. They pretend it is truth they do deliver, and that others do not or dare
not speak truth, but it proves erroneous; and then they say they were
mistaken, or they alter and mince their former sayings.

6. They pretend private conventicles, because they say truth is not taught
publicly, when the cause is they cannot get applause with the learned: (they
discover them) so they get the unlearned and unstable in private, whom they
hoodwinke; so all goes current, their lies, and errors, and falsehoods; thus
they are Clouds without rain, shows without substance.

Isralites and Egyptians.







Israel) differ from all other Clouds?



2. In the form and fashion there is difference; this cloud was like to a
pillar, the lower end descended toward the Tabernacle, the upper end ascended
up toward heaven: other clouds spread abroad and scatter.

3. In the motion, this cloud moved gently, and stood when the Israelites
rested, and their cattle baited; and this cloud went forward, and came
backward; other clouds are carried swiftly with winds, and once gone, they
never return again.

4. In the Situation, this cloud was near to direct them: other clouds are
more aloft, and give no direction.

5. In the continuance; other clouds do divide and scatter, and alter their
figure and shape: but this cloud kept his figure and shape for forty years
together.











Psalm. 29.

Of the Rain.
1. Of the natural cause of the rain.

2. God does dispose of the rain.

3. Why rain is kept from us.

4. Means to obtain rain.

5. The benefit of rain.

6. Resolves concerning the Rain.

First, of the natural cause of rain.
THe natural cause is thus: the Sun exhales moist vapors up into the air.

The Air has three Regions: the first is very hot near the element of fire:
the second is very cold, because the Sunne-beames gliding and piercing through
it, they have not a reflection so far back again; the lower region more
warm, by reason of the Sun, has reflection from the earth: Now in the middle
region are degrees of coldness; the most extreme sends hail, the next snow,
the next most temperate rain.

Let me from this natural cause look higher to that God which orders nature,
An ascent.
and gives power and virtue to the creatures, it i^ he that covers the heavens
with clouds, Ps. 147.8.
and causes them to drop down fatness: Ps. 65.11.
the earth is as Gods garden, the sea his Cesterne, the clouds his water-pots,
exhalations raise them up; so with sweet showers he waters the earth.

Secondly, God does dispose of the rain, which appears by these five
arguments.
1. IF he pleases, he can keep back the rain, cohibui a vobis imbrem, Amos
4.7. Deuteronomy. 28.23.
I have kept the showers from you, says God: it is he that does make the
heaven as brass, and the earth as iron. In Elias days God kept away the rain
three years and six months. James 5.17.

2. If God pleases, he sends the rain: Deuteronomy. 11.1^ I will give you the
rain of your land in due season. Zach. 10.1. Ask of the Lord, and he will
give you rain. Psalm. 147.8. He prepares rain for the earth.

3. He sends rain in his mercy and favor, when his sweet showers do soften
the earth, Psalm. 65.12. that food is brought forth for the beasts. Psalm. 147.8,
9.

4. He sends rain in Justice, as in Noah's time he opened the windows of
heaven in his wrath. Genesis 7.11. This way he both gives meat abundantly, and
also this way he judges the Nations. Job 36.29, 30, 31.

5. None other can give rain: not the heavens themselves of their own accord,
not the Idols of the heathen; it is Gods prerogative royal. Ier. 14.22.

Thirdly, why rain is kept from us.
1. BAcke-slidig binders rain: the Prophet does confess it in time of great
drought. Ier. 14.7.

2. Flattering preachers, that cry peace, and sooth up the people in their
sins, and tell them all shall be well Ier. 14 13.

3. The love of sin. Ier. 14.10. They loved to wander, therefore came a
drought.

4. Not harkning to the word of God, when men have no list, no obedient ears
to hear: this restraines the rain. Deuteronomy. 28.15. with 23. verse.

5. The sin may be i^ ^he Magistrates, when as justice is not executed. 2.
Sam. 2^^^ 6.10. verses.

6. Notorious wickedn^sse, when men out-stripp their forefathers; especi^^^ in
unlawful marriages, and Idolatry; this restraines t^^ rain. 1. Kings 16.30,
31, 32, 33. compared with 1. King. 17.1.

Fourthly, the means to obtain rain.
1. Confession of sins and humiliation: this course Jeremiah took. Ier. 14.7.

2. Prayer; this way Elias prevailed. James 5. so in Zach. 10.1. Ask of the
Lord rain.

Arguments in prayer.
1. He is a God hearing prayers. Psalm 65.2. 2. He has heard others
heretofore. Psalm. 22.6. 3. He is a Savior in trouble. Ier. 14.8. 4. Beg for
his own sake. Jer. 14.7. 5. He is a God in covenant. Ier. 14.21. 6. Because it
is for his own glory. Ier. 14.21, 22.
3. A third means is, that justice be executed, to cut off those which trouble
Jsrael, and punishes when man is too remiss: Judgment executed on earth,
brings down rain from heaven. 2. Sam. 21.6.

4. A fourth means is to be dilligent hearers and lovers of Gods word, and to
become obedient in sincerity; then God will give rain. Deuteronomy. 11.13, 14. Deuteronomy.
28.1. compared with the twelfth verse. By the drought God intends our
conversion and reformation, Amos 4.7, 8. that being wrought, we are capable of
rain, and all blessings.

Fifthly, the benefit of rain.
1. THe Rain softens the earth: Psalm. 65.12. then the husbandman sets his
plough to work.

2. The Rain makes the corn, and grass, and herbs, and plants to budde and
grow, to blossom and bear fruit.

3. It refreshes the earth, as drink does him that is thirsty: yea the
wilderness where man does not inhabit.

4. In Cities the Rain washes our tiles, and cleanses and sweetens our
streets. The Dutchmen use rainewater to dress meat: it does so much good,
and is so welcome, that it makes men sing for joy. Psalm 65.13.

Sixthly, resolves concerning the rain.




2. If we have prayed for the rain, then

1. We should observe the Lord is a God hearing prayers. Psalm. 65.2.

2. To love the Lord for hearing us. Psalm. 116.1.

3. To render humble praises to the Lord.

4. To take encouragement to pray at other times, and for other things.

3. If the rain fall unseasonable and immoderate,

1. We should humble our selves before God.

2. Entreat the Lord to shut the windows of heaven.

3. Renew our repentance, and forsake our sins.

4. Covenant with God, not to abuse the fruits of the earth by excess and
wantonness.

4. When we see the rain to fall on the earth, we may fruitfully remember the
word is like the rain, which we hearing often, Isai. 55.10, 11 Heb. 6.7, 8.
according to our obedience we shall be blessed, and for disobedience accursed.



Psalm. 65.10. so the word of God does soften the heart. 2. King. 22.19.

2. The rain causes gladness: Psalm. 65.12, 13. so the word brings great joy.
Psalm. 119.162. Jer. 15.16.

3. Rain makes fruitful: Psalm. 147.8. so does the word of God, falling on an
honest heart. Matthew. 13.23. Heb. 6.7.

4. Rain falling on a lump of earth, discovers which is earth, and which is
pibble stones: so the word discovers and manifests what we are. Heb. 4.13.

5. Rain washes and cleanses when it comes: so does the word, it sanctifies
and cleanses. John 17.17.

6. Rain cooles us when it comes; so does the word; our hot lusts by it are
assuaged, our hot afflictions allaied, our hot tentations quenched: Thus the
word and rain are fitly compared together.





2. There was that which was equivalant to the rain, Genesis 2.6. vapor
ascenderat ^ terra; a mist had not
ascended from the earth: but some read there was not a man to till the earth,
nor a mist had ascended from the earth, then the first answer serves.

3. The waters lately had covered the earth, and it might yet be without rain.





2. To men he brings forth the fruits of justice, and mercy, and peace.

3. To superiors he bears the fruits of reverence, obedience, and
faithfulness.

4. To his family, his fruit is example, and instruction, and provision.

5. To the godly a desire of them, a delight in them, a studying their good,
pleading for them.

6. To the poor compassion, counsel relief.

7. To enemies meekness, forgiveness prayer for them.

8. To neighbors, like affection, kindness, If it may be without sin.
sociablenes.

9. To friends faithfulness, gratitude, requital of favors, regard to their
posterity.

10. The fruits concerning our own good is.

1. To be sound in faith and repentance. 2. To increase in heavenly
mindedness. 3. To get more assurance, peace and joy:
In outward things.

1. To use them as things which have no sufficiency eternity.

2. To be diligent in the particular calling. sufficiency eternity.

This is a high point.
3. Out of earthly objects still to be winding the mind to holy things.



Egypt being under Zona Torrida, has no rain; unless in the Northern parts
some small showers, yet the Lord affoords them the river Nilus, which waters
their Land by the flowing thereof: Aegyptus sola inter regiones hyemem ignorant:
Egypt alone of the regions knows no winter: there Israel sowed their seed, and
to water it with their feet, That is with their labor as Genesis 30.30
(Sicut h^rtum olitorium:) as a garden of herbs, Deuteronomy. 11.10.



Canities for whiteness, pruina for coldness, a hoary frost, Psalm. 147.16.
compared to ashes for likeness.





Egypt, how could it hail so much there? Exodus 9.23.



1. It was over all the land, whereas it never rained over all the land before
Since Noah's flood.


2. It was deadly to them in the field.

3. It was mixed with fire, yet the fire did not melt the haile-stones, nor the
hailestones quench the fire; three elements were against the Egyptians, the
fire in the Lightning, the thunder in the Air, the water in the Hail.









2. It kills the worms which hurt the earth.

3. It brings us store of wild foul.





rain waters I mean.

1. Waters come not out of the dust, but from above, so afflictions come out of
the dust, Job 5.6.

2. Waters fall on all alike, Mat. 5.45. so afflictions come alike to all,
Ecles. 9.2.

3. Storms for the present are grievous; so are afflictions for the present,
Heb. 12.11.

4. The showers do wash, not wound us, so afflictions do cleanse us, not hurt
us.

5. When the storm is past the sunshine is welcome, so is prosperity after
afflictions: so much of the Rain.

Of the Earth.
1. Of the diverse names given to the earth.

2. Of the situation and place of the earth.

3. Of the fashion and form of it.

4. Of the nature and quality of it.

5. Of the subsistence and dependence of it.

6. Of the quantity and greatness of it.

7. Of the riches and fruitfulness of it.

8. Resolves concerning the earth.

First, Of the names given to the Earth.
1. IT is called (Terra) earth, Genesis 1.1.

2. It is called (Arida,) dry land, Genesis 1.9.

3. It is called (Tellus,) earth or ground.

4. It is called (Humus,) moist earth; the Greek (...), is used for earth,
with Terra, Tellus, Humus.

5. When earth is spoken with heaven, as in, Psalm. 124.8. then is it the whole
globe of earth and waters: The first time we do read of earth, is that it was
Informis, and Inanis.


Without shape and empty, a confused Chaos; but after it is Arida, dry land,
yet barren: lastly at the word of God it does bud and bear fruit.

I who am but earth in my natural estate without beauty, Eze. 16.5.
being empty of all good: a Reflection.
and though separated from pagans by outward Baptism; yet I am barren in
goodness: O that God would say to me, bring forth and increase, and multiply
in all saving graces; then should I not be as the mountains of Gilboa, 2. Sa.
1.21.
nor be as one called barren, Luke 2.36.
but as a well watered garden, Isa. 58.11.
and as a field the Lord had blessed, Genesis 27.27.

Secondly, Of the situation of the Earth.
IT is far from heaven: and as the center to the circumference; earthly
substance it poises downwards; the earth is in the middle, and heaven is round
about it, heaven is above, Exodus 20.4. earth is beneath, heaven is on high,
Psalm. 103.11. earth below, heaven is Gods Throne, Mat. 5.34. earth his
Footstool: when God is said to look down upon the earth, he is said to
look down from heaven Deu 26.15 Psalm. 33.13.
.

1. How shall I ascend so high, Reflections.
that am now so far from heaven; I am as far as can be from that blessed
place, no farther place from heaven then earth is, except it be hell, yet I
look for three ascentions thither. First, in my mind and affections, Colos.
3.1. Secondly, with my soul when I depart hence. Thirdly, with my body after
t^^ Resurrection.

2. Distance of place cannot hinder spiritual Communion with Christ: I may
have relation to him who is on high, though I be below. The Sun in the
Heavens communicates his light and heat to us below, the foot participates
with the head by virtue of corporal union, though the foot being on earth,
the head in the air.

Thirdly, Of the fashion and form of the Earth.
IT is for form and fashion, not a triangle nor square, nor long, nor a
semicircle, but round, called in Psalm. 93.1. and Psalm. 96.10. and Psalm. 98.7.

Orbis habitabilis,
An Orb for roundnesse, and in Isai. 40.22. it is called a Circle, The
Equinoctial. The Articke. The Antarticke. The Tropicks.
men usually call it the Terrestrial Globe, as heaven is called the
Caelestiall Globe, and as Astronomers do attribute five Circles to their
Caelestiall Globe; so Geographers make as many in this Terrestrial Globe, they
have their five Zones, the hot Zone, and the two extremes for cold, and the
two temperate Zones: so then the earth is a round Globe.

1. This calls for my delight: I can with delight look on the effigies of man's
making: Reflection.
why should I not, to look on the Globe of Gods making? I look on man's little
Globe with the eye of my body, I contemplate Gods great Globe with an act of my
mind.

2. This Globe is Gods Theater, whereon all the inhabitants are actors; here
are acted daily sinful, civil, pious acts: and the exijt of every man is from
this Globe is to a bottomless pit, or to the new Jerusalem, which is four
square, firm and sure: with what fear and care shall I act my part, Mat.
25.23.
that it may be said, well done.

Fourthly, of the nature and quallity of the earth.
1. It is dry. 2. It is cold. 3. It is heavy.
IT is dry of it self, for though it be called, Humus, moist earth, yet it is
not so of it self, but an adjunct of water; for of it self it is Arida, dry
land. Genesis 1.9.

Also the earth is cold of it self, as we may percevie in Cellers, and where
men dig deep, and in shady places where the Sun does not come; also the
body of a dead man is cold, which is of earthy matter.

Lastly, it is heavy; a basket of earth on a man's shoulders is heavy; and we
say of a man who is of a heavy disposition, that he is lumpish, that he is like
a heavy lump of earth.

Reflections.
I am dry by nature being made of earth, without all spiritual moisture:
whatsoever I have, it is added to me, but it comes not from me: but all grace
that softens and makes pliable, comes from him who powers out his Spirit on his
servants, and in the wilderness waters break out, and streams into the
deserts. Isai. 35.6.

2. I am as earth, cold, without the heat of zeal and love, benumbed, and
without life and vigor: it is Gods Spirit comes to kindle in my heart, the fire
of true zeal, and the heat of charity.

3. I am heavy earth and lumpish, in all holy duties, wanting spiritualnesse,
until God revives me, I cannot rejoice in him, Psalm. 85.6. till he quickens
me, I cannot call upon his name, Psalm. 80.18. I cannot give first to him, Romans
11.35. I am but a lump of sinful earth, and can do that is evil, but
nothing that is good: it is God who works all my works for me. Isaiah 26.12.

Dryness should cause me to thirst for a present suitable large satisfaction.
Coldness should make me stir and labor for heat; and lumpishinesse should
provoke me to pray to be quickened according to Gods loving kindness. Psalm. 119
88.

4. I much rejoice in hope and remembrance of that day, when all heaviness and
lumpishnesse shall fly away, and my body shall be raised, so as it shall
become spiritual. 1. Cor. 15.44. we shall then be (ut Angeli) as the Angels.
Mat. 22.30.

Fifthly, of the earthes subsistence.
THough it hangs in the air, yet it is upheld by a divine power. Heb. 1.3. No
creature is independent: God has made the earth, and hangs it upon nothing.
Job 26.7. The earth at first had being by the power of God, and still is
supported by the same power to this day.

Conclusions.
1. There be many things man could yet never attain unto: as First, the
perpetual motion. Secondly, the Philosophers stone. Thirdly, fire
incombustible. Fourthly, to make a heavy thing hang in the air: so that we
may say of God; there are no works like thy works. Psalm 86.8.

Men have tried, and could not effect their designs, but if God but speak it
is done. Psalm. 33.9.

2. The earth is upheld by God, without supporters; and secondary helps: Oh
that I could trust in God with all my heart; Prove. 3.5. then, though others
forsake me, yet the Lord will support me. Psalm 27.10.

Sixthly, of the greatness of the earth.
THe earth is great, simply considered, yet but small comparatively: as the
Center is small, compared with the circumference: of old they held the compass
of the earth to be 50000 miles, as Aristotle; others held it 34625. Some
differed from them and ghessed it 31500. But of late, those which have
compassed the whole Ocean, do say it is 19080 miles, the Diameter 7000: from
us to the Center, 3500 miles.

1. An elevation.
1. The great globe of the earth is but a little point, being compared to the
heavens, and my portion in it but a little, being compared with the whole; and
if I had it all, it could not be a sufficiency to my mind, nor could my
enjoyment be long. O that God would unglue my affections from this little, and
enlarge them toward his own greatness.

2. A Contemplation.
2. I was once nine months contained in a little room: and I have forty
years been contained in this little world; I am much enlarged by coming from
the womb to the world: there I had reason potentially, and a life of
obscurity: here I see a bright Sun, and Moon, and Stars, a earth, and waters,
and innumerable creatures for my admiration and delight, use and service: my
life in the next world, as far, yea farther exceedes this; then my life, now
exceed^ my life in the womb; I came from a little womb to a great world; I
go from a little world to a great heaven, which the great God of his great
love and mercy will bestow on them, which shall greatly be satisfied with it.

Seaventhly, of the riches and fruitfulness of the earth.
THe earthes riches, are first latent, lying hid, secondly, patent, being open.

The riches that lie hid, are among the rest these: the sand pit, the clay pit,
the cole-mine, the state for tiles, the quar-stone, the freestone, the marble,
the Jet, that draws to it the straw, the Adamant, that draws the iron: there
is the rich Diamond, the green Jasper, In Scithia, vel Persia.
the glittering Sapphire, the fiery Calcedony, the Sardonix, In India, vel
Arabia.
like to the color of a man's nail, above, but more red beneath, the green
Smaragdus In Scithia.
comforting the eyes, the red and soft Sardius, the gold shining Chrisolite, In
Ethi^pia
the Skie-colourd Beril, In India.
or it is a watrie color, and six square, the green, or seagreen Topaze,
Near the red sea. There is the Gold, Silver, Brass, Coper, Peuter, Tin, Lead,
Quicksilver, Brimston^, and much hid treasures.
shining in darkness, the green, and gold-like Chrisophrasus, there is the
purple Hyacinth, the Amethist of the same, or a violet color, with many other;
but I am dealing in hid treasures, and must cease.

The riches of the earth, that are patent, open, and manifest, are grass,
herbs, flowers, corn, and trees.

The grass for the plenty and use, the herbs for food and physic, and
medicine, the flowers for variety, colors, and smell, the trees for shade,
timber, and fruit, the corn for to make bread; time may permit to handle in
several meditations.

Applications.
1. I may raise my mind to the Lord, and say, the earth is full of thy riches,
Psalm. 104.24. it is full, but how full I cannot tell; but this I am sure God is
the owner of it; for the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. Psalm.
24.1. and Christ which is the heir of al things, Heb. 1.2. is now said to be
worthy to receive power and riches. Hos. 2.8. Dispensatores
Rev. 5.12. God is a rich God, Christ a rich heir, all is his, and we on
earth, are but stewards. 1. Peter 4.10.

2. The earth is rich within, and fruitful without; I would I were like it, to
have inward graces, outward fruits: The Kings daughter is all glorious within,
and also without. Psalm. 45.14.

3. If earth be so rich, what is heaven? the best things here are Gold and
Pearls, and precious stones; which there are the walls, the gates, and the
pavement of the street, Revel. 21.19, etc. the riches of heaven, we have no
riches to resemble them, no conceits to apprehend them: O how great is the
goodness hid and laid up Psalm. 31.20. I may admire it, and hope for it, and
wait for it, and that may comprehend me, for I cannot comprehend it.

4. The riches of the earth are obtained by labor and industry, for the hid
treasures men dig and search, Prove. 2.4 and for the outward treasures men
plough, and plant, and graft, and prune, and water, and take pains: for the
diligent hand makes rich, and in labor is abundance; then I must not think to
be idle in the earth, nor to gain spiritual riches without industry, and
pains, and labor.

Eighthly, Resolves concerning the earth.




Genesis



2. The waters gathered to one place at Gods command, so the dry land appeared.





2. Were the sea higher, men would sail far more swift to the Land, than
from it.

3. Were the sea higher, then going far on it with ships, the earth would be
the plainer discerned.

4. Men are said to go down to the sea in ships. Psalm. 107.

Psalm. 104 6. the waters stood above the mountains.





Psalm. 19. and the earth has foundations, therefore it stands fixed. Prove.
8.29. Mich. 6.2.

Archimides of Siracusa, who wa osfopirtion, if there were another globe to
place his engine, he could move the earth?

Struther in his observations.

2. The Text says the contrary. Psalm. 104.5.



Africa, where the Babarians and Ethiopians do inhabit. Secondly, Asia,
which is divided into two parts: Asia major which is parted from Europe by the
Scithian river Tanais: Asia minor, where were the seven churches St. John writ
unto. Revel. 1.11. Thirdly, Europe, divided from Africa with the Mediterranian
sea, and from Asia with the aforesaid river Tanais: England and Scotland are
the two greatest Isles which lie Northward. The fourth is America: first
discovered in 1492. by one Christopher Columbus, servant to the King of
Castile, and 7. years after it was nominated America of Americus vesputius.
Here is new Spain, new England, Virginia, Burmudus.



Luke 3. ult.

2. They do some outward services.

3. They are very industruous for these things, being children by creation they
have an earthly portion, for outward services they have out outward rewards;
their industry and labor is recompensed with terrestrial good things, as the
maine they aimed at, and did pursue with their strength and might.



Psalm. 115.16. the earth is given to the sons of men: To take from a wicked
man any of his goods, under a pretense he has no right to them, or to deny
payment of debt for that cause, is fantastical.

To say he is an usurper, leave that to be des^ided between God and him as the
case stands between us and him: let us give to all men their due, Romans 13. we
may not take a point from a Turks hose on the aforesaid terms; nor deny
payment of a debt to him, pleading he is wicked, and has no right.


Noah, deprived the men on earth of the beauty of it, and when the place is
disputed, yet little is concluded.



2. To be fruitful: the earth abounds with fruits. 3. To be bountiful: the
Earth receives all. 4. To be constant, the earth is immovable.
Our patience brings us much inward peace.

Our fruitfulness, evidences we have life in us.

Our bounty and doing good, wins others.

Our constancy brings us from duty, to reward.





2. God keeps them short, as Birds wings are clipped that they may not fly
from him.

3. They bend their chief studdies and endeavors for saving grace, and
spiritual riches.

4. God gives portions here to wicked men, Psalm. 17. but he reserves for them
an heavenly inheritance.





2. He is over-joyed if he winnes earth.

3. He is over-grieved if he looses earth.

4. He esteems them the only wise men that be wise for the earth, to get
great estates.

5. He opposes the powerful preaching of the word, and the heavenly minded
Christian.

6. He is loath to hear of going from the earth.

7. His delightful discourse is most forth earth.

8. He is never wearied in studdying and in laboring for earthly things.

9. He is never satisfied, but still desires more.

10. He is unwilling to part with earth, though God and his Conscience, and the
poor call for it.



Psalm 16.3. 2. To consider we are strangers on earth. Psa. 119.19
First we should labor to be Saints on earth.

1. By yielding to the Ministry of the word; which although others are not
wrought on, yet the Saints are gathered glued together, and grow up into one
body, by the Ministry of the word. Ephe. 4 11.

2. By separating from all gross sins in the act, and from all smaller
sins in the allowance.

3. By dedicating our selves, and giving our selves to God. 1. Speedily,
without delay. 2. Totally, without reservation. 3. Resolutely, against
opposition. 4. Constancy, not revolting.

Secondly, as strangers on the earth.

1. We should freely acknowledge we be strangers. 2. Use this world moderately.
1. Cor. 7. chap. 31. 3. Expect some wrongs, no preferments. 4. We should much
praise God, for our comforts here. 5. Forget that behind, and endeavor toward
that before. Phil. 3. 6. To do good now, Gall. 6.9. be ready to depart. 2.
Peter 1.10.11.
For our encouragement in the way.

1. Our Pilgrimage is not long. 2. We have company. 3. We shall be provided for.
4. We have a guide. Psalm. 119.105. 5. We have attendants. Psalm 91.6. A
Heaven to receive us.

Of the Water.
1. Of the Etymology, and also the original of waters.

2. Of the kinds of Waters.

3. Of the usefulness of Water.

4. Resolves concerning Water.

Aqua; some do derive it from a et qua: quasi a qua vivimi^; vel a qua omnia
fiunt: Lodwick Rowsee D. of Physic
by which we live, or of which all things were made: Others will have it, quasi
aequa, because nothing more equal and smooth then water, when it is not
troubled. Adam named many of the Creatures, but God he himself gave the name
to the Waters: in the general, Genesis 1.2. also the gathering together of the
Waters, he called Seas, he gave the name to the Rivers. For their original, we
read of them as soon as we read of any thing, the Spirit of God mooving on
them: the Earth to appear out of them; the waters are honorable for antiquity.


THe kinds of water are many, there is salt water, and fresh water; the Sea
water, and the River water, Well-water, Raine-water, Snow-water, the Water in
Bathes, there is Waters of diverse wonderful operations; some Water is said to
kindle a torch; some to make the Sheep wool black that drink it. The Spaw
does intoxicate the brain; some Waters are reported to be so cold, that they
turn Leather-gloues, and bals into stone: I have seen Cheese, and Wood, and a
Toadstoole turned to stone, I judge it came by such like water. In Boetia are
springs that help memory; some waters make Women barren; one River is reported
to be bitter and salt, thrice a day. In Arabia is a fountain which casts up
all heavy things put into it. In Phrygia are two Fountains, one makes men
laugh, the other makes men cry: there is a river in Bythinia, which torments
perjured persons being put into it; amongst us, some water will take Soape, and
some will not: some water will make better drink then other. At Bath, the water
springs always hot. In France is a river with the which a Scarlet is dyed,
excelling other colors: the variety of Waters, requires a Volume. I only take
an abridgement, and a taste, or touch.


FOr usefulness, it has a priority above the other elements; it pierces the
air and ascends by the Suns exhalation, it devoures the earth if it be not
strongly kept in by banks; it quenches the fire, it has great ability and
therefore may be useful: it carries our ships, makes fertile our grounds,
refreshes and nourishes man and beast, fowls and fishes: the trees live by
the water, the earth upholds them; a rose bush upheld in water without earth,
brings both leaves and roses as some affirm: some creatures live by water, but
none without it, most live without fire but none without water: men, beasts,
trees, and corn, cannot continue without water: It washes, and cleanses, and
cooles, and refreshes: In peace, in war, in sickness, in health, in the
house, in the field, always water is useful: In conclusion; no water, no
humane life, no Commonwealth, no world.

Fourthly, Resolves concerning water.
Genesis 1.5.

Psalm. 148.4. how heaven is diversely taken in Scripture; read before page 176.
as every part of the water is called water, so every part of the firmament is
called by the name of the whole.





2. His power in keeping it within his bounds.

3. His providence, for commodities are in great ships, conveyed in great
quantity and more speed, from one people to another, then could be by Camels or
Horses, also the Islands are as Innes for seafaring men to refresh them.





2. To prepare for death, for there is but an inch or two always between it
and them.

3. To resolve to glorify God when they do see his great works.











Solomon, Ecles. 1.7. all the rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not
full; unto the place from which the rivers come they return and go: so then
the sea, not the air, is the original of the springs: Solomon is to be
preferred before Aristotle.







Aetna: others think there are mines of brimstone they pass through: others,
the tumbling of waters beating one against the other makes them hot, we must
be content to look a posteriori: God he knows a priori: let us be thankful
for the effects, when we find not the cause.













1. The elements they live in are clear and perspicuous.

2. The bird flies very swiftly, so does the fishes swim swiftly.

3. The birds have wings and feathers, the fishes have sins and scales: The
bird guids his flying with his tail, so does the fish his swimming.

4. There be some fishes make a prey of others and devour them, so is it with
the birds.

5. The birds that prey on others, do not multiply so fast as those preyed
upon, so is it with fishes.











Ezekiel. 36.35. 2. Cor. 6.11. ye are washed, etc. by the Spirit.

2. Water refreshes, Judges 15.19. much more does the Spirit revive and
quicken our souls.

3. Water cools us: so does the Spirit in the time of tentation.

4. Water makes fruitful: so does the Spirit enable us to bring forth fruit to
God.

5. Those that have plenty of water, we judge them happy; so should we them
that have Gods Spirit.

6. No water, no temporal life: so without the Holy Ghost no spiritual life.

Joh. 4.14.

2. He shall not thirst corruptly to satisfy his lusts.
Exodus 14.

Suph, signifies a Reed; abundance of Reed grow there: so is to be understood
the Reedy sea.





Jsraelites passing through the Red sea?

Israelites were, as it were, buried in the sea, yet arose at the shore: so in
Baptism, we are as buried in sin, and rise to a new life.

2. The Egyptians being drowned, could no more hurt the Israelites: so our
sins in Baptism being pardoned, cannot prevail any more.

3. The Baptized Israelites all of them entered not into Canaan: nor do all
baptized Christians enter into heaven.

4. In the overthrow of Pharaoh, they were delivered from bondage: so by
Baptism we are delivered from the service of sin and Satan, and vow war
against them.

5. The Israelites after they passed through the sea, did feed on heavenly
Manna: so Christians after baptism do partake of heavenly mysteries.

6. As all the Israelites were baptized, 1 Cor. 10. so all Christians have but
one baptism, Ephesians the fourth. So much of the waters.

Of Fire.
1. Of the diverse names of fire.

2. Of fire properly so called.

3. Of the qualities of fire.

4. Of the improper fire: fire met aphoricall.

5. Diverse resolves concerning fire.

First, of diverse names given to fire.
SOmetimes fire is attributed to God. Heb. 12.29. Our God is a consuming fire:
so Christ in purging the elect, is like a purging fire, Mal. 3.2. and the holy
Ghost is like fire, Matthew, 3.11. and the word is as fire to perplexe the
carnal, Luke 12.49. and fire to try and examine men's doctrines, 1. Cor. 3.13.
so afflictions are fire, Psalm. 66.12. And fire is that which is made with
combustible things, as wood, Acts 28.2, 3. and coals, Isai. 54.16. But all
fire may be ranked to two heads: proper, or improper fire; fire natural, and
fire metaphorical.

Secondly, of natural or proper fire.
1. Fire is hid and secret. 2. Fire appears always with another thing. 3.
Fire is always in motion and working. 4. The fire it ascending upwards.
The effects of fire are in the third Section.
First, it gives light. Secondly, it gives heat. Thirdly, it consumes.
Fourthly, it changes. Fifthly, it purifies.

Again, fire

Is not lessened by giving heat; it is increased by adding fuel; it pierces by
degrees; it is never satisfied.

First, fire is hid and secret.
We see the earth and water distinctly: we feel the air, but the earth lies
hid: it appears not of it self, we must take pains to get it, and care to
look to it when we have it.

Considerations.
1. How is natural corruption like to fire? it lies hid: Little thought Hazael
that there had been that wickenes in his heart, which after manifested it
self. 2. King. 8.13.

2. As the steel discovers the fire which lay hid in the flint, so do
occasions bring forth the corruptions which like fire lay hid.

For example,
1. A man's preferment discovers what was in his heart: as we see in Saul and in
Vzzia. 2. Chron. 26.

2. Affliction discovers a man's heart. Isai. 8.21. Rev.

3. A man's praises discovers him. Prove. 27.21.9.20, 21.

4. Heresies discovers a man's corruptions that lay hid; he yeeldes when the
lovers of truth show themselves approved ones, 1. Cor. 11.19. Quos experientia
docuerit esse fidei and pietatis sincerae.

3. So is grace hid, and secret in the heart as faith, and love, and meekness,
and patience: yea occasions manifests the same, as Joseph's chastity appeared by
his mistress tentation; and David's loyalty, when she cut off the lap of his
masters garment, and would not kill him: we come to know the good and evil
that is in our selves and others by experience, and occasions will declare what
grace, and what sin is in us.

Secondly, Fire appears with another thing.
The spark stays not, unless ye nourish it with tinder or touch-wood, then
Brimstone, or wood, or cole, or paper, or match, or straw, or turffe, or some
combustible thing must show it preserve, and continue it.

Considerations.
1. How does grace manifest it self with that it works withal, like to the
fire it comes from God, and is kindled in the heart; and then Grace is the fire
and thoughts is as the fuel: Grace is the fire, and words is the fuel, Grace
appears with duties of piety, works of righteousness and Mercy.

2. That which appears with the fire, does nourish it, and continue it: so
Faith begets prayer, and prayer nourishes Faith: Joy begets strength, and
strength preserves Joy: diligence it breeds assurance, and assurance nourishes
diligence; faith begets works, and works confirm Faith, patience comes from
hope, and hope prolongs patience, as fire breeds ashes, and ashes preserves
fire.

3. So sin appears as fire in the fuel: Jgnorance appears in pride, and
pride will not be informed, but be ignorant still.

Thirdly.
Fire is always in motion ever working like the clock wound up, and pulses
which always beat: the fire ever goes forward, working on the fuel to turn
it into his own nature.

Consideration.
So is Grace, ever operative, turning the subject where it is to his own
nature: it ever provokes a man to read or pray, or fast, or work, or exhort,
or comfort others, or reconcile them at odds. A man that has Grace, is never
idle, he is a busy Creature in his general calling, or his particular, or
both, he will endeavor to spread truth, and oppose error, and mortify sin
in himself, and stop sin, and bewail it in others, he is always in action,
much in devotion.

2. Sin in the unregenerate, is as fire ever in motion: In their beds they
imagine mischeife, being risen they act it, they are resolved to do evil, and
act sin with a great delight. Pharaoh was a plotter against Gods people, and
Saul breathed out threats, and procures letters and takes a journey; men will
break their sleep, and be at cost, and unwearied, and unsatisfied in the
service of sin.

In the fourth place.
Fire ascends upwards, it being his natural motion, and disposition, so it
ascends.

1. Speedily, as soon as it is kindled.

2. Strongly, because natural motion is strong.

3. Constantly, natural motions are constant.

4. Easily, without compulsion.

5. If the flame be beaten down, or kept down, it breaks upward as soon as that
is remooved that held it down, and strives all the time it is opposed and kept
down.

Considerations.
1. What fit resemblance is between fire and true grace: Fire, the natural
motion is upward; so Grace makes the Soul ascend upward, to seek the things
above, Col. 3.1. and to make our Minds heavenly. Phil. 3.20.

2. Fire has a strong motion upward; so grace carries the soul to God with
strength, Psalm. 42.2. the soul thirsts for God: and thirst is the strongest
passion: In Act. 17.16. St. Paul's spirit was stirred for God, non poterat
sustinere, he could not forbear: so grace stirs the heart upward to mind
things above; it makes men spiritu ferventes, Romans 12.11. fervent in spirit; as
Christ was strong in the Spirit, Luke 1.80. hence Christians have deep sighs,
strong cries within them, earnest groans and longing, strong and fervent
prayers. Psalm. 51. Iam. 5.16.

3. Fire has a constant motion upward: so grace is always aspiring to the
things above; when a man breaks off his sleep he awakes with God. Psalm
139.18. grace makes a man trust in God all the day, Psalm. 25.5. to call upon
God continually, Psalm. 86.3. to set God always before us, Psalm. 16.8. grace is
thinking devising, contriving, desiring, questioning, seeking, and exercising
it self about things above, things holy, heavenly, gracious and spiritual.

4. Fire ascends easily without compulsion; so grace has a propensity and
facillity to heavenly things: grace makes a man joyful to come to the house of
God, Psalm. 122.1. and willing to come to the assemblies: Ps. 110.3. a man comes
with gladness, Philipians 1.4. hears with readiness, Acts. 10.33. his
praises comes from his joy, Psalm 63.5. his alms for a cheerful mind, 2.
Cor. 8.3. he is easy to be entreated, James 3.17. he is as ripe fruit soon
shaken, as ripe corn soon threshed.

5. If the flame be kept down, it ascends again as soon as that kept it
down is removed. So grace may be suppressed, but take that away which keeps
it down, it does flame up again presently. Sin quelled grace in David, but
his sin being pardoned, how did his graces flame upward! what sweet prayers
did he make to God? what holy Psal^s did he indite: Tyranny, and tentation,
and reproaches may seem to extinguish the graces of Gods children, but they
burn inwardly, Psalm. 39.3. and there is a recourse to God. Jer. 20.9.12. and
when they do get victory, enlargement, and liberty, then it is apparent the
fire was kept in, but by violence, and they flame more than they did before; as
the Smiths fire by his casting water on it, burns the more fervent.

Thirdly, Of the quallities and effects of fire.
1. FIre gives light so says the Prophet, Isay 50.11.

2. Fire gives heat, so says St. Mark, chap. 14. verse. 54.

3. Fire consumes, Amos 2.1. Combusserit ossa, etc.

4. Fire it changes, Psalm. 68.2.

5. Fire it purifies, Mal. 3.2.

6. Fire increases by adding fuel.

7. Fire is never satisfied, Prou. 30.16.



Fire gives light, so does Gods word: instruction is the light, shines from the
Law, Proverb. 6.23. by preaching men receive light, Acts 26.18.

Considerations.
1. Light does distinguish; so does the word, by it we know what is good, and
what is evil.

2. Light is comfortable, so is the word, Ier. 15.16.

3. Light makes us walk safely, so does the word;

Fire gives heat, so does Gods spirit; he heates us with zeal and warmes our
affections.

Considerations.
1. Heat makes us joyful: a man that is warmed at the fire says Aha, Isai.
44.16. so the comforts of Gods spirit makes a man much refreshed, Psalm. 94.19.

2. Heat makes a man active, his benumednesse being removed; so Gods peo^^e
are active being cheared with the comforts of Gods holy spirit, the joy of the
Lord is their strength. Nehem. 8.10.


3. The fire giving heat, men press to it, and desire to be nigh it: so Gods
spirit working heat and comfort in our souls, Luke 11.13.
we should ever desire and much pray for it.



Considerations.
1. The curse of God consumes, Zach. 5.3.4. as the fire consumes two ways,
either secretly by degrees, or violently and swiftly: so the curse is secret,
as a moath and rottenness, Hos 5.12. or more violent and terrible as a Lion,
or Lions whelp, verse. 14.

2. Fire consumes not only the house where it first kindles, but the next house
to it, and if it be not quenched it reaches to many houses: so the curse of God
reaches to a sinner, to his next heirs, yea if repentance do not come
between, it reaches to the third and fourth generation.



As fire changes, so does Gods spirit, 2. Cor. 3.18.

Considerations.
1. In their condition, they were captives, 2. Tim. 2.14. now they have
liberty, 2. Cor. 3.17. They were children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.2. they be changed
to be children of God, 1. John 3.1.

2. They be changed in disposition, Isa. 11.6, 7, 8. they were enemies, Romans
5.10. now are friends, Ioh. 15.14. they have a divine nature, 2. Pet. 1.4. and
a new heart, and a new spirit Eze. 36.26.

3. They be changed in conversation; the old companions they cry away from me*
Psalm. 119.115. they be changed in their speeches which were once rotten, Ephesians.
4.29. but now gracious, Col. 4.6. they are changed in their a^tions, they
eschew evil and do good, they practice righteousness and do exercise mercy,
they do perform duties of piety from an inward principle, from a new life
infused into them, there is an universal change where Gods spirit comes,
savingly and effectually.

5. Fire purifies, and purges, and seperats, the dross from the metal.

Considerations.
1. As fire purges and purifies, so do afflictions; God has his furnace in
Sion, there is fiery trials to prove and to try the people of God, Psalm. 66.10.
1. Pet. 4.12.

2. As the fire is made according to the will of the goldsmiths, so our
afflictions are according to the will of God.

3. As the time of the mettalls being in the fire is according to the wisdom
of the goldsmith, so the time of our afflictions are according to the wisdom
of God.

4. When the metal is melted and the dross taken away, then it comes forth
more pure, so when our hearts are humbled, and our corruptions purged, then we
come forth as gold. Job 23.10.


6. Fire increases by adding of fuel.

Addition breeds multiplication: the more fuel the greater is the fire.

Considerations.
1. So is it with coveteousnesse and riches, as wealth comes in, coveteousnesse
increases, having hundreds the desires run after thousands, the desires are not
quenched with money no more then fire is with fuel.

2. Addition of graces are as the fuel: assurance of salvation as the fire;
the more graces, the more assurance, by the joining grace to grace we make our
calling and election sure. 2. Pet. 1.


3. Wicked men add ^o the people of God affliction and misery, this they do
willingly, but by this means they add fuel to their felicity and glory, this
they do unwillingly.

7. Fire is never satisfied: yea may add till you be weary, fire still desires
more.

1. So is it with all earthly things, they do never satisfy the restless
desire of man: the Be flies from one flower to another, as unsatisfied:
Solomon proved by experience, no full satisfaction in earthly things; like the
fire we still desire more.

8. Fire is not lessenned by communicating heat, nor have we the less by
communicating of our gifts to others: wealth communicated to others lessenneth
our store; but in heavenly graces it is otherwise: in heating others we are not
the colder; in quickening others we are not the more dull: the Cock claps his
wings, and awakes himself, he crows, and awakes others: The fire burns if
that no body be near it, if you warm you, there is no diminishing: it burns,
and heates, and does good with advantage to us, and no dis-advantage to it
self. So much of proper fire: next


BY improper fire we may understand the metaphorical fire, that is like fire;
or the extraordinary fire we read of, which does differ from our material Fire.

This is of two sorts: 1. Supernall fire. 2. Infernal fire.


1. Supernall fire coming from above, and of these are two causes.

1. From Gods anger. 2. From Gods favor.
1. From Gods anger; so Fire came down from heaven on Sodom and Gomorrah,
Genesis 19.24. Also on them that offered Incense in the conspiracy of Korah. Numb.
16.35. On the Captain and his fifty. 2. Kings 1.10.

2. From Gods favor: so Fire came down on the sacrifice of Solomon, 2. Chron.
7.1. and on the sacrifice of Eliah, 2. King. 18.38. Thus God showed his love
and favor to these his servants by fire from heaven.

2. Infernal fire is that which the damned do feel in hell, set forth in
Scripture.

1. For the greatness, there is fire and much wood: the Prophet speaks to our
capacity. Isaiah 30.33.

2. By the terriblenesse, it is a lake of fire, as St. John says. Revel 21.15.

3. The eternity of it is everlasting. Matthew. 25.41.

This fire cease on the souls of men, it lays hold on spirits and has

1. Shame, for they shall be looked upon as spectacles of wrath to their
infamy. Isaiah 66.24.

2. This fire differs from fire on earth, and has with it darkness and pain:
our fire gives light and warmth.

3. This fire has with it indignation, and an exceeding vexation; for there is
gnashing of teeth.

4. Divines think there is horrible blasphemy, because of their torments.

5. The company of the devils most fearful and terrible. And in this Fire

1. Is no resistance, for now they suffer, Jude 7. and are bound hand and
foot. Matthew. 22.13.

2. Is not the least mittigation. Luke 16.24, 25.

3. There is a gnawing worm in the fire. Mar. 9.44.

4. A senciblenesse of the torment. Luk 16.24.

5. A knowledge that others be in joy. Luke 16.23.

6. The torment is on the whole man, all the faculties of the soul, and all
the parts of the body.

The degrees of torment.
1. According to the measure of wickedness committed. Matthew. 23.14.

2. According to the means of grace they despised. Matthew. 11.24.

Fifthly, of diverse resolves concerning fire, both natural and divine: and of
Meteors.
First of them that are natural.


of the fuel. Thirdly, by throwing water on it.

So our lust may be quenched; by separating of them, by taking away that which
does nourish them, by tears of repentance.













Aetna?









2. There is water wooses out at the other end. 3. There is air fumes out with
the water. 4. The stick burns to ashes, there is earth.


2. Because they want experience of the operation of it.




2. That our children might ask the meaning, and be instructed in Gods mercies
to us.

3. To daunt the enemy when they see us rejoicing, whom they rather would see
weeping and mourning.

4. We express outwardly what we have inwardly, the fire of zeal and
thankfulness.

5. The burning of the wood, shows how traitors shall burn in hell.

6. We would teach them: we make fires, not to burn them, as they did us, but
to give them light and warmth.

Secondly, other resolves concerning metaphorical fire.





2. Fire and anger be hurtful out of their proper places.

3. Fire is dangerous near flax, and anger is dangerous where is provocations.

4. Wisdom orders fire, so a wise man orders his anger.

5. Fire raked in ashes, stirring discovers it; so concealed anger, occasions
do manifest it.

6. There is likeness in the quenching of fire and anger.

1. Fire is quenched by withdrawing fuel: so anger is appeased by removing
that which does nourish it.

2. Fire is quenched by water, and anger is quenched by tears of humiliation.

3. Houses on fire are helped by pulling down, so anger is cured by pulling
down pride and high conceits.





2. Fire consumes; so does wickedness consume all good in the soul, the
strength of the body, the goods, the good name.

3. Some sport with fire; some sport with sin.

4. When fire gets mastery we are undone: so when sin gets dominion we
perish.

5. When a man sees fire in his house, too late, he cries desperately: so it is
with sin at the death bed.

6. Fire has undone them that were very rich: so wickedness did undone the
very Angels.

7. If we espy fire very dangerous, if we can timely quench it, we do rejoice;
so if we espy our sins, and timely repent, it abundantly comforts us.

8. If a man be cried unto, his house is on fire, if he he stir not, he is
like to perish: so if the Preacher cry out of the sin in man's soul, if he
repent not, he perishes.

9. If fire be almost put out, if it have matter it will revive again; so
wickedness curbed by law, education, shame, example, if not thoroughly
mortified, it will revive again.

10. If fire be blown, it is more furious: so if sin be provoked, furthered
and animated, it is more furious; provoked lusts are strong.





2. Fire works on the least advantage, so does jealousy.

3. Fire blown, and added unto, is outrageous, so is jealousy, if it be
stirred, and new matter added to it.

4. Many times the neighbors are called to help quench fire: so often times
the neighbors and the friends are called to appease the jealous party.

5. Fire will except of no gifts, nor be entreated not to burn: so the jealous
man will endure no ransom, though the gifts be augmented. Prove. 6.

6. Fire lies sometimes invisible in the ashes: so jealousy lies secret hid in
the heart.

7. Fire burns those that touch it; so the jealous person is angry with those
converse with them.

8. A sure way to quench fire, is to cast on water, and take away the fuel: so
to quench jealousy, the best way is to weep for them, and to give them no
just occasion.

9. If a man come with a handful of flax or straw to beat the fire, he
increases it: so to come to the jealous party with passion, rough words, or
threats, does more enrage them.

10. Put two fires together, they do burn the hotter; so put two jealous
persons together, let them talk together, they strengthen each other.

11. Fire sometimes burns where it should not: so the jealous person sometimes
suspects were he should not.

12. Fire welcomes that will increase it: so does the jealous party welcome the
tales and reports that increases jealousy.

Sodom?



2. Strange sins bring strange punishments.

3. The equity: they burnd in lust first, and then were burned with fire.

4. Voluptuous living has a smarting conclusion.

5. Universality of sins, brings universal destruction.

6. Those which cannot abide to be reproved, must abide to be punished.

7. We should take examples, least we make examples.



Psalm. 19.

2. The fire gives heat; so does the word.

3. The fire in his place rejoices; so does the word rightly applied. Ier. 15.
Job. 23.

4. The fire consumes the combustible stuff; so the word consumes our sins
and lusts.

5. The fire changes some things, and draws some things to it; so does the
word change us, and win us, and turn us to his own likeness.





2. Fire it impartial: so are Gods Judgments.

3. Fire consumes; so do Gods judgments.

4. Fire torments men; so do Gods judgments.

5. The spoil that fire makes, is reported a far off from the place: so Gods
judgments are heard of, and famous for report and record.

6. When fire is cried, and kindled, men do remove their Goods, and cast water
on their neighbors houses, or fly away: so in the threatening and beginning of
judgments, it is wisdom to pray, and to give alms, to lay up treasure in
heaven: to weep for the sins and miseries of others, to the from the sins of
the time, unto the name of God, to the throne of grace.

7. When we see the flame a far, we begin to bestirre our selves, so the
judgments on neighbor nations should now awaken us.

8. The mining sunder ground are least perceived, and yet most terrible,
sudden, and inevitable: so inward spiritual judgments are least perceived,
and most dangerous.

9. As those that kindled the fire are worthy of our hatred, and those that
quenched it are worthy of our love: so the wicked that procure Gods judgments
are worthy of most hatred, and the godly that preserve us from them, or by
their prayers remove them, deserve most love.

Of Meteors.
1. Of the names of Meteors.

2. Of the matter whereof they are produced.

3. Of the time when they do appear.

4. Of the various forms and shapes of them.

5. Of the place where they are.

First, of the names of Meteors.
A Meteor is taken more largely, or more strictly. Largely, all vapors,
exhalations, clouds, winds, tempests, hail, snow, are Meteors: Meteora is,
first, things engendered. Secondly, in the air. Thirdly, unperfect things
engendered imperfectly in the air: strictly, it is either from vapors arising
from the water, or exhalations from the earth, or both; so growing hard and
clammy, are called Meteors in the air.

Secondly, of the matter of them.
FIrst negatively, of what they are not. Secondly, affirmatively, of what they
be.

Negatively.
They are not of fire, nor of air, and so are of unperfect mixture: for the
perfect bodies are either simple, compounded of the four elements. The Meteors
are not of fire, for the fire consumes them, and does not produce them: the
fire, (I mean the elementary fire) is so thin, it cannot be altered and made
thinner: if the fire were thicker, it would become hot air: neither are
Meteors made of air: for if air were made thinner, it would turn to fire:
the exhalation then is not from air nor fire.

Affirmatively.
Meteors have their production from the Waters and Earth: from the waters do
arise moist vapors, from the Earth arise exhalations more hot and dry, and are
more thin, and pierce the Air, ascending up more free then Vapors to the place
where they are fired and consumed, and it is probable that Meteors are rather
exhalations then Vapors. As there be seen some at Sea: it may be they arise
from vapors, or from some Isles of the Sea; or exhalations may be drawn from
Fleetes of ships, and great Navies, this is but conjectures, we must leave
many causes in nature, to the God of Nature, who only knows them.


NOt in the heat of Summer, for then the Sun is strong on the earth in his
heat, and consumes the matter whereof the Meteors are formed. Not in the deep
of Winter, for then the Sun is so far distant, that it is not so operative to
raise the exhalations up into the Air. But the Spring and Autumn is the
ordinary time. As for the Star that did lead to Christ in the deep of winter,
it may be the Country is temperate, or it was an extraordinary Meteor or
Star for special use. God can throw the reins on natures neck, yet keeps
the bridle in his mouth; he can work by secondary means, and without them.


THe forms of Meteors are according to the quantity or quality: if the
quantity be very great, it is not carried up to the upper Region of the Air,
when the grossenes and heaviness is the quality of it; but if the quantity be
great, and the quality be thin and light, it goes to the upper Region, and
there is fired. And to prove that great quantity is exhaled up in the Meteor,
it appears in some Comets or blazing Stars, which continue many days after
they be fired, before they be consumed, which argues there was a great quantity
that lasted so long.


THe place is to be considered two ways. First, the place of their production.
Secondly, whither they ascend.

1. The place of their production is not far North, for that is too cold: nor
yet in the South, for there the Sun beams are too hot; but that part of the
earth which is like the Spring and Autumn, all the year there are most
Meteors: Under the Equinoctial line are none, nor in the two extremes, but in
the temperate Climat there they arise.

2. The place whither they ascend, it is to the upper Region, for the middle
Region wanting the reflection of the Sun beams, is extreme cold. In the
lower Region is Frosts and Mists, in the middle Region, Clouds and rain, in
the upper Region Comets and blazing stars.

Conclusions applicatory.
An Hypocrite is like unto a Meteor. First, a Meteor is raised from the Earth,
yet is not earth: So an Hypocrite is raised in the Church, yet is not of the
Church: They went out from us, says St. John, but are not of us; he is not of
the true Church of Christ's mystical body.

2. A Meteor has an ascent, yet is not heavenly; so an Hypocrite may be
advanced, yet not of an heavenly disposition.

3. An Hypocrite may make more show than a true Christian: as a meteor may
blaze more for a time, than a fixed star.

4. A Meteor is after his advancement burned; so is an Hypocrite his end is to
be burned.

5. A Meteor rises not under the Equinoctial line, nor in the hot south; nor
in the cold north: nor does an Hypocrite grow where is the feeling of Gods
presence, nor where is the heat of true zeal and fervent devotion, nor yet in
the cold, among Pagens, Heathens, and Infidels.

6. There be diverse forms of Meteors, some round, some streaming, like
Piramides: so some Hypocrites go round like the Mill-horse, still the same,
and are as the spider still in their cicular motion; some are streaming, like
Iehu and Demas: so long as the clammy matter of worldly hopes last and then go
out; some are great below and narrow above, large toward the world, and little
toward heaven; like to Piramides.

7. Some Meteors are thin, and are soon fired and consumed, some more full
of matter, and endure longer, some are fearful to behold: so some Hypocrites
are soon discovered; some are longer in their professions: others are terrible
in their deaths. So much of Meteors.

Of the Winds.
1. Of the generation of the winds.

2. Of the diversity of Winds.

3. Of the usefulness of them.

4. Of the strength of the wind.

5. Resolves concerning the wind.

First, of the generation of the Winds.
SOme Naturalists have ghessed at three causes: First, that the Sun draws up
thin vapors and exhalations, they falling down by violence turn to winds.
Secondly, some think the air being pend up in vaults and caves of the earth,
having a vent do break out, and so spread in winds, blowing on the earth.
Thirdly, some hold, certain vapors meeting together from between the
mountains, coming from the crannies of the earth, are the winds: some to all
this think, there is a soft moving of the air, yet it is not wind, but a
cool vapor.

But he that made them tells us a better doctrine, Ioh. 3. thou know not from
whence it comes: we must deny our curiosity, and submit to the verity: No man
knows from whence the winds do come; this is a lawful ignorance.

Secondly, of the diversity of winds.
THe East wind is hot and dry, of the fiery nature.

The West wind cold and moist of the watery nature.

The South wind hot and moist.

The North wind cold and dry.

The winds between these are qualified; of the several tempers whereof they
do participate.


1. They carry the Clouds, and bring us Rain.

2. They clear the Air, for our health of body.

3. They cause our ships to fetch Commodities.

4. They make our Mils to grind our Corn.

5. They cool the Air in the Summers heat.

6. Without the Winds nothing would grow or prosper. Revel. 7.1.3.


1. The Winds do raise the mighty waves of the Sea. Jonah 1.4. Psalm. 107.25.26.

2. The winds have blown down houses, Job 1.19.

3. The Winds rend the Mountains, and breaks the Rocks. 1. Kings 19.11. And
experience proves the winds have carried away rickes of Corn and Hay; rooted
up and torn great trees. The fierce winds mooves the great ships. James 3.4.




it has been Gods instrument diverse times for famous uses.

1. An East Wind divided or dried the Red Sea. Exodus 14. ver. 21.

2. An East Wind brought the Grasshoppers on Egypt. Exodus. 10.13.

3. An East Wind perplexed Jonah. Jonah 4.8.

4. An East Wind brake the ships. Psalm. 48.7. The East Wind is, vrentem,
ventum, a searing Wind; and is said to blast. Genesis 41.6. to scatter. Iere.
18.17. The East Wind is hurtful to the fruits, trees, and leaves. Mr. Calvin
on Isaiah the 27.8.





2. The Wind sweetly cooles and refreshes our bodies in the heat of Summer: so
the spirit does sweetly refresh and comfort our souls in the heat of
tentations and afflictions.

3. When men fast, then there increases wind in their stomachs; and when men
fast the spirit of God increases in their souls.

4. Without the wind nothing can grow and prosper: so without the spirit,
nothing can prosper concerning our salvation.

5. The wind is on the Sea and Land, with a kind of vbiquitie; so the spirit
is every where, being truly omnipresent.

6. The wind is invisible, and cannot be seen: so is the spirit of God
invisible,

7. By the effects we conclude, the wind has blown, and we do feel it
sencibly to blow. So by effects we know the spirit of God has been working,
and we feel his holy motions and consolations.

8. We cannot command the Wind to come, nor hold it always with us at our
pleasure, nor can we obtain the motions of the Spirit when we will, nor retain
them at our pleasure.

The disparity between the Wind and the Spirit.
1. The Wind is a creature, the Spirit is a Creator.

2. The wind is an unreasonable creature, the Spirit is the Doner of reason to
the creature.

3. The wind is always limited in his proper sphaere: the Spirit is
unlimitted, and fills Heaven and earth.

4. The wind blows equally on all, both good and bad; but the spirit of God
blows on the Elect, and makes a difference.

5. The winds blow and often do harm, where the spirit comes, he always does
good.

6. Satan has been permitted to raise the wind. Job. 1. but was never
permitted to give the good spirit.

7. VVind in the body makes men sick. But the spirit in the soul makes men
well.

8. The most favorable winds can bring but to a temporal haven, the blasts of
Gods spirit brings to a blessed Heaven.

9. When the Winds blow strong, it hinders men in their journey; but when the
Spirit moves strong, we make the more speed, and with the more comfort and
less trouble.

Aeolus the King of the winds?

Aelion Islands, whereof he was the King: they saw the place where the winds
arose, but looked not up to him that raised them.

Jtalians make a God of the Wind, and dedcate a Temple to it?

Sigismund had prepared a mighty Navy to invade Italy, a strong North wind
tare and sunk his ships, and dispierced his army, then the Jtalians made of
the wind a God, being ignorant that there is a Creator of the winds, Amos the
fourth the last verse. The Wine is but a creature.



In three particulars.



Secondly, other winds spread abroad: the Whirlewinde has a circular-like
motion, it holds together and runs round.

Thirdly, other winds do continue longer in motion: the Whirle-winde parts
assunder, and is sooner dissolved.





1. To think of Gods goodness, which now opens his treasures, and sends forth
the winds to us.

2. I should have thoughts of obedience; for the winds obey Christ.

3. I must believe more than I see: I cannot see God, nor Angels, nor my own
soul, nor the Wind, yet believe all this to be.

4. I may think of my mortallity; for my life is as the wind that passes
away. Psalm the one hundred and third.

5. I should desire the Spirit of God; which as the wind blows where it
lists, to blow on my soul, that I may be truly regenerated, and so
flourishing in grace, that I may be as a garden. John 3. Cant. 4.16.



is as a storm. Isaiah Chapt. the twenty fifth, verse the fourth.

2. In their mutability, the winds are variable and inconstant; so are wicked
men in their words, Psalm 5.9. in their deeds, therefore compared to a broken
tooth, or sliding foot; and we are forewarned not to put confidence in them.
Mich. 7.

3. The winds are in all parts wheresoever we go, and the wicked walk on
every side, and are in all places. Psalm. 12.8.



Manasses against Ephraim, Ephraim against Manasses, both against Judah. Isaiah
Chapter the ninth, verse twenty one.

2. A storm comes often times in secret when men are asleep: so wicked men
come on the godly at unawares. Psalm. 11.2.

3. The storm comes to spoil and undo men: so the wicked will spoil and
undo the godly; as says the Prophet, they will undo a man and his heritage.

4. The storm does wet, but not wound us: so the persecutions of the wicked
do wet our cheeks with tears, but hurt not our souls.

5. The storm is not in all places, nor lasts always; nor is the rage of the
wicked on all persons, nor all times, Revel. 2.10. Satan shall put some of you
in prison, some, not all, and ye shall have tribulation ten days, not
always, the time is limited.

Cant. 4.16.

wind has prospered, there men do take pleasure to walk; so Christ takes
delight to be among his gracious people.

2. In such a garden is variety of herbs, and flowers, fruits, and spices: so
in the people of God are variety of gifts and graces.

3. Such gardens are fenced and walled: so Gods people are protected and
defended.

4. Such gardens are weeded and watered: so Gods people are purged and
instructed.

5. In such gardens is beautiful order: so it is with Gods people in their
several places, they performing several duties, meddling each Christian with
their own business, are in a beautiful order.

6. As such a Garden seems dead in winter, yet there is life at the roots: so
Gods people do seem dead in afflictions, yet there is grace in their hearts.

7. The garden is the most beloved plot of ground, though the owner have much
land: so the people of God are beloved above others, though all the earth be
the Lords.

8. A blind man, and one that cannot smell, has small felicity in such a
garden: so those Satan has blinded, and those that have no spiritual savor,
do find small comfort or felicity in the company of the go^ly, though they
be excellent in graces, and the gales of the holy Spirit, as the North and
South wind has blown upon them.

Thus having gone through with some digressions and many imperfections: the
Heavens, the Sun, the light before the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Air,
the Clouds, the Rainbow, the Rain, the Earth, the Water, the Fire, the
Winds. I here make an end of these Meditations, and conclude the few leaves
ensuing with Meditations of Man: in whom is the Compendium of all the rest: he
has matter and substance with the Heavens, reason with the Angels, light with
the Sun, a parcel out of the earth, sense with beasts, growth with trees, (I
had almost forgot) sin with Devils.

The Exordium.
ALl our thoughts can reach unto, may be considered in two heads: The
Creator, and the creatures; The Creator is known to us in his Essence and
his Attributes; the creatures are two ways considered, invisible and visible:
the invisible two ways, either the habitation or the inhabitants: the
habitation express two ways, made though without hands, and glorious; the
glory express two ways in the perfection, and perpetuity: the perfection two
ways, freedom from all evil, the presence of all good.

The Inhabitants considered two fold, the Angels, and Saints; the Angels
considered two ways, in their Nature and office: their Nature considered two
ways, in the purity and celeritie: their purity is considered, derivately and
comparatively: their office is two fold, to praise GOD to do service to the
Elect; their praises are these two ways considered, as it is sincere, and
perpetual: their service to the Elect is unseene, and certain.

Again the Angels are considered in their number, their number is known to
GOD, unknown to Man: the Saints are considered in their Souls there, in their
bodies here in the grave, only two excepted, Henoch and Elias, whose bodies
are in Heaven before, as types of Christ, as evidences of the Resurrection. The
visible creatures are two fold, the Heavens, and the Earth: the Heavens are two
ways considered in their sphaeres and orbs, or in other phrases the Heavens,
and their ornaments: the Heavens are considered, as out-spread and firm: the
orbs are two fold, the Sun, and the Planets: the Sun is considered in his
light and swiftness; in his light is two things as it is the fountain, and as
it is communicated: the Moon is considered in her mutation and blemishes: the
Stars are set forth in multitude, and glory. The Earth is considered singly or
coniunctively; coniunctively by a Synecdoche, as it is land, and water, making
one globe. The waters are considered in the Sea, in the Rivers: the Sea is
considered in his bounds, in his motion: the motion is considered in the
flowing, and ebbing, the bounds are considered in the stabilitie, and
perpetuity. The Earth is singly considered in the substance, and dependence:
the dependence on Gods power, in the Air: the substance in the massinesse, and
riches: the riches latente or patente: the patente invegatives or the
sensitives: the sensitives have life, and feeling: the vegatives are part in
the earth, part above the earth: the creatures do one serve another, and all
serve Man: Man consists of a Soul, and a body: the Soul is distinct, and
immortal, the body has senses, and members: the Soul has substance, and
faculties: the substance is spiritual, and invisible: the body has
generation, and corruption. So much of the Exordium, beginning at God, ending
with Man. The Meditations follow: 1. What the Soul is. 2. How it was created.
3. Of the Conjunction with the body. 4. Of the immortality of the Soul. 5.
The difference of immortal, and eternal. 6. Of the life, and death of the
Soul.


A Conclusion concerning Gods Image on the Soul, explained by Resolves.
1. Concerning Images what they be. 2. What the Image of GOD is. 3. How Adam
was made after Gods Image. 4. Whether this Image still remains. 5. In whom
this Image is repaired. 6. Reflections applicatorie from the former heads.

IT is a spiritual Distinct invisible substance, spiritual opposed to that is
corporal: It is Distinct, and has a being and existence being separated and
departed from the body. It had an entrance, and has a return, Ecclesiastes
12.7. It being a Spirit, therefore is invisible. This quick, nimble,
apprehensive, very active stirring, working. It has being and faculties, some
superior, as the understanding and mind; some inferior, as the desires and
affections. The former rule, the later obey; the former contrive, the later do
act. The understanding is as the King, the will, the Lord Mayor; the memory,
the Recorder; reason and discourse, as the Sheriffs; determination, as the
Aldermen: Conscience, as the Serieant; Devotion, as the Divine; the Affections,
as the Commons: in this City of the Soul of Man.


There was the Creating of Adams Soul, and our Souls: How Adam came by his
Soul we know; how we come, by our Souls; for the manner we know not: Adams
Souls was by inspiration, Genesis 2.7. Spiration and Reason differs Adams Soul,
and makes a distinction from the Soul of other creatures, which is only in
the blood: we come by our Souls, some think, by participation; as one candle
does light another; by generation, a man beget a man compleat^: some think our
Souls come by infusion by a particular inspiration; when the child first
quickens in the womb: but this is certain, no man knows the way of the
Spirit, Eccles. 11.5. when all is imagined, little is concluded concerning this
question.

Soul with the body.
GOD made three sorts of Creatures in the beginning, Spirits without bodies, as
Angels; Bodies without immortal Spirits, as beasts, fowls, and fishes; Bodies
and immortal Spirits, having a joining together, as men. There is a Divine
Conjunction of the Deity to CHRIST'S Humanity, a matrimonial Conjunction
between man and wife, a mystical Conjunction between Christ and the
Faithful, a personal Conjunction between the Soul, and Body.

This Conjunction.
1. Is a Conjunction of contraries, as flesh and Spirit. 2. Such a Conjunction
as may be separated by death. 3. After the day of Judgment, this shall be
eternal. 4. In this Conjunction there is a fellow feeling, a simpathizing: The
passions alter the looks and visage, the sensible pains affect the Soul. 5.
The more Noble is to rule, the inferior to obey; Reason (not appetite or
sense) should govern.

GOD has immortality, 1 Timothy 1.17. he has it essensually, independantly; we
have it by derivation, by donation: GOD has made our Souls immortal, and our
Bodies though subject to corruption, yet by Divine ordination shall be
immortal after the Resurrection.

Arguments of the Souls Immortality.
1. The Father of our Spirits is immortal, Heb. 12.9. he is the GOD of the
Spirits of all flesh, Number. 16. yea the Father of our Spirits, and by
immortality, our Souls ressemble the Father of them.

2. The operation of the Soul shows it has more than mortality. The Soul
acts, and flies beyond the power of our senses: It flies from East to West
suddenly; It passes over the Seas, it calculates the course of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars. The Soul discourses of things past, and foreseeth things
to come: In hard matters the Soul first doubts, then deliberates, then
chooses, the Soul passes through humane actions; defining, dividing,
compounding, dissolving: the Soul pearceth the skies, and conceaves of GOD,
and of his Angels to be immortal Essences, thus the Soul conceaves of
immortal things, strives for immortal rewards, fears immortal punishment.

3. The vigor, strength, and duration of the Soul proves it immortal, age,
and sickness do weaken the body; yet the Soul has life and vigor, the
Soul wantes manifestation: in children old-men, and madmen, drunken-men, and
men a sleep: the Sun is the same though the clouds do hinder the shining,
the Soul is the same, and as an able workman, whose instruments be weak or
out of order, or broken.

4. The name (...) which is in Latin Spiritus, proves the Immortality of the
Soul; for Soul and Spirit are promiscuously taken one for the other: John
13.21. Turbatus est Spiritus, John 12.27. Nunc anima mea turbata est: In the
first Text, he was troubled in Spirit; in the last Text, he was troubled in
Soul: a spirit is immortal, so is the soul.

5. The soul is not derived out of any matter, which is the root of
corruption; so Angels, and the souls of men are not made of composition of the
Elements; so are immortal, and not subject to dissolution.

6. The last and least Argument is the Testimony of Heathen men: Solon says
the soul is an incorruptible substance, apt to receive Joie or pain here and
else where: Plato says: Though the body die, the Soul dies not. Socrates
says, The Soul that follows Virtue, shall see God. Anaxaxchus put to death
with Iron hammers, says: Knock hard the flesh, and bones; but Anaxaxchus thou
can not hurt.


Immortal is opposed to death, Eternal is opposed to time: Immortal has
respect to being without limitation of time, Eternal respects no time,
persons, nor things: there would be eternity, were there no persons, things,
nor time. Immortal is more noble than Eternal; for the Angels, and souls of
men are nearer GOD bearing his Image: Eternity is a vaste Ocean without
measure or limitation.

The Immortalls do dwell in Eternity at last, as the Inhabitants in the house.


First of the life of the soul here consider, 1. What life is. 2. The several
kinds of life. Life is a power to move, and to act; In the Creator it is an
essential, perfect, single, Divine, being there is the fountain: man had his
life at the first by spiration: Genesis 2.7. called breath of lives, for the
several faculties it is in, or the several operations or degrees.

There are three degrees of life, in the womb, in the world, in heaven; the
life in the womb is secret, the life in the world is active, the life in
heaven is contemplative, a life of vision.

The life in the womb is secret, in the conveyance, and in the continuance: In
the conveyance, Eccles. 11.5. Thou know not the way of the Spirit. In the
continuance, being nourisht by the Navill, and preserved by a Divine Providence
rather to be admired than disputed.

2. The kinds of life are three, a life of Nature, a life of Grace, a life of
Glory: The life of Nature is in such things as the strength of Nature can act,
all attain not to the like operations, nor the same man is all times alike;
one man excelles another, and the same man in time he does excel his former
actions: some have attained to a great knowledge of the heavenly sphares and
orbs: some to the knowledge of the terrestrial globe, finding out the
minerals that lay hid, and the Nature of the Creatures that do live, and grow
on the earth: man has divided the world into four parts, for distinction of
Countries, and people; some attain to Arithmetique, some are Musical, man
has found out writing, printing, Martial discipline, Navigation, policy in
Government, curious Arts, Phisique, Rethorique, Logique, much variety for the
being, and well being of humane life.

The life of Grace is a spiritual life, which only the regenerate do attain
unto:
1. Consider how it is communicated. 2. How it is manifested. 3. How it is
preserved.
First, how it is communicated: Christ is the original of light, and life,
John 1.9. He is the way, the truth, and the life. John 14.6. He is the
Resurrection, and the life. John 11.25. He is a quickening Spirit. 1 Cor.
15.45. Giving life to his members. This life is called spiritual life: 1.
Because the Spirit of God works it. 2. Because the carnal man knows it not,
it is the spiritual man has spiritual life. 3. It Is employed in spiritual
things, spiritual motions, spiritual words, and actions.


Secondly, how it is manifested:

1. By prayers, desires, longings after God; where is breath, there is life.

2. By sense of sin, to feel Idle thoughts, indisposednesse to duties, etc.
there is life; for where is sense, and feeling, there is life.

3. Affections against sin, and for GOD argues life; for where is heat, is
life.

4. To do good works, works of mercy, works of piety, works of
mortification; argues life, for where is motion, and action, there is life.

Thirdly, how spiritual life is preserved.

1. By a good diet, we must strive for appetite, and for food: labor, and salt
things, and sharp things brings appetite: we must exercise our selves in the
Law, and apply the curses and the threatenings home to the soul; this will
make us to hunger for Christ, for mercy, and grace: then labor for
nourishment; the word preached and read, the Sacraments, and prayer, and
conference, and meditation are spiritual nourishments to preserve spiritual
life.

2. Life is preserved by exercise, we should put forth our habilities in
duties, as in Gods sight, and for Gods Glory, here stirring is for souls
health.

3. Life is preserved by Physique.

1. There is preventing Physique, to remember Gods Presence, Gods Law, the
great account, the mercies we enjoy, the example of Christ; these means keeps
us from sinful diseases.

2. There purging Physique, true sorrow, free Confession, humiliation, prayer,
turning to God.

3. There is restoring Physique to embrace the tender of mercy, the promise of
grace, to lay hold on the blood of Christ, to ponder what is Gods sweet
Nature, what GOD has been to others, what he has been to us formerly, what
he is to us at this present, what a sweet Mediator we have at the right hand
of GOD: this may restore us.

In the third place, as there is a life of Nature, and a life of Grace; so
there is for the soul a life of Glory.

1. There is an eternal life of Glory. 2. The felicity of that life.
That there is an eternal life, it is plain, Mark 10.30. In the world to come
eternal life: John 3.16. Whosoever believes, shall have everlasting life.
Eternal life is four and twenty times to be read in the New Testament,
besides the other names of heavenly Glory, heavenly inheritance, etc.

The Arguments to prove an eternal life.

1. Other ways the Scriptures would be false, which do so manifestly reveal
it unto us.

2. Else we loose an Article of our Creed.

3. The very heathens have guessed at it.

4. Else the Saints of all people were most miserable. 1 Cor. 15.19.


The Felicity of that life.
1. It Is a life of Glory, in a Kingdom of Glory, with the God of Glory.

2. It Is a life of pleasure: Psalm 16.11. There is sweetness with our Glory,
then they that mourned, here shall laugh: those that fasted, shall feast: and
them imprisoned, shall be enlarged.

3. It Is a life of triumph, there be palms in their hands, in token of
victory: then the poor child of God, that is now militant, shall triumph.

4. It Is a life of safety, there no thief can come to rob, no enemy to
assalte, no Devil to tempte; there shall be no arrest, no suite, nor
accusation against us.

5. A life of love, Love is the Law of the Kingdom, every one is glad of
another felicity; so the joy is mixed, and enlarged: they so abounding in love
one to another, and all to the Lord.

6. It Is a spiritual life glorified, there is no thirst, nor weariness, or
lumpishnesse.

7. It Is a life of knowledge, Ignorance is expelled, we know here in part; but
then we shall know in perfection.

8. It Is a life of praises, then prayers cease, but praises never cease; we
shall do it for ever with spiritualnesse, and liveliness; and again we sound
forth the praises of God, and again, and again, with infinite sweetness.

9. It Is a life of Communion with Christ, and the Angels, and all the Elect: we
shall be all of one mind, none shall separate from this assembly; nor one
profane man be admitted.

10. It Is a life of Satisfaction, we shall say, Lord I have enough, Lord I am
full, I am satisfied, richly rewarded; here we ever want something, but that
life knows want of nothing.

Of the death of the Soul.
1. What Death is. 2. How the Soul can be said to die. 3. The cause of death.
4. The signs of death.
First, what death is, Pliny calls it ruin. Horace, the last line of things.
Some call death a dissolution or departing: sometimes it is afflictions, 2 Cor.
1.10. Who delivered us from so great a death: sometimes it is a dangerous thing,
2 Kings 4.40. Death is in the pot.

Death is the separating the Soul from the body, Heb. 9.27 our living out of
Gods favor, and without the Word of God, is the shadow of death. The
separation of the Soul from the body, is bodily death: the separation of grace
from the Soul, is spiritual death: the separation of the Soul, and body from
God and Glory is eternal death.

Secondly, how the Soul can be said to dye: It dies not in respect of
existence, and being; but relatively, in respect of Gods Grace and favor, as
the body being dead, there is ears, and eyes, and hands, and feet; but
without life, so it is a carcass, till life be put into it, being void of
motion: so the Soul has understanding, memory, will, and affections; yet is
dead by Nature, having no spiritual motion, hence it is said, Men are dead in
trespasses and sins; Ephesians. 2.1. Let the dead bury their dead, Matthew. 8.22.
This thy brother was dead, Luke 15.31. She that lives in pleasure, is dead
while she lives, 1 Timothy 5.6.

Thirdly, the cause of death is sin, there was an immortal, lively estate in
man's innocence: Death was threatened as a punishment, and was accomplished when
man had sinned: Adam stood or fell for himself, and his Posterity, as Levy
paid Tithes in Abraham: Heb. 7.9. So we sinned in Adam, being in his loins, so
death went over all men in as much as all men have sinned, Romans 5.12.

Fourthly, the signs and marks of death.

1. Where a dead body is there in time, is rottenness, so it is with the dead
soul, Psalm 53.3. All are corrupted, that is loathsome and stinking:
Ainsworth.

2. Where death is, there is insensiblenesse: So the Souls, dead in sin are
past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. They are so sensles, they feel nothing, though the
foundations of the earth be remooved, Psalm. 82.5. They in greatest danger be,
as the drunkard asleep on the top of the m^st, Pro. 23.34.

3. Where men are dead, they feed not; present to them the daintiest dish,
they taste not of it: so men that are dead in sin, feed not on Christ the
heavenly Manna, nor on the word, the food of their Souls, if wisdom make
her feast, and prepare her dainties, the living are her guestes, the dead in
sin hear not her invitations, not come to her house, nor eat with her at
her table.

Of Gods Image on the Soul, resolving:
First, what an Image is.

2. What the Image of GOD is. 3. How Adam was made after Gods Image. 4. Whether
this Image still does remain. 5. In whom it is repaired.
First, what an Image is: It is not only a resemblance, for the Sun
resembles God in light and brightness, but yet the Sun is not an Image of
GOD, an Image is a likeness, form, shape and similitude: Genesis 1.26. Let us
make man in our Image. Exodus 20.4. Thou shall not make any graven Image, nor
the likeness. The Image is substantial, so Adam begat Seth in his likeness,
Genesis 5.3. So Christ is the substantial Image of his Father, Coloss. 1.15. Heb.
1.3. Or an Image is artificial, Matthew. 22.20. Whose Image is this, says
Christ. By Art Images are molten, graven, carved, painted: or an Image is
spiritually taken: Ephesians 4.24. This Image is Holiness and Righteousness.

Secondly, what the Image of GOD is.
No corporal likeness is Gods Image, for he is a Spirit of infinite
perfection, the Image of God is Knowledge, Goodness, Soveraigntie,
Righteousness, Immortality, Blessedness, etc.

Thirdly, how Adam was made after Gods Image.
1. He was made Good, Genesis 1 3. Simply good, without mixture of evil.

2. He was made in Knowledge, Col. 3.10. He knew God, and the Creatures after
an excellent manner, and gave the Creatures suitable names. Genesis 2.19.

3. He was created Holy, Ephesians. 4.24. free from all sin, set apart for God.

So fourthly, He was made Righteous, Eccles. 7.3. being conformable to the will
of his Creator, fit to conceave a right of things in his mind, fit to will
righteousness, to remember righteousness, to love righteousness, to speak
righteousness, and to do it.

5. He was made Glorious, having these admirable endowments shining in his
Soul, and his body, without infirmity or deformity; strong, nimble, active,
healthie.

6. He was Immortal, heat, and cold, moisture and drought, were (as I take
it) perfectly compounded: fire and water, air and earth so curiously mixed,
and so tempered by the Lord of the Artistes, that man was not in this estate
capable of sickness, sorrow, pain, or death.

7. He was Lord over Gods works, and bare the Image of God in superiority,
Psalm 8. Thus was man every way happy, resembling the blessed God: the favor
of his Lord shined upon him, the Creatures submitted to him, the Air did not
distemper him, the Lion fawned on him like the dog: he had no lusts, nor
passions within him, he was joyful and wise, and rich filled with contentment
and satisfaction, he most lively resembled, and was the very Image of his
Creator.

Fourthly, whether this Image of God does still remain in us.
Man being in honor, he stood not in that condition; but is like the beasts
that perish: instead of goodness. Now we are evil, Matthew. 7.11. Instead of
knowledge, we are Ignorant, 1 Cor. 2.14. We were created holy in Adam, but
now are unclean: Job 14.4. Instead of righteousness, we have found out many
Inventions contrary to righteousness, Eccles. 7.31. Instead of glory, we
have shame; which makes us cover the nakedness of our bodies with garments,
and the nakedness of our souls with excuses. diminutions, distinctions,
imputations to others: Instead of Immortality, we have death attends on us,
and is sure of us; although we be Lords over the Creatures, sometimes they
rebel, 1 Kings 13.24. In steed of being happy, now we are accursed in our
Natures with sinful dispositions, Romans 7.23. And accursed in our labors: the
Earth sometimes denies fruits to releeve us, and brings forth briars and
thorns to greeve us, Micha. 6.15. Genesis 3.18.

Fifthly, In whom is the Image of God repaired?
Only in the Regenerate, they so learn CHRIST, that they are renewed in the
spirit of their minds, Ephesians. 4.23. GOD shines in their hearts, 2 Cor. 4.6.
And turns them from darkness to light, Act. 26.18. In the Gospel they so
behold Gods glory, so as they are changed into Gods Image, 2 Cor. 3.18. They
put off the old man, which is corrupt, and put on the new man, which makes
them like their first Creation, in holiness, and righteousness. Ephesians. 4 24.
These new Creatures are after the Image of God by resemblance, and are in this
his Image.

1. He is a God of knowledge: 1 Samuel 2.3. And these are an understanding
people, being fed with knowledge, Ier. 3.15. the Image of God is repaired in
knowledge, Colos. 3.10.

2. God is an holy God, Leviticus 11.44. The Regenerate are a holy people: 1
Pet. 2.9.

3. God is a merciful God, Exodus 34.6. And these are merciful like him,
Colloss. 3.12.

4. God is righteous, Psalm 92.15. And these are a righteous people, Psalm
11.6.

5. God keeps his Covenants, Daniel 9.4. And these people keep their
Covenants, Psalm. 15.4.

6. God cannot abide iniquity, Habakkuk 1.13. And these people hate evil,
Psalm 97.10.

Adam had Gods Image in his body, and soul; the Image of God was in his
Nature, and if he had not sinned, we had received Gods Image by a succession:
but now it is by reparation, here imperfectly in grace; hereafter we shall have
it transcendently in bliss and glory.

Reflections applicatorie from the former Heads.
1. Thou, O Lord, have given me a soul, O grant me thy saving grace, else I
were better have no soul at all. By thy grace preserve my soul, which thou
have given me; thy way I admire, but cannot comprehend.

2. Thou have joined my body and soul together, wherein I see thy power, and
wisdom, that can make such contraries to unite together: O join Christ and
my soul together, that nothing may make a separation; not life, nor death.

3. Thou only have Immortality from thy self, my Immortality is dependant
on thee, the Blessed and Immortal God; give me Faith, and Sanctification here,
and I shall not fail of Immortal bliss hereafter; let my thoughts of my
mortality be mixed with hopes of Immortality, and dwelling here in this
world, inhabited by mortals, let my conversation be in heaven, where mortality
cease; and when I come to lay down at my death, the rags of mortality, let
me not be like them, which despair of Immortality, and so die, raging, or
sensles, let me live the life of the righteous, that my last end may be like
his, that though I die, as a mortal; yet I may have a witness within me, and
give evidence without me, that I have striven for, and waited for an estate
Immortal.

4. As there is the death of the body, by the departing of the soul; so there
is the death of the soul, by the departing of God from it: O Lord, my life,
depart not thou from me, then I die. I die eternally; pardon me, and abide with
me, O cleanse me, and abide with me; set up thy government in my heart,
reign in my soul as a King, on his Throne, I am thine, do with me what thou will, only abide with me, and do not depart from me.

5. I live a life of Nature, whereby I excel the unreasonable Creatures, Lord,
when shall I live a life of grace? say to my sins, die; say to my prayers
live: when shall Lattaine mortification, a heavenly frame of heart, and be
filled with the fruits of righteousness? O! that I might attain to the
abundance of grace, that my whole life might be godly, and religious, holy,
heavenly, and spiritual; that it might be my meat, and drink, to do thy
blessed Will: O! that I could subdue my self, deny mine own corrupt will;
forgive injuries, be spiritual in duties, love them most, that be most godly;
be weaned from the world, and hope for Christ's appearing, as he that lives a
life of grace.

6. There is a life of Glory, that follows a life of Grace: I may admire it,
but not conceive it: I better know what it is not, then what it is. Honor,
Glory, Joy, Pleasures are there; for the measure it is unconceaveable, eternal
life, good company is there: a Crown, a Kingdom, an Inheritance is there: O!
that the Contemplation of that long life might swallow up my eager thoughts,
for this short life: O! that the Joys of that life might in my mind sweeten
the sorrows of this life: O! that the rest of that life, might sweeten my mind
in respect of the cares, labors, and troubles of this life: O! that with
Christ, I could look up to the Joy set before me, and with Moses look to the
recompense of reward: Lord raise Meditations of heaven in my heart, give me a
heavenly use of the thoughts of heaven: let me oftener think of heaven, oftener
speak of heaven: be more resolved for the ways of heaven; let me so have
heaven in my soul here, that I may have my soul in heaven hereafter, that I
may at last have that in fruition, that I have now in expectation.

7. Thy Image, O Lord, was stamped on man, at the first, as a Divine Character;
but alas! we have lost thy Image, and are most uglie, filthy, abominable
objects: I have nothing to present before thee, but sin, and shame; yet I fnd
in thy Word, there is a remnant shall be restored again, thine Image repaired,
and their souls and bodies saved, if I live and die in mine own Image; so I
shall arise at the last: then O mountains fall on me, O hills cover me: I am
ashamed of my filthiness now, I shall be worse ashamed then, if I be not in
this life renewed: O repair my soul, that I may have thy Image, not only in
superiority, over thy Creatures under me; but by regeneration, and renewing
of the Holy Ghost.

So much of the Soul, next of the Body.

Of the Body of Man.
1. Whereof the Body was made. 2. Of the Excellency of the Body. 3. Of the
mortality of the Body. 4. Of the Immortality of the Body.

Not of the Angelical Nature, nor of the heavenly Bodies, the Sun, Moon, or
Stars; but of the dust of the Earth, Genesis 2.7.

This puts me in mind of four things: 1. Of my baseness, I am but dust, and
earth. 2. Of my frailty, and weakness; I am brittle earth. 3. Of my
worldliness, I bend toward earth in my mind, to please my earthly body. 4.
Of my lumpishnesse, heaviness, and dullness; I am but a clod of earth.


1. The baseness of my body is expressed by these terms: Houses of clay, Job
4.19. Vile bodies, Philippians 3.21.

2. The frailty, and weakness of our bodies, has these terms: Man is a
worm, Job 15.6. Man is as grass, and as the flower of the field, Psalm
103.15.

3. The worldliness of earthly man is set down in these phrases: ye covet:
James 4.2. and it is said to be wicked covetousness, Esa. 57.17. The covetous
man is an Idolater, Ephesians. 5.5.

4. The lumpishnesse of man is expressed in these words, or the like; Go to the
pismire thou sluggard: Pro. 6.6. Awake thou that sleep, Ephesians. 5.14. Arise,
call upon thy God, Iona. 1.6.

My baseness should kill my pride, my frailty should kill my
selfe-dependance, my earthlinesse makes me unlike the Angels, my lumpishnesse
should make me desire to be quickened.


1. The Excellency appears by the Creation of it: the Blessed Trinity
consulted, and fashioned it: Genesis 1.26.

2. All other bodies serve man's body, as being more excellent, than they all:
the Celestial bodies give man bodily light, the fowls, and fishes, and
beasts feed his body; the massy body of the earth is for his habitation, and
delight, and nourishment.

3. Christ took humane flesh, and joined it to the Godhead, and now our bodies
are dignified exceedingly.

4. Man's body has excellent qualities: of strength, beauty, nimblenesse, and
activitie: so that we may say, we are Artificiose confecti: Psalm 139.15.

Conclusions applicatorie.
1. I am to be careful of this curious worke-manship of GOD, not to spoil it
by wrestling, fighting, running, over-heating it, by drunkenness,
intemperancie; or any way, or course to bring ruin upon it.

2. I am to serve GOD with my body* by bowing before him, speaking to him, and
for him: by working, walking, doing, suffering, as the Apostle says: Glorify
God with your bodies, 1. Cor. 6.

3. I must not defile my neighbors body, nor oppress the weak, nor, in
passion, wound, or maime, or kill that body, that is Gods noble, curious work.

4. I am to prefer the bodies of my servants, being humane, (before the bodies
of horses, dogs, hawks, parrets, monkies, apes) to love them, and care for
them, above the rest.


Mortality, and death seises on man's body.

1. Because of sin, and transgression. 2. Because it is of mixed matter, and
composition. 3. Because of Gods will, and ordination.
First, Because of sin, Romans 5.12. Death came into the world by sin: sin
ushers-in death, and then turns from an usher to a sting: and though some that
receive grace, do pull out deaths sting by Repentance, yet death has matter
to work upon, we being

2. Compounded of the four Elements, and being made of composition, we are
subject to a dissolution: fire, air, water, and earth are our composition:
heat, cold, moisture, and drought do strive to hasten our Conclusion: if one
prove praedominant above the rest; then we conclude, and dissolve to dust.

3. Because of Gods will, and ordination; Statutum est: It Is appointed, and
ordained; that men must die, Heb. 9.27.

Conclusions applicatorie.
1. This should stir up my hatred against sin, which brings death: and to
manifest my hatred.

1. By studying the destruction of it. 2. By withdrawing the means that
nourishes it. 3. By groaning at the feeling, and presence of it. 4. By
frequenting holy duties, to subdue it. 5. By longing for the time to be quite
rid of it.
2. To remember my mortality: thereby, 1. I shall apply my heart to wisdom.
2. Be the more moderate in all outward things. 3. Be stirred, and quickened to
duties; for there is no knowledge, wit, nor invention in the grave.


3. I am to prepare for death, and dissolution:

1. By being sound in Repentance then death will be an advantage. Daily I am to
enlarge, as I am able, my Conviction, Confession, shame, sorrow, and forsaking
of my sins; so will the sting of death be pulled forth.

2. I am to die daily in affection: I must be a man resolved for death; then,
when sickness, and death comes, I may say: Whom seek ye? I am the man, take
me, I submit.

3. When death comes: (Mors ultima linea rerum) being my last line; I am to
endeavor to die in Faith, with patience, hopefully, with giving instruction to
others: if I have time, and senses, and speech: and to die with devotion,
commending my Soul to the Lord.

4. Death is an Ordinance of GOD, and all his Ordinances are for our good, and
much to be regarded. The benefit of this Ordinance, is,

1. We by it attain to perfect mortification, that we have been digging at
all the time of our new life, and loosened the earth about the roots of sin:
death comes as a mighty blustering wind, and down fall our sins, never to
rise any more.

2. By this Ordinance, we come to rest from all our drudgerie, turmoile, and
labor.

3. By this Ordinance, we have a passage to Paradise, the third Heaven,
Abraham's boosome, to the company of innumerable Angels; to our Inheritance,
our Masters Joy.

4. By this Ordinance, we be freed from oppression, dangers, fears, faintings,
indisposednesse, and evil company.

So much of the mortality of the body.


1. It was Immortal in the Creation.

2. It shall be Immortal at the Resurrection.

[3. Some have Immortality by translation, as Henoch, and Elias.]

First, Man's body was immortal by Creation: before sin, there was no death;
for death came into the world by sin: Romans 5.12. Man was not made mortal,
and sin came, not as an accident, to make death a punishment; as though Adam
had dyed, if he had not sinned: but now he dies, as a punishment of sin. But
he was made immortal, and had he not sinned, he had not dyed: for Angels had
immortality by Nature; Adam was immortal in his condition, being in his body,
without deformity; and his humors without contrariety: death, and all the
forerunners of death; sickness, sorrows, pains proceed from the
transgression, which altered our immortal estate.

Conclusions applicatorie.
1. Sin always makes man's exchanges woeful, we have changed immortality,
for mortality; beauty, for deformity; felicity, for misery.

2. This should humble us to consider, we were once immortal; great men,
decayed, do look back on former dignities with sighs.

3. We should lay the blame on our selves, when we feel our ruins: GOD made
us happy, blessed, and immortal in our Creation.

4. We may take a view of our immortal condition by Comparisons: If Absolon
was so beautiful, what was Adam? If Asahel was so swift of foot, if some men
are so wise, and skillful, having but some remainder of the excellency Adam
lost; what had he then himself in his joyful, innocent, immortal condition?

Secondly, the body shall be Immortal at the Resurrection.
It shall be raised spiritual, and immortal: 1 Cor. 15.44. Mortality, and
death, and sin shall be abolished.

There is the dominion of sin, the being of sin, the consequent of sin.

The dominion is taken away in our Regeneration: the being ceases at our
dissolution: the consequent, which is death, and mortality, is taken away at
the Resurrection.

Conclusions.
1. I that like of comeliness, and activitie, may look backward, what I was in
Adam; and forward, what I shall be at the Resurrection: and so exercise my
grief, and hope.

2. In all my lumpishnesse, and drowsinesse of body, I may comfort my self in
this, at the Resurrection, I shall serve GOD with that conformity of body to
my soul, that there shall be no let, nor impediment; then my body shall be
immortal, with my soul.

Then there shall be no actual evil, for Grace shall be consummated; nor
potentiall evil, being confirmed in goodness, and holiness; no actual
corruption of body; then there shall be no defect, nor deformity: no
potentiall corruption: then all passions cease, all sufferings are abolisht:
the passions of the senses shall be with Joy, and perfection: as Music
perfects our hearing.

3. With the prospect of Faith, by the light of the word, I see a glimpse of
the bodies immortality: Absolon had natural beauty, and here is a reflex in
this life; but then the soul shall appear in the body, as the wine in the
pure glass, the soul shall be joined to GOD, the body to the soul, and both
glorious.

Now to come to the particulars, and first of the Head.
The Head of man is: 1. Obvious, and is seen above the rest of the body. 2.
It Is honorable, above the rest of the members. 3. It Is united to the body. 4. It
conveighes influence to the body. 5. It is sensible, all the senses be in the
Head.



IT being placed on the body, high things we soon perceive; as a hill, or
mountain, or tree: so presently we look on the face, and epsy frowning, or
smiling, deformity, or beauty.

Conclusions.
1. There be three Heads: Mystical, Political, Natural. Mystically Christ is
the Head of his Church, which he has redeemed: Politically, the Prince, and
Governors be Heads; So are Masters of Families the Heads of their Families:
Naturally, the Head of the body, is the Head, and Chief. As my mystical Head
is obvious, not only to the Angels, and Saints in heaven by vision; but to the
Saints on earth by Faith: Heb. 2.9. We see Jesus Crowned, etc. So is my
natural head to all Spectatours. As I am the Head of a Family; I am obvious
to GOD, who sees my faylings, and forgives me: to my Conscience, who sees, and
checkes me: to men, who see, and censure me.

2. My Governors, as Heads Political, are obvious: God give them Grace to be
good examples, then we the people, may look on them, and learn virtue, and
godliness, wisdom, and moderation.

3. LONDON is an Head City, as the Head of Aram was Damascus: Esaias 7.8. And a
City obvious to the Land: O that they might see here Piety, and Godliness,
Temperance, and Justice: and less pride, riot, and wantonness.


THE Natural Head is honorable, so is the Political: 1 Pet. 2.17. Kings must
be honored, 1 Timothy 6.1. Masters must be honored, but Christ, who is the
mystical Head of his Church, he is to be honored above all.

Conclusions.
1. Lofty looks will not honor my Head, but Wisdom will make my face
shine: Eccles. 8.1. And modest carriage to men, and devotion to GOD, is the
exact way to make my head comely, and honorable.

2. As a Governor, and Head of a Family; my honor is to give example of
Piety, moderation, diligence, mortification, patience, and zeal.

3. I raise my thoughts to Christ, who is most excellent in dignity, and
honor: he that is Head of the Church, is the most excellent.

1. The Political Head is subordinate: he is absolute, and independent.

2. Men rule those that have a present being: Christ is Head of them departed,
and of them yet unborne.

3. Men are Heads by Government: Christ is Head by Influence.

4. Men govern often uniustly; but Christ always righteously, he is most
honorable.


The Anatomists say, in the Head, and neck be 125. muscles, there is a near,
and strong, and inseparable union between the head, and the body.

There be four Unions, considerable: 1. A Natural, between the head, and
the body. 2. Matrimonial, between man, and wife. 3. Divine, between the two
Natures of Christ. 4. Mystical, between Christ, and his members.


Conclusions.
1. My feet, and toes, though farthest off, are united to my Head, being
members.

2. If I be a hundred miles distant, yet I am united to my wife, in the
Matrimonial bond.

3. Christ's Godhead, and Manhood make one Christ; as soul, and body make one
person.

4. I am Mystically united to Christ, though he be in Heaven, and I on earth.


All the nourishment is received into the head, and so conveyed to the
members: the head looks out, takes care for the whole body; so in the
Political, or oeconomicall Head; Dignity, and Duty are copulatives.

Conclusions.
1. Not to envy them in Dignity: they have honor, but accompanied with
cares, and great accounts.

2. To love my Governors, and to labor to preserve their lives, credits, and
comforts: from them I have direction, and protection; let me return my
prayers, love, and service.

3. I will shun irregularitie: it is Jesuitical, and Brownisticall: I must
learn to submit, where men cross not God: In things indifferent, their part
is to direct, mine to obey.

4. Christ is the Head, a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. John 1.
Of his fullness we all receive. All good desires, motions, inclinations, all
Grace, and goodness, life, and spiritualnesse is derivative from this Head;
Who is blessed for ever.


All the senses are in the head, though not all only in the head, for the
touch is all over the body.

Conclusions.
1. Christ our Head is sensible in their troubles. Of old he was troubled with
them: Esai. 63.9. And, in the New Testament, he says to Saul: Why persecutest
thou me? Acts 9.

2. Godly Governors are sensible of the estate of their people, as David, 2 Samuel 24.17. What have these sheep done? Let thy hand be against me, and my
fathers house.

3. The Natural Head is sensible of the wrong done to the members, the Tongue
will speak, the Eye will weep, the Ear hearken for a remedy.

So much of the Head.

Of the Eyes of man.
1. The cause of Seeing. 2. The benefit of the Sight. 3. The misery of
Blindness. 4. The gracious employment of the Eyes.

THE Natural cause is from the spirits coming from the Optic Nerves, into
the Apple of the Eye, wherein there is a Crystalline humor, which receives, as
by a mirror, the kinds of colors, and the figures, numbers, motions of
bodies: The Nerves of the Eye are seated between the place of the Original:
there is a meeting like the forke of a tree, and the spirits meet together, so
the Object is one: otherways all things would seem double to us: Anatomists
say, there are six inner parts of the Eye.

1. The Fat which is placed above the Eye, for to defend it from cold, to keep
it from the hardness of the bone, and to fill up the distance of muscles, to
further the quick motion.

2. The Glandule is seated in the upper part of the Outer Corner, lodged in the
Fat, and full of moisture, to help the Nimble motion.

3. The Nerves, being in Number six; whereof four be straight, and two
Oblique, or winding.

4. The Tunicles are six in number: The first, Adnata membrana: the utmost
pannicle which cleaves to the Eye, and makes it firm: The second is Cornea;
it is firm, and bright: The third is Wea; which some count the fourth thin
Membrane, we see our selves in the Apple of ones Eye, from the hole of Wea:
The fourth is Membrana Pupillaris, the membranous Circle compassing the Ball,
or Apple of the Eye: The fifth, a Cristalline humor: The sixth, like a spiders
web.

5. The Humors. There is first the watrie humor: secondly, a crystallick
humor: the third, is like moulten glass; exceeding the other two in quantity.

6. The Vessels of the Eye: either external from the veins, that nourish the
Eye; or internal from Chorion, and Cerebellum: there be two Nerves appointed
for the Eye; one for sight, called Opticus, the other, for motion, called
Motorius.

And now I come to hear what the Word of GOD says: The Lord has made the Eye
to see: He formed the Eye, Psalm 94.9. And for what end, Matthew. 6.22.
but to give light to the body? he made all things for his own Glory, and
all things shall turn to his Glory, he made the Earth to hang in the Air,
and it does hang in the Air; he made the Banks to keep in the Sea, and they
do so: he made the Sun, to be the light of the World, and the Eyes, to be
the light of the body.

Conclusions.
1. As the Lord gives Eyes, so he gives light, without which, our Eyes would be
unprofitable: for in the dark, we see nothing. GOD has not made my body, as
a fair building without windows. Light is a pleasant thing, and it is joyful
to behold the Sun. Blessed be God for the light: and again, Blessed be God
for my Eyes, whereby I do partake of the benefit of the light.

2. If the Lord give Eyes, and Sight: let me take heed, I abuse not that
Blessing, and deprive my self of it, by late working to get money; or, by late
gaming, I may weaken my Sight; by drinking excessively, I may bring redness,
and Reumes; and by fighting, and quarrelling, I may loose an Eye, as some have
done to their grief.

3. If God gives Eyes, and Sight: then he must needs see himself: they be
fools, and have not yet learned to be wise, Psalm 94.6.7.8.
which say, The Lord sees not: None be so brutish to deny this, unless sordid
Atheists, that have no Religion: or upstart Antinomians amongst us, which are a
disgrace to our Church, and a blot to our Religion.


THE Benefits may be rancked to two Heads: Safety, and Comfort: First,
Safety: by our Eyes we see dangers at Sea, afar off, by a prospective
glass, Pirates are discovered; and enemies, that way, are in some places, and
times discovered at Land. By the Eye we see a storm, and shelter our selves,
if we can: we see what is hurtful in our meats, our houses, our Cartell: and
some of the wiser sort of women, do see by their husbands looks, they begin
to be angry, and so give them good words, or else, be silent, or avoid their
presence for a time.

2. The Comforts by the Eyes are Profits, or Delights:

First, the Profit is great: all Arts, and Sciences are learned by the Eye, and
used with the Eye: When we see a man, that was blind, to attain to learning;
we admire it, and count it extraordinary. The Plowman, the Mechanic, the
Shopkeeper, the Divine, the Lawyer, the Soldier, love all to see what they
do: and do what they see in their callings, and learn much by the Eyes (if
not all) by their bodily sight, and their Rational sight concurring together:
Only the man, that turns the grind-stone, may be blind; this is no Art, but a
drudgerie rather: the horses at the water-houses, being blind, or blind-folded,
can do that work, to make the wheels go round.

Secondly, for delight, we open those windows: and view Gods Works, with Joy:
or men's Arts, with a lacritie: or their activenesse, motions, gestures, merry
conceits, with our smiling, laughing, applauding rewarding them, which
evidences our delight. A Windmill, at first making, was an admiration, and a
delight to the Spectatours: so was a Clock, and a pocket-watch: London Bridge,
and Paul's Church, many have beheld with delight; and, when they be again
repaired, the Spectatours will have new delight: When the inclination within
meets with a suitable object without, and we come to have a propriety in it,
then comes delight in the enioyment.

Conclusions.
1. Have I such safety by the Eyes to prevent bodily dangers? if I see a Cart
in a narrow place, I stand up, least it hurt me: if a man come running with a
drawn sword, I fly away from him: if the fire kindle in my house, on my
stuff, I, seeing it, cry out: if the boat be half full of water, I will not
go into it, fearing a leake in it. Why should I not use my Rational Sight,
which Religion rectifies, and does not abolish? the Rat sees the bait, but
knows not, it is a trappe: I should look to the Consequences of
sinfull-pleasures, and see their danger before hand: the win is red to the
view, but bites as a Serpent in the end; it bites away my Reason, my Credit, my
peace, my time, my silver. The harlot is finely dressed, so is her chamber; but
she digs down a man: Pro. 7.26. Undoes a man, spoils him, consumes him,
infatuates him, and brings him to a morsel of bread; this light woman brings
him to a heavy curse; this fair woman brings him to a foul disease; this
smiling woman brings him to sorrow at last; it may be, when it is too late.

2. If my Eyes be for the safety of my body, much more are GODS Eyes for the
safety of my body, and soul. Except the Lord watch the City, the Watchmen
watch in vain: Except the Lord watch the body, the Eyes watch in vain: Gods
care is my safety; It is his Eye that is over his people, from one end of the
year, to the other: Deutero. 11.12. It Is GOD preserves, and defends me, and
Compasses me about with songs of deliverance, Psalm 32.7.

3. Have I such Benefit by my Eyes, as to learn to read, write, and work, and
to earne mine own bread? what shall I render to the Lord, for the benefit
comes this way? without learning I am like a mortal beast, without trade, or
Art, I am in danger to be like a moyling beast. Beggars, that have neither
learning, nor trade, nor Art; live most wretchedly, without Magistracy, or
Ministry, or Laws, or Sacraments, or Marriages: I mean the worser sort, and
their end is without honor.

4. Is there shining-in by the windows of mine Eyes, the light of pleasures,
and delight?

1. Let me be wise to take heed of sinful delights, not to delight at men's
deformities, or infirmities, or miseries, or iniquities.

2. To be moderate in Lawful Delights, regarding the things, the measure, and
time.

3. To enlarge Spiritual Delights, here no surfeit, or excess is to be feared.

4. Expect Eternal Delights, at GODS right hand. Those in reversion are far
more excellent, than the voluptuous man's present, shadowish, possession.


IT IS said, he, that has but one Eye, may be a King in the Land of Blindmen:
but what can his Subjects do in peace, or war? fools, and blind go
together: neither can distinguish aright. The Blindmans misery, is,

1. He is in danger: if he be led by another like himself, both do fall into
the ditch.

2. He is apt to be deceived, and abused.

3. He is in an estate very uncomfortable.

4. He is beholding to others, yea to his dog, that leads him.

Conclusions.
1. If the Blindman be in danger to fall into the ditch; whether is he like to
fall, that is spiritually blind? as the Pharisees, Matthew. 23.17. Those, that be
natural men in blindness of mind, are under the power of Satan: Acts 26.18.
From this Blindness, the Lord deliver my Soul.

2. The Blind are apt to be deceived, and abused; so it is with them spiritually
blind: they do take error for truth; passion. for zeal; covetousness, for
good husbandry; false Teachers beguile them, weak Arguments prevail with
them: they see no great difference between Papists, and Protestants: had they
but owle-light, they might distinguish between an Ass, and a Lamb: But the
Blind eat many a fly. And do they see that eat their God?

3. The Blind is in an uncomfortable estate; those sit in darkness, are in the
shadow of death: and death is uncomfortable. The Papist, that blows out the
light, has but a bedlam-comfort; and, getting loose the six Marian years,
they made mad work, and we in England had little Comfort, till they were
chained up, and lights set up.

4. The Blind are beholding to others; even to the Dog, that leads them: none
so slavish as they; yet some mystically blind are intolerably proud, and think
they be rich, and want nothing: but are poor, and blind, and naked: They will
be beholding to base Instruments, to accomplish their own ends. To live in a
golden slaverie, and a blind braverie, pleases them: they see not others deride
their ways, and courses; it is because they be basely blind, and blindly base:
and are beholding to Bribers, and Flatterers, and Temporisers, which be as the
Blind-mans Dog, to lead them

5. Here may I take occasion to bewa^^ mine own inward Blindness: How little a
portion do I know of GOD? I can but little discern of holy Mysteries,
because of darkness.

which is,
FIRST, In Devotion. 2. In Observation. 3. In Mourning. In Devotion, to lift
them up to Heaven, with prayer: to read the Word of GOD, or other holy Books,
to further Devotion. In Prayer, I glorify God, and do express my inward
Devotion by external Acts. By Reading, I understand by Books. Dan. 9.2.
Psalm 119.104. I am capable of a Blessing, Psalm 1.1. Revela. 1.3. and my
heart may with Gods Blessing melt this way, 1 Kings 22.11.

Secondly, my Eyes should be graciously employed in Observation of God, in his
works, and in his Judgments. In his works,

1. Because they demonstrate his eternal power, and Godhead: Romans 1.20. Psalm.
19.1.

2. My Eyes should behold his works with Delight, Psalm 111.2.

3. God has made his Works to this end, that we should behold them: Esai.
40.26.

Also, to behold his Judgments.
1. By them, God is known: Psalm 9.16.

2. That I may learn to fear: Psalm. 119.120.

3. To beware of the like sins, as have brought Judgments on others: 1 Cor.
10.6.

I should also observe men in their actions: 1. Sinful, 2. Civil. 3.
Religious.

1. This is not Arbitrarie, but a Duty: Psalm. 37.37. Romans 16.17. Philippians
3.17.

2. By Observation, we may the better judge whom to avoid, and whom to
company withal.

3. By Observation of their Lacedaemonian vices, we dislike vice, and seeing
their Christian Virtues, we are encouraged to Imitate them; and answer the
objection of Impossibility, to be godly, and gracious: when we see Virtue,
and Godliness acted.

4. We know the better to admonish, exhort, comfort, and encourage: and we
discern whom to resort unto for Counsel: and hereby to be stirred up to
praise God, for the gifts, and Graces of others: Galat. 1.23. 2 Cor. 9.12.

Mine Eyes should graciously be employed to look on men's necessities:
Spiritual, and Temporal.
First, Spiritual: To Pray to the Lord of the Harvest, to send forth
Laborers, Matthew. 9.38.

2. That we may prize his Word, which we do enjoy, it being a special
favor: Psalm 147.20.

3. To be stirred to the care of fruitfulness, least the Lord bring on us a
spiritual famine: Amos 8.11.

Mine Eyes should graciously look on the bodily necessities of men.
1. To stir up the bowels of Compassion. 2. That I may comfort, and releeve
them. 3. To make me thankful for my prosperity. 4. To prepare my self for
the like af^^ictions.
Lastly, mine Eyes should be graciously employed in Mourning.
1. For our own sins. 2. For the sins of others. 3. For the afflictions of
Gods people.
First, for our own sins.
That is, my sins, and the sins of mine: those under my Charge.

1. Because sin dishonours God, Romans 2.23.

2. Sins be painful, and grievous. Romans 7.24.

3. Sin separats from God, the Chief Good: Esa. 59.2.

4. Sin makes us Captives, Esaias 61.1.2. 2 Timothy 2.14.

5. Sins are our debtes, Matthew 6.12.

6. Sins are our grievous burdens, Psalm 40.12. Our defilements, 2 Cor.
7.1. Our wounds, Psalm 41.4.

Secondly, I should mourn for other sins, abroad in the world.
1. Because Gods Children have done it, Psalm. 119.136. 2 Pet. 2.7.

2. The sins of others may bring Judgments.

3. This Mourning proves a man righteous, 2 Pet. 2.7.

4. The Mourners have been saved, when others have been destroyed: Ezekiel. 9.4.

Thirdly, I should Mourn for the afflictions of others.
1. GOD requires it, to Mourn with them: Romans 12.

2. We show by it, we be feeling members.

3. They in affliction expect it, Job 19.21.

4. The same measure shall be paid to us again, we measure to others.

So much of the Eyes.

Of the Ears.
1. Of the Denomination of the Ears.

2. Of the placing of the Ears.

3. Of the admirable work-man-ship of GOD, in the Ears.

4. Of the Benefit of Hearing.

5. Diverse Resolves about Hearing.


THE Denomination is taken from their employment; they draw-in the sound: So
Aurio, without the aspiration; Haurio: or auris, quasi audis, ex Audio. They
are Hearers called ears, for drawing-in the sound, or else, of Aere: for, Sonus
per Auram ad Aurem defertur, The Sound by the thin Air to the Ear is
conveyed.


THEY are placed in the middle of the Head, so that we hear Sounds
straight-forward, and also round about; and the Ears are placed one against
the other, in comeliness, and order. The Beasts have their Ears more forward
on their heads. The Ears be placed in the Head, the most honorable part; and
it is our honor to hear: near the brain; to remember what we hear. And to
disgrace them, that offend, the Ears be cut off on the Pillorie, by the
Magistrates Appointment, that though they have the sense of hearing, yet they
are deprived of the outward Ears, which beautified their heads.


EXternally, there is (Lobus) the lap of the Ear, and the (Cutis) the upper
skin: then the Cartilage, or gristle, then the membrane, the thin skin,
that ties the Cutis, and the Cartilage together. Some say, there be three
muscles in the Ear, and the hole is winding to receive the Sound, the more
without danger; and the hairs growing in the Ear, defend it from that would
hurt, and more easily fall into it.

Internally, the Ear has, within, a Membrane, which separates the internal
Air, from the outward Sound: This Membrane is thin, and dry, and strained
like a Drum. And there be three of the least bones, and the most curious in all
the body of man; and they have three names from their forms, or likeness;
the one, like a Hammer; the other, like an Anvill; the third, like a Stirrup.
There be four Cavities in the Ear; the first, the Passage for hearing; the
second, the Tunnell, for to let-in the Sound; the third, is the Labyrinth,
having diverse semi-circles; the fourth, is Cochlea, or the perwinckle, because
of the wreathings to conveigh the Sound, which comming-in, does move the
Tympanum: then the three bones are moved, and we discern the diversity of
Sounds. This is the work of GOD, more fit to be admired, than discussed.


1. WE learn to speak by the Ear, for those which be borne deaf, do live
dumb all their days.

2. By hearing, men attain to Arts, and Sciences, Ocular Instructions go with
visible Demonstrations.

3. Man's life is sweetened by Conversing with one another: our Eyes would little
comfort us without light; nor speech profit us without hearing: we do retort
words, and propound questions, and speak merrily, because one hears another.

4. By this Sense, we are delighted with the singing of Birds, and the
sweetness of Music, vocal, and Isntrumental.

5. By hearing, we get Faith, Romans 10. By Faith, we lay hold on Christ; by
Christ, we come to eternal life: therefore the Benefit of hearing is most
excellent.


1. What is the cause of the Echo?

Ans. As in the Water-poole, the Circle coming to the Bank, rebounds, and
returns back; so the voice, or sound, being bounded in vaultes, or hollow
places, rebounds again; which we call an Echo, or resounding.

2. What Instructions may we gather from the three bones, that move on the
Tympanum?

Ans. The one like an Anvill, may teach us; they are bad hearers, that be not
altered; but like an Anvill: their Consciences be Sermon-proofe: let the
Preacher say what he can, they are of the Anvills Nature: The second bone, like
a Hammer, puts us in mind of another sort of bad hearers, which learn much, to
form, and fashion others only, and to work on them for reformation: but are
as hard as Hammers, to reflect on themselves: The third bone, like a Stirrup;
puts us in mind of them, that will hear, and learn; to get advancement, and
ease: a stapesian hearer.

Again a good Hearer.
1. Is like an Anvill in invincible patience, and constancy, heresies, and
persecutions may beat on him; but he is always the same, semper Idem.

2. He is as an Hammer to beat down error, and profaneness, within his own
Reach, and power; and to knock at heaven Gate, by fervent Prayer.

3. He is as a Stirrup, he aspires by hearing to advance his mind to heaven;
and to settle the peace of his Conscience: he hears, and gives ear for
heavenly mindedness, and peace; setlednesse, and assurance to be kept from
falling, and to finish his Journie with Comfort.

3. What may we think of them, which do follow no particular Calling, but do
altogether follow Sermons all the week?

Ans. 1. The Devils malice appears in such, he prevails with them, to make
them scandalous Professors: so others shun them, and Religion.

2. That which GOD ioynes, they do separate, that is a general, and
particular Calling.

3. They be in danger to be cloyed at first, or fall to be idle, or carried away
with errors; being not balanced with honest labor.

4. If all should be as Marie, where should the Commonwealth be? If all should
be as Martha, where should Religion be? both do well, being mixed together;
Action with Devotion.

5. They have bodies, as well as souls; and should labor, as well as hear.

6. They make not Conscience of the second Table, to pay scot, and lot; to
help to maintain Magistrate, and Minister; Commandment 5. By labor, to
preserve life, Commandment 6. Chastity, Commandment 7. To eat their own
bread by labor, Commandment 8. These often are pratlers, busybodies,
Censurers, against the 9. Commandment; and covet other men's money, meat, and
Clothes, not having labored to have of their own: thus partly by borrowing,
and never paying again, and partly, by begging, that should feed the
laboring Be, they do live offensively, and in the height of their Piety,
they be in the depth of Iniquity.

4. What Arguments are powerful against the worldly, and malicious man, that
on the other side, will not hear Sermons, but opposes them that are diligent
Hearers?

Ans. There be four maine Arguments to stop his mouth, and for ever to silence
him.

1. Without knowledge, the mind is not good; Pro. 19.2. but by Hearing, we get
understanding; Jer. 3.15.

2. Without Faith, we cannot please God; Heb. 11.6. But Faith comes by
Hearing; Romans 10.17.

3. If any man have not the Spirit of CHRIST, the same is none of his: Romans
8.9. But We receive the Spirit, by Hearing: Galat. 3.2. Acts 10.44.

4. Except we be converted, we cannot be saved: Matthew. 18.3. Luke 13.5. But
We are converted by the Preaching of the Word: James 1.25. 1 Pet. 1.25.

5. Quest. How should a Christian hear aright?

Ans. 1. He must Repent, and prepare to hear: Psalm 26.6.

2. He must hear with humility, Deuter. 33.3.

3. He must hear with Judgment, 1 Cor. 10.15.

4. He must hear with Meekness, James 1.21.

5. He must hear with Reverence, Acts 10.33.

6. He must hear with Attention, Ier. 13.15.

7. He must hear with Affection, 2 Kings 22.19.

8. He must hear, to treasure-up the Word in his heart, Psalm 119.11.

9. He must Question with the Preacher, after he has heard, if he understand
not: Matthew. 13.36.

10. He must hear to Obey: Luke 11.28. John 13.17.

11. He must labor to hear with Faith, Heb. 4.2.

6. Quest. What hearing is most grievous to a good man?

Ans. 1. The hearing of Blasphemy against his God.

2. The hearing of treachery against his King.

3. The Reproaches against the godly.

4. The hearing of Ribaudrie, and filthy talk.

5. The hearing vice, and wickedness commended; this is as gall, and wormwood
to him.

Of the Mouth.
The Mouth is, 1. The Gate of the body, or Door, or entrance. 2. It Is the
Nourisher, to feed the body. 3. It Is the Distinguisher, or Sentence-giver. 4.
It Is the Interpreter of the heart.


Of the Tongue.
The Tongue is, 1. The Glory of a man. 2. Hard to be kept in order. 3.
Resolves concerning the Mouth, and Tongue.



IT IS called OS in Latin, because thereby we putin meat, as it were by a
door, and thereby we put out spittle, and send-out breath, and words: The
Scripture gives the Name of a Door, Metaphorically, to the Mouth: Psalm
141.3. Keep thou the Door of my lips. Micha. 7.5. Keep the Doors of thy
lips from her, that lies in thy bosom.

Conclusions.
1. A Door has a lock, to make it fast: so should my Mouth be locked fast
with the Fear of GOD, not to be opened to excessive eating, and drinking;
these passe-in by the Mouth: nor to be opened to foolish talking, and jesting,
cursing, swearing, or slandering, vaine-boasting, or mocking; these go out of
my Mouth.

2. A Door has a knocker, which causes them within to open: so occasions are
still ministered to us to open our Mouths. Questions are as so many knockes;
wrongs, and Injuries are hard knockes; and we soon open the Door of our lips,
and, it may be, let fly Complainings, curses, evil wishes: and our Doors be
not easily shut again.

3. A Door has a bolt, which only they within can open: this bolt is a wise
Resolution. In some Cases, and Company, silence is best, though they knock,
yet we should not open: let them loose their expectation; and our silence may
be our safety, and preservation.

4. A Door sometimes is only put-to with a latch, there is neither lock, nor
bolt: so is the Mouth of a Temporiser. If a Thief, or a Bawd, or a Civil
man, or a Divine draw the latch, there is entrance: so some can discourse for
error, or truth; of worldliness, or filthiness: the first occasion
prevails, be it whatsoever; there is an easy entrance, no lock of the Fear
of God.

5. As diverse Doors being open, we have diverse prospects: so it is with the
Door of men's Mouths. Open a brothel-house-doore, you see Curtizans, Bawds,
light persons: so some men's Mouths once open, we perceive nothing, but
filthy talk, and scurrilitie. Open the Beare-garden-Doore, there is
confusion, noise, fighting, barking: so some men's Mouths are opened with
Contention, Railing, Threatening, Censuring, miscalling. Open a Shop-doore, you
perceive wares, commodities: so some men's Mouths once open, all the Discourse
is for Bargains, purchases, Interest-money, engrossings, getting, saving,
suretiship, seeuritie, etc. Open some Doors, ye see pleasant walks, sweet
herbs, bowers, grasplots, trees, fruits: so some men's Mouths once open,
their talk is witty, pleasant, profitable, wise, harmless, honest, savourie.
Open the Church-Doore, there is Divine Service, Exhortations, Praises, Psalms:
so open some men's Mouths, their talk is Divine, holy, gracious; they praise
God, and edify men.


THE Babes suck their Nourishment, men do feed; the Mouth receives all, and
conveighes it to the stomach: so the food is concockted, and dispersed, and
the body nourished, and preserved.

Conclusions.
1. I see the difference of our Nourishment, in the womb, and in the world; In
the womb, the Child is nourished by the Navill; In the world, by the Mouth.

2. I see the difference of Nourishing the body, and nourishing the soul; the
body is fed by the Mouth; but the soul, by the Ear: Esa. 55.3. Ier. 3.10.

3. As the Mouth is to the body, so is the Minister to the Congregation: he
speaks to GOD for them; he receives nourishment, and conveighes it to them:
we should not be a means to wrong the Faithful Preachers, that were Impious:
nor separate from them; that were erroneous.


PAlatum gustat escam: The Mouth tastes meat: Job 34.3. It distinguishes
between bitter, and sweet; between that is sour, and that is unsavourie;
that is moist, and that is dry; that is stale, and that is new. The Mouths
Roof is of sinews, so hard, that every meat cannot hurt it; so soft, that
it is sensible: hollow, and round; for the moving of the meat, and the
drawing-in the breath, the Mouth is so apprehensive, that if you put hot, or
cold into it: or if you put a hair in your meat, it is felt; the smallest
gravel, or fish-bone is discerned; the Mouth will quickly give sentence, what
is pleasant, and what is offensive.

Conclusions.
1. We may see how wisely the Lord does fit things together: Sounds with
Hearing, Light with Sight, Savours with Smelling, Meat with Tasting.

2. As the Mouth tastes meat, so the Ear tastes words: Job 34.3. We relish
that is spoken to be wise, or foolish; to be Carnal, or Spiritual; to be
sober, or light; to be in love, or hatred: we will guess at flattering words,
and approve wholesome talk.

3. There is an Inward Taste of the soul, and this is twofold. The one, a
slight Taste, a general knowledge; as to taste of a Cup, and not to drink:
Heb. 6.4.5. A second is an Experimental Taste with feeding, and nourishment
after it: Psalm 34.9.


AN Interpreter gives the Exposition, declares the meaning, makes things
plain: so does the Mouth declare, and show, what is in the Heart: Matthew.
12.34. Out of the abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks.

Conclusions.
1. I may guess, who be wise in Heart, and who be foolish; who be Religious,
who be profane: their Interpreter will expound to me

2. They do err grossly, who usually do swear, and scoff, or speak
filthily, and all their delightful talk is worldly; yet say, They have good
hearts to GOD, though they make no show. Certainly, such stuff, as is in the
warehouse, comes into the Shop: such as the Fountain is, such are the
streams.

3. If I would avoid foolish words in my mouth, I must shun foolish contrivings
in my heart: if I would have my Tongue, as the Pen of a ready Writer, then
My Heart must indite a good matter, Psalm 45.1. In this, the Mouth, and Tongue
are considered Jointly, Next of the Tongue singly.

First, the Tongue is the Glory of a man.

Secondly, it is hard to bridle the Tongue.

Thirdly, Resolves concerning the Mouth, and Tongue.


SO is the Tongue called Genesis 49.6. Psalm 16.8. and Psalm 30.12. The Tongue,
is man's Glory. Heb. Chebodh says Willet on Genesis page 444.


1. Because by it, he speaks, so excells all other Creatures, on the Earth.

2. With the Tongue man preaches, and converts Souls, and comforts others.

3. The Tongue speaks to God by Prayer, confers with men: the Tongue can sing,
dispute, persuade, allure, terrify, encourage, etc.

Conclusions.
1. I see how wicked men pervert all things, and do abuse them; especially
their Tongues. Their Glory is their shame, their Tongues are their dishonor;
their silence makes them most honorable: when they speak, they bewray their
folly, Impiety, and profaneness; their words tend to their shame.

2. If my Tongue be my Glory, I am to use it honorably; which is done,

1. By praising, and blessing the Name of the Lord.

2. By Confessing his Truth (made known to me) with boldness, and Reverence,
especially being called to Answer, for the same.

3. To speak to men Religiously in my common Conversation, to edify them, and
do them good, to endeavor to convince the obstinate, to Counsel the Ignorant,
to Comfort the dejected, to Inform the weak, and encourage the strong in
well-doing; to avoid passion, and pride, and flattery, and discontent, in my
speeches: and to speak with wisdom, and Reverence, and love, and meekness,
and humility. Then shall my Tongue be my Glory indeed.


1. BEcause the Heart is so corrupt, and hard to be reformed.

2. It Is hard to leave an old custom, as to go against the stream, or Tide.

3. Other things be more easily tamed as birds, beasts, Creeping things: James
3.7.8.

4. Those that set themselves to tame the Tongue, have found it hard: David
resolved to bridle his Tongue, Psalm 39.1. yet his own words grieved him
daily: Psalm 56.5.

5. It Is hard to make men yield, where they think they have Possession: men do
think their lips be their own, Psalm 12.4.

6. It Is hard to make men lay down their weapons: The Tongue men esteem their
weapons: Ier. 9.3. Ier. 18.18. Psalm 57.4. Psalm 64.3. Their Tongues be as
Swords, and their words as Arrows; it is hard to disarme them.


1. Quest. What is meant by the Mouth of the Lord Esai 1.20?

Ans. It Is the Certainty of Speech in utterance, and performance: GOD has said
it, and it shall be accomplished.

2. Quest. What is meant by the Rod of his Mouth Esai 11.4?

Ans. The mighty, and powerful Word of GOD, smiting some, to their
Conversion; others, to their destruction.

3. Quest. What is meant by the Mouth of the brooks Esai 19.7?

Ans. The Rivers, whose Banks are as the lips of the Mouth.

4. Quest What is it to stop the Mouth Job 5.16?

Ans. To stop the Mouth through the astonishment at Gods Works.

5. Quest. What is meant by the Mouth of the Earth Genesis 4.11?

Ans. The Earth it self receiving Abels blood: the like phrase, Numbers 16.32.
The Earth opened her Mouth, and swallowed Corah, and the rest of his Company.

6. Quest. What is it to be with ones Mouth Exodus 4.12?

Ans. To Instruct, and Teach one what to speak.

7. Quest. What is meant by the Mouth of the Dragon?

Ans. 1. Power, and Authority: Revela. 16.13. Also, Calumniations, and
Reproaches to bring Christians to be hated, and contemned: Rev. 12.16.

Resolves concerning the Tongue.
1. Qu. How is the Tongue set on fire of Hell James 3.6?

Ans. When Satan has power over men's Tongues, to make them speak wickedly.

2. Quest. Why was the Rich glutton tormented in his Tongue Luke 16?

Ans. 1. He is likely to have sinned by delicates in eating, and drinking.

2. He, it may be, had been a Blasphemer, or scoffer, and licentious, and
profane in speech.

3. Or he had neglected Prayer, and praising God: so is passive, being on Earth
(herein) not active.

Coloss. 4.6.
3. Qu. What is it to be gracious always in speech?

Ans. It Is to speak graciously, at all times, in all places, on all occasions,
in all Companies; in all the tempers, and dispositions of heart; as in anger,
in mirth, in fear, in sorrow, in hope; still to maintain gracious speech,
from a gracious mind, after a gracious manner, to a gracious end: to stir up
grace, to manifest grace, to edify them which hear us.

4. Qu. How may we order the Tongue aright?

Ans. 1. To think before we speak; to be more slow to speak, and to
premeditate, is a sure way to speak well.

2. To speak as those, that do acknowledge Gods presence, as well as know it.

3. To speak pertinently, and avoid the multitude of words, learn
Compendiousnes to abbreviate Matters, especially before our Governors, or our
servants, or our enemies, or before strangers.

4. Moderate the passions within: else there will break out excessive speeches.

5. Be often in Prayer: then being able to speak to GOD, we shall be the
better fitted to speak to men.

6. Be often examining our speeches with the circumstances of Matter, Manner,
and End we aimed at.

5. Qu. What is an Idle word?

Ans. 1. A word, that tends not to the Glory of God, nor man's good.

2. A word, that might better have been spared, than spoken.

3. Or a word pertaining to neither our general Calling, or particular.

6. Qu. What are the Causes of Idle words?

Ans. 1. The Heart is vain, which is the Fountain of Speech.

2. Custom is as a great Commander; so it is easy.

3. Pride of wit makes men very frothie in speech.

4. Some Ingredients of Atheism, and want of fear.

5. Idleness, and want of labor, causes Idle words.

6. Want of Prayer: those that pray best, speak not Idly.

7. Want of wisdom brings fulness of Idle talk.

7. Qu. What be the Contraries to Idle words?

Ans. 1. Words of Thankfulness, Ephesians. 5.4.

2. Words of Wisdom, which respect circumstances.

3. Words of Holiness, and Grace: Ephesians. 4.29.

4. Speeches about our particular Callings.

5. Propounding our Doubts to be Resolved.

8. Qu. Who be the most Wise men of Speech?

Ans. 1. Those that always speak of God reverently.

2. Those that speak charitably of Enemies.

3. Those that be very discreet in praising others.

4. Those that can reproove wisely, and meekely.

5. Those that keepe-close to the Truth in their Speeches.

6. Those that speak sparingly in passions.

7. Those which speak pertinently to the Matter in hand.

9. Qu. Before whom must we be silent?

Ans. 1. Before Magistrates in open Courts: Acts 24.10.

2. Before our Elders: Job 32.8.

3. Before Fools, and Pratlers: Pro. 26.

4. Before Malicious Scorners: Matthew. 7.6.

10. Qu. What is the Cure of Idle words?

Ans. 1. We must Reform the Fountain, the Heart.

2. Get a strong persuasion of Gods presence.

3. Be often examining our Speeches, and repent.

4. Take some time for serious Thoughts of Judgment.

5. When we be to go into Company, to pray before; either solemnly, or by
some eiaculation.

11. Qu. What Comfort belongs to them, which do in some measure bridle their
Tongues?

Ans. 1. There is a mighty work wrought in them.

2. Their Religion is sound, not vain: James 1.

3. Their Prayers shall be heard: 2 Pet. 3.10.12.

4. In GODS Account they be wise: Pro. 10.19.

5. Before men they be valiant, many have conquered Cities, but not their
Tongues.

6. They have comfort in redeeming the Time; they do save their Words, and
Time together.

7. These shall have Comfort at the Day of Judgment, above Idle Talkers:
Matthew 12.36.

12. Quest. How may I Confer with others, and speak Religiously?

Ans. 1. You must get Wisdom to observe the Circumstances of Time, and Place,
Persons, and Matter.

2. Converse with Love; that by meeting together, you may be bettered, not
imbittered.

3. By Meekness, you must bear with one another.

4. Be Humble in Speeches, avoiding Boasting, Obstinacy, and Contradiction.

5. Observe where you profit most, and desire that Company, which has not
puzzelled you, and distracted; but edified, comforted, resolved, and encouraged
you.

13. Quest. Who are they be most profitable in Conference?

Answer 1. The tender Conscienced Christian; If he speak but little, he will
do much good, by his Reverend, Careful, Godly Speeches.

2. The Experienced Christian, he can best lay-open the sleights of Satan, the
deceiptfulnesse of sin, the beauty of holiness; he can best discover the
vanities of the World; he talks not like the giddie Sectarie, nor the
profane worldling; he will speak to purpose, and himself receive
Instruction.

3. Those which make Conscience of their particular Callings, such be unlike
the Bloodhounds, that be all Ear, and Mouth; nor be they, as Ships, with
large sails, and no balance. He that labors diligently, will speak most
profitably.

4. Those that be wise, humble, and zealous, their wisdom makes them speak
of good things, and of good things to choose the best; their humility will
keep them within their Bounds, and their zeal will heat others, and quicken
to Duties.

14. Qu. What be the Enemies to godly Conference?

Ans. 1. Ignorance, that makes men unable to esteem, and value good things:
nor can they communicate to others, being destitute themselves in the Theorie.

2. Churlishness; a Nabal cannot confer sweetly.

3. Sullenness, which makes men as Mutes, or Statues.

4. Affectation; then men be all Tongue, no Ear.

5. Censoriousnesse; to be as a f^ie lighting on the sore. These bring little
honey to the hive.

6. Feasting sumptuously above our purses, or places: the belly is filled; the
soul, by Conference, not fed.

7. Discouragement; when some look on their weakness, not considering it is
required according to that we have. Weak performances are better than
Idleness.

15. Qu. What Course should we take, to be more profitable in our Speeches,
and Conference?

Ans. 1. Speak of God with Reverence, of men with Charity.

2. Avoid three boastings: What I am, What I have done, what I will do.

3. Strive more to do good, than to get commendations.

4. Use private Prayer well, you will speak well.

5. Raise Heavenly Discourse, from Earthly things.

6. Begin first, if others neglect; Question, if they be Superiors: let little
sticks kindle great ones.

So much of the Tongue.

Of the Neck.
1. Of the Situation, and place of the Neck.

2. Of the Composition of it.

3. Of the Strength of the Neck.

4. Resolves concerning the Neck.


IT is above the Body, yet under the Head.

It Joines the Body to the Head, as the Medium.

The Body upholds it, and it upholds the Head.

The Neck is Honorable, and Obvious, above the Body; yet under the Head:
which puts me in mind,

1. Of their estate, that like the Centurion, are under Authority, yet do
command some. These men should labor for Reverence, and Humility; wisdom,
and circumspection.

2. The Head by the Neck (as by a Medium) has a conveighance to the Body, for
the good of the whole: so should those which are above us, under the Prince, be
a Medium, for the good of King, and people.

3. The Neck so unites the Head, and Body, that it self is preserved; so it
is with them which do seek Union, and Peace; themselves fare the better for
it, the common peace is their own happiness.


IT is composed of Bones, and Sinews: there are the Pipes, and flesh, and
skin, etc. Which puts me in mind,

That although Compositions must end in a Dissolution; yet they may be very
useful, as a well composed Army, Diverse Simples composed for Physical use.
And if we could compose our zeal with discretion, our passion with Reason,
our Earthly employments with Spiritual mindednes, our Desires with
endeavors, our finding-out others faults, with amending of our own, our good
Duties with good Affections, and good aims; these as Bones, and Sinews, would
make us hold up our Heads comfortably.


IT IS strong, we see, for some can bear a great burden on their Heads.

Conclusions.
1. As the Neck is strong, so it is pliable; So should I be strong to bear, yet
pliable to Obey, and submit, lawfully.

2. The Neck is for beauty, yet strong for service; some like of the beauty,
but will none of the burden: they like Rebekabs Bracelets, but not her
Pitcher; they like our Gentlewomens Jewels, not the Christians burdens. Labor
is an ornament, and ends in rest.


AS it is taken Naturally, Metaphorically, and Spiritually: First, Naturally:

1. Quest. Why is the Neck called Collum, in Latin?

Answer, Either for the Roundnesse, or because it is the Medium, between the
Head, and the Body. There be two parts of the Neck, the one Cervix, which is
the part behind, which is thought to carry the marrow to the ridge-bone: The
other Gula, which is the place, where the meat passes to the Stomach.

2. Quest. The Neck has motion, from whence is it?

Ans. From the Head, or brain; and sends down an influence to the Body by
sinews.

3. Quest. What may we observe in the Necks of Beasts, aad Fowls?

Ans. Those Beasts, that have short Necks, be strong, as Bulls, and Bears,
etc. yet some are excepted, as Dromedaries, and Camels; but for the most part,
the short-necked are strong, and it is observed Fowls, that have crooked Bills,
have short Necks: as, Hawks, Eagles.

4. Quest. What was the Yoke on Esau his Neck, spoken of in Genesis the 27.40.
and how was it broken?

Ans. The Yoke was Servitude, which his Posterity endured: 2 Samuel 8.14. and
they brake the Yoke, 2 Kings 8.20.22.

5. Quest. What is meant by a Yoke of Iron Deuteronomy. 28.48?

Ans. Hard Servitude, under Heathen Governors, as we read, Ier. 28.13, 14.
from which they could no more free themselves, than they could from an Iron
Yoke on their Necks.

6. Quest. What is it to harden the Neck against reproves, Pro. 29.1?

Ans. It Is to be stubborn, and not to yield, and submit; as stubborn Oxen
turn away the Neck, and yield not to the Yoke: such be our wild Gallants, and
Romanists, Dod on Pro.
and proud Sectaries: these will endure no Reproof of the Learned, Godly,
Painful Preachers.

7. Quest. What is it to have an Iron sinew in the Neck, Esai. 48.4?

Ans. That place of Esai. adds to the Iron sinew a brow of Bras: they were
unteacheable, and Impudent: they would not bend to Instruction; nor be ashamed
of their Conditions: they wanted fear before sin, Call. on Esai.
and remorse after sin. Most usually, when the sinew is Iron, there is no
Humility to learn; and when the brow is bras, there is no shame to repent.

8. Quest. What is meant by Chains to the Neck, Pro 1 9. and Pro. 3.3. and
Verse 22?

Ans. To receive Instruction, to exercise Mercy, and Truth, to make Conscience
of Duty to GOD, and Man, makes us honorable, and comely, and fit to come
before the great Ones: as if we had chains of Pearls about our Necks.

9. Quest. How may it be Interpreted, The Neck is like a Tower, Cant. 4.4. and
7.4?

Amsworth Anot.
Ans. That the Christian united to CHRIST, his Neck is strong, that is, he
will not bow to sin, not become in bondage to Satan; but ^ather make war
against Spiritual Enemies.

Of the Arms, and Shoulders.
1. Of GODS Work in the Arms, considered.

2. Of the usefulness of the Arms.

3. Resolves concerning the Arms, and Shoulders.


THEY have their fastening to the Shoulders, which is strengthened with bones,
called blades; (because they be like a sword blade) in Latin Scoptula,
coming from the Neck, to each Arm. The bones of the Soulder be hollow
within, and bending outward: The Shoulder bones have knots (called Eyes) for
defense: the Shoulders have special Relation to the Neck, the Arms, and the
Breast: They do support the Neck, give strength to the Arms, and defend the
Breast: and on the Shoulders Men lay burdens, it is the most able part of the
Body to carry any great weight, or heavy thing.

And Now I come to Gods Work in the Arms: First, The bones be in number
thirty, in Arm, and Hand; the Arm alone has only two, one from the
Shoulder to the Elbow, the other to the Hand.

Conclusions applicatorie. Conclusion.

1. If the bones be thirty in the Arm, and Hand: as Anatomists affirm; then
Judas stretched forth as many bones, as he received pieces of silver.

2. If the Arm only has two bones, then my strongest actions require two
things: a good Warrant, and a good Aim, and then things are done to purpose.

Secondly, the bones of the Arm are big for strength, hollow for lightness,
full of marrow for moisture, strengthened with sinews, covered with flesh, and
skin, bending, nimble, fit for action.


1. AS the Arms have relation to the Head, the Heart, and Liver, It minds me
my actions should proceed from Memory, Prudence, and Love. From Remembrance,
of what I have been taught. From Wisdom, to do things well,
circumstantially. From Love, then I shall be profitable, and accepted.

2. The Veins about the Heart, pass through my Arms, and my pulses, and show
how it goes with me: So my Actions come from my Intentions, and Resolutions,
and Purposes, and are for Manifestation.

3. If Diseases befall the Body, the Arm is let blood, to save the whole: To
teach us a readiness to suffer for the good of others, and in public
calamities some smart though all sin.

4. If one strike at my Head, mine Arm will receive the blow: To teach me
loyalty to my King; To die to preserve him.

5. The Sinews, and Gristles do strengthen the Arm: To teach the strong not
to despise the weak. Who art thou despisest small things? Zach. 4.

6. The bones of the Arm are joined with moisture; so they grate not one
another, nor consume one another: To teach those joined in nearest bonds a
meek yielding, and unity; so they may perform Duties comfortably together.

7. As the Arm has three Jointes, one at the Shoulder, another at the Elbow,
another at the Hand: So should mine Actions have a threefold Respect. First,
to the Glory of God. Secondly, the good of my neighbor. Thirdly, the
salvation of mine own Soul: I must seriously respect Duties of Piety,
Righteousness, and Sobriety.


1. Quest. HOW is the Government on Christ's Shoulders, Esai 9.6?

Answer, He has all Authority within his Church, and also without it: It Is as
he will, not as wicked men will; that things are disposed-of here below.

2. Qu. What is meant by the Arm of the Lord, Esa. 53.1?

Ans. The power of GOD, in converting of Souls.

3. Qu. What is meant by Arm of flesh, Ier. 17?

Ans. Weak, and feeble is man's help without God.

4. Qu. What be the burdens we must help to bear, Gal. 6?

Ans. The burden of Infirmities, and Afflictions.

5. Qu. Why have some Rivers the name of an Arm of the Sea?

Ans. Because they issue from the Ocean, as the Arm from the Body.

6. Qu. What is it to have the sword on the right Arm, Zach. 13?

Ans. To be deprived of power, and strength: to be like an Idol, that can do
no good, nor help others.

7. Qu. What is the condition of the wicked, whose Arms are broken, Psalm
37.17?

Ans. 1. They are deformed, like those without Arms.

2. They are in misery; as those whose Arms be broken, though they be in a
dead sleep, and for the present feel no pain.

3. They cannot adorn themselves, nor defend themselves.

4. They are unserviceable, unfit for Duty.

5. They may grinne, or curse; but the godly will be too hard for them, when
once GOD breaks their Arms.

6. They will never make good Soldiers, nor good Artists. To conclude, when
once God takes them in hand, they shall be like Vessels, in whom is no pleasure.

So much of the Arms.

Of the Hands.
1. A Consideration of the Nature of the Hands.

2. Conclusions from that Consideration.

3. Of the employment of the Hands.

4. Resolves concerning the Hands.


I Consider it singly, as I am able; as it is between the Arm, and the
fingers: It Is said on the upper part be nine bones; some knottie, some hollow,
some straight. The Inside has hollownesse for receipt, and hairs grow not
within, as they do on the back of the Hand. If the Hand be stretched abroad,
then it is Palma, like a tree spreading out the Branches: If the Hand be
clinched, it is Pugnus; because men clinch the fist to fight. The Hand is very
sensible, and so framed, that we can turn it this way, or that, speedily, and
move one part, not another. This is the Instrument of Instruments. The most
wise GOD has framed the Hands, to do many Noble Works.


1. AS some bones be knottie in the Hand: so be some Actions that I must do.
To do things against my Natural Inclination, against my Reason, against my
profit, or ease, I shall find knots, and lets, and stops, and much ado.

Some bones be hollow, so be some Actions, seeming more than solid; more
fained than real; more in show, than substance: their hollownesse is filled
not with marrow, but hypocrisy, deceit, and sin: it is good if these were
taken out of my Hands, for these will bring a mystical gout, and lamenesse.

Some bones be straight, so be some Actions: these be the most perfect, that
avoid defect, and excess, and be even according to the line: straight things
be stretched out, and the middle agrees with both ends. Let mine Actions have a
good rise, a good aim, and good affections.

2. The peaceable Hand is stretched out, the angry Hand is clinched: How
beautiful is the one? how terrible the other? let my hands be stretched forth
to pray; stretched out to the poor, voluntarily: clinched to threaten, or
strike, compulsorily.

3. Is the Hand so turning, and nimble an Instrument for Action? let me loath a
gentile, and beggarly lasinesse; my Hands were made for employment? he that is
not in labor with men, may hereafter be in dolor with Devils.


1. WE most nobly employ them in prayer, Psalm 143.6.

2. We employ our Hands to give to the poor:

3. With our Hands we do receive things.

4. With our Hands we do most works.

5. With our Hands we fight, and war.

6. With our Hands we feed, and cloth us.

7. With our Hands we correct offenders.

8. With the Hands we play, and recreate us.

9. With the Hands we direct by pointing, beckening.


1. Quest. WHY is the right Hand most active, usually?

Ans. Because the right Hand is more hot, and dry, so more fit for Action: and
the left hand is to give place to the right. Some men be left handed, but
women seldom: All foure-footed beasts are more active with the right leg (some
observe,) the Elephant only excepted.

2. Qu. Whose Hands do fail of activenesse?

Ans. 1. Old men's, whose Natural he^te declines.

2. Those that labor, and travail, and spend their vigor.

3. Those whose blood wants passage for nourishment.

4. Those that fast too much, their hands wax feeble.

3. Qu. How are Hands attributed to God?

Ans. It Is Metaphorically, in a borrowed speech.

Sometime his Hand is his Purpose, Acts 4.28.

Sometime his Vengeance, Judges 2.15.

Sometime his Providence distributing, Psalm. 104.28.

Sometime his special Favor, Luke 1.66.

Sometime the Gift of Prophecy, Ezech. 1.3.

Sometime extraordinary Assistance, 1 Kings 18.46.

There is GODS Hand of Blessing, his Hand of correction, his Hand of Revenge.

4. Qu. How many ways be the hands lifted-up?

Ans. The Hand, or Hands be lifted up:

1. In Prayer, Psalm. 63.4. I lift up my hands in thy Name.

2. In taking an Oath, Genesis 14.22.

3. By smiting, so Kain lift up his Hand.

5. Qu. How is the Hand stretched forth?

Ans. 1. By Invitation; Proverbs 1.24.

2. To Comfort; Ieremi. 16.7.

3. To Releeve; Prove. 31.21.

4. To Direct; 1 Kings 13.4.

5. To give liberty to speak: Acts. 24.10.

6. To manifest a readiness to Answer, Acts 26.1.

6. Qu. Why do our Magistrates burn thieves in the Hand?

Ans. 1. To punish their burning desire to gain, with a burning punishment.

2. It Is done openly, though they stole secretly.

3. That others may know them by the hand.

4. That if they Repent, they may be humble for ever, when they lift-up that
hand in Prayer,

5. To fore-warne them of the burning to come, when shame, and burning shall be
for evermore.

So much of the Hands.

I have brought my Thoughts now to my Fingers-ends, and I shall be more brief:
1. Because I want the Art of the Anatomist. 2. The Body is a heavy subject to
dwell on. 3. My paper begins to call for brevitie.


The Fingers, with the Thumb,
FIrst, are for number 10. When I look on them, I may mind the 10.
Commandments, which I should have in my Doings, rather than in my
Speculations: I have but one Tongue to speak of the Law, two Eyes to read it,
two Ears to hear it, ten Fingers to be doing.

2. There is Order, and Comeliness, and men give several Names, because of
several uses: The Thumb is Pollex for strength, and to measure the Inch
withal: the forefinger is the Directer: the middle-finger is called
Impudicus, the unclean, of some the fools finger: the next, the Ring-finger;
the least, the Eare-picker.

3. The Fingers be lean, more fit for Action: and be lesser, after we have
dined, than before; to teach us to be less in ourselves, when we have received
plenty.

4. The Fingers are fenced with Nails, which be harder than Flesh, and softer
than Bones; united to the Flesh by Sinews, Veins, and Arteries (as it is by
some affirmed) The nails have vigor from the heart, for if the heat of the
heart decay, Observed in Sickness.
the Nails do wax black.

So much of the Fingers.

Of the Back.
1 Of the Strength of the Back.

2. Of the Ridge-bone.

3. Resolves concerning the Back.


IT is the strongest part of man, made fit to bear: though the lighter
burdens be carried on the Head, or in the Arms; yet when a great weight is to
be borne then it is laid upon the back. Dorsum is the Back, for it lieth-out,
somewhat bunching: and so Dorsum is a hill, or bed in a garden: yet Dorsuarius
is he that carries on his Shoulder: the Back is the Porter for the whole Body,
there the Soldier lays his snap-sack.

Conclusions.
1. It Is fittest the strongest should bear: the smaler burdens came to the
Judges, the most weighty to Moses, Exodus 18. Able Christians should resolve
petie questions of the weak, and Ignorant: and let the higher Matters be
carried of the Divine. The Children, and Servants can dispatch the smaler
Matters in the Family, the most weighty are reserved for the Master: as the
arms, and hands can carry the lighter burdens, but the most heavy are carried
by the Back.

2. The Eye sees not, when the burden is on the back, yet the back bears his
burden as well, as if it were looked upon. The Bearers must carry though the
Spectators be absent: A good Lesson for Eie-servants; the Masters Eyes be the
winds, which move their sails: Their Cure is, 1. To look to the Eye of God,
which is upon them. 2. To the trust is committed to them. 3. To the account
they must make, at the last Day. 4. To the great Recompense of Reward.


3. Though all have Backs that have Bodies, yet some can, and some must bear
more than others. There is a Providence disposes our burdens; if our
Spiritual burdens be great, he will give us the more Assistance: if small,
they be the more tolerable, and less than others do bear.


THe Ridge-bone begins at the nape of the Neck, and stretches near the
kidneys: it is compounded of many Jointes: the other bones are fastened to the
Ridgebone: this bone is for defense, and receives marrow from the brain. The
Ridge of the Beast is not rested on; but the Beast lies on the belly: but our
bone is so framed, we lie on our Ridge-bone, and rest, and sleep. So resting,
we awake, and looke-up to Heaven.

1. In the way of Thankefulnes for our rest. 2. We looke-up for Blessings from
above. 3. We looke-up to Christ, our Head, in Glory. 4. We looke-up, that GOD
may look down. 1. To melt our hearts; so he looked on Peter. 2. To direct us;
Mark 10.27. 3. To Cure us; Mark 1.21.
5. We looke-up with Reverence, and subjection. 6. We looke-up with hope, at
last to ascend up.
Thus as we do not lodge like Beasts: so we should looke-up, and excel them.


1. Quest. What is it to go backward, John 6.66?

Ans. It Is to depart from Christ, and the good way; to Apostatise: as in a race
they that go backward, are sure never to obtain the prize.

2. Qu. What is meant by bowing the back, Romans 11.10?

Ans. To be void of strength: Inwardly, to be void of Grace, good Inclinations,
will, and endeavor: Outwardly, to be void of dignity, and honor, and to be
in base servitude. Willet. Wilson.


3. Qu. What is it to have our sins cast behind Gods Back, Esai 38 17?

Ans. To be as not seen; to be pardoned; to be cast into the Sea: Micha. 7.19.

4. Qu. What be Gods Back-parts, Exo. 33.23?

Ans. Moses saw according to his capacity, not his desire: The Back-parts we
see; we perceive God by his Word, 1 Cor. 13.12.
and Works, here; Face to Face, in Heaven.

Of the Breast.
1. A Consideration of the Breast. 2. Resolves Concerning the Breast:
First, A Consideration of the Breast
hollow to preserve the inward parts, and that the lungs especially, may close,
and open. 3. The Breast is the Noble part, the Spirits are within it, and many
other of the Chief parts: there is heat, and life, and strength. 4. The
Breast of a man is broad, but of a bir^ the Breast is sharp. The Beast has
dugges in the womb; but only Mankind, and Elephants have dugges in the
Breast. 5. If other parts be pained, the Breast has a fellow-feeling; If the
Throat be grieved, or the Stomach, or Lungs; the Breast will be sore. 6. The
Breast is sensible; a little pricking, within, more troubles us, than a wound
on the Arm, without.


1. Quest. What learn we from the Breast, and the Shoulder given to the Priest
in the Peace Offerings, Leviticus 7.29. to 32?

Ans. 1. The Priest must have the Breast of knowledge; the Shoulder of labor.

2. The people must bring the Breast to be cleansed from corruption; the
Shoulder to be directed to work, and take pains.

3. The lifting it up, and waving the Breast: 1. In acknowledgement, it was
from God. 2. Our minds, and endeavors should be upward. 3. In public view,
our works must be manifest.


2. Qu. What learn we from the Breast Plate, Exo. 28.30?

Ans. 1. It was the Breast Plate of Judgment, the High Priest put-on, when he
consulted with God: Number. 27.21.

2. He must wear it on his Hear, or Breast, with precious-stones therein
graven, signifying the nearenesse of the Church to Christ, and always in
remembrance, and enricht with Graces; Rich, precious Graces.

3. The Breast Plate was lost in the Captivity, Ezra. 2.63. After that they
must keep to the Law of Moses, Mala. 4.4. and enquire there.

3. Qu. What is that Righteousness, which is a Breast Plate, Ephesians. 6.14?

D. Goog^ his (...) pag^ 146.
Ans. It is the Righteousness of a good Conscience, being a powerful work of
Gods Spirit, in the Regenerate, whereby they endeavor to approve themselves to
God, and Man, by performing what Gods Law requires: 1. It Is a work of Gods
Spirit, which quickneth. Romans 6.11. 2. A powerful work: We by Nature be dead,
Ephesians. 2.1. 3. In the Regenerate: They be borne of the Spirit, John 3.6. 4.
They endeavor, and strive: Acts 24.16. Heb. 13.18. 5. To approve themselves to
God, and Man: Matthew. 22.37.39. 6. According to the Law, that shows us our
Duty.


This Breast Plate keeps us from sin, in safety.

4. Qu. Why is Faith, and Love a Breast Plate, 1 These. 5.8?

Ans. 1. Faith brings home Christ, for our Defense.

2. Love evidences, we be Gods Children: 1 John 3.14. That prevents despair;
and Love sets us on work to keep Gods Commandments: so we prevent sin, and
fly presumption, and security, and escape wounds, as by a Breast Plate.

5. Qu. What is meant by the Blessing of the Breasts, Joseph's Blessing, amongst
the rest, Genesis 49.25?

Ans. It was a numerous Posterity, ten thousands of Ephraim, and thousands
of Manasseh: Deuteronomy. 33.17. Many Children, well nourisht Children: the contrary
is a curse, Hosea. 9.14. a barren womb, and dry Breasts.

6. Qu. What is meant by the two Breasts, Cant. 4.5?

Ans. Breasts set out the Churches Ornaments, Ainsworth on Cant. Or Towers for
strength o^ deliverie o^ the word Midal, which i^ Tower, and (...) is a Pulpit,
8 Nehemiah 4
Eze. 16.7. Thou art come to excellent Ornaments, thy Breasts are fashioned.
Also they signify Nourishment. Esa. 66.11. Those without the Ministry, are
said to be without Breasts, Cant. 8.8. The Breasts of the Church, be as Towers,
Cant. 8.10. being obvious, and strong, and large.

Of the Belly.
1. The Anatomists Relation of the Belly. 2. A more plain Observation. 3.
Resolves for Edification.

IT IS separated from the Breast, by the midriffe, and bounded in the foure-part
above, by the Dag ger-like Cartilage, below by the share-bone. There be three
Regions: the first, Epigastrica, covering the entrales, from the bulk
downward: the second, Regio umbilicalis, void of ribbs, the part where the
Navell is: the third, is Regio Hypogastrica, from the Navell downward.

There are observed, in the Belly, five things more: 1. Cuticula, a tender
skin called the Scarfe-skinne. 2. Cutis, the skin covering the out-parts.
3. Pinguedo, the fat between the skin, and the membrane. 4. Membrana
carnosa, somewhat fleshie to keepe-in the fat. 5. The Membrane pertaining to
every Muscle.



THREE Names are given to the Belly; First, Venture the Belly, or panch.
Secondly, Alvus, for the receptacle, or hollownesse. Thirdly, Vterus, the
Womb; this belongs to the Female. The Belly may be considered as containing,
or as the things contained; externally, or internally: the form, and fashion
round, the Navell in the midst. If a man, be laid on his back, his arms and
legs spread abroad, set a pair of great compasses on his Navell, we shall
find him round by measure, as far to his toes, as to his fingers. The Belly
is like a Buckler, the Navell is like a Bosse. In the midst of it, the Navell
is composed of sinews, and veins: the Child in the womb sucketh Nourishment,
and draws breath by the Navell. In the birth, the Navell breaks, and
commeth-forth with the Child, and the Midwife binds it about four Inches,
that drying-up comes to a roundnesse.


1. Quest. HOW was it a curse to the Serpent to creep on his Belly, Genesis 3.14?

Answer. Because his creeping before was pleasant, but now is painful. 2.
before it was comely, but now with Ignominy, Ross. on Genesis 3.

2. Quest. What learn we from the unlawfulness of eating that which creepes
on the Belly, Leviticus 11.42?

Answer. 1. That distinctions of Gods making must be regarded: He is the great
Lawgiver.

2. The Spiritual use is to decline those, which savor of earthly things.

3. Quest. What learn we from Psalm 17.14. where the wicked have their
Bellies filled with hid Treasures?

Ans. 1. Gods Bounty to wicked men, He fills their Bellies.

2. I am not to Judge of Gods Favor by the Belly; For all comes alike to all
sorts, (of these earthly Treasures) Eccles. 9.1.2.

4. Quest. What learn we from Nabuchad-nezzars Image, whose Belly was Brass,
Dan. 2.32?

Answer 1. The Belly, and Thighs signified the third Monarchy, obtained by
the Grecians, who ruinated the Persians; compared to a Belly; because as the
meat staieth not long in the Belly, so Alexander got many Kingdoms, yet
enjoyed them, but a short time.

2. The Grecians were as a Belly, given to Drunkenness, Gluttony, and
excess. Alexander gave one Protarchus a Talent for drinking four Measures of
wine, which contained each of them a Gallon, and a Pint: but died within three
Days, and 41. men more by excessive drinking.

5. Qu. What learn we from Philippians, 3.19. where it is said of some: Their
Belly is their God?

Ans. 1. They mind their Belly most, and care to fill it, and live like
Epicures a sensual life.

2. There is a flat opposition between Gods Children and worldlings. The one
look for a Savior, the othe^^ and is Damnation; The one ^^teeme their bodies
vile; the other make their Belly their God; the one minds earthly things; the
other have their conversation in Heaven.

Of the Thighs, Legs, and Feet.
1. Of the uniting of these parts together.

2. Of the bones of these parts, and of the body.

3. Resolves Concerning these parts.

4. How a man is a Medium between an Angel, and a Beast, with a view of other
Mediums.


THE lower parts of man's Body answer to the Arms: for, as the Arm has
Shoulder, Elbow, and Hand; so the lower parts have Thighs, Shankes, and Feet.

The Thigh has but one bone, which is the longest, and greatest in the Body;
and the Thighs are united to the Legs, and Legs to the Feet, with such
admirable wisdom, that if the uniting were stiffer, we could not move, and be
so active: if more limber, we should be weaker, and feebler, and unfit for
burdens, and strong Actions.


THE Thigh Bone is only one, and the Shanke-bones two; a greater, and a
lesser. The foot is divided into three parts; the bones of the feet are seven
in a foot: the first called Os balistae: the second the Heele-bone: the third
the bone like a Boat: the fourth is the largest Bone: the other three be the
wedg-like bones.

Bones grow without some Middle Substance, three ways: First, by a line, as
the bones in the upper Jaw, and Nose do grow: 2. As the Bones of the Scull are
united: 3. When one Bone is fastened within another, as in the Gummes.

If Bones be united by a Medium, it is by a Cartilage, or gristle, or a ligament,
or string, which is unsensible, and is not hollow.


1. Quest. WHY did Abraham cause his Servant to put his hand under his Thigh,
when he gave him an Oath?

Ans. 1. Some think, for to signify the firmness of an Oath; because the
Thighs be the Pillars of the Body.

2. Others think it was to try the subjection of his Servant, in Obeying his
Command.

3. The most likely Cause was, I adjure thee, as thou expect^st the Messiah to
come of my loins, to be faithful to me.
in a Mystery to fore-shew the Messiah was to come from his loins: in this
Phrase, the Israelits came out-of Jacobs Thigh, Genesis 46.26.

This kind of Oath was not usual, for the hand was lifted-up, when they did
swear: Genesis 14.22. There is something in the Mystery, for the word (Jerek) a
Thigh, in Hebrew, is (...) an Oath in Greek: Ainsworth on Genesis 24.

2. Qu. What may we learn from Jacobs halting on his Thigh, Genesis 32.31?

Ans. 1. We are not rashly to Judge those to be wicked, who have Infirmities,
or deformities. Moses was defective in Speech, Mephibosheth was Lame, Lea
Bleare-eyed, Isaak Blind, and Jacob Halted.

2. In our Tentations, and Wrastlings with God, we have our Infirmities, Psalm
35.15. Read the Marginall Note.

3. He prevailed, yet went away halting, Which may teach us to be humble,
after we have done our best, and sped never so well.

4. The Jews eat not the Sinews of the Beast, in the right Thigh, but of the
Fowls they do; because there is no hollow in the Thigh.

3. Quest. What is that Sword Christ girds on his Thigh, Psalm 45.4?

Ans. It Is the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. The girding on the Thigh is to
make it ready, Exodus 32.27.

4. Qu. What do the Jews report of the Woman whose Thigh did rott, after she
had drunk the bitter water, Numbers 5.27?

Ans. 1. They say, being guilty, her face looked yellow.

2. Her Eyes did stick-out.

3. Her Belly did swell.

4. Her Thigh did rott, and in the same hour, the Adulterer did die:

But if she were Innocent, 1. Her Countenance would look Cheerful. 2. If she
had any disease, it left her. 3. She should Conceive Seed. 4. She should have
easier travail, than before. 5. If she had Females before, now it should be a
Male.


Resolves Concerning the Legs.
1. Quest. What is meant by making bare the Legs, Esai 47.2?

Ans. Their slaverie is set-forth by the Mil-stones, and their shame by the
loosing the Locks, and making bare the Legs: to pass not only through the
Streets, but through the Floods. Now their wickedness shall be discovered, and
appear in open view, to their great dishonor.

2. Quest. What learn we from John 19.36. Not a Bone of CHRIST was broken,
when those crucified with him had their Legs broken, verse 22?

Ans. Christ was prefigured in the Paschall Lamb, Exodus 12.46.

1. The Lamb was without blemish; so was Christ.

2. The Lamb must be killed, so must Christ.

3. The Posts of their Doors must be sprinkled: So our Hearts must be
sprinkled with the Blood of Christ: Heb. 12.24. 1 Pet. 1.2.

4. The Lamb was roasted with fire: Christ he felt the heat of GODS Wrath.

5. The Lamb was to be eaten whole: so Christ had not a bone broken, when the
Legs of them Crucified with him were broken.

3. Qu. What were the Creatures with Legs above their Feet, lawful to be
eaten, Levit. 11.21.22?

Ans. They were several sorts of Locusts:

The first are more common, and their Name, the Learned say, is from their
shortness: (...) a (...).
others say they are named from their multitude: Exodus 10.4.5.

The second sort have their Name from a Rock, because they breed in stony
places.

The third is called (...), because he will fight with Serpents.

The fourth is called a Grasshopper: because of his Leaping: The Marginall Note
says these were kinds of Grasshoppers to us unknown.

4. Qu. What were the Legs of Iron, and Clay, Dan. 2.33?

Ans. The fourth Monarchy divided into two kingdoms, Syria, and Egypt.

1. These two Kingdoms were as Iron, to the Church.

2. They issued from the Brasen-bellie, and Thighs; from Alexanders Monarchy.

3. These Kingdoms were one stronger than the other; the King of the North was
strongest.

4. Their Matrimonial Leagues would not hold together, as Iron, and Clay can
make no firm lasting Conjunction.

5. Qu. What is meant by Cant. 5.15. His Legs are Pillars of Marble, set upon
sockets of Gold?

Ans. Christ's goings are commended:

1. For Comeliness; Pillars of Marble be long, and straight, and beautiful.

2. For strength, and stabilitie; Marble is lasting.

3. For Glory, the Sockets be Gold; the most precious of Metals.

Christ comes beautiful, as one to be desired; his goings are strong, none can
let his coming, nor rase-out his footsteps: his footsteps be golden steps,
he brings Glory with him, to that people, to that soul, where he comes.

Resolves Concerning the Feet.
1. Qu. What may we observe from Moses putting-off his shoes from his Feet
Exo. 3.5?

Ans. There be three Causes of putting-off the shoes:

1. By way of Humiliation, as David did, 1 Samuel 15.30.

2. By way of Resignation, Deuteronomy. 25.9. Ruth 4.7.

3. By way of Reverence, so Moses put-off his shoes.

Diverse Opinions Concerning Moses Action.
1. Some think, to Consecrate the place: but Gods presence made it holy
before.

2. Another Opinion; The shoes were made of dead Beasts skins: Now he must
put-off the fear of Death.

3. Or to put-off the shoes, to acknowledge he is not the Head of the Church;
he resignes his right by that Action: that is another Opinion.

4. Moses must put-off his carnal Affections, when he approches Gods
Presence: this is a true Opinion. The Jews from the Precept, Leviticus 19.30.
Ye shall Reverence my Sanctuary, Concluded, None must come there, with shoes
on his Feet.

2. Q^est. What is meant by Saules going in the cave, to cover his Feet, 1 Samuel 24.3^?

Ans. To do his easement: we call it to untrusse a point: The Holy Bible
teaches a holy Expression of things unseemely to be spoken: Adam knew Hevah,
Genesis 4.1. The Title of Psalm 51. A Psalm of David, after he had gone-in to
Bath-sheba.

3. Qu. What learn we from Romans 16.20. The God of Peace will tread Satan
under your Feet?

Ans. 1. To encourage them against false Teachers, he promises them victory.

2. The God of Peace will destroy him, that breaks Peace.

3. We must not trust to our own strength to subdue Satan: it is God can do it.

4. Satan shall be subdued, and kept under.

5. God did this for the Christians in that time, who suffered under the Roman
Persecuters.

6. As GOD raises up an Adversary to the Negligent, 1 Kings 11.14. So he
threatens to crush the greatest Enemy of the Diligent.

7. When Satan is subdued, then Grace florishes presently. The Apostle wishes
the Grace of Christ, as soon as he had spoken of Satan's being trodden under
our Feet.

8. If Satan the Chiefest, then all other Enemies that be Inferior, must needs
be subdued.

9. Though Satan has a Throne for a time, Revelation 2.13. Yet he must come
under Foot, in a short time: he shall be trod under Foot shortly.

10. Those which have trod on Satan, and been victorious, should encourage us:
as Joshua did encourage from former Experience, Joshua 10.24.25.

4. Quest. What is meant by Esai 3.16. The Daughters of Sion made a tinkling
with their Feet?

Ans. 1. They had some Bells, or Plates, that sounded.

2. whatsoever it was, it made a noise as they went.

3. Such a noise, as they would be taken notice of.

5. Quest. How are the Affections like the Feet, and the Feet like the
Affections?

Ans. 1. The Affections be a part of the Soul, and the Feet be a part of the
Body.

2. The Affections be in Motion, so be the Feet.

3. The Affections be soon cold, so be the Feet.

4. The Affections must be guided, so must the Feet.

5. The Affections go by two, and two: so the Feet are in number two.

Quest. How do the Affections go by two, and two?

Answer, There is Joy, and Grief: Loving, and Hating: Desiring, and Fearing:
Hoping, and Despairing, etc.

6. Feet, well shod with shoes, will tread on Stones, or Thorns, yet goe-on
Comfortably: And Affections, well shod with Patience, will go on Crosses, and
Troubles, with Constancy.

7. When the Feet be cold, it is uncomfortable: so when the Affections be cold,
it is uncomfortable.

8. Stirring, or Fire, warmes the Feet: so Duties, and the Ordinances warm
the Affections.

9. A pair of little shoes will serve a pair of little Feet: so those which
Affect little, a little will content them.

10. As Children do grow Elder, so their Feet grow bigger, and stronger: So
GODS Children, as they grow Elder, their Affections should grow better, and
stronger.

Medium between an Angel, and a Beast, and of other Mediums.
1. THE Angel is all Spirit, the Beast is all Flesh: Man is a Medium, Soul
and Flesh.

2. The Angel has clear Understanding, the Beast has no Understanding: Man
is a Medium, in his Knowledge above Beasts, less than Angels.

3. The Angels Love is Divine, the Beasts Love is sensual: Man is a Medium,
and by Grace, he loves Divinely, by Nature, sensually.

4. The Angel does service willingly, the Beast by compulsion: Man is a
Medium; by Grace he is willing; by Nature he is dull, and backward; and must
be forced by Laws, threats, corrections, etc.

5. The Angel is full of Admiration, the Beast may be frighted but cannot
Admire: Man is a Medium, he may be frighted; and has Reason, so is capable of
Admiration.

6. The Angel never dies, the Beast dies: Man is a Medium, his Body dies, his
Soul dies not.

Of other Mediums.
1. THERE is Earth, there is Water: Slime is a Medium.

2. There is Air, there is Water: Vapors are a Medium.

3. There is Air, there is Fire: Exhalations are a Medium.

4. There is Slime, there are Stones: the Sea-some a Medium.

5. There is a Diamond, there is Water: Crystal the Medium.

6. There is Water, and Metals: Quicksilver the Medium.

7. There are Roots, and Stones: the Coral the Medium.

8. There are Animals, and Plants: the Mandrake the Medium.

9. There are Fowls, and Beasts: the Ostrich the Medium.

10. There are Birds, and Creeping-things: the Bat the Medium.

11. There is Rain, and Hail: the Snow the Medium.

FINIS.

