A plain and fynall confutacion: Of cammells corlyke oblatracion.
YE upright men which loves the light, whose hearts be void of gyle:
condemn no cause till truth be tried, give ear and list a while.
And mark my tale from point to point, let no word skip vnskande:
And hear them with indiffrent ears, and way them as they stand.
First lay aside affeccion blind, for truth my cause must plead,
let nether foe nor feigned friend, this matter Judge nor read.
And then I trust to clear my self, and Cammell clean confound:
that blows the trompet of defame, which geues vnsertayn sound.
The tune whereof semes yet full strange, so boystous is the blast:
but quiet calmes settes forth still winds, when storms be gone and past*
Which quiet time I wish to have, that I may be well hard:
and then I hope this vypars bird, shall have his just reward.
That forgeth fautes and seeks holes, to crepe and steal therein:
and flattereth for no other cause, but fame or gain to win.
What thinks this man he has more wit, and learning in his head:
than has five thousand other men, that (Dycarres dream has read.
Or thinks he that I am so rash, to run so far from square:
or that I make such obscure things, that I dare not declare.
Than is he blind and very fond, and scarce him self does know:
let him look on his book again, his rule is nothing so.
To you I speak friend Camel now, which wresteth right to wrong:
you say you have been kept at schole, in soothe I think not long.
Your master did but stroke your head, he did forbear the rod:
I dout he did not teach you well, how you should fear your God.
For if he had you would have stayed, to write against this dream:
to spy a mote within my eye, since in yours is a beam.
If you might sit and judge my cause, I should soon feel your worst:
but God forbid there were long horns, on beasts that would be corst.
I call you beast because you said, here goes the beast abroad:
the beast will turn you gage a grote, if he be prickte with goade.
Now turn sir beast and come aloft, fling not for fear of whip:
in deed it is a monstruse thing, to see a camel skippe.
You say you shoke me by the sleue, than rubde I your gall back:
if I know how to do you good, my healpe you should not lack.
We Iompe in leasse, ye gab sir beast, I am but one alone:
but I can prove (O beaw Camew) that you are more then one.
My surreioynder does declare, this dream was for the best:
and yet you cry, a bandye ho at tenues thus ye ieste.
What can you lay unto my charge, of malice or of hate:
since I do wyshe that every wight, should walk in his estate.
This verse you hyppe, and yet it stands, next that when rex does rayng:
both these be good and godly to, here shall I show you plain.
But as I said, out of fair flours, the spyder poison takes:
and yet the be does feed thereon, and therewyth honey makes.
I do compare this spyder now, to you which so appeeres:
for that you run a patheles way, to lead me in the breerres.
Wheare find you this that dreams can have, any effect at all,
be not they fancies of the head, and so wise men them call,
Why do you write against a dreme, which has a small effect,
why turn you yt to meaning lewd, to bring it in suspect,
You meant no more but me to learn, so ^ou would you excuse:
Sir if you mind to keep a frynde, (...) ^ot your frynde so use.
You brag you of your master much when you to skoole did go:
You said ye learnd your duetye well, good sir it seems not so.
To serve the king and pray for him, I learnde as well as you:
to love him leall for concyens sake this lesson well I knew.
His council eeke for to obaye, my duty learnes me too:
and with there matters not to mell, nor therein have to do.
This lesson hitherto I kept, and shall here after keep:
till I to earth return again, where flesh and fell must sleep.
What is the cause you answerde not, to that which I wrott last:
You do conclude much like a thief, which is condemnde and cast.
For at the bar he prateth long, and can no reason show:
to clear him self and save his life when truth does him orethrow.
So you although with matter now, I do you still assault:
yet with great shame you are content, to yield unto your fault.
I wrate more things than one or two, yet read them ons again:
I do perceive a little thing, will soon orecom your brain.
You have sought council fourteen days, it seems that you did dream:
or else ye thought to run away, into some other realm.
But now I hear a sodayn sownde, the beast begyns to braye:
it is much like a camels voice, that dwells in lyn they say.
Be as be may you say your felfe, ye bid me foet it well,
why will the beast now lead the dance, with beasts I will not mell.
But wheare you say, I when out whens, above eala a note,
you gront and groen from gammuth far, I dare you gage my cote.
Sins you will put me to my trompe, with a false card of ten,
mark how justice shall ioyn to truth, I will make large this when.
Note. Though justice does belong to Rex, whose sword puts that in ure,
yet every justice under him, is not so just and pure.
Because there be knights of the post, which will them selves forswere,
and fained troeth will forge a tale, sometimes in justice ear.
And work such wiles, justice to blind, and make him credit lies
such crafty mistes these men can cast, before true justice eyes.
Though justice of him self is pure, and clean deuoide of crime,
yet false witness may alter him, and change his mind sometime.
The faut thereof is not in him, he would fayn ioyn to truth:
But flatteryng faith, may him corrupt, alas the more is ruthe.
When truth is forman of the quest, and right shall vardyt give,
Than justice shall ioyn still to truth, and so together live.
Thus is this when made manifest, truly as I it meant,
and yet it was full plain before, to every true intent.
Here have I waide what justice is, to whom it does pertain,
who swayes the sword, who does decree, here have I set out plain.
Now stay a while, and mark this when, which you call principa^l,
and is the beast among the rest, and stands last of all.
Note. When Rex does reign (And) rule the roast, a conjunction copulative,
your master taught you not to know, could he such things discriue?
Now Rex does rain whom god preserve, in long life on us here,
and send him rule the roast him self, as prince withouten pere.
That he may find those secret slighes, which now in cornets lie:
And such as do abuse his laws and live so wickedlie.
It semes they live as they delight, and lean not to his lore:
Because he does commend them laws and they pass not therefore.
How does the master of the schole, his scholars rule and tame:
when he does give preseptes and rules, and none does keep the same.
How does the king his people rule, let this be better wayde:
when he does give them laws and acts and none of them obeyde.
For though that Rex do tayne and rule, as I believe in deed:
yet does not he for mercy great, the wicked all ^ute wede.
And like as God is merciful, so does our king in deed:
^n^we and follow in his steps (whom God defend and speed.)
His Justice is to ponishe sin, with death and pain extreme:
which is most godly exercisde and so does show and seem.
Yet if all those that do offend, should have such punyshmente:
what man is living now a days, that should escape vnshente?
But following the exa^mple o^, the Lord and king of kings:
does often su^^er us unkind, in vile and grievous things.
Because he would (as it doethe seem, so merciful and dear:)
be rather loved then obeyed, for only dread and fear.
And this his mercy godly mente, doothe make us worse in deed:
as scollers when they lack the rod, do live withouten dread.
But when he shall begin again, to punyshe wyckednes:
which is his justice (or more plain,) to us but ryghtousnes.
Then folk ^or fear (but not for love,) shall better end their life:
as horses whipte ye then for fear shall stynte and cease our strife.
Wherefore if every king th^s day which ought in deed to raygne:
do raygne and rule the roast and weed, the wicked out full plain.
Then have they welthe withouten strife, which God give us right sone:
that all out wyckednes were paste, and dreadful days were done.
If Dy^ar said, when Rex does raygne, and all men do obey:
how could you Camel, thus conclude? he raygneth not to day.
Note. Or if he said, when Christ is God, and you a faithful man:
would ye conclude ^rgo, (to him,) he is not God now than.
Wherefore in Rex do raygne and rule, as I believe he does:
and I beseech almyghtye God, he may do long in sothe.
Yet (...) you take a another point, contained in this when:
when Rex ^oeth raygne and rule the roste, and wedes out wicked men.
You must not harken half the tale, and leave the rest behind:
for than in deed you do amysse, and feign would quareles find.
You Read in faith much like the nun omnia probate:
and (...) not the other side quod bonum est tenete.
Read you no more but Rex does raygne, and left the rest vnspyed:
is there not (^oo) and rule the roste, the sentence is so tide.
And wede out wicked worldly men, the spotted from the clean:
whose vice infectes the chosen lambs, lo thus did Dicar mean.
He do^bted not but Rex doethe raygne the truethe it self does show:
but yet he thought it good to wede, out wicked men I trow.
And thus I say did Dycar dream, the sense does plainly tell:
if vpryght eyes and righteous minds, do look and skan him well.
If you should ben^y judge I se, and deem my dremynge thus
I should have but short curtesy, and you my cause discus.
But god has sawed your horns so short, no great hurt do you can,
he made you nether lord nor judge, nor skarse an honest man.
When Rex does raygne and rule the roast, and out the wicked weed,
than you and many other like, would first of all precede.
But where you set a snare and net, for these that well intend:
to show what is the very cause, of evil and the end.
There you your self* and if it were, applied well in frame,
as he has meant) should certainly be catched in the same.
What if I should cast forth the bone, you thought to choke me with:
perhaps you may repent to late, you went so nie the pyth.
Where is your lesson now become, you lernd so long ago,
that spyde such fault in dicars dreme, and yet conceylde it so.
Note. If it had raught to Jupiters seat, as you affirm in deed,
you ought not it have kept so long, but straight it told with speed.
Or if you thought you saw the mist, that no man else could skrie,
there should no cause have stopte you so, to tell it by and by.
If dicars when, as true it is, be clear from blame and blotte,
yet your offente is no whit less, by cause you thought it not.
If ignorance had said a mysse, the same be my defense,
yet wilful ignorance in you, does plead your great offense.
Behold of god the rightuouse scourdge, that now a mydde the gryn:
you laid to trappe the innocent your self is fallen therein.
What say you now wise camelles caulfe, if rex wede wicked men,
you should of right be tide to short, to peruerte dicars when.
But till such spiders be wede out, and all their cobwebes to,
that sekes to trappe the sellye flies, as you begin to do.
The barnes I say that here do won, with in this bryttaine land,
shall bide alas those dreadful days, and dicars dreme may stand.
O Sir you took my then in hand, wherewith my when I knit,
where I perceive your frantike head, begins an other fyt.
Note Can you deny the plages of god, which he to us has sent?
and scourges us for our great sins, from which we not repent.
Does not the plowe man plowe his grownde, and laborith verey sore,
the earth bringes forth his fruit likewise, encreasyng more and more
Does not the heavens give us rain, the watters gyues us fyshe?
does not the counsel seek our wealth, as well as we can wish?
Do not they take great care and pain, all euelles to redress,
yes all these things do work as well, as man's tongue can express.
Yet though our king do make good laws, the earth bringes forth much sede:
till God will take his plage away, our plenty shall be need.
Thus balefull barnes we be vnblyethe, and dreadful days do see:
till gracious God of his goodness, will help our miserye.
Within the town wheare you do dwell, you know no dred nor strife:
than is it sure a paradise, I lay thereon my life.
For I have traueld here and theare, and sought this world full wide:
to find a restyng quiet place, where I would fayn abide.
But in this weary pylgrimage, I never found such stay:
nor such a virtuous town as Lyn, if it be as you say.
If you have done as much in Lynne, as you in London have:
I think that all your neighbors would, sone wyshe you in your grave.
For we were here in quiet all, until you came to town:
sense that we could not live in reast, for such a country clown.
And Dauie Dicars dream for soothe, was lowed of every man:
till you began your wrangling riemes, to brall upon his when.
Wherein you lost your honest name, you could not lose much more:
thus are you put to open shame, and have no thank therefore.
Go show your council one by one, what gain you here have got:
Ad b^^ to wall.
Herman will help to row you hom, good sir now take your botte.
Now trudge a way fear gentle beast, and kycke no more at me:
and let them live in peace and rest, that thinks no harm to the.
Thus here I take my leave from you, wishing for grace and health:
to keep my prince from all his foes, and eke the common wealth.
Finis.
(quod) Thomas Churchyard.

Imprinted in Flet strit by Wyllyam Gryffyth, a little above the condit at the
syne of the Gryffyn.

A Replicacion to Camels Objection,
If right or reason* might move you to speak,
I would not you blame, your malice to wreake:
Or if your judgment, were upright and clean,
You would not so rudely construe what I mean.
How should your folly, so plainly be known,
If that your wisdom, abroad were not blown.
You bid me amend. whose life you know not,
As though that in you, there were not a spot.
A tale of a tubbe, you brag and you brall.
wherein you do rub your self on the gall.
You touch not one point, whereof that I wrate.
You leap ore the hedge, and sees not the gate,
I muse what you mean to discant and preach,
Upon a plain song, so far past your reach.
why Camel I say, will you needs be fine,
what will ye be known for a durty divine.
It seems you are learned, past reason or wit,
Or else you could not, the mark so well hit.
You have so good laten, you can want no pewter,
Though ye are no fool, yet you are a newter.
You writ like a clerk, ore seen well in Cato.
Forgetti^g your name, which There^s calls Gnato.
I can do no less, but show what you are,
Since you ar a Daniell, dark dreams to declare
Your knowledge is great, your judgment is good,
The most of your study* has been of Robyn hood
And Be^ys of Hampton, and sir Launcelet de lake,
Has tought you full often, your verses to make:
By sweet saint Benet, I swear by no fool.
You are not to learn, you plyde well your scole.
Your wyts are not breched, who list you to preeue,
You flock and you flout, and smils in your sleeue,
I praise you no more, lest you think I flatter,
I must now return, to the pith of my matter,
How can you well prove, that I do envy,
At any estate, be they low or hye*
Or that I spy fauts, in Iuppiters seat,
why are you so mad, on me thus to bleate.
It grees not, it cords not, it fyts not you say,
That me^ should find faut, with gods that bear sway
If plain Dauy Dicar, with wise man be skande,
He speaks uprightly, I dare take in hand.
I write not so rashly, but I rule my pen.
In faith you mistake. Dauy Dicars, when,
You take chauke for chese* and day for dark night,
Of like you are spurblinde, or ye look not a right:
Your purpose I know, you were in such care,
Against this good time, your purs was fulbare.
You thought to optaine, some garment or gift*
Then did you invent, to make a foul shift.
To flatter the Gods, and get a new cote,
That made you to sing. so merry a note.
You feign me like Judas, you think me not so
For if I were he, then you would me know
I bear not the bag, that may you reward
But yet my good will, I pray you regard
You say that order, would have each degree,
To walk in his calling: then how may this do.
That you out of fraine, do blother and bark,
So like a curre dog, at every good warke,
Is this the order, that Camels do use?
Because you are a beast, I must you exscuse:
A Camel, a Capon, a Curre sure by kind.
I may you well call, since so I you find:
Because you have ratled and railed to mytche.
Now give me good leave, to claw you where ye ytch
And if that you think. I cubbe you to sore,
Then give me no cause, to scratch you no more.
Hold this for certain, and for a sure thing,
The ofter you stir me, the more I will styng.
Syns that you will needs awaken my wits.
I will seek for you, both snaffuls and bittes.
To hold in your head, and make you to rain.
And byte on the bridle, for anger and pain.
Then will I devise for you such a burden,
As long as you live, you shall bear a lurden:
A Camel by kind, will bear more at once,
Then.iii. great horses, picktout for the nonce.
More meeter for you, to be in some stable,
To bear heavy burdens, I think you more able
Then being as you are, walking abroad,
Your limbs ar well made, to carye a great lode:
All beasts that be made for carte and carriage.
Should lean to their labor, as man to his marriage
with horses and Asses, you are well acquainted,
Their manners in order, right well you have painted
I dout of your shape, some monster you are,
Because such a name, to me you declare.
Your words and your works, ar tokens right sure
You ar some brute beast, in man's form and picture.
Right happy he were, that had you in charge,
He should gain much money, to show you at large
what cause, or what toye, did trouble your mind,
To make you seek fauts, where non you can find:
Your instrument iarres, your mirth is not sweet,
You play on false strungs, which thing is unmeet
Your ear is not good, you know no sweet sound,
You can not epsy, where faut may be found.
So far out of tune, I never heard none,
Nor so much past shame, nor yet so far gone,
As you in this case, God send you to amend,
which seeks to learnr me, to bow and to bend:
Direct well your steps, by order and line,
And sclaunder me not, nor no works of mine.
In all my writings, right honestly I meant.
If they be taken, to my true intent:
They shall breed no strife, nor no error sow.
when truth shall be tryde, and virtue shall flow.
Thus yet once to, when, again I return,
Because that you seem, against it to spurn,
Until this long, when, do well come to pass,
This world shall be naught, and you shall be an Ass:
Since you do inuey, all vice to maintain,
You show that you have, a folish light brain:
God send you more wit, now keep your head warm
Or else the next winter, may do you some harm.
Thus here I do end, and rest for this time,
Except you procure me, to make a new rhyme.
Finis.
Quod. Thomas Churchard.

Imprinted by Rychard Lant.

The Surreioindre unto Camels reioindre.
WHat life may live, long vndefamde, what works may be so pure,
What virtuous thing, may fl^r^sh so, that fautles may endure:
What things be past, or yet to come, that freely may rejoice,
Or who can say he is so just, he fears not sc^aundero^s to is voice.
This Sclaunderous peales, does ^yng so loud, he soundes in every ear,
Whose craft can fayn such plesaunt tunes as truth were present theare.
But it is falshed, fraught with fraud, and syngs a no^e to hye,
Though that he bring, some plesaunt p^ynts* for to maintayn a lie.
The s^mple wy^s, at soon ^egylde, through sclaunders sweet deccay^
But those that knows, such rishing ho^es, sh^l sone perce^ue the bayt.
Unto whose ca^es, and judgments ^^e, I ^oo commend my works.
To save me from, the Serpents styng^ (...) ^orkes.
With healpe of truth, I hope to ^ee the v^n^m^ o^ this (...).
Orels I trust, in his own turn, to cast him ^t the ^cast.
Although he where, his teeth at me, and strugs me ^^th his tong^,
Yet with the just, I am content, to learn to ^^ff^e wrong.
Since Princes pears, and kings themselves, their Acts and godly lays,
Are sclan^dred often, through ^uyl tongues, and blamed without cawes.
Look what is done, and truly meant, to put things in good stay,
Are wres^ed, etc crue^ted often, by evil tongues I say.
The Preachers voice* which thre^neth wrath, the sinful to reduse*
Does purchase have, for tellyng truth: lo, this is man's abuse.
The child does blame, the byrchen rod, whose strypes may not desparde,
Because his wyts* unto his wealth, has very small regard.
The wicked sort whose vice is known, by these which writes their lives,
Can not abide, to hear their fauts, but still against them stryues.
The horse, can not abide the whyp, because it mends his pace,
Thus each thing hates, his punishment, we see before our face,
Therefore I blame, this man the less, which sclaundreth me so mouch,
And casts venom* like the Tode, because his faults I touch:
What cause in me. what hate in him, what mattier has he sought,
Within this Dauy Dicars Dream, which for the best ^as wrought.
Unto the good it is not ill, nor hurtful unto none.
(...) unto those, that lo^^es the light, it is no stumblyng stone.
But those that stands, to watch a time, the innocent to spyll,
May wrest the truth, clean out of frame, and turn good things to ill.
Out or the sweet* and fairest flower the spydre poison takes,
And yet the B^e, does feed thereon, and therewith honey makes.
The Caterpiller, sp^ls the fruit* which God made for man^ food,
The fly likewise, where he does blow, does still more harm^ tha^ good.
Thus may you see, as men do take, the things whereon they look,
There may it turn, to good or bad, as they apply the book.
But every man, to his own work, an honest meaning has,
Orels those hasty, sclaunders tongues, might do good men much s^ath.
He feels much ease, that suff^^ can, all things as they do hap,
Who makes a pyt, for other men, may fall in his own trap
who flynges a stone at every dog, which barketh in the street,
Shall never have, a just revenge, nor have a pacient sprete.
Therefore I suffer, al your words, which is mine enemy known,
I could you serve, with ^aunting terms, and feed you with your own
But I mind not, to chocke your tale, before the worst be told,
Then may I have* fre^choyce and leave, to show you where you scolde.
Good sir if I, should you salute, as you saluted me,
Then should I call you. Dauy too, and so perchance you be.
Ye multiply, five names of one, a progeny you make,
As your defent, did come from thence, whereof you lately spoke.
Though such as you, have nycknamed me, in gest and half in scorn,
Churchyard I am* in Shrew^sbury town, they say where I was borne
You put your name, to others works, the weaklings to begilde.
Me think you are, somewhat to young, to father such a child.
The truth thereof, is ecth to know, a blind man may discus,
Ye are in nombre, mo then one, ye say, be good to us.
You say, I did not answer you: I could no mattier find,
Nor yet can see, except I should, at folly wast my wind.
The greatest shame, and most reproach, that any man may have,
Is for to write, or scolde with fools, whose nature is to rave,
Since raising ryms, ore co^^s your wits, talk on and babble still,
I not entende, about such chats, my pen nor speech to spyll.
I neither fume, nor change my mood, at ought that you have said.
The world may judge, your railyng tongue, full like a beast has brayd.
Iud where you say, you can point out, by line and level both,
Of all the, whens, of Dycats dream, you say you know the troth.
It is a wilful ignorance, to hyde, I know full well,
I fault, against Iuppiters seat, or against his counsel*
You show your self, not Iuppiters friend, it you can truly prove,
A ^au^e ^n me, and does it hyde, for fear or yet for love.
As for my work^, and thankles pains, in this and such like case,
I shall be ^edy to defend, when you shall hide your face.
Think you I tear, what you can do, my ground is just and true.
On e^^ry word. which I did speak, I force not what ye brue.
^yll all your (...) is (...), and dish (...) chone,
wren they be^ul, and (...) ore, I will cast you a bone.
(...), though tha^ yo^ twits be fine,
I can (...), you out of squar, how your level and line:
I will not answer word for wor^^, to your reiondre yet,
Because I find no matter their, ^or yet no point of wit,
But brabling blasts, and fra^tike fyte, and chyding in the air,
why do you fr^t thus with your self, fie man do not despair:
Though that your wyts, be troubled sore, if you in Bedlem wear,
I think you should be right well kept, if you be trended theare:
if you were scourged once a day, and fed with some warm meat,
You would come to your self again, after this rage of heat.
This may be said without offense, it that your wyts you had,
you would not lie nor rail on me, nor fate as you were mad,
But as it is a true proverb: the threatened man lives long,
your words can neither hang nor draw, I fear not your ill tongue.
The world is such it does contempne, all those that virtue have,
An evil tongue has no respect, whose name he does deproue.
what is the cause of mortal fo^d, which does in trendes arise,
But comenly these sclaunder tongues, which still delyts in lies:
who makes war, who sows strife, who brings Realms to ruin:
But plenty, pride and evil tongues, whose voice is nere in tune,
The root and branch and cheifest ground, of mischeefs all and some,
Is evil tongues, whose sugared words, has wise men overcome,
The proof whereof you put in use, your words ye f^ame and set,
To excepe into some noble hertes, a credit for to get.
The eating worm within the nut, the sweetest curnell secke,
so do you draw where gain is got, and there you look full meek.
But under those fair angels lokes, is hyd a deuelish mind,
I durst lay odds who trust you long, full false he shall you find.
Now to return unto the cause, which made you first to write,
you show your self to be a fool, to answer me in spite,
The first and last that I have seen, of all your nipping gear,
Is not well worth when (...) cheap, the paring of a year.
your sodayn storms and thundre claps, your boasts and braggs so loud.
Has done no harm though Robyn Hoo^, spoke with you in a cloud
Go learn again of litell Ihon, to shute in Robyn Hoods bow^,
Or Dicars dream shall be ^hit, and all his, whens, I trow,
This hear I leave, I list not wr^^, to answer where you ^ayle:
He is unwise that stri^es with fools, where words can not prevail,
Finis.
Domine, saluum fat Regem: and da pacem in diebus nostris. Thomas Churcharde.

Imprinted at London in Aldersgate street by Richard Lant.


