A SPARK OF FRIENDSHIP AND WARM GOODWILL, THAT SHOWS THE EFFECT OF TRVE
AFFECTION AND VNfoldes the finenesse of this world.

Whereunto is joined, the commodity of sundry Sciences, the benefit that
paper brings, with many rare matters rehearsed in the same: with a
description and commendation of a Paper Mill, now and of late set up (near the
Town of Darthford) by an high Germayn called M. Spilman, Ieweller to the Qu.
most excellent Majesty.

Written by THOMAS CHVRCHYARD Gent.

Nulla potest esse incunditas, sublata amicitia. Cic. pro Flace. Printed at
London. 1588.

EN^DIEV^ET^MON^ ROY^:
blazon or coat of arms Churchiards Arms.



TO MY HONORABLE Friend Sir Water Ralegh Knight, Seneshall and Chancellor of the
Duchy of Cornwall and Exon, Lord Warden of the Stanneries, and her Majesty's
Lieffetenant of the County of Cornwall, etc.
ENFORCED by affection (that leads the minds of men to a multitude of causes)
I stood studying how to requit a good turn received, and confessing that no
one thing is more monstrous in nature than an unthankful mind, I saw my self
in debt, and bound either one way or other to pay that Iowe, but not in such
degree as I received, but in such sort as my ability serves, and as a man
might say to make a cunning exchange, in steed of due payment, to offer glass
for gold and bare words for friendly deeds. In good truth (my honorable Friend)
if my creditours will so stand contented, I am readier to depart from words,
and discharge debt therewith, than to promise treasure, and offer that I have
not. For if free hearted people (fortunate in the world) through bounty of
mind (toward my suits or preferment) bestow many speeches to do me good,
where grace is to be gotten: I can but yield one ordinary thank, for a
thousand benefits, except they ransacke my storehouse of vain inuencions,
and find some pleasant papers, bepainted with verses, or pollished Pamphlets
(beblotted with barraine matter) where both verse and prose, shall make but a
bad restitution for the goodness I have stolen by fortune or borrowed by
frendshippe. Yet waying how little Fortune has done for me, and how few
creditors I have, that have either lent me any portion of preferment (or
procured me but a piece of any certain living) I think my self somewhat able
with the little talent God has given me, to repay all the debtes that ever I
could bring to perfect remembrance, saving one a most honorable Personage, that
I dedicated my book of Choice unto, who got me two great Seals (besides
common courtesies many) to shifte withal a season. And furthermore, your
self 6. years past bestowed good speeches to the Q. Majesty in my behalf, by
the which I got some comfortable recreation, to quicken my spirits and keep
me in breath. And yet lo a matter to be mused at, I have sixteen several
books printed presently to be bought (albeit they are but trifles) dedicated
in sundry seasons to several men off good and great credit, but to be plain
not one among them all, from the first day of my labor and studies, to this
present year and hour, has any way preferred my suits, amended my state,
or given me any countenance, I hope I am not much indebted to those, nor
fallen so far in their dangers, but may easily get out, though I yield them
no more, but a customable good will. So finding my Muses frank and free from
their servitude, I address this work of unfeigned friendship to your good
consideration, which work shows the value and worth of friends (whose love
is necessary about all Estates) the flattery and finenesse of foes, and the
daily dissimulation of a cunning world. And if the world marvel why I treat
of that which is so commonly known, and often put in practice, I answer not
those wondering wits, but shoot what bolts I think convenient, at the bad
behavior of transformed people, that bears but the shapes of tame men, and
shows the manners of wild monsters: and if the world say (as I know it is
talkatiue) I show a kind of adulation to fawn for favor on those that are
happy. I answer, that is a point of wisdom, which my betters have taught me,
and I have read in a great book of latin (printed 400. years ago) that one
of your own Ancestors called Sir Water Ralegh, had more fawners and followers
than you have: for he was L. chief Justice of England, and so far in credit
with his Prince, (his learning was such) that he made laws and edicts, the
which the Prince confirmed and allowed. I take an example from the fish that
follows the stream, the fowls that comes to the covert from the winds, and
the brute beasts that auoydes a sturdie storm, under the sauegard of a strong
and flourishing tree. Their crafty forecast though they want reason, may
succor the simplenes of any reasonable creature, and the defense and provision
they make to escape open danger, may set to school a great company of
ignorant scholars. But I leave to speak of their examples (because they are
brute) and follow the grauest sort of sage and wise personages, that will not
blush nor think scorn, to learn a lesson of their forefathers, that got al
their good fortune by following the flood, where we fish for preferment. Thus
honorable friend, as my affection (and other good causes moves) bad me go
forward with this my device and Present unto you: so beginning the same in
health, and falling suddenly sick, I feared God would have cut me short from
my purposed enterprise: but his goodness called me up, from the bed of sorrow,
(where despair had almost dispatched the life) and set me afoote to go and
end my first determination, and brought me in hope you will accept my good
will: which may encourage me to a further labor and study, that may purchase
more greater favor and thanks. So resting yours in all that my small power may
stretch unto, I take leave, and wish you what goodness you can imagine or desire.

London, at my lodging the 8. of March. Most willing at commandment. T.
CHVRCHYARD.

AA


A spark of Friendship and warm goodwill.
Where Friendship finds, good ground to grow upon,
It takes sound root, and spreads his branches out:
Brings forth fair fruit, though spring be past and gone,
And blowmeth where, no other grain will sprout:
His flowers are still, in season all the year,
His leaves are fresh, and green as is the grass,
His sugared seeds, good cheap and nothing dear,
His goodly bark, shines bright like gold or brass:
And yet this tree, in breast must needs be shrinde,
And lives no where, but in a noble mind.
BEing rockt too long in the careless cradle of idleness (where slothful lims
are soon lulled a sleep) the hinderer of health, good hap and virtue: a
multitude of worldly causes (my honorable friend) awakened my wits, and bad
the sensible Spirits arise from the forgetful couch of drowsy rest, and
offer the body to some profitable exercises, that thereby the head hand and pen
might either purchase commendation, or publish to good people a matter that
should merit some memory. But finding my self unfurnished of learning, and
barely seen in the arts liberal, and far unfit to touch or treat of
Divinity, I stood amazed and knew not what thankful thing I should first
go about and take in hand to a good end and purpose. And so a while bethinking
me (minding to draw no stronger bow thau I could well shoot in) and looking
into mine own strength, I saw me most ablest and apt to be at commandment
of Prince, Country and Friends. In the honoring and service of whom I should
study to bring forth some acceptable work, not striving to show any rare
invention (that passes a mean man's capacity) but to utter and revive matter
of some moment known and talked of long ago, yet ouer-long has been buried,
and as it seems layne dead (for any great fruit it has showed) in the
memory of man. The thing that I mean that has layne so long in the grave of
forgetfulness, is faithful friendship, which Tully has touched, and a number
of good authors have written of, but few in these days have observed, honored
and followed.

And now to proceed forward with this freindship (and show the degrees thereof
orderly) me thinks that the first branch thereof is the affectionat love
that al men in general ought to bear to their country. For the which Musius
Scaeuola, Horatius Cocles, Marcus Curtius, Marcus Regulus, and many more has
left us most noble examples. Yea, you shall read that some although they were
banished from their country, yet they bore in their bowels and breasts, to
the hour of their death, the love of their country, parents, friends and
family. In which everlasting love of theirs remained such manly and honorable
motions of the mind, that many noble services (of voluntary goodwill were
brought forth by them to the benefit of their country, and recovery of their
first credit, estate and dignity. Thus by a natural disposition planted in
the soul and sensible storehouse of stayed judgment, great exploytes were
brought to pass, and sondrie wonders of this world has casely been taken in
hand. And surely all these former examples (with the hazard of our forefathers
lives) bravely put in proof and executed, serves to no other end (as their
meaning was) but to teach those that came after with the like greatness of
mind, to follow the forerunners of all worthy renown and worldly reputation.
So by this, thousands may see, man is not made for himself, created to be king
of earthly delights, and placed amidst the pleasures of the world, to do what
he pleases, but chiefly to look and with good aduisement to search, how and
in what sort he may be duetiful and beneficial to his country. Now
peradventure in this perilous age (where many are puffed up with presumption)
and sedicious season of proud practices and headstrong people, some serpentine
sect, that caries venom in their minds, and mortal stings in their tongues,
will hold a bad opinion and say: that the earth is made for the children of
men (as the Sea is for the fish) and that is man's natural country where he
finds food, living, and credit in. But this canckred kind of rebellious
conceit, is such a gnawing worm in the conscience of man, (and so far
differs from all human laws) that he that but thinks one thought of this
nature, is not only unnatural to his country, but likewise unblessed and
unhappy in all the soyles and countries he happens to dwell in. For he that
honoreth not in heart the soil and seat of his nativity, and despises the
place where he took life, sustenance, nurriture and education, besides good
fortune and preferments (the only blessedness here to rejoice of) he does
degenerate, and what birth and blood soever he be of, we may call him a bace
borne groom, or a kindly bastard begotten out of time, living out of order,
and of worse belief than an Infidel. The birds of the air, the fish in the
flood, and the beasts on the earth loves to haunt and behold the place of
their procreation: and the greatest Conquerors that ever were (call them Kings
or what you please) though they went never so far to obtain victories, yet
they brought all the glory home to their country, and triumphed only there
where they were first fostered, found favor and fortune, and had from the
beginning been trained and brought up: yea and after their life (both Kings,
Prophets and other great men) desired to have their bones buried in their
country. And some of excellent judgment held opinion, that the love of their
country did far surpass the love of their parents, in defense of which they
offered lives, lands and goods, and cared not what danger they should thrust
themselves into, so that thereby they might do their country any honor or
service.

O then what a blemish and blot is this in the faces and brows of them that in
a proud presumption (persuaded by pestilent wits) abandoneth their country,
and would hazard on a peevish opinion (if it were in their power) to sell
Prince, people and patrimony, for a cold and bare welcome full of hollownes
of heart in a strange Kingdom, where cracked credit is loathsome and long
mistrusted, and seeldome or never comes to a good and honorable end, I can but
wish their payment no worse nor better, but such as Tarpeia found of the
Latins and Sabines for selling unto them the Capitol of Rome: a most
notorious example read it who pleases. So if in those days (a great while
ago) millions of men held the love and friendship of their country so dear
and precious, as in deed it ought to be esteemed: now in our ripened years
when wits are mellowed and seasoned with the sweet savor of long
experience, the folly and foul facts that by over great boldness makes many
run mad, should be a general warning, and teach all kind of people, to
keep the right and plain path of natural affection toward their country
and friends.

Now, all these things there rehearsed before, are written in way of
friendship to the wild wanderers of this world, who undoubtedly wants but
grace and good council. And the rest that follows hereafter in this little
piece of prose, is written to your self (my honorable friend) whose friendship
I have felt, and sondrie more have tasted. Let the deed show it self: not
writing this to teach you (with presuming words) any other course than your
former judgment and present consideration thinks best to hold, but only to
keep the blaze of good will continually burning, by feeding the flame with
plying and putting in more oil to the lamp. For I acknowledge that you know,
that as the sinowes is needful for the body, the marrow for the bones, and the
blood for the life: so friendship is most fittest to knit the joints and
minds of men together, and binds them about with such brazen bands, that no
bars of iron may break, nor policy of people may put asunder.

He yt has trauayled (as I have done) through the torrest of affliction, where
many wild beasts are wandering in the woods (some roaring and running after
their pray) shall see how narrowly he has escaped from the gaping and
devouring monsters, and find that if friendship and good fortune had not
helped him, he had been utterly destroyed. From the highest to the lowest
(reckon what degrees can be named) in good sooth they are all left alone
barefooted and desolate, where friendship has forsaken them. But where or
into what laborinth, O Lord, have I now brought my self: for now I am forced
to go forward, and may not step back, but seek an open way to walk in,
orderly to set down and show the substance of friendship, the flattery of
the world, and the sinenesse of our age: the circumstance whereof craves an
other manner of discourse and volume than this little treatise can utter. What
then, as by small sparks (or kindled coals) great fire is made, and of a
trifeling tale true matter may be gathered: so out of weak words strong
arguments may be sifted, and through a number of spiced speeches, a simple
sentence may show some savor, and yield such taste to the quickness of
understanding, that the hearers wits and judgment shall willingly stand
contented with all that shall be spoken. And friendship is so much desired,
spoken of, and necessary for all kind of people, that only the bare and
naked name thereof, is sweet and most acceptable, though the writer thereon be
but meanly learned, and of small sufficience to set out at the full, the
fullness of so flourishing a virtue.

Then forward to the purpose: I say and prove that the same is true friendship
that proceeds from virtue, and has so noble a nature (by a divine motion of
goodness) that neither vice can corrupt, nor any kind of vanity vanquish:
For where it takes root, it buds so beautifully that it brings forth an
everlasting fruit, whose taste is more sweet and precious, than can be
easily imagined.

And now in a season, when finenes and flattery so abounds, and strives by
cunning practices to supply the place of friendship (and ouergrowe every
branch that springs from loyal amity) this true friendship is most
sweetest of savor, and most highest of reputation, and burns with a
quenchlesse flame, like a blazing Beakon, or sparkling Torche (that can abide
all winds) which is set up on the top of a high Mountain. For fine or
gross flattery is but a bare foil to set forth a bad Jewel: and the crafty
curious cunning of these artificial fellows (that feeds all men's humors)
makes through their manifold trumperies, a free passage to perfect
faithfulness and friendly good will. There is covertly crept and finely
conuayed, into the common society of men, a hundred sondrie sorts and shows
of amity, which in deed are but iuggling castes (or ledger demayne) to
purchase favor, and deceive the lookers on. If all that speak fair, bow
down knee, make trim curtchie, kiss fingers and hands (yea offer service and
friendship) were hearty and loving friends, the world would be so full of
friendship, that there were no place left for adulation and dubble dealing. And
surely if a man durst discipher the deepenesse of dissimulation, we should
find our ordinary manner of friendship so faint-harted and lame, that it
neither could go out of the door with any man, nor yet dwell safely with many
in the house. It seems and may be well aduouched, that friendship of it
self is so secret a mystery (shrined in an honest heart) that few can
describe it, and tell from whence comes the privy and inward affection, that
suddenly breeds in breast, and is conuayed to the heart, with such a content
and gladness, that the whole powers of man leapes in the bowelles of the body
for joy at that instant. For example, some that never gives cause (with
probable matter) to be embraced and made account of as a friend, is by a
natural inclination, received into favor, placed in delight, and planted
perpetually (so long as life lasts) in the warm bosom of our friendly
affections and favorable conceits.

Then further note, a wonder of nature, for we see a merueilous motion among
men: for some, and that a great number, having neither harmed us, nor ministered
any way occasion of dislike, yet no sooner in our company, but we find their
persons offensive, their presence unpleasant, their words sharp, (spoken well
and to the best meaning) yea their works and whatsoever they will do, are
taken amiss and construed to the worst. But chiefly to be noted, we little
desire the acquaintance, peradventure of a friendly companion. Thus so to hate
without cause, and love earnestly without desert, is a matter disputable, and
argues plainly, that friendship is (without comparison) the only true love
knot, that knits in conjunction, thousands together: and yet the mystery and
manner of the working is so great, that the ripest wits may wax rotten,
before they yield reason, and show how the mixture is made: that two several
bodies shall meet in one mind, and be as it were married and joined in one
manner of disposition, with so small a show of virtue, and so little cause,
that may constrayne both parties to be bound and fast locked in a league of
love. Then what may be thought on those that currie favor, follow for good
turns, turns about like a wether-cocke, faunes where fortune favors, and
favors no where, but for commodity, countenance, credit, and to compass that
they seek. If friends be chosen by election and privy liking, these open
palterers may go whistle: for neither they know the bounds of a good mind,
nor the blessedness that belongs to friendship. What then should we say of
men's behauiours in general? For without reverence uttered by courtesy, suing
and following for benefit, fauning and speaking fair (for entertayning of
time) creeping and crouching to keep that we have, and win that we wish,
all civil order would be forgotten, rudeness would make revel, and men
should suddenly miss the mark they shoot at. But granting now, these
ceremonious fashions and manners, yet the users thereof, are no more like
friends, than a Mask and Mommerie (with vizars on their faces) is like a
company of grave Senators, that gouerns a mighty Monarchy. And more then
monstrous it is, that such painted shadows are commonly preferred to be as
pillars of friendship, when friendship, without proppes stands against all
weathers and winds, and is of a more clear complexion, than to be patched up
with compounds, or matched with corrupted manners, ennie to virtue, and friend
to nothing but vice. For friendship is a certain felicity of the mind, a
sweet ensence that burns before God, a preserver of man's renown and life, a
willing bondage that brings freedom for ever, a steadfast staff that all good
people do stay on, the mother and nurse of mutual love, the conqueror of
hate, the pacifier of quarrels, the glory of Kings, and the surety of
subjects. And friendship is so princely and noble of condition, it may not be
joined with any but such as are as honorable as it self. You shall see among
friends of equal calling (that are like of affection) such a sweet and
common consent of fraternall love and liking, that every thing is wrested to
the best construction, and no one matter may be ministered amiss, the minds
and manners of men, runs so mirrily together, as it were a sort of pretty
chickens, hopping hastily after the cheereful chucking, of a brooding hen. And
where such amity is (enterlarded with honest pastime) there all hollownes of
heart is banished, all playnnes is embraced, and all good things do prosper: as
a man might say, friendship is a ringleader to all happiness, and the guide
that shows men the high way to all worldly exercises.

But now some may ask me, how men should make choice of their friends, and
know by outward appearance, the inward disposition of people, so many look
smoothly, so many flatter, and so many has clapped on such audacious
countenances, that the wisest may be beguiled when he least looks for defaite?
It may be answered, that choice ought to be made of proof, and not of fair
semblance, but of constant perfection: for such as casts colors on cunning
devises, and always to cloak collusion, crcepes finely in favor with simpering
and smiling, to lead ready wits after their subtle intentions, by their
needles babble fruitless fauning, often change of vizage, unmannerly boldness,
and daily attendance, where no desert commands them, the feigned friends of
this world may be found, and in the state of necessity, all true friendship is
tried. And me thinks they take no great pains, that accompany men in their
prosperity, and they merit no great thanks, that desire to taste (at all
times) other men's good fortunes: so that by thrusting and pressing after those,
we hope to pluck somewhat from, debates of it self it is no certain sign of
friendship, that springs from a simple and plain affection.

Now, many will hold question, and say that Fortune must be followed, sought
for, waited on, flattered because she is a deceiuer, and finely entertained:
For that with rude and rusticall behavior, both fortune and friends, will
fling us far behind, that would march before our fellows. But I pray you,
is not the long proof of crafty practices, the extraordinary dissimulation of
fine people, a testimony that they are no true dealers, that work with
worldly wickedness and policy, to be accepted as friends. Then who should
presently be called a faithful follower? thus some man may demand. Such I
say as in men's meanest calling and credit, has begun to favor them, and in
their better estate, do honestly in all causes of reason, equity and justice
of judgment, discharge their duties, and leave flattery (that opens the
door of dubblenesse) and fall flatly to the true order of plain dealing: such
I say that neither for favor, fear or fortune, but dare speak as they think
(due reverence observed) and do rather cut off the festered flesh than feed
and nourish a corrupted cancker. Such whose love and fidelity looks narrowly
on all the bounds and limits of friendship, and are so ielous over the
friends they honor, that they cannot suffer any thing to sound out of frame,
that may impeach, hinder, or appale the good name and credit of them they
follow: such whose study, diligence and waking regard, stands as a watch to
give warning, and advertise their friends of all inconveniences, dangers,
sclaunders, and eminent perils and hazardes: such are the members most meet to
be about a friend, most worthy welcome, most to be liked, loved and trusted:
and such are the blessed birds of the bosom, that ne sings nor says, nor
makes sign of other thing than they present. And the rest that loyter about
crooked measures, sounding and searching by deceites (like Fishers that closely
hides their hooks) to see who they may catch, take hold of, and feel for
their advantage. They are the slay smellers out of fortunate flowers, that
grows in happy men's gardens, the prowlers after profit and preferment,
purchased by audacious practices, the busy bodies that never stands still, but
turns like a top to betray the trusty: the tossed white froth of the Sea
(that makes a fair show without substance) which vanishes away at the touch
of every man's finger: and they are the swelling bubbles of the troubled water
that are blown with each little blast over many a land, and makes neither sign
from whence they are come, nor to what good end and purpose they serve. So
sir, seeing the swarms of feigned friends, the heaps of hollow hearts, the
abuse of infected minds, the musted faces covered with counterfaite good
manners, and the effect of true friendship utterly mistaken, in many points
and places of this world. I trouble you no further with the reading of these
lines, hoping in your favor and friendship, as your affection shall move,
and my merits without presumption shall crave and require, making a further
present unto you, of a few verses (handled as well as I could) that were
devised for the setting forth of a Paper Mill, which a great well willer of
yours (as good cause he has so to be) has builded by Darthford, and brought
to perfect frame and form, I trust to the great contentment of the Queens
Majesty, and benefit of her whole country: as knows God, who augment,
maintain, and blessedly uphold her Highness long among us, and increase your
good credit with all virtuous disposition.

FINIS.
A DESCRIPTION And plain discourse of paper, and the whole benefits that
Paper brings, with rehersall and setting forth in verse a Paper myll, built
nere Darthford, by an high German, called Master Spilman. Ieweller to the
Queens Majesty.
WHen sense of man,
sought out what Science was,
And found each Art,
through wit and study great,
Before long proof,
could bring great things to pass,
In judging head,
did many a hammer beat:
But trial had, experience proved good,
for practice skill, on certain surety stood:
Then ignorance blind, gave learned knowledge place,
so studious mind, gaynde glory, wealth and grace.
Some searched for gold, and digd deep Caves in ground,
and some sought pearl, and precious Jewels gay,
Some saylde the seas, and wandered world full round,
to bring home goods, that should the charges pay.
Some made fine silks, and veluets fair and rich,
invention still, was daily used so much,
That each device, that could be put in proof,
was set abroach, and tried for man's behoof.
But sure some Arts, dath so surmount the rest,
that famous were, the authors of the same,
Whose noble acts, their worth so well expressed
that writers pen, should but ecclips their fame.
Look thoroughly then, on that our elders did,
and bring to light, their secret knowledge hid,
And yield them lawde, as their deserts does crave,
for I in hand, another matter have.
I praise the man, that first did paper make,
the only thing that sets all virtues forth:
It shoes new books, and keeps old works awake,
much more of price, than all this world is worth:
It witness bears of friendship, time and troth,
and is the tromp of vice and virtue both,
Without whose help, no hap nor wealth is won,
and by whose aid, great works and deeds are done.
It flies from friend and foe in letter wise,
and serves a state, and kingdom sundry ways,
It makes great wind, where never dust does rise,
and breeds some storms, in smoothest summer days.
It tells of war, and peace as things fall out,
and brings by time, ten thousand things about.
For scholars fit, and merchants all alike,
for plowe men good, that digs and delues the dike,
For good Deuines, and lawyers not amiss,
for Sailors too, and those that travel far,
For Students best, that knows what learning is,
for pleaders meet, for men of peace or war,
For all degrees that are of manly kind,
a right good mean, that may express the mind,
A needful thing, that no good wit may want,
a thing most used, yet never will be skant.
What man, or sex, or shape of worthy molde,
can paper lack, but buies it less or more?
Things present are, in paper long enrolde,
so things to come, and things long past before.
Though partchment duer, a greater time and space,
yet can it not, put paper out of place:
For paper still from man to man does go,
when parchment comes in few men's hands, you know.
If paper be, so precious and so pure,
so fit for man, and serves so many ways,
So good for use, and will so well endure,
so rare a thing, and is so much in prays:
Than he that made, for us a paper mill,
is worthy well, of love and worlds good will.
And though his name, be Spillman by degree,
yet Help-man now, he shall be calde by me.
Six hundred men, are set a work by him,
that else might starve, or seek abroad their bread.
Who now lives well, and goes full brave and trim,
and who may boast, they are with paper fed.
Strange is that food, yet stranger made the same,
Spillman, Help-man, so rightly call the same:
For greater help, I guess he cannot give,
than by his help, to make poor folk to live.
Few helps these days, to bring us any wealth,
some sundry ways, do still more harm then good:
So such as help, do breed good blood and health:
and in best part, ought well be understood.
If paper mill, helps poor and harms no rich,
the gain is great, and the invention much,
The work not small, the labor worth the view,
because old Art, is now reuiude a new.
One Thirlby went, Ambassador far from hence, Bishop of Ely.

to Charles the fifth, an Emperor of great fame,
And at return, did bring with him from thence,
a learned man, Remigius by name.
Who Thirlby loud, and made by his devise,
a paper mill, but not so much in price,
As this that now, near Darthford stands well,
Where Spillman may, himself and household dwell.
Well this is he, that first here profit brought,
first trial made, of things not here well known:
First framde the form, that sundry paper wrought,
first took in hand, by charges of his own
A doubtful work, that others erst begun,
Who spent thereon more wealth then well they won,
This man alone, the substance shows so right,
that all the rest, were Lamps that gave no light.
The mill it self, is sure right rare to see,
the framing is, so queint and finely done,
Built all of wood, and hollow trunkes of tree,
that makes the streams, at point device to run,
Now up, now down, now sideward by a slight,
now forward fast, then spouting up on height,
As Conduits cold, could force so great a heat,
that fire should flame, where thumping hammers beat.
The Hammers thump, and make as loud a noise,
as Fuller does, that beats his woollen cloth,
In open show, then sundry seceete toys,
makes rotten rags, to yield a thickened froth:
Then is it stamped, and washed as white as snow,
then flong on frame, and hanged to dry I trow:
Thus Paper straight, it is to write upon,
as it were rubde, and smoothde with slicking stone.
Through many hands, this Paper passes there,
before full form, and perfect shape it takes,
Yet in short time, this Paper yucke will bear,
whereon in haste, the workman profit makes.
A wonder sure, to see such rags and shreads,
pass daily through, so many hands and heads,
And Water too, that Papers enmy is,
yet Paper must, take form and shape from this.
This Water does, not only drive the mill,
but gives it grace, and makes it fine and fair,
Is cause and ground, to give it fashion still,
for it is made, with Water, wind and air.
And takes his form of compoundes mixed well,
wherein there does, a secreate nature dwell:
A heavenly power, that earth and air has knit,
by cunning Art, and work of humane wit.
For cloth and silk, and mettalles fine or bace,
are wrought of things, that have a substance great,
This finds form, and stamp in stranger case,
as Water mill, made rags and shreds to sweat.
Of whose thick froth, a cream or crudde should rise,
that should take shape, and strength by breath of skies:
Though sure a mean, there is to work the same,
some secret cause, brings Paper first in frame.
As corn is sown, and there must rotte in ground,
before it blade, or takes good root or strength,
Then reapt and thrasht, and to the myll full round,
is sent to grind, and made good dow at length,
Then kneaded well, then bakte and made good bread,
so paper sure, through many a hand and head
Does pass like dross, that of it self is naught,
till it be tried, by skill and thoroughly wrought.
From dross commes gold, when fire has searched it well,
so all things have, their worth from some great cause:
The pearl some say, is fetched from oysters shel,
thus each thing yeeldes, to Art and natures laws.
As fire from slint, through stroke of steel we find,
so world may see, what wonders works kind.
Glass was at first, as strange to make or vewe,
as Paper now, that is deuisde of new.
Of new I mean, in England save one man,
that had great wealth, and might much treasure spare.
Who with some charge, a Paper mill began,
and after built, a stately work most rare.
The Royal exchange, but got by that more gain,
than he indeed, did loose by former pain.
But neither he, nor none before his days,
made Paper mill, that merits so much praise.
As this that now, is not full far from hence,
where Water ran, in waste and vain a way,
Now profit yeeldes, and brings in pounds and pence,
that quittes the cost, and does the charge defray.
This had not been, if Prince had not retained,
the stranger here, by whom these gifts are gained:
Her highness than, saw in her deep foresight,
what famous work, this man could bring to light.
The glory then, and honor of this deed,
is hers, and ours, shall be the gain therein.
We reap the Corn, whoeuer sowde the seed,
who ere have lost, we shall be sure to win.
This mill remaynes, a sampler to the rest,
that after comes, to show whose work is best,
No doubt but some, this course will follow on,
a stranger left, this work to look upon.
That many more, by this may builded be,
and many heads, and hands may thrive thereby,
He merits much, that first plants fruitful tree,
they purchase prayer, that first does practices try.
They ought not reap, that never meant to sow,
they win great hap, that can through hazards go,
They lose no time, that toils for public state,
they glory gain, that first a conquest gate.
Now gallant wits, that joys in doing well,
ply pen a pace, whiles learning may be had,
Now stripplings young, but late come out of shell,
to School good boys, to make your parents glad.
Now Printers press, that sets forth many a book,
besturre the stamp, that world for news may look,
Now Stationers, that works all the year,
sell books good cheap, for Paper is not dear.
Now writers grave, that studies heavenly things,
your works shall shine, by mean of Papers grace*
Now Merchant wise, that home great profit brings,
send letters out, abroad to every place.
For Paper does, present it self to those,
in common weal, that writes verse and prose,
The merry myll, now grindes and goes so brave,
that world at will, shall always Paper have.
When Paper was, not throwly known of men,
they wrote in stones, and barks of trees for shift,
But lo long since, the Paper and the Pen,
by deep device, found out a finer drift.
And most to praise, because of trifling toys,
so great a wealth, our worthy world enioyes,
Of dross and rags, that serves no other mean,
and foul had shreds, comes Paper white and clean.
And even so, the baddest people may,
became good folk, if they will bide the stamp,
Which people first, with many a worthy way,
must be well wrought, like oil that burns in Lamp.
For Oil is tried, and pur'd ear it be sold,
and searched throw out, as fire tries out the gold,
And when the oil, is fit to blaze or burn,
it is applied, at need to serve our turn.
So man is meet, to serve his native soil,
when thumping world, abroad has tried him throw,
Or here at home, his life has escaped foil,
and he thereby, may show a blotlesse browe.
But this must be, as Paper passes mill,
man's doubtful days, must pass through perilles still,
And though great blows, do beat him back a space,
he bides the brunt, to get the greater grace.
And yeeldes to thumps, and thwartes as ice to thawe,
as frost to fire, will soft and gentle wax:
Or as stiff necks, will stoop and yield to law,
compelde by flame, to yield to fire like flax.
For nothing more, becomes a noble mind,
than bide the blastes, and puff of every wind,
Whose bellows blows, to hinder well won fame,
when do well shall, in spite possess good name.
If ship pass storm, and tries the surging seas,
comes quiet home, to harber in a road,
Man must of force, through torment purchase ease,
and must believe, great burden is no load.
And so bace rags, whereof is no account,
through straining hard, past tenter hooks may mount,
And body cost, and tumbled up and down,
may come to rest, and reap right rare renown.
Man's secret faults, and foul defects of mind,
must be reformde, like rags in Paper mill,
When hammers help, has changde his cankered kind,
and clensde the heart, from spots and former ill.
A second shape, and form full fresh and new
he does receive, in nature grace and hiew.
When Water streams has washed him over quite,
than man becomes, like paper fair and white.
If Water were as scant as dearest wine,
how should this world maintain each science here?
In Water thin there dwells a power divine,
where face is seen, as in a Crystal clear.
An Element that every creature needs,
wherein full often both foul and fishes breeds:
Whereby a world of people daily live,
and God to man does many a blessing give.
What earth or soil can flourish where it wants?
cold Water sweet does cool the scalded breast,
The drops whereof does comfort herbs and plants,
and graces great by Water is possessed.
Then muse not man, if Water thee reform,
that art but earth, and food for scraling worm,
A bladder pufte with wind and air full thin,
that can not bide the push of baggage pin.
Our finest coin of silver or of gold
in grossest sort is handled as ye know,
And beaten long, and thumped treble fold
before it does for current money go.
The woollen cloth that from the walkemill comes,
at first must pass, through many hands and thums:
Yea washed and walked with Water where it goth,
ere it do take his breadth and thicknes both.
What linen, lawne, or cambricke can be white,
if Water do not thoroughly wash the same:
It scowres that clean, that is as dunne as Kyte,
and brings foul cloth in perfect form and frame.
All slubbred things must needs be washed anue,
foul things are naught, if proverb old be true.
Thus prove I plain, by course of Water mill,
and hammering world, men's manners changes still.
Though some do say, in France and other place,
are Paper mils, as fair and strange as this,
What Is that to us, this gives our Country grace,
and to all Kent, a double honor is.
That in the soil, was borne our worthy Queen,
by strangers mean, so strange a work is seen:
And strangers are, so glad with strange device,
to serve and please, our Prince of peerless price.
In other Realms, there milles are not in worth,
scarce half so good, the proof may well be found,
This is so fine, with workmanship set forth,
so surely built, and planted in the ground.
That it does seem, a house of some estate,
a Mill most rare, a work deuisde of late,
Whose goodness great, exceedes the outward show,
and from whose stamp, shall public profit flow.
And troth to tell, the mill is black and white,
and Water does work all the Paper there,
The sight thereof, shall breed more rare delight,
than man with eye, beholdes in many a where.
This somewhat more, may move a marvel here,
no profit may, be reapt in many a year,
The author than, of this new Paper Mill,
bestows great charge, and gaynes but worlds goodwill.
Death may prevent, his hope and purpose too,
death cuts off all, from him if it so hap,
If loss so fall, what then shall Spilman do,
but so receive, the losses in his lap.
This danger great, deserves some regard,
or of the world, does merit some reward,
Give him good speech, (as reason does require,
yield duty, so the labror has his hire.
An high German he is as may be prooude,
In Lyndoam Bodenze borne and bred:
And for this Mill may here be truly loud
and praised too, for deep device of head.
But if the hope of gain quit not the cost,
the world will judge his labor is but lost.
To hazards hap he does commit the same,
and seems as yet to care for naught but Fame.
Wealth, wit and time, with toil and travail great,
he plyes a pace, and spares for no charge,
The Mill goes round, the workmen moyle and sweat,
the stream goes straight, that erst ran all at large,
The wheels conueyes the Water diverse ways,
the Hammers thump, the stamp but seldom stays:
The rags and clowts, becomes as white as snow,
and all these knackes, the master needs must know.
Whose purse, whose pains, and purpose is not small,
whose plot, points out, a piece of work right fair,
To hinder none, but made to please us all,
to which brave Mill, do thousands still repair.
To see what things, are wrought by cunning skill,
to Gods great praise, and Princes honor still,
And to the place, and soil where it does stand,
a goodly grace, and Paper near at hand.
Lo here how man to paper is comparde,
that ready is to take both stamp and print
Though trial great, and many a passage hard,
more stiff than steel that strikes out fire from flint:
But though most hard the path and passage be,
in the right way it sets man frank and free:
That has been brought in bondage from his birth,
and makes him seem a little God on earth.
Full fraught with wit, with Art and science great,
with learned lore, with skill and knowledge deep,
With gifts divine, that fears not fortunes threat,
with quick device, that can both get and keep,
With reason such, as rules each other thing,
of Beast and Foul, the only Lord and King,
A Prince of all the earthly pleasures here,
found out with pain, and bought with travail dear.
AA


FINIS.

