THE Worthiness of Wales: Wherein are more then a thousand several things
rehearsed: some set out in prose to the pleasure of the Reader, and with such
variety of verse for the beautifying of the Book, as no doubt shall delight
thousands to understand.

Which work is enterlarded with many wonders and right strange matter to
consider of: All the which labor and device is drawn forth and set out by
Thomas Churchyard, to the glory of God, and honor of his Prince and Country.



Imprinted at London, by G. Robinson, for Thomas Cadman. 1587.

To the Queens most Excellent Majesty, Elizabeth, by the grace of God, Queen
of England, France and Ireland, etc. Thomas Churchyard wishes always
blessedness, good fortune, victory, and worldly honor, with the increase of
quiet reign, virtuous life, and most Princely government.
MOST Redoubted and Royal Queen, that Kings do fear, Subjects do honor,
strangers seek succor of, and people of special spirit acknowledge (as their
manifold books declare) I least of all, presume to far, either in presenting
matter to be judged of, or to adventure the cracking of credit, with writing
any thing, that may breed mislike (presents not well taken) in the deep
judgment of so high and mighty a Princess. But where a multitude runs
forward (forced through desire or fortune) to show duty, or to see what
falls out of their forwardnes, I stepping in among the rest, am driven and
led (by affection to follow) beyond the force of my power or feeling of any
learned art. So being thrust on with the throng, I finding my self brought
before the presence of your Majesty (but barely furnished of knowledge) to
whom I must utter some matter of delight, or from whom I must return all
abashed with open disgrace. Thus Gracious Lady, under your Princely favor I
have undertaken to set forth a work in the honor of Wales, where your
highness ancestors took name, and where your Majesty is as much loved and
feared, as in any place of your highness dominion. And the love and obedience
of which people so exceedes, and surpasses the common goodwill of the world,
that it seems a wonder in our age (wherein are so many writers) that no one
man does not worthily according to the countries goodness set forth that noble
Soil and Nation. Though in deed diverse have slightly written of the same,
and some of those labors deserves the reading, yet except the eye be a witness
to their works, the writers can not therein sufficiently yield due
commendation to those stately Soyles and Principalities. For which cause I have
trauayled sundry times of purpose through the same, and what is written of I
have beheld, and thoroughly seen, to my great contentment and admiration. For
the Cities, Towns, and goodly Castles thereof are to be mused on, and merits
to be registered in everlasting memory, but chiefly the Castles (that stand
like a company of Fortes) may not be forgotten, their buyldings are so
princely, their strength is so great, and they are such stately seats and
defenses of nature. To which Castles great Royalty and livings belongs, and
have been and are in the gifts of Princes, now possessed of noble men and such
as they appoint to keep them. The royalties whereof are always looked unto,
but the Castles do daily decay, a sorrowful sight and in a manner remediles.
But now to come to the conditions of the people, and to show somewhat of their
courtesy, loyalty, and natural kindness, I presume your Majesty will pardon me
to speak of, for of truth your highness is no sooner named among them, but such
a general rejoicing does arise, as makes glad any good man's heart to behold or
hear it, it proceeds of such an affectionate favor. For let the meanest of
the Court come down to that country, he shall be so saluted, halsed and made
of, as though he were some Lords son of that soil, and further the plain
people thinks it debt and duty, to follow a strangers Stirrup (being out of
the way) to bring him where he wishes, which gentleness in all countries is not
used, and yet besides all this goodness and great regard, there is neither hew
nor cry (for a robbery) in many hundredth miles riding, so whether it be for
fear of justice, love of God, or good disposition, small Robberies or none at
all are heard of there. They triumph likewise so much of fidelity, that the
very name of a falsifier of promise, a murderer or a thief, is most odious
among them, especially a Traitor is so hated, that his whole race is rated at
and abhord as I have heard there, report of Parrie and others, who the common
people would have torn in pieces if the law had not proceeded. And such
regard they have one of another, that neither in market towns, high ways,
meetings, nor public assemblies they strive not for place, nor show any kind
of roysting: for in sted of such high stomachs and stoutnes, they use friendly
salutations and courtesy, acknowledging duty thereby, and doing such
reverence to their betters, that every one in his degree is so well vnderctood
and honored, that none can justly say he has suffered injury, or found
offense by the rude and burbarous behavior of the people. These vsages of
theirs, with the rest that may be spoken of their civil manner and honest frame
of life, does argue there is some more nobler nature in that Nation, then is
generally reported, which I doubt not but your Highness is as willing to hear
as I am desirous to make manifest and publish: the hope whereof redoubleth my
boldness, and may happily sheeld me from the hazard of worlds hasty judgment,
that condemns men without cause for writing that they know, and praising of
people before their faces: (which suspicious heads call a kind of adulation)
but if telling of troth, be rebukable, and plain speeches be offensive, the
ignorant world shall dwell long in errors, and true writers may suddenly sit in
silence. I have not only searched sundry good Authors for the confirmation of
my matter, but also paynfully traueiled to try out the substance of that is
written, for fear of committing some unpardonable fault and offense, in
presenting this Book unto your Highness. Which work, albeit it is but
little, (because it treats not of many Shieres) yet greatly it shall rejoice
the whole Country of Wales, when they shall hear it has found favor in
your gracious sight, and has passed through those blessed hands, that holds
the rain and bridle of many a stately Kingdom, and Terrytorie. And my self
shall reap so much gladness, by the free passage of this simple labor, that
hereafter I shall go through (GOD sparing life) with the rest of the other
Shieres not here named. These things only taken in hand, to cause your
Highness to know, what puysance and strength such a Princess is of, that may
command such a people: and what obedience love and loyalty is in such a
Country, as hereunto has bin but little spoken of, and yet deserves most
greatest lawdation. And in deed the more honorable it is, for that your
Highness princely Ancestors sprung forth of the noble branches of that
Nation. Thus duetifully praying for your Majesty's long preservation, (by whose
bounty and goodness I a long while have lived) I wish your Highness all the
hap, honor, victory, and hearts ease, that can be desired or imagined.

Your Highness humble Servant and Subject, Thomas Churchyard.

To every loving and friendly Reader.
IT may seem strange (good Reader) that I have chosen in the end of my days
to travail, and make description of Countries: whereas the beginning of my
youth (and a long while after) I have hau^ted the wars, and written somewhat
of Martial Discipline: but as every season breeds a several humor, and the
humors of men are diverse: (drawing the mind to sondrie dispositions) so common
occasion that commands the judgment, has set me a work, and the warm good
will and affection, borne in breast, toward the worthy Country of Wales,
has haled me often forward, to take this labor in hand, which many before
have learnedly handled. But yet to show a difference in writing, and a
playnnesse in speech (because plain people affects no flourishing phrase) I
have now in as ample a manner (without borrowed terms) as I could, declared my
opinion of that sweet Soil and good Subjects thereof, even at that very
instant, when Wales was almost forgotten, or scarce remembered with any great
lawdation, when it has merited to be written of: for sondrie famous causes
most meet to be honored, and necessary to be touched in. First, the world will
confess (or else it shall do wrong) that some of our greatest Kings (that have
conquered much) were borne and bred in that Country: which Kings in their
times, to the glory of England, have wrought wonders, and brought great
benefits to our weal public. Among the same Princes, I pray you give me
leave to place our good Queen Elizabeth, and pardon me withal to commit you
to the Chronicles, for the seeking out of her Ancestors noble actions, and
suffer me to show a little of the goodness, gathered by us, from her
Majesty's well doing, and possessed a long season from her princely and just
dealings. An act so noble and notorious, that neither can escape immortal
fame, nor shall not pass my pen vnresited.

Now weigh in what plight was our state when she came first to the Crown, and
see how soon Religion was reformed, (a matter of great moment) peace planted,
and wars utterly extinguished, as the sequel yet falls out.

Then behold how she succored the afflicted in France, (let the going to
Newhauen bear witness) and chargeably without breaking of League mainteyned
her friends and amazed her enemies.

Then look into the service and preservation of Scotland (at the siege of
Leeth) and see how finely the French were al shipped away (they being a great
power) and sent home in such sort, that never since they had mind to return
thither again, in that fashion and form that they sailed toward Scotland at
the first.

Then consider how bace our money was, and in what short time (with little
loss to our Country) the bad coin was converted to good silver: and so is
like to continue to the end of the world.

Then in the advancing of Gods word and good people, regard how Rochell was
relieved, and Rone and other places found cause to pray for her life, who
sought to purchase their peace and see them in safety.

Then think on the care she took for Flaunders, during the first troubles,
and how that Country had been utterly destroyed, if her Highness helping hand
had not propped up that tottering State.

Then Christianly conceive how many mul^itudes of strangers she has given
gracious countenance unto, and has freely licensed them to live here in peace
and rest.

Then paise in an equal balance the dangerous estate of Scotland once
again, when the Kings own Subjects kept the Castle of Edenbrough against
their own natural Lord and Master: which presumptuous part of Subjects, her
Highness could not abide to behold: whereupon she sent a sufficient power to
aid the Kings Majesty: which power valiantly won the Castle, and freely
delivered the same to the right owner thereof, with all the treasure and
prisoners therein.

Then regard how honorably she has dealt with diverse Princes that came to see
her, or needed her magnifice^t supportation and countenance.

Then look thoroughly into the mightiness and managing of all matters gone
about and put in exercise princely, and yet peaceably since the day of her
Highness Coronation, and you shall be forced to confess that she surmounts a
great number of her Predecessors: and she is not at this day no whit inferior
to the greatest Monarke of the world.

Is not such a peereles Queen then, a comfort to Wales, a glory to England,
and a great rejoicing to all her good neighbors? And does not she daily
deserve to have books dedicated in the highest degree of honor to her
Highness? Yes undoubtedly, or else my senses and judgment fails me.

So (good Reader) do judge of my labors: my pen is procured by a band of
causes to write as far as my knowledge may lead: and my duty has no end
of service, nor no limits are set to a loyal Subject, but to wish and work to
the uttermost of power.

Within this work are several discourses: some of the beauty and blessedness
of the Country: some of the strength and statelynesse of their inpregnable
Castles: some of their trim Towns and fine situation: some of their
antiquity, showing from what Kings and Princes they took their first name and
prerogative. So generally of all manner of matters belonging to that Soil, as
Churches, Monuments, Mountains, Valleys, Waters, Bridges, fair Gentlemen's
houses, and the rest of things whatsoever, may become a writers pen to touch,
or a readers judgment to know. I write not contenciously to find fault with
any, or confute the former writers and time: William Malmesburie de regibus
anglorum. David Powell a late writer, yet excellently learned, made a sharp
inuectiue against William Paruus and Pollidor Virgill (and all their accomplices)
accusing them of lying tongues, enuyous detraction, malicious slanders,
reproachful and venomous language, wilful ignorance, dogged envy, and
canckered minds, for that they spoke irreverently of Arthur, and many other
thrice noble Princes. Jeffrey of Monmouth. Matthewe of Westminster, and others
are here in like sort to be read and looked on.
but to advance and win credit to the present truth, agreeing and yielding
to all former times and ages, that has justly given every Nation their due,
and truly without affection has set down in plain words the worthiness of
plain people: for I honor and love as much a true Author, as I hate and detest
a reporter of trifeling fables. A true History is called the Mistress of
life: and yet all Historyographers in writing of one thing, agree not well one
with another: because the writers were not present in the times, in the places,
nor saw the persons they make mention of: but rather have leaned and listened on
the common report, than stayed or trusted to their own experience.

Strabo a most famous writer finds fault (for the like occasion) with
Erstaotheus, Metrodorus, Septius, Possidonius, and Patrocles the Geographer:
And such discord did arise among writers in time past, as Josephus says
against Appio, that they reproved one another by books, and all men in
general reproved Herodotus.

God shield me from such caueling: for I deliver but what I have seen and
read: alleging for defense both ancient Authors, and good trial of that is
written. Wherefore (loving Reader) do rather struggle with those two strong
pillars of knowledge, than strive with the weakness of my invention: which to
avoid sharpness (and bitter words) is sweetened and seasoned with gentle
verses, more pleasant to some men's ears then prose, and under whose smooth
grace of speech, more acceptable matter is conuayed, then the common sort of
people can comprehend. For verses like a familiar friend (with a gallant
phrase) rides quietly by thousands, and dasheth no one person, and galloping
cleanly away merits no rebuke: when prose with a soft pace cannot with such
cunning pass unperceived. But all is one when in neither of both is found no
matter of mistrust, nor speeches to offend, there is no cause of dislike. So
craving thy good opinion, good Reader farewell.

A true note of the ancient Castles, famous Monuments, goodly Rivers, fair
Bridges, fine Towns, and courteous people, that I have seen in the noble
Country of Wales.
THrough sondrie Soyles, The Authors troublesome life briefly set down.
and stately Kingdoms rich,
Long have I traest, to tread out time and years:
Where I at will, have surely seen right mitch,
As by my works, and printed books appears.
And wearied thus, with toil in forrayne place,
I homeward drue, to take some rest a space:
But laboring mind, that rests not but in bed,
Began a fresh, to trouble restles head.
Then newfound toils, that hales men all in haste,
To run on head, and look not where they go:
Bade reason ride, where love should be enbraste,
And where time could, his labor best bestow.
To Wales (quoth Wit), there does plain people dwell,
So may thou come, to heaven out of hell:
For France is fine, A short note of the nature of many Countries, with the
disposition of the people there.
and full of faithless ways,
Poor Flaunders gross, and far from happy days.
Rich Spain is proud, and stern to strangers all,
In Italy, poysning is always rife:
And Germany, to Drunkenness does fall,
The Danes likewise, do lead a bibbing life.
The Scots seek blood, and bear a cruel mind,
Ireland grows naught, the people ware unkind:
England God wot, has learnde such leawdnesse late,
That Wales methinks, is now the soundest state.
In all the rest, of Kingdoms far or nere,
A commendation of the loyalty of Welshmen.
A trick or two, of treachery staynes the Soil:
But since the time, that rule and law came here,
This British land, was never put to foil,
For foul offense, or fault it did commit:
The people here, in peace does quiet sit,
Obayes the Prince, without revolt or jar,
Because they know, ethe smart of Civil war.
A rehearsal of great strife and dissension that ruinated Wales.
Whiles quarrels rage, did nourish ruin and wrack,
And Owen Glendore, set bloody broils abroach:
Full many a Town, was spoyld and put to sack,
And clean consumed, to Countries foul reproach.
Great Castles raste, fair Buyldings burnt to dust,
Such revel raignde, that men did live by lust:
But since they came, and yielded unto Law,
Most meek as Lamb, within one yoke they draw.
How Law and love links men together like brethren.
Like brethren now, do Welshmen still agree,
In as much love, as any men alive:
The friendship there, and concord that I see,
I do compare, to Bees in Honey hiue.
Which keep in swarm, and hold together still,
Yet gladly show, to stranger great good will:
A courteous kind, of love in every place,
A man may find, in simple peoples face.
The accustomed courtesy of Wales.
Pass where you please, on Plain or Mountain wild,
And bear your self, in sweet and civil sort:
And you shall sure, be haulst with man and child,
Who will salute, with gentle comely port
The passers by: on braues they stand not so,
Without good speech, to let a trau'ler go:
They think it dett, and duty frank and free,
In Town or field, to yield you cap and knee.
They will not strive, No such theft and robbery in Wales as in other
Countries.
to royst and take the way,
Of any man, that travails through their Land:
A greater thing, of Wales now will I say,
Ye may come there, bear purse of gold in hand,
Or mighty bags, of silver stuffed throw,
And no one man, dare touch your treasure now:
Which shows some grace, does rule and guide them there,
That does to God, and man such Conscience bear.
Behold besides, a further thing to note,
The best cheap cheer, Victuals good cheap in most part of Wales.
they have that may be found:
The shot is great, when each man's paies his groate,
If all alike, the reckoning runs round.
There market good, and victuals nothing dear,
Each place is filde, with plenty all the year:
The ground mannurde, the grain does so increase,
That thousands live, in wealth and blessed peace.
But come again, A great rebuke to those that speaks not truly of Wales.
unto their courteous shoe,
That wins the hearts, of all that marks the same:
The like whereof, through all the world do go,
And scarce ye shall, find people in such frame.
For meek as Dove, in looks and speech they are,
Not rough and rude, (as spiteful tongues declare)
No sure they seem, no sooner out of shell,
(But nature shows) they know good manners well. Good disposition never wants
good manners.

How can this be, that weaklings nursed so hard,
(Who barely goes, both barefoote and vncled)
In gifts of mind, should have so great regard,
Except within, from birth some grace were bred.
It must be so, do wit not me deceive,
What nature gives, the world cannot bereave:
In this remains, a secret work divine,
Which show they rise, from ancient race and line.
Good and true Authors that affirms more goodness in Wales than I write of.
In Authors old, you shall that plainly read,
Geraldus one, and learned Geffrey two:
The third for troth, is Venerable Beade,
That many grave, and worthy works did do.
What needs this proof, or genalogies here,
Their noble blood, does by their lives appear:
Their stately Towns, and Castles every where,
Of their renown, does daily witness bear.
A description of Monmouth Shiere.
Two Rivers by Mo^mouth, the one called Monnow, and the other Wye.
FIrst I begin, at ancient Monmouth now,
That stands by Wye, a River large and long:
I will that Shiere, and other Shieres go throw,
Describe them all, or else I did them wrong.
It is great blame, to writers of our days,
That treates of world, and gives to Wales no praise:
They rather hyde, in cloud (and cunning foil)
That Land than yield, right glory to that Soil,
King Henry the fifth.
A King of ours, was borne in Monmouth sure,
Near the Town Sir Charles Harbert of Troy dwelt in a fair Seat called Troy.
The Castle there, records the same a right:
And though the walls, which cannot still endure,
Through sore decay, shows nothing fair to sight.
In Seat it self, (and well plaste City old)
By view ye may, a Princely plot behold:
Good mynds they had, At Wynestow now dwells Sir Thomas Harbert, a little from
the same Troy.
that first those walls did raise,
That makes our age, to think on elders days.
The King here borne, did prove a peereles Prince,
He conquered France, and reigned nine years in hap:
There was not here, so great a Uictor since,
That had such chance, and Fortune in his lap.
For he by fate, and force did covet all,
And as turn came, stroke hard at Fortunes ball:
With manly mind, and ran a reddie way,
To lose a joint, or win the Gole by play.
If Monmouth bring, Master Roger Ieames dwelt at Troy nere this Town.
such Princes forth as this,
A Soil of grace, it shall be calde of right:
Speak what you can, a happy Seat it is,
A trim Shiere town, for Noble, Barron or Knight.
A City sure, as free as is the best,
Where Size is kept, and learned Lawyers rest:
Buylt ancient wise, The Earl of Worcesters house and Castle.

The Earl of Penbroke that was created Earl by King Edward the 4. buylt the
Castle of Raggland sumptuously at the first.

Earl of Worcester Lord hereof.

A fair bridge. Master Lewis of Saint Peer dwelles near that.


in sweet and wholesome air,
Where the best sort, of people often repair.
Not far from thence, a famous Castle fine,
That Raggland hight, stands moted almost round:
Made of Freestone, upright as straight as line,
Whose workmanship, in beauty does abound.
The curious knots, wrought all with edged tool,
The stately Tower, that looks ore Pond and Poole:
The Fountain trim, that runs both day and night,
Does yield in show, a rare and noble sight.
Now Chepstowe comes, to mind (as well it may)
Whose Seat is set, some part upon an hill:
And through the Town, to Neawport lies a way,
That ore a Bridge, on Wye you ride at will.
This Bridge is long, the River swift and great,
The Mountain big, about does shade the Seat:
Sir Charles Sommerset at the Grange does dwell now.
The craggie Rocks, that ore the Town does lie.
Of force far of, does hinder view of eye.
The common Port, and Haven is so good,
It merits praise, because Barks there do ride:
Sir William Morgan that is dead dwelt at Pennycoyd.
To which the Sea, comes in with flowing flood,
And does four hours, above the Bridge abide.
Beyond the same, does Tyntterne Abbey stand,
As old a Sell, as is within that Land:
Harbert of Colbroke buried there.

Chepstow. In the Castle there is an ancient tower called Longis tower, whereby
rests a tale to be considered of.

Of this Earl is a great and worthy tale to be heard A piece of a petigree.

Earl Strongbowe was married to the King of Lynsters Daughter in Ireland, and
this Strongbowe wan by force of arms the Earledoms of Wolster and Tyroll.


Where diverse things, has been right worthy note,
Whereof as yet, the troth I have not got.
To Chepstowe yet, my pen again must pass,
Where Strongbow once, (an Earl of rare renown)
A long time since, the Lord and Master was
(In princely sort) of Castle and of Town.
Then after that, to Mowbray it befell,
Of Norffolke Duke, a worthy known full well:
Who sold the samet, o William Harbert Knight,
That was the Earl, of Penbrooke then by right.
His eldest Son, that did succeed his place,
(Of Huntyngton: and Penbrooke Earl likewise)
Had but one child, a Daughter of great race:
And she was matched, with pomp and solemn guise,
To Somerset, that was Lord Chamberlain,
And made an Earl, in Henry seuenths reign:
Of him does come, Earl Worster living now,
Who builds up, the house of Raggland throw.
A Creation of an Earl.
EDward by the grace of God, King most imperial,
Of France, and England, and the Lord of Ireland therwithall,
To Archbishops, and Bishops all, to Abbotes and to Priors
To Dukes, to Earls, to Barrons, and to Sheriffs of the shires,
To Justices, to Majors, and chief of Townly government,
To Baylieffes, and my lichefolke all, have herewith greeting sent.
Know ye whereas we judge it is a gracious Prince his part,
To yield love, favor, and reward to men of great desarte:
Who of himself, his Royal house, and of the public state,
Have well deserved, their virtues rare ever to renumerate:
And to adorn with high reward, such virtue clear and bright,
Stirs others up to great attempts, and faintnes puts to flight.
We following on the famous course, ye former Kings have run,
That worthy and approved wight, whose deeds most nobly dun,
Have greatest things of us deserved, we do intend to raise,
To fame and honors highest type, with gifts of Princely praise,
That truly regal are we mean, that valiant worthy Knight,
That William Herbert has to name, and now L. Herbert hight.
Whose service when we first did reign, we did most faithful find.
When for our royal right we fought, which still we call to mind:
To which we ad from then till now, continual services,
Which many were whereof each one, to us most pleasing is.
And chiefly when as lately now, his deeds did him declare,
A worthy Knight whereby he gayn'd, both fame and glory rare:
When as that Rebel and our foe, even Jasper Tudyrs son,
who said he Earl of Penbroke was, did westwales coast oreru^.
And there by subtle shifts and force, did diverse sondrie ways
Anoy our State, and therewithal a vile Sedition raise.
But there he gave to him a field, and with a valiant hand
Orethrew him and his forces all, that on his part did stand.
And marching all along those Coasts, ye most he flew out right,
The rest he brake and so dispersed, they gave themselves to flight.
Our Castle then of Hardelach, that from our first days reign,
A refuge for all Rebels did, against us still remain:
A Fort of wondrous force, besiege about did he,
And took it, where in most men's mynds, it could not taken be.
He wan it and did make them yield, who there their saftie sought,
And all the Country thereabouts, to our obedience brought.
These therefore his most worthy Acts, we calling into mind,
His services and great deserts, which we praise worthy find:
And for that cause we willing him, with honors royally
For to adorn, deck, and advance, and to sublime on hye*
The eight day of September, in the eight year of our Reign*
We by this Charter, that for ours shall firm for ever remain*
Of special grace and knowledge sure, sound and determinate,
And motion mere him William do, of Penbroke Count create
Erect, prefer, and unto him the Title style and state,
And name thereof and dignity, forever appropriate,
As Earl of Penbroke and withal, we give all rights that do
All honors and pre-eminence, that state perteyne unto:
With which estate, style, honor, great, and worthy dignity,
By cincture of a Sword, we him ennoble reallie.
The Authors verses in the honor of noble mynds.
For that the sense, and worthy words were great,
The service such, as merits noble fame:
The form thereof, in verse I do repeat,
And show likewise, the Lattin of the same.
He served a King, that could him well reward,
And of his house, and race took great regard,
And recompenst, his manly doing right,
With honor due, to such a noble Knight.
Good men are made of, and bad men rebuked.
Where loyal mind, does offer life and all,
For to preserve, the Prince and public state:
There does great hap, and thankful Fortune fall,
As guerdon sent, by destnie and good fate.
No Sovereign can, forget a Subjects troeth,
With whose good grace, great love and favor goes:
Great gifts and place, great glory and renown,
They get and gain, that truly serves a Crown.
And thou my Knight, that art his heir in blood,
Sir William Harbert of ^^^nt Gillyans.
Though Lordship, land, and Ragglands stately towers,
A female heir, and force of fortunes flood
Have thee bereft, yet bearst his fruits and flowers:
His arms, his name, his faith and mind are thine,
By nature, nurture, art and grace deuyne:
Ore Seas and Lands, these move thee pains to take,
For God, for fame, for thy sweet Soueraines sake.
Here follows the Creation of an Earl of Penbroke in Latin.
EDwardus Dei gracia Rex Angliae and Fraunciae and Dominus Hibernic,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Ducibus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Iusticiarijs, Vicecomitibus, Prepositis, Ministris, and omnibus Balliuis, and
fidelibus suis, salute^. Sciatis quod cum felicis and grati admodum Regis munus
censeamus, de se, de Regia domo, deque Republica and regno been meritas
personas, co^gruis amore, beneuolentia and liberalitate prosequi: denique and
iuxta eximias probitates, easdem magnificentius ornare and decorare, quatenus
in personis huiuscemodi congestis clarissimis virtutum praemijs ceteri,
socordia ignauiaque sepositis ad peragenda pulcherrima quaeque facinora laud
and gloria concitentur: Nos ne a maiorum nro^ laudatissimis moribus discedere
videamur, nostri esse officij putamus probatissimu^ nobis virum qui ob res ab
se clarissime gestas quam maxima de nobis promeruit, condignis honoru^
fastigijs attollere and vere regijs insignire muneribus. Strenuum and insignem
loquimur milite^ Willu^m Herbert Dominum Herbart, iam defunctu^, cuius in regni
nostri primordijs obsequia gratissima tum nobis multipliciter impensa cum nro^
pro iure decertaretur, satis ambigue obliuisci non possumus accessere and de
post in hoc vsque temporis continuata seruicia, que non parum nobis fuere
complacita, presertim nuperimis hijs diebus quibus optimum se gessit militem,
ac non mediocres sibi laudis and fame titulos comparauit. Hijs equidem
iampride^ cu^ Rebellis, hostisque nostri Jasper Owini Tedur filliu^, nuper
Pembrochiae se Comitem dicens, Walliae parts peruaderet, multaque art ad
contra nos and statum nostrum vilem populo seditionem concitandum truculentiam
moliretur, societatis sibi ad eandem rem conficiendam electissimis viris
fidelibus nostris arma cepit, confligendi copiam hostibus exhibuit, adeoque
valida manu peruasus ab ipsis parts peruagatus est and nusquam eis locum
permiserit quo no^ eos complicesque affligauerit, vires eoru^dem fregerit,
morteque affecerit, seu desperantes in fugam propulerit, demum Castrum nostrum
de Hardelagh nobis ab initio regni nostri contrarium, quo vnicum miseris
patebat refugium, obsidione vallabat, quod capi impossible ferebatur, cepit,
inclusos que ad deditionem compulit, adiacentem quoque primam omnem nostram
Regiae Maiestati rebellem hactenus ad summam obedientiam reduxit. Haec itaque
sua laudabilia obsequia, promeritaque memoriter and vt decet intime recolentes
volentesque proinde eundem Willu^m condignis honoribus, regalibusque praemijs
ornare amplicare and sublimare, octauo die Septembris anno regni nostri octauo,
per Chartam nostram de gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa scientia and mero
motu nostris ipsum Willu^m in Comitem Pembrochiae ereximus, praefecerimus, and
creauerimus, and ei nome^, statum, stilum, titulum, and dignitatem Comitis
Pembrochie cum omnibus and singulis preeminencijs honoribus and ceteris
quibuscunque huius statui Comitis pertinentibus, sieve congruis dederimus and
concesserimus, ipsumque huiusmodi statu, stilo, titulo, honor, and dignitate
per cincturam gladij insigniuerimus, and realiter nobilitauerimus.

This was set down, for causes more then one,
The world believes, no more than it has seen:
When things lie dead, and time is past and gone,
Blind people say, it is not so we ween.
It is a tale, deuisde to please the ear,
More for delight, of toys then troth may bear:
But those that thinks, this may a fable be,
To Authors good, I send them here from me.
First let them search, Records as I have done,
Then shall they find, this is most certain true:
And all the rest, before I here begun,
Is taken out, not of no writers nue.
The oldest sort, and soundest men of skill
Mine Authors are, now read their names who will:
Their works, their words, and so their learning through,
Shall show you all, what troth I write of now.
BEcause many that favored not Wales (parsiall writers and historians) have
written and set down their own opinions, as they pleased to publish of that
Country: I therefore a little degresse from the orderly matter of the book,
and touch somewhat the works and words of them that rashly have written more
then they knew, or well could prove.

As learned men, has wrote grave works of yore,
So great regard, to native Soil they had:
For such respect, I blame now Pollydore:
Because of Wales, his judgment was but bad.
If Buckanan, the Scottish Poet late
Were here in sprite, of Brittons to debate:
He should find men, that would with him dispute,
And many a pen, which would his works confute.
But with the dead, the quick may never strive,
(Though sondrie works, of theirs were little worth)
Yet better far, they had not been alive,
Than sow such seeds, as brings no goodness forth:
Their praise is small, that plucks back others fame,
Their love not great, that blots out neighbors name,
Their books but brawles, their babble bauld and bare,
That in disdain, of fables writers are.
What fable more, then say they know that thing
They never saw, and so give judgment straight:
And by their books, the world in error bring,
That thinks it reads, a matter of great weight.
When that a tale, of much untroth is told:
Thus all that shines, and glisters is not gold:
Nor all the books, that ancient Fathers wrate
Are not alo'wd, for troth in every state.
Though Caesar was, a wise and worthy Prince,
And conquered much, of Wales and England both:
The writers than, and other Authors since.
Did flatter time, and still abuse the troth.
Same for a fee, and some did humors feed,
When sore was healde, to make a wound to bleed:
And some sought means, their patient still to please,
When body throw, was full of foul disease.
The worldly wits, that with each time would wagge,
Were carried clean, away from wisdoms lore:
They rather watched, to fill an empty bag,
Than touch the time, then present or before:
Nor cared not much, for future time to come,
They rould up time, like threede about the thome:
And when their clue, on trifles all was spent,
Much rotten stuff, unto the garment went.
Which stuff patcht up, a piece of homely ware,
In Printers shop, set out to sale sometime:
Which ill wrought work, at length became so bare,
It neither served, for prose nor pleasant ryme:
But past like that, and old wives tales full vain,
That thunders long, but never brings forth rain:
A kind of sound, that makes a hurling noise,
To fear young babes, with brute of bugges and toys.
But aged sires, of riper wit and skill,
Disdaines to read, such rabble farst with lies:
This is enough, to show you my goodwill
Of Authors true, and writers grave and wise.
Whose pen shall prove, each thing in printed book,
Whose eyes withal, on matter strange did look:
And whose great charge, and labor witness bears,
Their words are just, they offer to your ears.
Each Nation had, some writer in their days
For to advance, their Country to the Stars:
Homer was one, who gave the Greeks great praise,
And honored not, the Troyans for their wars.
Liui among, the Romans wrate right mitch,
With rare renown, his Country to enritch:
And Pollidore, did ply the pen a pace,
To blurre strange Soyles, and yield the Romans grace.
Admit they wrate, their volumes all of troeth,
(And did affect, ne man nor matter then)
Yet writer sees, not how all matters goes
In field: when he, at home is at his pen.
This Pollidore, saw never much of Wales,
Though he have told, of Brittons many tales:
Caesar himself, a Uictor many a way,
Went not so far, as Pollidore does say.
Kings are obayd, where they were never seen,
And men may write, of things they hear by ear:
So Pollidore, often times might ouerweene,
And speak of Soyles, yet he came never there.
Some run a ground, that through each water sails,
A Pylot good, in his own Compass fails:
A writer that* believes in worlds report,
May roue to far, or surely shoot to short.
The eye is judge, as Lantern clear of light,
That searches through, the dim and darkest place:
The gladsome eye, gives all the body sight,
It is the glass, and beauty of the face.
But where no face, nor judging eye does come,
The sense is blind, the spirit is deaffe and dome:
For wit can not, conceive till sight send in
Some skill to head, whereby we knowledge win.
If strangers speak, but straungely on our state,
Think nothing strange, though strangers write amiss:
If strangers do, our native people hate,
Our Country knows, how strange their nature is.
Most strange it were, to trust a forayne foe,
Or favor those, that we for strangers know:
Then straungely read, the books that strangers make,
For fear ye shroude, in bosom stinging Snake.
Polidorus Virgilius spoke all of his own nations praise, and saw but little
of Britain, nor loved the same.
The strangers still, in ancient time that wrate,
Exalt themselves, and keeps us under foot:
As we of kind, and nature do them hate,
So bear they rust, and canker at the root
Of heart, to us, when pen to paper goes,
Their cunning can, with craft so cloak a troeth,
That hardly we, shall have them in the wind,
To smell them forth, or yet their finenesse find.
Of force then must, you credit our own men,
Venerable bede, a noble writer.
(Whose virtues works, a glorious garland gaynes)
Who had the gift, the grace and art of pen:
And who did write, with such sweet flowing veins,
Gildas, a passing Poet of Britain.
That Honey seemed, to drop from Poets quill:
I say no more, trust strangers and ye will,
Our Country breeds, as faithful men as those,
As famous too, in stately verse or prose.
Sibilla, a divine Prophesiar and writer.
And truth I trow, is likte among us best:
For each man frounes, when fabling toys they hear,
And though we count, but Robin Hood a Jest,
And old wives tales, as tatling toys appear:
Yet Arthurs reign, the world cannot deny,
Such proof there is, Merilinus Ambrosius, a man of hye knowledge and spirit.
the troth thereof to try:
That who so speaks, against so grave a thing,
Shall blush to blot, the fame of such a King.
Condemn the days, of elders great or small,
And then blurre out, the course of present time:
Cast one age down, and so do orethrow all,
And burn the books, of printed prose or ryme:
Who shall believe, he rules or she does reign
In time to come, if writers loose their pain:
The pen records, time past and present both,
Skill brings forth books, and books is nurse to troth.
Now follows the Castles and Towns near Oske, and there aboutes.
A Pretty Town, A description of Oske.
calde Oske near Raggland stands,
A River there, does bear the selfsame name:
His Crystal streams, that runs along the Sands,
Shows that it is, a River of great fame.
Fresh water sweet, this goodly River yields,
And when it swells, it spreads ore all the Feelds:
Great store of Fish, is caught within this flood,
That does in deed, both Town and Country good.
A thing to note, Two Rivers nere together of several natures, shows a
strange thing.
when Sammon fails in Wye,
(And season there: goes out as order is)
Than still of course, in Oske does Sammons lie,
And of good Fish, in Oske you shall not mis.
And this seems strange, as does through Wales appear,
In some one place, are Sammons all the year:
So fresh, so sweet, so red, so crimp withal,
As man might say, lo, Sammon here at call.
King Edward the fourth and his children, (as some affirm), and King Richard
the third, were borne here.
A Castle there, in Oske does yet remain,
A Seat where Kings, and Princes have been borne*
It stands full ore, a goodly pleasant Plain,
The walls whereof, and towers are all to torn,
(With wethers blast, and time that wears all out)
And yet it has, a fair prospect about:
Trim Meades and walks, along the Rivers side,
With Bridge well built, the force of flood to bide.
Upon the side, of wooddie hill full fair,
Castle Stroge^ does yet remain three mile from Oske, but the Castle is almost
clean down.
This Castle stands, full sore decade and broke:
Yet builded once, in fresh and wholesome air,
Full near great Woods, and many a mighty Oak.
But since it wears, and walls so wastes away,
In praise thereof, I mind not much to say:
Each thing decayed, goes quickly out of mind,
A rotten house, does but few favors find.
In the Duchy of Lancaster, these three Castles are, but not in good plight
any way.
Three Castles fair, are in a goodly ground,
Grosmont is one, on Hill it builded was:
Skenfreth the next, in Ualley is it found,
The Soil about, for pleasure there does pass.
Whit Castle is, the third of worthy fame,
The Country there, does bear Whit Castles name,
A stately Scate, a lofty princely place,
Whose beauty gives, the simple Soyles some grace.
The Duke of York once lay here, and now the Castle is in Master Roger
Willyams hands.
Two miles from that, upon a mighty Hill,
Langibby stands, a Castle once of state:
Where well you may, the Country view at will,
And where there is, some buildings new of late.
A wholesome place, a passing plat of ground,
As good an air, as there abouts is found:
It seems to sight, the Seat was plast so well,
In elders days, some Duke therein did dwell.
Carleon now, A description of Carleon.
step in with stately style,
No feeble phrase, may serve to set thee forth:
Thy famous Town, was spoke of many a mile,
Thou have been great, Master Morgan of Lanternam in a fair house dwelles two
mile from Carleon.
though now but little worth.
Thy noble bounds, has reached beyond them all,
In thee has been, King Arthurs golden Hall:
In thee the wise, and worthies did repose,
And through thy Town, the water ebs and flows.
COme learned lore with lofty style, A plain and true rehearsal of matter of
great antiquity.

and lead these lines of mine:
Come gracious Gods, and spare a while
to me the Muses nine.
Come Poets all, whose passing phrase
does pearce the finest wits:
Come knowledge whereon world does gase, A fair Fountain now begun.

(yet still in judgment sits)
And help my pen to play his part, A free School now erected by Master
Morgan of Lanternam.

for pen is stepped on stage,
To show by skill and cunning art,
the state of former age.
For present time has friends enowe,
to flatter faune and feign: A gird to the flatterers and fauners of present
time.

And elders days I know not how,
do dwell in deep disdain.
No friend for ancient years we find,
our age loves youth alone: A house of reformation newly begun likewise.

The former age wears out of mind,
as though such time were none.
King Arthurs reign (though true it wear) The Bishop of Landaffe still lying
in the Town.

Is now of small account:
We praise and extol strange Nations, and forget or abase our own Countries.
The same of Troy is known each where,
And to the Skies does mount.
Both Athens, Theabes, and Carthage too
We hold of great renown:
What then I pray you shall we do,
To poor Carleon Town.
In Arons the Martyrs Church King Arthur was crowned.
King Arthur sure was crowned there,
It was his royal Seat:
And in that Town did Scepter bear,
With pomp and honor great.
Three Archbishops, York London, and Carleo^, crowning King Arthur.
An Archbishop that Dubrick hight,
Did crown this King in deed:
Four Kings before him bore in sight,
Four golden Swords we reed.
Arthur was great, that commanded such solemnity.
These Kings were famous of renown,
Yet for their homage due:
Repayrd unto Carleon Town,
As I rehearse to you.
The true Authors are in the beginning of this book for proof of this.
How many Dukes, and Earls withal,
Good Authors can you tell:
And so true writers show you shall,
How Arthur there did dwell.
What Court he kept, what Acts he did,
What Conquest he obtaynd:
And in what Princely honor still,
King Arthur long remaynd.
Another notable solemnity at a Coronation.
Queen Gueneuer was crowned likewise,
In Julius Church they say:
Where that four Queens in solemn guise, In Julius Church the Martyr the
Queen was crowned. An honor rare and great yet seldom seen.

(In royal rich array).
Four Pigeons white, bore in their hands
Before the Princess face:
In sign the Queen of British Lands,
Was worthy of that grace.
Carleon lodged all these Kings,
And many a noble Knight:
As may be proved by sondrie things,
That I have seen in sight.
The bounds has been nine miles about,
The length thereof was great:
It shows it self this day throughout,
It was a Princes Seat.
In Arthurs time a Table round, A deep and large round piece of ground shows
yet where Arthur sat.

Was there whereat he sat:
As yet a plot of goodly ground,
Sets forth that rare estate,
The City reached to Creet church than, A Church on a hill a mile of. Saint
Gillyans is a fair house where Sir William Harbert dwelles.

And to Saint Gillyans both:
Which yet appears to view of man,
To try this tale a troth.
There are such Uautes and hollow Caves,
Such walls and Condits deep:
Made all like pypes of earthen pots,
Wherein a child may creep.
Such streates and pauements sondrie ways, Wonderful huge and long pauements.

To every market Town:
Such Bridges built in elders days,
And things of such renown.
The notablest seat to behold being on the top that may be seen.
As men may muse of to behold,
But chiefly for to note:
There is a Castle very old,
That may not be forgot.
The Castle almost down.
It stands upon a forced Hill,
Not far from flowing flood:
Where lo ye view long Uales at will,
Enuyron'd all with wood.
The flowing water may easily be brought about both Town and Castle.
A Seat for any King alive,
The Soil it is so sweet:
Fresh springs does streams of water drive,
Almost through every streate.
From Castle all these things are seen,
A great beauty of grounds, waters, groves, and other pleasures for the eye to
be seen from the old Castle of Carleon.
as pleasures of the eye:
The goodly Groves and Uallies green,
and wooddie Mountains hye.
The crooked Creekes and pretty Brooks,
that are amid the Plain:
The flowing Tides that spreads the land,
and turns to Sea again.
The stately Woods that like a hoope,
I have seen Caves under ground (at this day) that go I know: not how far,
all made of excellent work, and goodly great stones both over head and under
foot, and close and fine round about the whole Cave.
does compass all the Uale:
The Princely plots that stands in troop,
to beautify the Dale.
The Rivers that does daily run,
as clear as Crystal stone:
Shows that most pleasures under Sun,
Carleon had alone.
Great ruth to see so brave a Soil,
Fall in so sore decay:
In sorrow sit, full nere the foil,
As Fortune fled away.
And world forsook to knowledge those,
That erst has been so great:
Where Kings and grave Philosophers,
Made once therein their Seat.
Vrbs legionum was it namde, The name so mighty argues it was a mighty and
noble town.

In Caesar's days I trow:
And Arthur holding resdence there,
(As stories plainly show).
Not only Kings and noble Peers, Two hundred Philosophers were norished in
Carleon.

Repayrde unto that place:
But learned men full many years,
Received therein their grace.
Than you that ancient things denies,
Let now your talk surcease:
When proof is brought before your eyes,
Ye ought to hold your peace.
And let Carleon have his right,
And joy his wonted fame: Yield right as well to our elders days, as to our
present age.

And let each wise and worthy wight,
Speak well of Arthurs name.
Would God the brute thereof were known,
In Country, Court, and Town:
And she that sits in reagall Throne,
With Scepter, Sword, and Crown.
(Who came from Arthurs raze and line)
Would mark these matters throw:
And show thereon her gracious eyne,
To help Carleon now.
Thus far my pen in Arthurs praise,
Has past for plainness sake:
In honor of our elders days,
That keeps my muse awake.
All only for to publish plain,
Time past, time present both:
That time to come, may well retain,
Of each good time, the troth.
An Introduction to the Letters sent from Lucius Tyberius, at the Coronation of
King Arthur.
NOt unwilling to delate and make large the matter now written of, and further
because the reign of King Arthur is diversely treated on and uncertainly spoken
of (the men of this world are grown so wise) I have searched and found (in
good Authors) such certainty of King Arthur, and matter that merits the
reading, that I am compelled with pen to explain, and with some pains and
study to p^esent the world with in general. The substance whereof being in
Latin, (may be read and understood by thousands) is englished because the
common sort (as well as the learned) shall see how little the Kings and
Princes of this Land, have esteemed the power of the Romans, or manasing and
force of any foreign foe whatsoever. And for the amending of my tale, let our
Sovereign Lady be well considered of, (whose graces passes my pen to show)
and you shall see great things are encountered, and no small matters gone about
and brought to good pass, in the action before named: which becomes well a
Queen of that race, who is descended of so noble a progeny. But now purposing
orderly to proceed to the former discourse, and to rehearse word for word, as
it was left by our forefathers, (men of great learning and knowledge) I have
set down some such Letters and Orations, as peradventure will make you to
marvel of, or at the least to think on so much, that some one among a
multitude, will yield me thanks for my labor, and rather encourage a true
writer to continue in the like exercises, then to give him any occasion to sit
idle, and so forget the use of pen. There follows hereafter those things
before mentioned, which I hope the Readers will judge with aduisement, and
construe to the best intent and meaning. For this matter not only shows by
good authority the royal Coronation of King Arthur, but in like manner
declares with what pride and pomp the Romans sent hither (at the very instant
of this great triumph) for tribute and homage: at which proud and presumptuous
demand, King Arthur (and all his other Princes about him) began to be greatly
moved, and presently without further delay, gave so sharp and sudden an
answer to the Ambassadors of Rome, that they were so vexed and abashed
therewith, that they neither knew well how to take it, nor made any further
reply: as follows by matter presently here, if you please thoroughly to read
it. Consider withal, that after this Embassage, King Arthur in plain battle
slew Lucius, and had gone to Rome to have been crowned Emperor there, if
Mordred had not made a revolt in Arthurs own kingdom.

The Coronation, and solemnity thereof: The Embassage, and proud message of
the Romans: And the whole resolution of King Arthur therein, is first set
forth here in English.
THE appointed time of the solemnity approaching, and all being ready
assembled in the City of Carleon, the Archbishops, London and York: and in
the City of Carleon the Archbishop Dubright were conueighed to the Palace,
with royal solemnity to crown King Arthur. Dubright therefore (because the
Court then lay within his Diocese, furnished himself accordingly to perform
and solemnize this charge in his own person. The King being crowned, was
royally brought to the Cathedral Church of that Metropoliticall See. On either
hand of him, both the right and the left, did two Archbishoppes support him.
And four Kings, to wit, Angusell King of Albania, Caduall King of Venedocia,
Cador King of Cornwall, and Sater King of Demetia, went before him, carrying
iiii. golden Swords. The companies also and concourse of sondrie sorts of
officers, played before him most melodious and heavenly harmony. On the other
part, the Queen was brought to the Church of professed Nuns, being
co^ducted and accompanied with Archbishops and Bishops, with her Arms and
titles royally garnished. And the Queens, being wives unto the four Kings
aforesaid, carried before her (as the order and custom was) four white Doves
or Pigeons.

For behold, twelve discreet personages of reverend countenance came to the
King in stately manner, carrying in their right hands in token and sign of
Embassage, Olive boughs. And after they had saluted him, they delivered unto
him on the behalf of Lucius Tyberius, Letters containing this effect.

The Epistle of Lucius the Roman Lieutenant, to Arthur King of Britain.
LVcius Gouerner of the Commonwealth, to Arthur King of Britain, as he has
deserved. I have exceedingly wondered to think of thy malepert and tyrannical
dealing. I do marvel (I say) and in considering the matter, I am angry and
take in ill part, the injury that thou have offered to Rome: and that thou, no
better aduising thy self, refusest to acknowledge her. Neither have thou any
care speedily to redress thine oversight, thus by unjust dealings to offend
the Senate: unto whom thou art not ignorant, that the whole world owes homage
and service. For, the Tribute done for Britain which the Senate commanded
thee to pay; for that Julius Caesar, and other worthy Romans long and many
years enjoyed the same, thou to the contempt of such an honorable Estate, have
presumed to detain and keep back. Thou have also taken from them Gallia:
thou have won from them, the Provinces of Sauoy and Daulphinie: Allobroges
thou have gotten the possession of all the Islands of the Ocean: the Kings
whereof (so long as the Roman authority was there obeyed) paid Tribute to
our Ancestors. Since therefore the Senate has decreed to redemaund amends and
restitution at thy hands for these thy so great wrongs, I enjoin and command
thee to come to Rome in the midst of August the next year; thexe to answer
unto thy Lords, and to abide such sentence and order, as they by justice shall
lay upon thee. Which thing if thou refuse to do, I will invade thy Countries,
and whatsoever thy wilful rashness has disloyally taken away from their
Commonwealth, that will I by dint of sword, assay to recover and to them
restore.

Cador the Duke of Cornwall his Oration to the King.
I Have hitherto been in fear, least the Britains through much ease and long
peace, should grow to flouth and cowardice* and lose that honorable reputation
of Cheualrie and martial prowess, wherein they are generally accoumpted to
surmount all other Nations. For where the use of Arms is not esteemed, but in
steed thereof, Dyeing, Carding, dalying with women and other vain delites
frequented, it cannot choose, but there cowardice and sluggardie must needs
dim and deface all virtue, honor, valiaunce, and fame. There be now almost
five years passed, since we having lacked Martial exercise, have effeminately
been nuzzeled in these foresaid delites. God therefore not willing to see us
any longer marred and stained with sluggardie, has stirred up the Romans,
that they should be the means to reduce our ancient valor unto the former
state and dignity. While he used these and such like words, confirmed by
those that were there at that time in presence, they came at length to their
Benches or Seats, where after that every person was set and placed: Arthur
used this speech unto them.

The Oration of Arthur to his Lords and people.
MY fellows (says he) and companyons both of adversity and prosperity:
whose fidelities I have heretofore both in your sound counsels, and in
exployting militare services had good trial and experience of: listen now and
afford unto me your advise, and wisely foresee, what you think convenient for
us, touching such demands and commandments, to be done. For, when a thing is
wisely aforehand deliberated and carefully foreseen, when it comes to the
pinch, it is more easily avoided and tolerated. We shall therefore the easier
be able to abide the imperious demand of Lucius, if we lay our heads
together and foresee, how and which way, we may best defeat and infringe the
same. And (surely) for my part, I do not think that we have any cause greatly
to fear him, since upon an unreasonable cause he seeks to have a tribute
paid out of Britain. For, he alleges, that the same is due and payable to
him, because it was paid to Julius Caesar and others his Successors, which
being invited and called hither through the discord and iarres of the ancient
Britains, arrived here in Britain with numbers of armed Soldiers: and with
force and vyolence, brought under their subjection, this our Country,
miserably tossed with civil garboyles and domestical discord. And because
they in this sort, got the possession of it, they have since taken and unjustly
received a Tribute out of it. For nothing that is gotten by force and vyolence,
is justly possessed by him that offered the vyolence. The cause therefore which
he pretends is unreasonable, whereby he d(...)eth us by law and right to be
tributarie unto them. Since therefore he thus presumes to demand of us that
which is unjust: let us by the same reason, demand of him, tribute at Rome:
and he that is the stronger, let him carry away that which he desires and
claymeth. For, if his reason, why he demands tribute now, as due, to be
paid by us, because Caesar and other Roman Princes sometimes conquered
Britain be good: by the like reason, I do think that Rome ought to pay
tribute to me, because my Predecessors heretofore wanne and subdued it. For
Belinus that most noble King of Britains, with the help and aid of his
brother Brennus Duke of Sauoy, Allobroges
took by force that City, and long while possessed it, hanging up in the
midst of their chief Market place and high streate, twenty of the chiefest
Nobles among them. Constantine also the son of Helena, and Maximianus
likewise, being both of them, my nere Cosens, and either of them successively,
crowned King of Britain, were enthronized in the imperial Seat of the
Roman Empire. What think ye now? Judge you that the Romans have any reason
or right to demand Tribute at our hands? As touching France or other
collateral Islands of the Ocean, it needs no answer, since they refused to
defend them, when we forcibly took them out of their cloutches and
jurisdiction.

The answer of Howell King of little Britain.
THough every one of you should never so diligently consider: and debate with
himself never so advisedly in his mind: yet do I not think, that he could
possibly devise any better counsel then this, which thy most grave wisdom
has now remembered. Thy eloquent and Tullie like advise therefore, has
furnished us with that skill, whereby we ought incessantly to commend in you
the affect of a constant man, the effect of a wise mind, and the benefit of
prudent counsel. For, if ye will take your voyage and expedition to Rome,
according to the reason before alleged, I doubt not, but we should win
triumph, sir^ we do but defend our liberty, and justly demand of our
enemies, that, which they have unjustly begun to demand of us. For whosoever
goes about to defeat or dispossess an other of his right, and to take from
him that which is his own; worthylie and deservedly may be put from that,
which is his own, by him to whom he has offered and done such wrong and
violence. Seeing therefore, the Romans would so gladly take from us, that
which is our own, we will without doubt, take from them that, which they have,
if we may once come to buckle with them. Behold this is the conflict that al
true hearted Britains so long have wished for: Sybilla her prophesies touching
the Britains.
Behold these be the Prophesies of Sybilla now fulfilled, which so plainly and
truly foretold, that of the third stock of the Britains there should one be
borne, that should obtain and possess the Romain Empire. Now, for two of
these, the Prophesies be already fulfilled: sithence it is manifest (as thou
have already declared) that those two most noble and excellent Princes Belinus
and Constantine, overcame, and gave the Arms of the Roman Empire. And now
have we you, being the third, unto whom such high exployt and honor is
promised. Make haste therefore to receive that which God is ready to bestow
on thee. Hasten (I say) to subdue that which he is willing should be subdued.
Hasten to advance all us, that are here ready for thine advancement and
honor, neither to refuse wounds, nor to lose life and limme. An exhortation of
Howell.
And for thy better atchieuing hereof, I my self will accompany thee with
ten thousand well armed Soldiers.

ANgusell King of Albania, when Howell had made an end of his Oration, began
to declare his lyking and opinion of the matter, in this sort following. Since
the time that I heard my Lord utter his mind, touching this case, I have
conceived such inward joy as I am not able here before you to express. For,
in all our victorious Conquests already passed, and in so many Kings and
Regions as we have subdued, we may well seem to have done nothing at all; if
we suffer the Romans and Germans still to remain, and do not manfully
wrecke upon them, The sentence and resolution of the King of Albania.
those bloody slaughters, which heretofore they inflicted upon our Ancestors
and Countrymen. And now since we have occasion and liberty to try the matter
with them by force of arms, I rejoice exceedingly, and have a longing thirst
to see that day, wherein we may meet together; yea I thirst, even as if I had
been dry and kept three days, thirsty, from a Fountain of water. Oh that I
might see that day; how sweet and pleasant should those wounds be, that I
should either give or take, when we coape together! yea, death it self shall be
sweet and welcome, so that I may suffer the same in revenging our fathers, in
defending our liberty, and in aduauncing our King. Let us therefore give the
charge and oncet upon yonder effeminate and meycoclie people, and let us stand
to our tackle like men: that after we have banquished them, we may enjoy their
honors and offices with joyful victory. And for my part, I will augment our
Army with two thousand Horsemen well appointed and armed, beside Footmen.

FINIS.
Here follows the Latin of the English going before.
OMnibus in vrbe legionum congregatio solemnitate instante Archipraesules
Londinensis Eboracensis: necnon in vrbe legionum Archiepiscopus Dubricius ad
pallatium ducuntur vt regem Arthurum diademate regali coronarent Dubricius ergo
quoniam in sua duecesi curia tenebatur: paratus ad celebrandum huius rei curam
suscepit. Rege tandem insignito ad templum metropolitanae sedis ornate
conducitur: a dextro and a laeuo latere duo Archipontifices ipsum tenebant.
Quatuor autem reges viz. Anguselus rex Albaniae, Caduallus Venedociae rex,
Cador rex Cornubiae, and Sater rex Demetiae: quatuor aureos gladios ante ipsum
ferentes praeibant. Conuentus quoque multimodocum ordinatorum miris
modulationibus praecinebat. Ex alia part reginam suis insignibus laureatam
Archipraesules atque pontifices ad templum dicatarum puellarum conducebant.
Quatuor quoque praedictorum regum reginae quatuor albas columbas de more
praeferebant.

Ecce enim duodecim viri maturae etatis reuerendi vultus: tamos oliuae in
signum legationis in dextris ferentes moderatis passibus ad regem ingrediuntur:
and eo salutato literas ipsi ex part Lucij Tiberij in haec verba obtulerunt.

Lucij Romani Procuratoris ad Arthurum Britonum regem epistola.
LVcius reipublicae procurator Arthuro regi Brita^niae quid meruit. Admirans
vehementer admiror super tuae tyrannidis proternia. Admiror inquam and iniuriam
quam Romae intulisti recolligens, indignor quod extra te egressus eam
cognoscere diffugias: nec animaduertere festines quid sit iniustis actibus
senatum offendisse: cui totum orbem famulatum debere non ignoras. Etenim
tributu^ Britanniae quod tibi senatus reddere precaeperat: quia Caius Julius
ceterique romanae dignitatis viti illud multis temporibus habuerunt: neglecto
tanti ordinis imperio detinere praesumpsisti. Eripuisti quoque illi Galliam:
eripuisti Allobrogum prouincia^: eripuisti omnes oceani insulas: quarum reges
dum romana potestas in illis partibus perualuit, vectigal maioribus nostris
reddideru^t. Quia ergo de tantis iniuriarum tuarum cumulis senatus reparationem
petere decreuit mediante^ Augustum proximi anni terminum perfigens Romam te
venire iubeo: vt dominis tuis satisfaciens sententie quam eorum dictatori
iusticia acquiescas. Sin aliter ipse parts tuas adibo and quicquid vesania tua
reipublicae erripuit eidem mediantibus gladijs restituere conabor.

Cadoris ducis Cornubiae ad regem.
HVcusque in timore fueram ne Britones longa pace quietos ocium quod ducunt
ignauos faceret, famamque militiae qua ceteris gentibus clariores censentur in
eis omnino deleret. Quippe vbi vsus armorum videtur abesse, alearum vero and
mulierum inflamationes, ceteraque oblectamenta adesse: dubitandum non est quin
quod erat virtutis: quod honoris, quod audaciae: quod famae ignauia commaculet.
Fere namque transacti sunt quinque anni ex quo (predictis delitijs dediti)
exercitio Martis caruimus. Deus igitur vt nos segnitia liberaret: Romanos in
hunc affectum induxit vt in pristinum statum nostram probitatem reducerent.
Haec and hijs similia illo cum caeteris dicente venerunt tandem ad sedilia vbi
collocatis singulis: Arthurus illos in hunc modum affatus.

Oration Arthuri ad suos.
COnsocij (inquit) aduersitatis and prosperitatis: quorum probitatis hactenus,
and in dandis co^silijs, and in militijs agendis expertus sum: adhibete and
monete nunc vnanimiter sensus vestros, and sapienter prouidete quae super
talibus mandatis nobis esse agenda noueritis. Quicquid enim a sapiente
diligenter prouidetur cum ad actum accedit facilius toleratur. Facilius ergo
inquietationem Lucij tolerare poterimus si communi studio premeditati fuerimus
quibus mofiis eam debilitare instaremus. Quam non multum timendam nobis esse
existimo: cum ex irrationabili causa exigat tributum quod ex Britannia habere
desiderat. Dicit enim ipsum sibi dare debere quia Iulio Caesari ceterisque
successoribus suis redditum fuerit: qui dissidio priscoru^ Britonum inuitatem
cum armata manu in Britaniam applicuerunt: atque patriam domesticis motibus
vacillante^ suae potestativi, and viole^tia submiserunt. Quia vero hoc modo eam
adepti fuerunt vectigal ex ea unjust ceperunt. Nihil enim quod vi vt violentia
acquiritur just ab ipso possidetur qui violentiam metuit.

Irrationabilem ergo causam pretendit: qua nos iure sibi tributarios esse
arbitratur. Quoniam ergo id quod iniustu^ est a nobis praesumit exigere:
consimili ratione petamus ab illo tributum Romae: and qui fortior superuenerit
ferat quod habere exoptauit. Nam si quia Caesar caeterique romani reges
Britanniam olim subiugauerunt vectigal nunc debere sibi ex illa reddi decernit:
Similiter nunc ego censeo quam Roma mihi tributum reddere debet: quia
antecessores mei eam antiquitus obtinuerunt. Belinus etenim ille Britonum
serenissimus rex vsus auxilio fratris sui, Brenni videlicet ducis Allobrogum:
suspensis in medio foro viginti nobilioribus Romany: vrbem ceperut, captamque
multis temporibus possederunt. Constantinus etiam Helenae filius necnon and
Maximianus vterque mihi cognatione propinquus alter post alterum diademate
Britanniae insignitus: thronum Romani imperij adeptus est. Censetis ne ergo
vectigal romany petendum? De Gallia autem sine de collateralibus insulis
oceani non est respondendum: cum illas diffugerent quando easdem potestati
eorum subtrahebamus.

Hoeli regis minoris Britanniae, responsio.
LIcet vnusquisque vestrum totus in se reuersus, omnia, and omnibus animo
tractare valuerit non existimo eum praestantius consiliu^ posse inuenire quam
istud quod modo discretio solertis prudentiae tuae recoluit. Proinde etenim
prouidit nobis tua deliberatio Tulliano liquore lita. Vnde constantis viri
affectum: sapientis animi effectum optimi consilij profectum laudare
indesinenter debemus. Nam si iuxta praedicta^ rationem Romam adire volueris non
dubito quin triumpho potiamur: dum libertatem nostra^ tueamur dum just ab
innimicis nostris exigamus quod a nobis unjust petere incaeperunt. Quicunque
enim sua alteri eripere conatur merito quae sua sunt per eum quem impetit
amittit. Quia ergo Romani nostra nobis demere affectant: sua illis procul
dubio: auferemus si authoritas nobis congrediendi praestabitur. En congressus
cunctis Britonibus desiderandus. Vaticinia Sibille de Britonibus.
En vaticinia sibyllae quae veris angurijs testantur: ex Britannico genere
tertio nasciturum qui Romanum obtinebit imperiu^. De duobus autem adimpleta
sunt oracula: cum manifestrum sit praeclaros vt dixisti principes Belinum atque
Constantinum imperij Romani gessisse insignia and imperia. Nunc vero te tertium
habemus, cui ta^tum culmen honoris promittitur. Festina ergo recipere: quod
deus non differt largiri. Festina subingare quod vltro vult subingari.
Exhortatio Hoeli.
Festina nos omnes exaltare qui vt exalteris nec vulnera recipere: nec vitam
amittere diffugiamus. Vt autem haec perficias december millibus armatorum
praesentiam tuam conabor..

ANguselus Albaniae rex: vt Hoelus finem dicendi fecerat: quod super hac re
affectabat in huc modum manifestare perrexit. Ex dominum meum ea quae dixit
affectare conieci: tanta laetitia animo meo illapsa est: quantam nequeo in
vestra presentia exprimere. Nihil enim in transactis debellationibus quas tot
and tantis regibus intulimus egisse videmur: Sententia regis Albaniae.
si Romani and Germani illesi permaneant: nec in illos clades quas olim
nostratibus ingesserunt viriliter vindicemus. Ac nunc quoniam licentia
congrediendi permittitur gaudens admodu^ gaudeo and desiderio diei quo
conueniamus aestuans sitio cruorem illorum quemadmodu^ fontem si triduo
prohiberer. O si illam lucem videbo quae dulcia erunt vulnera quae vel recipiam
vel inferam: quando dextras conferemus. Ipsa etiam mors dulcis erit: dum eam in
vindicando patres nostros: in tuendo libertatem nostram: in exaltando regem
nostrum perpessus fuero. Aggrediamur ergo semiuiros illos and aggrediendo
perstemus vt deuictis ipsis eorum honoribus cum laeta potiamur victoria.
Exercitum autem nostrum duobus milibus armatoru^ equitum exceptis peditibus
angebo.

FINIS.
Would to God we had the like aid of Kings and offer now to daunt the pride of
the Romish practices.

The true Authors of this whole Book.
Johannes Badius Ascenciu. Merlinus Ambrosius. Gualterus Monemotensis. Giraldus
Cambrensis. Johannes Bale of Brutus. Ieffrey of Monmouth. Analles sue gentes.
Gildas Cambrius, a Poet of Britain. Sibilla.
Two Brethren that were Martyrs, Julius and Aron in Carleon, in whose names two
Churches were built there.

Thelians Episcopus Landaph.

Saint Augustine could not make the Britains be obedient to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, but yet they only submitted themselves to the Archbishop of
Carleon, in Adelbrights time that was King of Kent.

A Hill most notable near Carleo^ a mile from the town.
NOw must I touch, a matter fit to know,
A Fort and strength, that stands beyond this Town:
On which you shall, behold the noblest show,
(Look round about, and so look rightly down)
That ever yet, I saw or man may view:
Upon that Hill, there shall appear to you,
Of seven Shieres, a part and portion great,
Where Hill it self, is sure a warlike Seat.
Ten thousand men, may lodge them there unseen,
In trebble Dykes, that gards the Fortress well:
And yet amid, the Fort a goodly green,
Where that a power, and mighty Camp may dwell:
In spyte of world, A very high Hill of a marvelous strength which was a
strong For^ ^n Arthurs days.
if Soldiers victual have.
The Hill so stands, if Bird but wing do wave,
Or man or beast, but once stir up the head
A Bow above, with shaft shall strike it dead.
The Hill commands, a maruels way and scope,
It seems it stood, Bellinus Ma^gnus made this called Bellingstocke.
far off for Towns defense,
And in the wars, it was Carleons hope:
Or else in deed, the Duke of Gloucester sense
(That did destroy, both Town and all therein)
To serve his turn, A wonderful high mountain with the like manner of defense.
this Fortress did begin.
Not far from this, much like unto the same,
Tombarlown stands, a Mountain of some fame.
A Town nere this, that buylt is all a length,
Called Neawport now, The town of Neawport.
there is full fair to view:
Which Seat does stand, for profit more then strength*
A right strong Bridge, On a round hill by the Church there is for Sea and Land
the most princely sight that any man living at one instant may with perfect eye
behold. The Town has Merchants in it. A Castle is at the end of this Town,
and full by the Bridges and River. Greenefield Castle that was the Duke of
Lancasters.
is there of Timber new:
A River runs, full nere the Castle wall:
Nere Church likewise, a Mount behold you shall,
Where Sea and Land, to sight so plain appeeres,
That there men see, a part of five fair Sheeres.
As upward hye, aloft to Mountain top,
This Market town, is buylt in healthful sort:
So downward lo, is many a Merchants shop,
And many sail, to Bristowe from that Port.
Of ancient time, a City has it bin,
And in those days, the Castle hard to win:
Which yet shows fair, and is repayrd a part,
As things decayed, must needs be helped by art.
A goodly Seat, a Tower, a princely pyle,
Built as a watch, or saftie for the Soil,
By River stands, from Neawport not three mile.
This house was made, when many a bloody broyle,
Eboyth is the Rivers name that runs here.
In Wales God wot, destroyed that public state:
Here men with sword, and shield did braules debate:
Here saftie stood, for many things in deed,
That sought sauegard, and did some sucker need.
The name thereof, the nature shows a right,
For River, wood, pasture air, walk and pleasure, this place passes.
Greenefield it is, full gay and goodly sure:
A fine sweet Soil, most pleasant unto sight,
That for delight, and wholesome air so pure,
It may be praisde, a plot sought out so well,
As though a King, should say here will I dwell:
The Pastures green, the woods, and water clear.
Says any Prince may buyld a Palace here.
And in this place, and many parts about,
A true judgment of the commodities in Wales if the people there would be
laborous.
Is grass and Corn, and fertile ground enough:
And now a while, to speak of Wales throughout,
Where if men would, take pains to plye the Plough:
Dig out of dross, the treasure of the earth,
And fall to toil, and labor from their birth:
They should as soon, to store of wealth attain,
As other Soyles, whose people takes great pain.
But most of Wales, likes better ease and rest,
Nychill.
(Loves meat and mirth, and harmless quiet days)
Than for to toil, and trouble brain and breast,
To vex the mind, with worldly weary ways.
Some stand content, with that which God shall send,
And on their lands, their stock and store does spend:
And rubs out life, clean void of further care,
Because in world, right well to live they are.
Yet were they bent, to proule and purchase still,
And search out wealth, as other Nations do:
They have a Soil, a Country rich at will,
Which can them make, full quickly wealthy too.
They have begun, of late to lime their land.
And plowes the ground, The people of wales in many places thriues by labor
daily, and gets great gain through tillage.
where sturdie Oaks did stand:
Conuerts the meares, and marrish every where,
Whose barraine earth, begins good fruit to bear.
They tear up Trees, and takes the roots away,
Makes stony fields, smooth fertile fallowe ground:
Brings Pastures bare, to bear good grass for Hay,
By which at length, in wealth they will abound.
Wales is this day (behold throughout the Sheeres,
In better state, than it was these hundred years:
More rich, more fine, and further more to tell,
Few men have known, the Country half so well.
Whereas at first, I have known many places so barraine, that they have sought
for come far of, who now are able to live without help of any other Country.
they sought for Corn far off,
(To help the wants, of Wales when grain was dear)
Now on the board, they have both Cheese and lofe,
To show the world, in house is greater cheer.
The open Plain, that has his rubbish lost,
Says plenty is, through Wales in every coast:
The well wrought ground, that thousands may behold,
Where thorns did grow, says now there springs up gold.
I mean where weeds, and thistles long has grown,
(Wild dross and docks, and stinking nettles vile)
There Barley sweet, and goodly Wheat is sown,
Which makes men rich, that lived in lack long while.
No gift nor gain, more great and good to man,
Then that which toil, and honest labor wan:
What sweat of brows, brings in is sugared sweet,
Makes glad the mind, and comforts heart and spreete.
Aborgaynies Town is walled round about, and has fair Suburbs also.
Return I must, to my discourse before,
Of Borrow towns, and Castles as they are:
It stands over two little Rivers, called Ceybbie and Ceyuennie, of which
Ceyuenie, Aborgeuenie took the name.
Aborgaynie, behind I kept in store,
Whose Seat and Soil, with best may well compare.
The Town somewhat, on steep and mounting hill,
With Pastor grounds, and Meddowes great at will*
On every side, huge Mountains hard and hye,
And some thick woods, to please the gazers eye.
The River Oske, along the Uale does pass,
The Bridge of stone a eleven fair arches, and a great bridge of stone to come
drylie to that bridge.
Right underneath, an ancient Bridge of stone:
A goodly work, when first it reared was,
(And yet the Shiere, can show no such a one)
Makes men to know, old Buildings were not bace,
And new things blush, that steps not so in place,
With surety good, and show to step on stage,
To make new world, to honor former age.
For former time, built Towns and Castles trim,
Of the bounty of time past, and the hardness of our age.
Made Bridges brave, and strong for time to come:
And our young days, that does in glory swim,
Holds hard in hand, that finger fast may thome*
Look what time past, made gallant fresh and fair,
Time present spoils, or will not well repair:
A fair and noble Castle belonging to the ancient house and race of the
honorable, the Lord of Aborgaynie
As in this Town, a stately Castle shoes,
Which lo to ruin, and wretched wrack it goes.
Most goodly Towers, are bare and naked laft,
That cou'red were, with timber and good lead:
These Towers y(...)and, as straight as does a shaft,
The walls whereo^, might serve to some good stead.
For sound and thick, and wondrous high withal,
They are in deed, and likely not to fall:
Would God therefore, the owner of the same,
Did stay them up, for to encreace his fame.
Who does delight, to see a goodly Plain,
Fair Rivers run, The bounty of the Castle and Country.
great woods and mountains hye:
Let him a while, in any Tower remain,
And he shall see, that may content the eye.
Great ruth to let, so trim a Seat go down,
The Countries strength, and beauty of the Town:
A Lordly place, a princely plot and view,
That laughs to scorn, our patched buildings new.
The shell of this, A goodly and stately piece of work as like to fall as be
repaired again.
I mean the walls without,
The worthy work, that is so finely wrought:
The Sellers deep, and buildings round about,
The firm Freestone, that was so derely bought,
Makes men lament, the loss of such a thing,
That was of late, a house for any King.
Yea who so ways, the worth of Castle yet,
With heavy mind, in muse and dump shall sit.
To see so strong, and stately work decay,
The same disease, has Oske in Castle wall:
Which on maine Rock, Any heart in the world would pity the decay of Castles
in Mo^mouth shiere.
was builded every way,
And now Got wot, is ready down to fall.
A number more, in Monmouth Shiere I find,
That can not well, abide a blast of wind:
The loss is theirs, that sees them overthrown,
The gain were ours, if yet they were our own.
Though Castle here, In this church was a most famous work in manner of a
genealogy of Kings, called the root of Iesse, which work is defaced and
pulled down in pieces.
through trackt of time is worn,
A Church remains, that worthy is of note:
Where worthy men, that has been nobly borne,
Were laid in Tomb, which else had been forgot.
And buried clean, in grave past mind of man,
As thousans are, forgot since world began:
Whose race was great, and who for want of Tome,
In dust does dwell, unknown till day of Dome.
In Church there lies a noble Knight,
Enclosde in wall right well:
On the right hand in a fair Chapel.
Crosselegged as it seems to sight,
(Or as record does tell)
He was of high and princely blood,
Both the window and in other parts about him shows that he was a stranger.
His Arms does show the same:
For thereby may be understood,
He was a man of fame.
A shield of black he bears on breast,
A white Crow plain thereon:
A ragged sleeue in top and crest,
Blewe is.
All wrought in goodly stone.
The labell whereon are nine Flowerdeluces.
And under feet, a Greyhound lies,
Three golden Lions gay,
Nine Flowerdeluces there likewise,
His Arms does full display.
On the left hand a Lord of Aborgany.
A Lord that once enioyde that Seat,
Lies there in sumptuous sort:
They say as lo his race was great,
So ancient men report.
His force was much: for he by strength
With Bull did struggle so,
He broke clean off his horns at length,
And therewith let him go.
This Lord a Bull has under feet,
And as it may be thought,
A Dragon under head does lie,
In stone full finely wrought.
The work and Tomb so ancient is,
(And of the oldest guyse)
My first bare view, full well may mis,
To show how well he lies.
A Tomb in deed, Sir William Thomas Knight (alias) Harbert.
of charge and show,
Amid the Chapel stands:
Where William Thomas Knight ye know,
Lies long with stretched hands.
A Harbert was he called of right,
Who from great kindred came,
And married to a worthy wight, Sir Dauie Gam Knight father to this Knights
wife.

Daughter to Dauie Gam,
(A Knight likewise, of right and name)
This Harbert and his Feere,
Lies there like one that purchased fame, This Knight was slain at Edgingcourt
field.

As plainly does appear.
His Tomb is rich, and rare to view,
Well wrought of great device:
Though it be old, His Tomb is of hard and good Allablaster.
Tombs made but new,
Are of no greater price.
His Arms three ramping Lions white,
Behind his head in shield:
A crowned Lion black is hers,
Set out in most rich field:
Behind her head is likewise there, Sir William Thomas was father to the next
that follows, called Sir Richard Harbert of Colbroke Knight.

Lo what our elders did,
To make those famous every where,
Whose virtues are not hid.
In Tomb as trim as that before,
Sir Richard Harbert lies:
He was at Banbrie field of yore,
And through the battle twice:
He past with Pollax in his hands,
A manly act in deed,
To preace among so many bands, In the Chronicle this is rehearsed.

As you of him may reed.
Th^^ valiant Knight, at Colbroke dwelt,
On the left hand of the Chapel they lie.
Nere Aborgaynie town:
Who when his fatal destnie felt,
And Fortune flong him down,
Among his enemies lost his head,
A rufull tale to tell:
Yet buried was as I have said,
In sumptuous Tomb full well.
She was daughter to Thomas ap Griffith father to Sir Rice ap Thomas Knight.
His wife Dame Margret by his side,
Lies there likewise for troth:
Their Arms as yet may be tried,
(In honor of them both)
Stands at their heads, three Lions white
He gives as well he might:
Three Ravens black, in shield she gives,
As Daughter to a Knight.
A sheafe of Arrows under head,
He has as due to him:
Thus there these worthy couple lie,
In Tomb full fine and trim.
On the right hand of the Chapel.
Now in another passing Tomb,
Of beauty and of charge,
There lies a Squire (that Harbert hight)
With cost set out at large.
Two Daughters and six Sons also,
Are there set nobly forth:
With other works that makes the show,
And Monument more worth.
Himself, his wife, and children to,
Lies shrouded in that Seat:
Now somewhat for that Squire I do,
Because his race was great.
The old Earl of Penbroke one of the privy Council.
He was the father of that Earl,
That dyed Lord Steward late,
A man of might, of spreet most rare,
And borne to happy fate.
His father laid so richly here,
So long ago withal,
Shows to the lookers on full clear,
(When this to mind they call)
This Squire was of an ancient race,
And borne of noble blood:
Since that he dyed in such a case,
And left such wordly good,
To make a Tomb so rich and brave:
Nay further now to say,
The three white Lions that he gave
In Arms, does race bewray:
And makes them blush and hold down browe,
That babble out of square.
Rest there and to my matter now:
Upon this Tomb there are
Three Lions and three white Bores heads:
The first three are his own.
The white Bores heads his wife she gave,
As well in Wales is known.
A Lion at his feet does lie,
At head a Dragon green:
More things who lists to search with eye,
On Tomb may well be seen.
Amid the Church, Lord Hastings lay,
Lord Aborgaynie than:
And since his death removed away, In the window now he lies.

By fine device of man:
And laid within a window right,
Full flat on stony wall:
Where now he does in open sight,
Remain to people all.
The window is well made and wrought,
A costly work to see:
In which his noble Arms are thought,
Of purpose there to be.
A ragged sleeue and six red Birds,
Is portrayed in the Glass:
His wife has there her left arm bare,
It seems her sleeue it was
That hangs about his neck full fine,
Right ore a Purple weed:
A robe of that same color too,
The Lady wears in deed.
Under his legs a Lion red,
His Arms are rare and rich:
A Harrold that could show them well,
Can blase not many fitch.
Sire Lions white, the ground fair blew,
Three Flowerdeluces gold:
The ground of them is red of hew,
And goodly to behold.
But note a greater matter now,
Upon his Tomb in stone
Were foreteene Lords that knees did bow,
Some say this great Lord was called Bruce and not Hastings, but most do hold
opinion he was called Hastings.
Unto this Lord alone.
Of this rare work a porch is made,
The Barrons there remain
In good old stone, and ancient trade,
To show all ages plain.
What homage was to Hastings due,
What honor he did win:
What Arms he gave, and so to blaze
What Lord had Hastings bin.
Right ore against this window, lo
A Lady of Aborgaynie.
In stone a Lady lies:
And in her hands a Heart I troe,
She holds before your eyes:
And on her breast, a great fair shield,
In which she bears no more
But three great Flowerdeluces large:
And even lo, right ore
Her head another Lady lies
With Squirrell on her hand, A Lady of some noble house whose name I know not.

And at her feet, in stone likewise,
A couching Hound does stand:
They say her Squirrell lept away,
And toward it she run:
And as from fall she sought to stay
The little pretty Bun,
Right down from top of wall she fell,
And took her death thereby.
Thus what I heard, I do you tell,
And what is seen with eye.
A friend of mine who lately dyed,
That Doctor Lewis hight: Doctor Lewis lately Judge in the Amoraltie

Within that Church his Tomb I spyed,
Well wrought and fair to sight.
O Lord (quoth I) we all must dye,
No law, nor learnings lore:
No judgment deep, nor knowledge hye,
No riches less or more,
No office, place, nor calling great,
No worldly pomp at all,
Can keep us from the mortal threat
Of death, when God does call.
Since none of these good gifts on earth,
Have power to make us live:
And no good fortune from our birth,
No hour of breath can give.
Think not on life and pleasure here,
They pass like beams of Sun:
For naught from hence we carry clear,
When man his race has run,
An Introduction for Breaknoke Shiere.
IS body tyerd with travail, God forbid,
That weary bones, so soon should seek for rest:
Shall senses sleep, when head in house is his,
As though some charm, were crept in quiet breast.
And so bewitch, the wits with too much ease,
That duls good spreete, and blunts quick sharp device:
Which climes the Clouds, and wades through deepest Seas,
And goes before, and breaks the frozen Ice,
To clear the coast, and make the passage free
For trau'lers all, that will great secrets see.
When quick conceyt, by sloth is rock asleep,
And fresh device, goes faint for lack of use:
Along the limbs, does lazy humors creep,
And daily breeds, in body great abuse.
If metal fine, be not kept clean from rust,
The brightest blade, will sure some cancker take:
And when clear things, are staynd with dross and dust,
They must be skour'd by skill, for profits sake.
Wit is naught worth, in idle brain to rest,
Nor gold does good, that still lies locked in chest.
The soft Down bed, and Chamber warmed with fire,
Or thick furd gown, is all that sluggard seckes:
But men of spreete, whose hearts do still aspire,
Do labor long, with lean and lentten cheeks,
To try the world, and taste both sweet and sower:
Who much does see, may much both speak and write:
Who little knows, has little wit or power
To win the wise, or dwell in worlds delight.
Fear not to toil, for he that sowes in pain,
Shall reap with joy, for store good Corn again.
In reachlesse youth, whiles fancy flewe with wind,
Feet could not stay, the body moved so fast:
For every part, thereof did answer mind,
Till aged years, said wanton days were past.
If that be true, sound judgment should be fraught
With grauer thoughts, and greater things of weight:
Since sober sense, at lightness now has laughed,
Thy reason should, set crooked matters straight:
And newly frame, a form of fine device,
That virtue may, bring knowledge most in price.
To treat of time, and make discourse of men,
And how the world, does chop and change estate,
Does well become, an ancient writers pen:
If skill will serve, such secrets to debate.
If no, hold on the course thou have begun,
To talk of Towns, and Castles as they are:
And look thou do, no toil nor travail shun,
To set forth things, that be both strange and rare.
If age do droope, and can abide no toil,
When thou come home, yet set out some sweet Soil.
Though joints wax stiff, and body heavy grows,
And back bends down, to earth where corpse must lie:
And legs be lame, and gowte creepes in the toes,
Cold crampe, and cough, makes groaning goast to cry.
When fits are past, if any rest be found,
Plye pen again, for that shall purchase praise:
Yea though thou can, not ride so great a ground,
As all ore Wales, in thine old aged days:
Forget no place, nor Soil where thou have bin,
With Breaknocke Shiere, than now this book begin.
Show what thine eyes, are witness of for troth,
And leave the rest, to them that after lives:
When man is called, away to grave he goes,
Death steals the life, that God and nature gives.
Thou have no state, nor pattent here on earth,
But borrowed breath, the body bears about:
Death daily wayts, on life from hour of birth,
And when he lists, he blows thy candle out.
Then leave some work, in world before thou pass,
That friends may say, lo here a writer was.
My Muse thus said, and so she shranke aside,
As though some Spreet, a space had spoke to me:
With that I had, a friend of mine espyde,
That stood far of, behind a Laurel tree.
For whom I called, and told him in his ear
My Muses tale: but therewithal his eyes
Bedeaw'd his cheeks, with many a bitter tear,
For sorrow great, that from his heart did rise.
Oh friend (quoth he) thy race I see so short,
Thou can not live, to make of Wales report.
For first behold, how age and thy mishap,
Agreed in one, to tread thee under foot:
Thou wast long since, flong out of Fortunes lap,
When youths gay blowmes, forsook both branch and root.
And left weak age, as bare as barraine stock*
That neither fruit, nor leaves will grow upon:
Can feeble bones, abide the sturdie shocke
Of Fortunes force, when youthful strength is gone:
And if good chance, in youth has fled from thee,
Be sure in age, thou can not happy be.
It Is hap that must, maintain thy cost and charge,
By some such mean, as great good turns are got:
Else walk or ride, abroad the world at large,
And yet great mind, but makes old age to dote.
Thy travail past, shows what may after fall,
Long iourneys breeds, disease and sickness often:
Thou have not health, nor wished wealth at call,
That glads the heart, and makes men look aloft.
No sorer snib, nor nothing nips so near,
As feel much want, yet show a merry cheer.
My newfound friend, no sooner this had said,
(Which trial knows, both true and words of weight)
But that my mind, from travail long was stayed,
Save that I took, in hand a journey straight,
To Breakenoke Town, whose Seat once thoroughly pend,
(With some such notes, as season serves therefore)
There all the rest, of toil should make an end,
Since aged limbs, might travail Wales no more.
Right sorry sure, I can no further go,
Content perforce, since hap will have it so.
Some men begin, to build a goodly Seat,
And frames a work, of Timber big and large:
Yet long before, the workmanship be great,
Another comes, and takes that plot in charge.
Men may not do, no more then God permits,
The mind it thinks, great things to bring to pass:
But common course, so soon orecomes the wits,
In pieces lies, man's state like broken glass.
We purpose much, but little power we find,
With good success, to answer mighty mind.
Well, that discourse, let go as matter past,
To Breakenoke now, my pen and muse are pressed:
And since that Soil, and town shall be the last,
That here I mean, to touch of all the rest,
In briefest sort, it shall be written out:
Yet with such words, as caries credit still,
As other works, in world can breed no dout:
So this small piece, shall show my great good will,
That for farewell, to worthy Wales I make,
That follows here, before my leave I take.
O Happy princely Soil, my pen is far to bace,
My muse but serves in sted of foil, to give a Jewel grace*
My bare invention cold, and barraine verses vain,
When they thy glory should unfold, they do thy Country stain.
Thy worth some worthy may, set out in golden lines,
And blaze ye same, with colors gay, whose glistring beauty shines.
My boldness was to great, to take the charge in hand,
With wasted wits the brains to beat, to write on such a Land:
Whose people may compare, in highest degree of praise,
With any now alive that are, or were in elders days.
Thy Towns and Castles fair, so bravely stands in deed,
They should their honor much apayre, if they my verses need.
A writers rural rhyme, does hinder thy good name:
For verse but entertaines the time, with toys yt fancies frame*
With Tullies sugared tongue, or Virgils sharp engine,
Thy rare renown should still be rong, or sung in verse divine.
A simple Poets pen, but blots white paper still,
And blurres the brute and praise of men, for want of cunning quill.
If Ouids skill I had, or could like Homer write,
Or Dant would make my muses glad, to please ye worlds delight.
Or Chawser lent me in these days, some of his learned tales,
As Petrarke did his Lawra praise, so would I speak of Wales.
But all to late I crave, for knowledge wit and sense:
For look what gifts yt Gods the^ gave, they took the^ al from hence,
And left us naught but books, to stare and pore upon,
On which perchance blind bayard looks, when skill and sight is go^.
Our former age did floe, with grace and learned lore,
Then far behind they come I troe, that strive to run before.
We must go lagging on, as legs and limbs were lame,
And though long since ye gole was gone, and wit has won ye game.
We shall have room to play, and time and place withal,
To look, to read, to write and say, what shall in fancy fall.
But woe is me the while, that ouerweenes in want,
When world may at my boldness smile, to see my skill so scant.
Yet write in Countries praise, that I cannot set out,
And stands discouraged many ways, to travail Wales about.
Yet take now well in worth, the works I have begun,
I can no further thing set forth, my days are almost dun:
As candle clear does burn, to socket in small time,
So age to earth must needs return, when youth has past his pryme.
Now Breakenoke shiere, as falls to thy lot,
In place a peer, thou art not sure forgot:
Nor written of so much as I desire:
For sickness long, made body for to retire
Unto the Town where it was borne and bred,
And where perhaps, on turffe must lie my head.
When labors all, shall reap a geaue for rest,
And silent death, shall quiet troubled breast:
Then as I now, have somewhat said on thee,
So shall some friend, have time to write on me.
Whose restless muse, and weary waking mind,
To pleasure world, did often great leisure find:
And who reioyst, and took a great delight,
For knowledge sake, to study read and write.
The Town and Church of Breakenoke.
THE Town is built, as in a pit it were,
By water side, all lapt about with hille
You may behold a ruinous Castle there,
Somewhat defaste, the walls yet stands still.
Small narrow streates, Maistre Gams dwelles here.
through all the Town ye have,
Yet in the same, are sondrie houses brave:
Doctor Awberie has a house here.
Well built without, yea trim and fair within,
With sweet prospect, that shall your favor win.
The River Oske, and Hondie runs thereby,
Four Bridges good, of stone stands ore each stream:
The greatest Bridge, does to the College lie,
A free house once, where many a rotten beam
Has been of late, through age and trackt of time:
Which Bishop now, refourmes with stone and lyme.
Had it not been, with charge repayrd in haste,
That house and Seat, had surely gone to waste.
Two Churches does, belong unto this Town,
One stands on hill, where once a Priorie was:
Which chaung'd the name, when Abbyes were put down,
But now the same, for Parrish Church does pass.
Another place, for Morning prayer is,
Made long ago, that stands hard by this.
Built in this Church, a Tomb or two I find,
That worthy is, in brief to bring to mind.
The ancient house of Gams.
Three couple lies, one ore the others head,
Along in Tomb, and all one race and live:
And to be plain, two couple lies dead,
The third likewise, as destnie shall assyne,
Shall lie on top, right ore the other twain:
Their pictures now, all ready there remain,
In sign when God appoynts the term and date,
All flesh and blood must yield to mortal fate.
These are in deed, the ancient race of Gams,
A house and blood, that long rich Arms does give:
And now in Wales, are many of their names,
That keeps great train, and does full bravely live.
The eldest Son, and chiefest of that race,
Does bear in Arms, a ramping Lion crowned,
And three Spear heads, and three red Cocks in place.
A Dragons head, all green therein is found:
And in his mouth, a red and bloody hand,
All this and more, upon the Tomb does stand.
Three fair boys heads, The Arms of the Gams.
and every one of those
A Serpent has close lapt about his neck:
A great white Bucke, and as you may suppose,
Right ore the same, (which does it trimly decke^)
A crown there is, that makes a goodly shoe,
A Lion black, and three Bulls heads I troe:
Three Flowerdeluce, all fresh and white they were,
Two Swords, two Crowns, with fair long cross is there.
Three Bats, whose wings were spreaded all at large,
And three white bars were in these Arms likewise:
Let Harrolds now, to whom belongs that charge,
Describe these things, for me this may suffice.
Yet further now, I forced am to go,
Of several men, some other Arms to shoe.
Within that Church, there lies beneath the Quere,
These persons two, whose names now shall ye hear.
In Tomb of stone, The Arms of one Waters.
full fair and finely wrought,
One Waters lies, with wife fast by his side:
Of some great stock, these couple may be thought,
As by their Arms, an Tomb may well be tried.
Full at his feet, a goodly Greyhound lies,
And at his head there is before your eyes
Three Libbarts heads, three cups, two Eagles splayd,
A fair red Cross: and further to be said,
A Lion black, a Serpent fircely made,
With tail wound up: these Arms thus ends so*
Cross legged by him, His name was Reynold Debreos.
as was the ancient trade,
Debreos lies, in picture as I troe,
Of most hard wood: which wood as diverse say
No worm can eat, nor time can wear away:
A couching Hound, as Harrolds thought full meet,
In wood likewise, lies underneath his feet.
Just by the same, Meredith Thomas lies,
Who had great grace, great wit and worship both,
And world him thought, both happy blessed and wise,
A man that loved, good Justice faith and troth.
Right ore this Tomb, of stone, to his great fame,
Good store in deed of Latin verses are,
And every verse, set forth in such good frame,
That truly does his life and death declare.
This man was likt, for many graces good
That he possessed, besides his birth and blood.
Somewhat of some Rivers and Waters.
Glasseberies Bridge is within two mile of Portthamwel.
OF other things, as far as knowledge goes,
Now must I write, to furnish forth this book:
Some Shieres do part at Waters, trial shows
There, who so list upon the same to look.
Dulace does run, along unto the Hay.
So Hartford shiere, from Breakenoke parts there.
Master Robert Knowles that married one of the heirs of the Vaughhans has a
fair house and a Park at Portthamwell.
Brennick Deelyes, Thlauenny as they say
At Tawllgath meets, so into Wye they bear:
From Arthurs Hill, Tytarell runs apace,
And into Oske and Breakenoke runs his race.
Nere Breakenoke Town, there is a Mountain hye,
Which shows so huge, it is full hard to clime:
The Mountain seems so monstrous to the eye,
Yet thousands do repair to that sometime.
And they that stand, right on the top shall see
A wonder great, as people do report:
Which common brute, and saying true may be,
But since in deed, I did not there resort,
I write no more, then world will witness well:
Let them that please, of those strange wonders tell.
What is set down, I have it surely seen,
As one that toyld and trauayld for the troth:
I will not say, such things are as I ween,
And frame a verse, as common voices goes.
Nor yet to please the humors of some men,
I list not stretch, nor rack my terms awry:
My muse will not so far abuse the pen.
That writer shall gain any blot thereby:
So he have thank in using idle quill,
He seeks no more for pains and great good will.
Ludloe Town, Church and Castle.
THE Town does stand most part upon an Hill,
Built well and fair, The names of streates there. Castle streate. Broad
streate. Old streate. And the Mill streate. A fair house by the gate of the
making of Justice Walter.
with streates both large and wide:
The houses such, where strangers lodge at will.
As long as there the Council lists abide,
Both fine and clean the streates are all throughout,
With Condits clear, and wholesome water springs:
And who that lists to walk the Town about,
Shall find therein some rare and pleasant things:
But chiefly there the air so sweet you have,
As in no place ye can no better crave.
The Market house, where Corn and Cates are sold,
Is covered ore, and kept in finest sort:
Nere this is a fair house of Master Sackfords which he lid buyld, and a
fair house that Master Secretary Fox did bestow great charges on, and a
house that Master Berrie dwelles in. M. Townesend has a fair house at Saint
Austins once a Frierie. The Lord President Sir Harrie Sidneys Daughter, called
Ambrosia, is entombed here in most brauest manner and great chargeable
workmanship on the right hand of the Altar. On the same is my Lord of Warwicks
Arms excelle^tly wrought, and my Lord Presidents Arms and others, are in like
sort there richly set out.
From which ye shall, the Castle well behold,
And to which walk, do many men resort.
On every side thereof fair houses are,
That makes a show, to please both mind and eye:
The Church nere that, where monuments full rare
There is, (wherein does sondrie people lie)
My pen shall touch, because the notes I find
Therein, deserve to be well borne in mind.
Within the Quere, there is a Lady laid
In Tomb most rich, the top of fair Touchstone:
There was bestowed in honor of this maid,
Great cost and charge, the truth may well be known.
For as the Tomb, is built in sumptuous guise,
So to the same, a closet fair is wrought,
Where Lords may sit in stately solemn wise,
As though it were a fine device of thought,
To beautify both Tomb and every part
Of that fair work, that there is made by art.
Against that Tomb, full on the other side,
A Knight does lie, that Justice Townesend hight:
His wife likewise, so soon as that she dyed,
In this rich Tomb, was buried by this Knight:
And truth to tell, Dame Alice was her name,
An Heir in deed, that brought both wealth and land,
And as world says, a worthy virtuous Dame,
Whose ancient Arms, in colors there does stand:
And many more, whose Arms I do not know,
Unto this Knight, are joined all a roe.
Amid the Church, a Chantrie Chapel stands,
Where Hozier lies, a man that did much good:
Bestowed great wealth, and gave thereto some lands,
And helped poor souls that in necessity stood.
As many men, Sir Robert Townes-end Knight lies in a maruelos fair Tomb in
the Queere here, and his wife by him, at his feet is a red Rowbuck* and a word
tout en dieu. On the left hand Hozier lies in the body of the Church. On the
right hand Cooks lies. This man was my mothers father. Beawpy was a great
rich and verteous man* he made another Chantrie.
are bent to win good will
By some good turn, that they may freely show:
So Hoziers hands, and head were working still:
For those he did, in det or danger know.
He smyld to see, a beggar at his door:
For all his joy, was to relieve the poor.
Another man, whose name was Cooks for troth,
Like Hozier was, in all good gifts of grace:
This Cooks did give, great lands and livings both,
For to maintain, a Chauntrie in that place.
A yearly dole, and monthly alms likewise
He ordaynd there, which now the poor do mis:
His wife and he, within that Chapel lies,
Where yet full plain, the Chauntrie standing is:
Some other things, of note there may you see
Within that Church, not touched now by me.
Yet Beawpy must, be named good reason why,
For he bestowed, great charge before he did,
To help poor men, and now his bones does lie
Full nere the Font, upon the foremost side.
Thus in those days, the poor was looked unto,
The rich was glad, to fling great wealth away:
So that their alms, the poor some good might do.
In poor men's box, who does his treasure lay,
Shall find again, ten fold for one he leaves:
Or else my hope, and knowledge me deceiues.
THE Castle now, The Castle of Ludloe.
I mind here to set out,
It stands right well, and pleasant to the vewe,
With sweet prospect, yea all the field about.
An ancient Seat, Sir Harry Sidney built many things here worthy praise and
memory.
yet many buildings new
Lord Presdent made, to give it greater fame:
But if I must, discourse of things as true,
There are great works, that now does bear no name,
Which were of old, and yet may pleasure you
To see the same: for lo in elders days
Was much bestowed, that now is much to praise.
Prince Arthurs Arms, is there well wrought in stone,
Over a Chimney excellently wrought in the best chamber, is S. Androwes Cross
joined to Prince Arthurs Arms in the hall window.
(A worthy work, that few or none may mend)
This work not such, that it may pass alone:
For as the time, did always people send
To world, that might exceed in wit and spreete:
So sondrie sorts of works are in that Seat,
That for so hye a stately place is meet:
Which shows this day, the workmanship is great.
Look on my Lords, and speak your fancies throw,
And you will praise, fair Ludloe Castle now.
In it besides, (the works are here unnamed)
A Chapel is, most trim and costly sure,
So bravely wrought, so fair and finely framed,
That to worlds end, the beauty may endure.
About the same, are Arms in colors sitch,
As few can show, in any Soil or place:
A great device, a work most rare and rich:
Which truly shows, the Arms, the blood and race
Of sondrie Kings, but chiefly Noble men,
That here in prose, I will set out with pen.
All that follows are Arms of Princes and Noblemen.
Sir Walter Lacie was first owner of Ludloe Castle, whose Arms are there, and
so follows the rest by order as you may read.

Ieffrey Genyuile, did match with Lacie. Roger Mortymer the first Earl of
Martchy an Earl of a great house matched with Genyuile. Leonell Duke of
Clarence joined with Ulster in Arms. Edmond Earl of Marchy matched with
Clarence. Richard Earl of Cambridge matched with the Earl of Marchy. Richard
Duke of York matched with Westmerland. Edward the fourth matched with Woduile of
Rivers. Henry the seventh matched with Elizabeth right heir of England. Henry
the eight matched with the Marquese of Penbroke.
These are the greatest first to be named that are there set out worthily as
they were of dignity and birth.

Now follows the rest of those that were Lord Presidents, and others whose
Arms are in the same Chapel.

William Smith Bishop of Lincoln was the first Lord President of Wales in
Prince Arthurs days. Ieffrey Blythe Bishop of Couentrie and Litchfield Lord
President. Rowland Lee Bishop of Couentrie and Litchfield Lord President.
Ihou Uessie Bishop of Exeter Lord President. Richard Sampson Bishop of
Couentrie and Litchfield Lord President. John Duldley Earl of Warwick (after
Duke of Northumberland) Lord President. Sir William Harbert (after Earl of
Penbroke) Lord President. Nicholas Heath Bishop of Worcester Lord President.
Sir William Harbert once again Lord President. Gilbert Brown Bishop of Bathe
and Wells Lord President. Lord Williams of Tame Lord President. Sir Harry
Sidney Lord President. Sir Andrew Corbret Knight, Uicepresident.
There are two blancks left without Arms.

Sir Thomas Dynam Knight, is mentioned there to do some great good act. John
Scory Bishop of Hartford. Nicholas Bullingham, Bishop of Worcester. Nicholas
Robinson, Bishop of Bangore. Richard Dauies, Bishop of Saint Dauies. Thomas
Dauies, Bishop of Saint Assaph. Sir James Crofts Knight, Controller. Sir John
Throgmorton Knight, Justice of Chester and the three Shieres of Eastwales. Sir
Hugh Cholmley Knight. Sir Nicholas Arnold Knight. Sir George Bromley Knight,
and Justice of the three shieres in Wales. William Gerrard, Lord Chauncellor of
Ireland, and Justice of the three Shieres in Southwales. Charles Fox Esquier
and Secretorie. Ellice Price Doctor of the Law. Edward Leighton Esquier.
Richard Seborne Esquier. Richard Pates Esquier. Rafe Barton Esquier. George
Phetyplace Esquier. William Leighton Esquier. Miles Sands Esquier.
The Arms of al these before spoken of are gallantly and cunningly set out in
the Chapel. The great water called Tea^, comes 17. mile from a place called
the Whitehall near unto Begyldie in the County of Radnor.


Now is to be rehearsed, that Sir Harry Sidney being Lord President, buylt
twelve roumes in the said Castle, which goodly buildings does show a great
beauty to the same.

He made also a goodly Wardrope underneath the new Parlor, and repaired an old
Tower, called Mortymers Tower, to keep the ancient Records in the same: and
he repaired a fair room under the Court house, to the same intent and
purpose, and made a great wall about the woodyard, The Forest of Brenwood is
west from the town. The Chase of Mocktrie and O^kley Parkes sta^ds not far
from thence.
and built a most brave Condit within the inner Court: and all the new
buildings over the Gate Sir Harry Sidney (in his days and government there)
made and set out to the honor of the Queen, and glory of the Castle.

There are in a goodly or stately place set out my Lord Earl of Warwicks
Arms, the Earl of Darbie, the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of Penbroke, and
Sir Harry Sidneys Arms in like manner: al these stand on the left hand of the
Chamber. On the other side are the Arms of Northwales and Southwales, two red
Lions and two golden Lions, Prince Arthurs.

A device of the Lord Presidents.
At the end of the dyning Chamber, there is a pretty device how the Hedgehog
brake the chain, and came from Ireland to Ludloe.

There is in the Hall a great grate of Iron of a huge height: so much is
written only of the Castle.

The Town of Ludloe, and many good gifts granted to the same.
He gave great possessions, large liberties, and did incorporate them with many
goodly freedoms.
KIng Edward fourth, for service truly done,
When Henry sixth, and he had mortal war:
No sooner he, by force the victory wone,
But with great things, the Town he did prefarre.
Gave lands thereto, and liberty full large,
Which royal gifts, his bounty did declare,
And daily does, mainteyne the Towns great charge:
Whose people now, in as great freedom are,
As any men, under this rule and Crown,
That lives and dwells, That Town has bin well governed a long while with two
Bayliefes, twelve Aldermen, and five and thirty Commoners, a Recorder and a
Townclarke assistant to the said Bayliefes by judicial course of law weekly,
in as large and ample manner for their trial between party and party, as any
City or Borrowe of England has.
in City or in Town.
Two Bayliefes rules, one year the Town throughout,
Twelve Aldermen, they have there in likewise:
Who does bear sway, as turn does come about,
Who chosen are, by oath and ancient guise.
Good laws they have, and open place to plead,
In ample sort, for right and Justice sake:
A Preacher too, that daily there does read,
A Schoolmaster, that does good scholars make.
And for the Queere, are boys brought up to sing,
And so serve God, and do none other thing.
Three times a day, in Church good Saruice is,
At six a clock, at nine, and then at three:
In which due hours, a stranger shall not mis,
But sondrie sorts, of people there to see.
And thirty three, poor persons they maintain,
Who weekly have, both money, alms and aid:
Their lodging free, and further to be plain,
Still once a week, The poor have sweet lodgings each one a part to
himself. An Hospital called S. Jones. A Guyld that King Edward (by Letters
Pattents) gave to the Bayliefs and Burgesses of the town. The Alderme^ are
Justices of the Peace for the time being
the poor are truly paid:
Which shows great grace, and goodness in that Seat,
Where rich does see, the poor shall want no meat.
An Hospital, there has been long of old,
And many things, pertaining to the same:
A goodly Guyld, the Township did uphold,
By Edwards gift, a King of worthy fame.
This Town does choose, two Burgesses always
For Parliament, the custom still is so:
Two Fayres a year, they have on several days,
Three Markets kept, but monday chief I troe:
And two great Parkes, there are full near the Town,
But those of right, pertain unto the Crown.
These things rehearst, makes Ludloe honored mitch,
And world to think, it is an ancient Seat:
Where many men, both worthy wise and rich
Were borne and bred, and came to credit great.
Our ancient Kings, and Princes there did rest,
Where now full often, the Presdent dwells a space:
It stands for Wales, most apt, most fit and best,
And nearest to, at hand of any place:
Wherefore I thought, it good before I end,
Within this book, this matter should be pend.
The rest of Towns, that in Shropshiere you have,
I need not touch, they are so thoroughly known:
And further more, I know they cannot crave
To be of Wales, how ever brute be blown.
So wishing well, as duty does me bind,
To one and all, as far as power may go,
I knit up here, as one that does not mind
Of native Soil, no further now to show.
So cease my muse, let pen and paper pause,
Till thou art calde, to write of other cause.
An Introduction to remember Shropshiere.
HOw has thy muse so long been luld a sleep?
What deadly drink, has sense in slumber brought?
Does poison cold, through blood and bosom creep?
A device of the Author called Reasons threatening.
Or is of spite, some charm by witchcraft wrought,
That vital spreetes, has lost their feeling quite?
Or is the hand, so weak it cannot write?
Come idle man, and show some honest cause,
Why writers pen, makes now so great a pause.
Can Wales be nam'de, and Shropshiere be forgote,
The marshes must, make muster with the rest:
Shall Sallop say, their countreyman does dote,
To treat of things, and write what thinks him best.
No sure such fault, were dubble error plain,
If in thy pen, be any Poets vain,
Or gifts of grace, from Skies did drop on thee,
Than Shrewsebrie Town, thereof first cause must be.
Both borne and bred, The Author borne in Shrewseburie.
in that same Seat thou wast,
(Of race right good, or else Records do lie)
From whence to school, where ever Churchyard past.
To native Soil, he ought to have an eye,
Speak well of all, and write what world may prove,
Let nothing go, Shrewseburie the marshes of Wales.
beyond thy Countries love:
Wales once it was, and yet to mend thy tale,
Make Wales the Park, and plain Shropshiere the pale.
If pale be not, a special piece of Park,
Sit silent now, and neither write nor speak:
But leave out pale, and thou may miss the mark,
Thy muse would hit, or else thy shaft may break
Against a stone, Reasons threatening is done.
thou think to glance upon.
Now weigh these words, my chorlish check is gone,
More gentle speech, hereafter may I spend,
When that in verse, I see thy Country pend.
When Reasons threat, had rapt me on the pate,
(With privy blows, The privy blows that Reason gives.
that never draws no blood)
To study straight, with pen and ynke I gate,
And sadly there, bethought me what was good.
But ere the lock, and door was bolted fast,
Ten thousand toys, in head through fancy past,
And twenty more, conceyts came rouling on,
That were too long, to talk and treat upon.
Wherefore in brief, I settled pen to work,
For fear of shame slothful men are well occupied.
For fear least world, found fault with slothful muse:
And calling up, the spreetes that close did lurk
In cloak of ease, that would good wits abuse.
I held on way, to ancient Shrewsebrie Town,
And so from horse, at lodging lighting down,
I walked the streates, and marked what came to vewe,
Found old things dead, as world were made a new.
New buildings makes old device blush.
For buildings gay, and gallant finely wrought,
Had old device, through time supplanted clean:
Some houses bare, that seemed to be worth naught,
Were fat within, that outward looked lean:
Wit had won wealth, to stuff each empty place,
The cunning head, and laboring hand had grace
To gain and keep, and lay up still in store,
As man might say, the heart could wish no more.
A number sure, were rich become of late,
Labor reapes reward.
By worldly means, by hap or wisdoms art:
He had no praise, that did apayre his state,
And he most lawde, that played the wisest part.
To come by goods, well won with honest trade,
And warely look, there were no hauock made:
Such thriftie men, do dwell in Shrewsebrie now,
That all the Town, is full of Merchants throw.
Many well borne and rich in Shrewseburie. Diverse Alms houses in Shrewseburie,
and has bin there mainteyned in old time.
And sondrie borne, of right good race and blood,
Who freely lives, from bondage every way:
Whose rent and lands, whose wealth and worldly good,
(When other works, gives them free leave to play)
Most part are rich, or else right well to live,
And to the poor, the godly people give:
To preaching still, repayres both young and old,
Makes more thereof, then of rich pearl or gold.
Now come to points, Shrewseburie and Wales are like in courtesy.
and rules of civil men,
Good manner calde, that shows good nature still:
And so with Wales, ye may compare them then,
The meanest sort, I mean of slendrest skill.
For as some whelps, that are of gentle kind,
Exceedes curre dogs, Fair words and reverence is a common thing there.
that bears a doggish mind:
So these meek folk, that meets you in the street,
Will curchie make, or show an humble spreete.
This argues sure, Good nature and good manners shows good mynds.
they have in Wales bin bred,
Or well brought up, and taught where now they dwell:
If haughty heart, be spyde by lofty head,
And courteous folks, by looks are known full well:
Me thinks the myld, wins all goodwill away,
The sturdie stands, Stout behavior is rather abhorred then embraced.
like Stagge or Bucke at bay:
The tame white Dove, and Faulkon for delytes,
Are better far, then fifteen hundred Kytes.
My theme is Wales, Many of wales wealthy men in Shrewseburie.
and to that theme I go,
Perhaps some seed, of that same Soil is here:
Sown in such sort, that daily it does grow
In fairest form, to furnish forth this shiere.
Admit the same, the sequel graunts it well,
Pass that discourse, and give me leave to tell
How Shrewsebrie stands, and of the Castles seat,
The River large, and stony bridge so great.
The Town three parts, A deep device the foundation of Shrewseburie. The
Castle built in such a brave plot, that it could have espied a byrd flying in
every streate.
stands in a valley lo,
Three gates there are, through which you needs must pass,
As to the height, of Town the people go:
So Castle seems, as twere a looking glass,
To look through all, and hold them all in awe,
Treangle wise, the gates and Town does draw:
But Castle hill, spies out each streate so plain,
As though an eye, on them did still remain.
In midst of Town, four Parrish Churches are,
A matter to be marked.
Full nere and close, together note that right:
The vewe far of, is wondrous strange and rare,
For they do seem, a true love knot to sight:
A Knight lies crosselegged in S. Mary's, his name is Leyborne.
They stand on hill, as Nature wrought a Seat,
To place them four, in stately beauty great:
As men devout, to buyld these works took care,
So in these days, these Temples famous are.
Of the same of Churches.
First for the cause, whereon they so were made,
Then for their form, and fashion framed fine:
Next for the cost, the stones and ancient trade,
And chief of all, for man's intent divine.
Their placing thus, the plots whereon they stand,
The workmanship, with cunning Masons hand:
Their height and breadth, their length and thickness both,
Argues in deed, a wondrous work of troth.
Of the River of Seuarne.
Not far from them, does goodly Seuarne run,
An arm of Sea, a water large and deep:
Whose headstrong stream, the Fisher can not shun,
Except by bank, both bote and he does creep.
This River runs, to many a noble Town,
As Wyster one, and Bristowe of renown:
With more besides, which here I need not name,
The Card can show, both them and all their fame.
A notable River, called Seuarn, running under two fair bridges of stone.
About the walls, trim under goodly banks
Does Seuarne pass, and comes by Cotton hill:
Much praise they had, and purchased many thanks,
That at Stonebridge, made place for many a Mill.
About the Town, this water may be brought,
If that a way, were nere the Castle wrought:
So Castle should, stand like a peereles mount,
And Shrewsebrie Town, be had in great account.
Full from Welshbridge, There is a bridge called Welshbridge, which shows
Shrewseburie to be of Wales
along by meddowes green,
The River runs, most fair and fine to vewe:
Such fruitful ground, as this is seldom seen
In many parts, if that I hear be true.
Yet each man knows, that grass is in his pride,
And air is fresh, by every Rivers side:
But sure this plot, does far surpass the rest,
That by good lot, is not with graces blessed.
Who has desire, The Castle though old and ruynate stands most brave and
gallantly.
to vewe both hill and vale,
Walk up old wall, of Castle rude and bare,
And he shall see, such pleasure set to sale,
In kindly sort, as though some Merchants ware
Were set in shop, to please the passer by:
Or else by show, Master Prince his house sta^ds so trim and finely, that it
graceth all the Soil it is in.
beguyld the gazers eye:
For look but down, along the pleasant coast,
And he shall think, his labor is not lost.
One way appears, Stonebridge and Subbarbs there,
Which called is, the Abbey Forehed yet:
A long great streate, well builded large and fair,
In as good air, as may be wished with wit:
Where Abbey stands, and is such ring of Belles,
As is not found, from London unto Wells:
The Steeple yet, a gracious pardon finds,
To bide all blasts, all wethers storms and winds.
Another way, Here is the way to Meluerley, to Wattels Borrow where Ma.
Leighton dwelles, to Cawx Castle Lord Staffords, and to Master Williams house.
full ore Welshbridge there is,
An ancient streate, called Franckwell many a day:
To Ozestri, the people pass through this,
And unto Wales, it is the reddie way.
In Subbarbs to, is Castle Forehed both,
A streate well pau'd, two several ways that goes:
All this without, and all the Town within,
When Castle stood, to vewe has subject bin.
But now does hold, their freedom of the Prince,
Aldermen in Scarlet orderly in Shrewseburie, and two Bayliefes as richly set
out many Mayor of some great Cities.
And as is found, in Records true vnfaynd,
This trim shiere town, was buylt a great while since:
Whose privilege, by loyalty was gaynd.
Two Bayliefes there, does rule as course does fall,
In state like Mayor, and orders good withal:
Each officer due, that fits for stately place,
Each year they have, to yield the room more grace.
On sollemne days, in Scarlet gowns they go,
Good house they keep, as cause does serve therefore:
Great and costly banqueting in Christmas and at all Sessions and Sizes.
But Christmas feasts, compares with all I know
Save London sure, whose state is far much more.
That Cities charge, makes strangers blush to see,
So princely still, it is in each degree:
But though it bear, a Torch beyond the best,
This Lantern light, may shine among the rest.
A matter of traffic to be noted and considered of.
This Town with more, fit members for the head,
Makes London rich, yet reapes great gain from thence:
It gives good gold, for Clothes and marks of lead,
And for Welsh ware, exchaungeth English pence.
A fountain head, that many Condits serve,
London compared to the flowing Sea.
Keeps moist dry Springs, and does it self preserve:
The flowing Sea, to which all Rivers run,
May spare some shewres, to quench the heat of Sun.
So London must, like mother to the Realm,
The great must maintain the small.
To all her babes, give milk, give suck and pap:
Small Brooks swelles up, by force of mighty stream,
As little things, from greatest gaynes good hap.
If Shrewsebrie thrive, and last in this good luck,
It is not like, to lack of worldly mucke:
The trade is great, the Town and Seaee stands well,
Great health they have, in such sweet Soyles that dwell.
Thus far I go, to prove this Wales in deed,
Or else at least, the martches of the same:
But further speak, of Shiere it is no need,
Save Ludloe now, a Town of noble fame:
A goodly Seat, Ludloe is set out after.
where often the Council lies,
Where Monuments, are found in ancient guyse:
Where Kings and Queens, in pomp did long abide,
And where God pleased, that good Prince Arthur did.
This Town does front, on Wales as right as line,
So sondrie Towns, in Shropshiere do for troth:
As Ozestry, Ozestrie and Bishops Castle does front in Wales.
a pretty Town full fine,
Which may be loved, be likte and praised both.
It stands so trim, and is maintaynd so clean,
And peepled is, with folk that well do mean:
That it deserves, to be enrould and shrynd
In each good breast, and every manly mind.
The Market there, so far exceedes withal,
As no one Town, comes near it in some sort:
For look what may, be wished or had at call,
It is there found, as market men report.
For Poultrie, Of a notable market a meruclous matter.
Foul, of every kind somewhat,
No place can show, so much more cheap then that:
All kind of Cates, that Country can afford,
For money there, is bought with one bare word.
They hark not long, Poor folks makes few words in bargayning.
about the thing they sell,
For price is known, of each thing that is brought:
Poor folk God wot, in Town no longer dwell,
Then money had, perhaps a thing of naught:
So trudge they home, both barelegge and unshod,
With song in Welsh, or else in praising God:
O sweet content, O merry mind and mood,
With sweat of brows, thou love to get thy food.
The blessedness of plain people.
O plain good folk, that have no crafty brains,
O Conscience clear, thou know no cunning knacks:
O harmless hearts, where fear of God remains,
O simple Souls, as sweet as Uirgin wax.
O happy heads, and laboring bodies blessed,
O silly Doves, of holy Abraham's breast:
You sleep in peace, and rise in joy and bliss,
For Heaven hence, for you prepared is.
A rare report yet truly given of Wales.
Where shall we find, such dealing now adays?
Where is such cheer, so cheap and change of fare?
Ride North and South, and search all beaten ways,
From Barwick bounds, to Venice if you dare,
And find the like, that I in Wales have found,
And I shall be, your slave and bondsman bound.
If Wales be thus, as trial well shall prove,
Take Wales goodwill, and give them neighbors love.
You must read further before you find Ludloe described.
To Ludloe now, my muse must needs return,
A season short, no long discourse does crave:
Time rouleth on, I do but daylight burn,
And many things, in deed to do I have.
Look what great Town, does front on Wales this hour,
I mind to touch, God sparing life and power:
Not hyerd thereto, but hal'de by hearts desire
To give them praise, whose deeds do fame require.
Verte folium.
Of Shrewsebury Churches and the Monuments therein, The Authors forgetfulness
cleansed.
with a Bridge of stone two bowshot long, and a streate called Colam, being in
the Subbarbs, and a fair Bridge there in like manner: all this was forgotten in
the first copy.
I Had such haste, in hope to be but brief,
That Monuments, in Churches were forgot:
And somewhat more, behind the walls as chief,
Where Plays have bin, A pleasant and artificial piece of ground
which is most worthy note.
There is a ground, new made Theat or wise,
Both deep and hye, in goodly ancient guise:
Where well may sit, ten thousand men at ease,
And yet the one, the other not displease.
A space below, to bayt both Bull and Bear,
For Players too, great room and place at will.
And in the same, a Cock pit wondrous fear,
Besides where men, may wrestle in their fill.
A ground most apt, and they that sits above,
At once in vewe, all this may see for love:
At Astons Play, Master Aston was a good and godly Preacher.
who had beheld this then,
Might well have seen, there twenty thousand men.
Fair Seuarne stream, runs round about this ground,
Save that one side, is closde with Shrewsebrie wall:
And Seuarne banks, A Friery house stood by this ground called the Welsh
Friars. In Shrewseburie were three Friar houses.
whose beauty does abound,
In that same Soil, behold at will ye shall.
Who comes to mark, and note what may be seen,
Shall surely see, great pleasures on this green:
Who walks the banks, and thinks his pain not great,
Shall say the Town, is sure a princely Seat.
Without the walls, as Subbarbs builded be,
So do they stand, as arms and legs to Town:
Each one a streate, does answer in degree,
And by some part, comes Seuarne running down:
As though that stream, had mind to guard them all,
And as through bridge, this flood does daily fall,
So of Freestone, three Bridges big there are,
All stately built, a thing full strange and rare.
Then judge by this, and other things a heap,
They had deep skill, that first the founders were:
Good right they should, the fruit of labor reap,
Whose wit and wealth, did all the charges bear.
O fathers wise, and wits beyond the nicke,
That had the head, the spreetes and sense so quick:
O golden age, that car'de not what was spent,
So leaden days, did stand therewith content.
Gold were those years, that sparde such silver pence,
And brazen world, was that which hoorded all:
The leaden days, that we have sauerd since,
Bytes to the bones, and tastes worse then gall.
What new things now, with franknesse well begun,
Can stain those deeds, our fathers old have done:
Great Towns they buylt, great Churches reard likewise,
Which makes our fame, to fall and theirs to rise.
Look on the works, and wits of former age,
And our time shall, come dragging far behind:
If both times might, be plainly played on stage,
And old time past, be truly calde to mind,
For all our brave, fine glorious buyldings gay,
Time past would run, with all the fame away.
Ask Oxford that, and Cambridge if it please,
In this one point, shall you resolve at ease.
A brief discourse of ancient time.
In ancient time, our elders had desire,
To buyld their Towns, on steep and stately hill:
To show that as, their hearts did still aspyre,
So should their works, declare their worthy will.
And for that then, the world was full of strife,
And few men stood, assured of land or life:
Such quarrels rose, about great rule and state,
That no one Soil, was free from foul debate.
The occasion of buylding strong Holds.
For which sharp cause, that daily bred discord,
They made strong Holds, and Castles of defense:
And such as wear, the Kings the Prince and Lord
Of any place, would spare for no expense,
To see that safe, that they had hardly won:
For which sure point, were Forts and Towns begun:
And further lo, if people waxed wyld,
They brought in fear, by this both man an child.
And if men may, judge who had most ado,
Or guess by Forts, and Holds what Land was best:
Or look upon, Wales has a wonderful number of Castles.
our common quarrels to:
Or search what made, men seek for peace and rest,
Behold but Wales, and note the Castles there,
And you shall find, no such works any where:
So old so strong, so costly and so hye,
Not under Sun, is to be seen with eye.
And to be plain, so many Holds they have,
As sure it is, a world to mark them well:
Pause there a while, my muse must pardon crave,
Pen may not long, upon such matter dwell.
Now Denbigh comes, A description of Denbighshiere.
to be set forth in verse,
Which shall both Town, and Castle here rehearse:
So that the verse, such credit may attain,
As writer shall, not lose no piece of pain.
An Introduction to bring in Denbighshiere.
Has sloth and sleep, bewitched my senses so,
That head cannot, A conceyted toy to set a broach an earnest matter.
awake the idle hand:
Is friendly muse, become so great a foe,
That labring pen, in pennor still shall stand.
What trifeling toye, does trouble writers brain,
That earnest love, forgets sweet Poets vain?
Bid welcome mirth, and sad conceytes adue,
And fall again, to write some matter new.
Let old device, a Lantern be to this,
To give skill light, and make sound judgment see:
Since gazing eyes, has seen what each thing is,
And that no Town, nor Soil is hid from thee:
Set forth in verse, as well this Country here,
As thou at large, have set out Monmouthshiere:
Praise one alone, the rest will thee disdain,
A day may come, at length to quite thy pain.
Though former toils, be lost in Summer last,
Being Muster-maister of Kent more chargeable then well considered of there.
Despair not now, for Wales is thankful still:
Thou have gone far, the greatest brunt is past,
Then forward pass, and pluck not back goodwill,
Put hand to Plough, like man go through with all,
Thy ground is good, rim and thou can not fall:
When seed is sown, and time bestows some pain,
Thou shall be known, a reaper of good grain.
Hold on thy course, and travail Wales all ore,
And whet thy wits, to mark and note it well:
And thou shall see, thou never saw before,
Right goodly things, in deed that does excel:
More ancient Towns, more famous Castles old,
Then well far of, with ease thou may behold:
With Denbighshiere, thy second work begin,
And thou shall see, what glory thou shall win.
So I took horse, and mounted up in haste,
From Monmouthshiere, a long the coasts I ride:
When frost and snow, and wayward winters waste,
Chirke Castle a goodly and princely house yet.
Did beat from tree, both leaves and Summers pride.
I entered first, at Chirke, right ore a Brook,
Where staying still, on Country well to look.
A Castle fair, appeerde to sight of eye,
Whose walls were great, and towers both large and hye.
Full underneath, the same does Keeryock run,
A raging Brook, Keeryock a wondrous violent water.
when rain or snow is great:
It was some Prince, that first this house begun,
It shows far of, to be so brave a Seat.
On side of hill, Master John Edwards has a fair house nere this.
it stands most trim to vewe,
An old strong place, a Castle nothing new.
A goodly thing, a princely Palace yet,
If all within, were thoroughly furnished fit.
Beyond the same, there is a Bridge of stone,
That stands on Dee, New Bridge on the River Dee.
a River deep and swift:
It seems as it, would riue the Rocks alone,
Or undermine, with force the craggie Clift.
To Chester runs, this River all along,
With gushing stream, and roaring water strong:
On both the sides, are banks and hills good store,
And mighty stones, that makes the River rore.
It flows with wind, although no rain there be,
And swelles like Sea, A strange nature of a water
with waves and foming flood:
A wonder sure, to see this River Dee,
With wind alone, to wax so wyld and wood,
Make such a stir, There is a poole in Meryonethshiere of three mile long
rages so by storm that it makes this River flow.
as water would be mad,
And show such life, as though some spreete it had.
A cause there is, a nature for the same,
To bring this flood, in such strange case and frame.
Not far from this, there stands on little mount,
A right fair Church, with pillars large and wide:
A monument, Ruabon Church is a fair piece of work.
therein of good account,
Full finely wrought, amid the Queere I spyde,
A Tomb there is, right rich and stately made,
Where two does lie, in stone and ancient trade.
The man and wife, with sumptuous sollemne guyse,
In this rich sort, before the Altar lies.
His head on crest, and warlike Helmet stays,
This Gentleman was called John Bellis Eytton.
A Lion blew, on top thereof comes out:
On Lions neck, along his legs he lays,
Two Gauntlets white, are lying there about.
An ancient Squire, he was and of good race,
As by his Arms, appeeres in many a place:
His house and lands, not far from thence does shoe,
His birth and blood, was great right long ago.
The trimmest glass, that may in window be,
(Wherein the root, of Iesse well is wrought)
At Altar head, of Church now shall you see,
Yea all the glass, of Church was dearly bought.
Within two miles, there is a famous thing,
Offaes Dyke.
Cal'de Offaes Dyke, that reaches far in length:
All kind of ware, the Danes might thither bring,
It was free ground, and cal'de the Britains strength.
Wats Dyke likewise, about the same was set,
Wats Dyke.
Between which two, both Danes and Britains met,
And traffic still, but passing bounds by sleight,
The one did take, the other prisner straight.
Thus foes could meet, (as many times they may)
And do no harm, when profit meant they both:
Good rule and law, makes baddest things to stay,
That else by rage, to wretched revel goes.
The brutest beasts, that savage are of kind,
Together comes, as season is assyude:
The angryest men, that can no friendship bide,
Must ceace from war, when peace appalles their pride.
Now let this go, and call in haste to mind,
Trim Wricksam Town, Robert Howell lies there a Gentleman.
a pearl of Denbighshiere:
In whose fair Church, a Tomb of stone I find,
Under a wall, right hand on side of Queere.
On the other side, one Pilson lies in grave,
Whose hearse of black, says he a Tomb shall have:
In Queere lies Hope, by Arms of gentle race,
Of function once, a rector in that place.
But speak of Church, and steeple as I ought,
My pen to base, so fair a work to touch:
Within and out, they are so finely wrought,
I cannot praise, the workmanship too much.
But buylt of late, not eight score years ago,
Not of long time, the date thereof does shoe:
No common work, but sure a work most fine,
As though they had, bin wrought by power divine.
The steeple there, in form is full four square,
Yet every way, five pinnackles appear:
Trim Pictures fair, in stone on outside are,
Made all like wax, as stone were nothing dear.
The height so great, the breadth so big withal,
No piece thereof, is likely long to fall,
A work that stands, to stayne a number more,
In any age, that has bin buylt before.
A general Commendation of Gentilitie.
NEre Wricksam dwells, of Gentlemen good store,
Of calling such, as are right well to live:
By Market town, I have not seen no more,
(In such small room) that ancient Arms do give.
In Maylor, are all these Gentlemen.

Master Roger Pilsons house at It^hlay.

Master Almmer at Pantyokin.

Master John Pilson of Bersan.

Master Edward Jones of Cadoogan. Master James Eaton of Eatton.

Master Edward Eaton by Ruabon. Master Owen Brueton of Borras.

Master John Pilson of Haberdewerne. Master Thomas Powell of Horsley.

Master John Treuar of Treuohn. Agene all praise of all Gentlemen inhabiting
of any Country.


They are the joy, and gladness of the poor,
That daily feeds, the hungry at their door:
In any Soil, where Gentlemen are found,
Some house is kept, and bounty does abound.
They beautify, both Town and Country too,
And furnished are, to serve at need in feeld:
And every thing, in rule and order do,
And unto God, and man due honor yield.
They are the strength, and surety of the Land,
In whose true hearts, does trust and credit stand,
By whose wise heads, the neighbors ruled are,
In whom the Prince, reposeth greatest care.
They are the flowers, of every garden ground,
For where they want, there grows but wicked weeds:
Their tree and fruit, in rotten world is sownd,
Their noble mynds, will bring forth faithful deeds:
Their glory rests, in Countries wealth and fame,
They have respect, to blood and ancient name:
They weigh nothing, so much as loyal heart,
Which is most pure, and clean in every part.
They do uphold, all civil manners myld,
All manly acts, all wise and worthy ways:
If they were not, the Country would grow wyld,
And we should soon, forget our elders days:
Ware blunt of wit, in speech grow rude and rough,
Want virtue still, and have of vice enough.
Show feeble spreete, lack courage every where,
Dout many a thing, and our own shadows fear.
They dare attempt, for fame and hye renown,
To scale the Clouds, if men might clyme the air:
Assault the Stars, and pluck the Planets down,
Give charge on Moon, and Sun that shines so fair.
I mean they dare, attempt the greatest things,
Fly swiftly ore, high Hills if they had wings:
Beat back the Seas, and tear the Mountains too,
Yea what dare not, a man of courage do.
Now must I turn, to my discourse again,
I Wricksam leave, Holt Castle an excellent fine place, the River of Dee
running by it.
and pen out further place:
So if my muse, were now in pleasant vain,
Holt Castle should, from verse receive some grace:
The Seat is fine, and trimly buylt about,
With lodgings fair, and goodly roumes throughout,
Strong Uaults and Caves, Master Hues dwelles there.
and many an old device,
That in our days, are held of worthy price.
That place must pass, Master Euan Flud dwelles in Yale, in a fair house.
with praise and so adue,
My muse is bent, (and pen is ready pressed)
To feed your ears, with other matters new,
That yet remains, in head and laboring breast.
A Mountain town, that is Thlangothlan calde,
A pretty Seat, but not well buylt nor walde,
Stands in the way, Castle Dynosebraen on a wooddie hill on the one side, and
Green Castle on the other.
to Yale and Writhen both,
Where are great Hills, and Plains but few for troth.
Of Mountains now, in deed my muse must run,
The Poets there, did dwell as fables feign:
Because some say, they would be near the Sun,
And taste sometimes, the frost, the cold, and rain,
To judge of both, which is the chief and best.
Who knows no toil, A Bridge of stone very fair there stands over Dee.
can never skill of rest,
Who always walks, on carpet soft and gay,
Knows not hard Hills, nor likes the Mountain way.
A discourse of Mountains.
DAme Nature drew, Master Lakon. Ma. Thlude of Yale.
these Mountains in such sort,
As though the one, should yield the other grace:
Or as each Hill, it self were such a Fort,
They scornde to stoop, to give the Cannon place.
If all were plain, and smooth like garden ground,
Where should hye woods, and goodly groves be found:
The eyes delight, that looks on every coast,
With pleasures great, and fair prospect were lost.
On Hill we vewe, far of both feeld and flood,
Feel heat or cold, and so suck up sweet air:
Behold beneath, great wealth and worldly good,
See walled Towns, and look on Countries fair*
And who so sits, or stands on Mountain hye,
Has half a world, in compass of his eye:
A platform made, of Nature for the nonce,
Where man may look, on all the earth at once.
These ragged Rocks, brings playnest people forth,
On Mountain wyld, the hardest Horse is bred:
Though grass thereon, be gross and little worth,
Sweet is the food, where hunger so is fed.
On roots and herbs, our fathers long did feed,
And near the Sky, grows sweetest fruit in deed:
On marrish meares, and watrie mossie ground,
Are rotten weeds, and rubbish dross unsound.
The fogges and mists, that rise from vale below,
A reason makes, that highest Hills are best:
And when such fogges, does ore the Mountain go,
In foulest days, fair weather may be gest.
As bitter blasts, on Mountains big does blow,
So noisome smells, and savors breed below:
The Hill stands clear, and clean from filthy smell,
They find not so, that does in Ualley dwell.
The Mountain men, live longer many a year,
Then those in Uale, in plain or marrish soil:
A lusty heart, a clean complexion clear
They have on Hill, that for hard living toil.
With Ewe and Lamb, with Goats and Kids they play,
In greatest toils, to rub out weary day:
And when to house, and home good fellows draw,
The lads can laugh, at turning of a straw.
No air so pure, and wholesome as the Hill,
Both man and beast, delights to be thereon:
In heat or cold, it keeps one nature still,
Trim neat and dry, and gay to go upon.
A place most fit, for pastime and good sport,
To which wyld Stagge, and Bucke does still resort:
To cry of Hounds, the Mountain ecco yields,
A grace to Uale, a beauty to the feelds.
It stands for world, as though a watch it were,
A stately guard, to keep green meddowe myld:
The Poets feign, on shoulders it does hear
The Heavens hye, but there they are beguyld.
The maker first, of Mountain and of Uale,
Made Hill a wall, to clip about the Dale:
A strong defense, for needful fruit and Corn,
That else by blast, might quickly be forlorn.
If boystrous wynds, were not withstood by strength,
Repulst by force, and driven backward too,
They would destroy, our earthly joys at length,
And through their rage, they would much mischief do.
God saw what smart, and grief the earth would bide
By sturdie storms, and pearcing tempests pride:
So Mountains made, to save the lower soil,
For fear the earth, should suffer shameful spoil.
How could weak leaves, and blossoms hang on tree,
If boystring wynds, should branches daily beat:
How could poor souls, in Cottage quiet be,
If higher grounds, did not defend their seat.
Who buylds his bower, right under foot of hill,
Has little cold, and weather warm at will:
Thus prove I here, the Mountain frendeth all,
Stands stiff gaynst storms, like steel or brazen wall.
You may compare, a King to Mountain hye,
Whose princely power, can bide both bront and shocke
Of bitter blast, or Thunderbolt from Sky,
His Fortress stands, upon so firm a Rock.
A Prince helps all, and does so strongly sit,
That none can harm, by fraud, by force nor wit.
The weak must lean, where strength does most remain,
The Mountain great, commands the little Plain.
As Mountain is, a noble stately thing,
Thrust full of stones, and Rocks as hard as steel:
A peereles piece, comparde unto a King,
Who sits full fast, on top of Fortunes wheel:
So is the Dale, a place of subtle air,
A den of dross, often times more foul then fair:
A durtie Soil, where water long does bide,
Yet rich withal, it cannot be denyde.
But wealth mars wit, and wears out virtue clean,
An eating worm, a Cancker past recure:
A trebble loud, but not a merry mean,
That Music makes, but rather iarres procure:
A stirrer up, of strife and leaud debate,
The ground of war, that stayneth every state
With gifts and bribes, that greedy glutton feeds
And filles the gut, whereon great treason breeds.
Wealth fosters pride, and heaues up haughty heart,
Makes wit oreweene, and man believe to far:
Enfects the mind, with vice in every part,
That quickly sets, the senses all at war.
In Ualley rich, these mischiefs nourisht are,
God planted peace, on Mountain poor and bare:
By sweat of brows, the people lives on Hill,
Not sleight of brain, ne craft nor cunning skill.
Where dwells disdain, discord or dubble ways,
But where rich Cubs, and currish Karles are found?
Where is more love, who has more happy days,
Then those poor hynds, that digges and delues the ground.
Perhaps you say, so hard the Rocks may be,
Ne Corn nor grass, nor plough thereon you see:
Yet lo the Lord, such blessing there does give,
That sweet content, with Oten Cakes can live.
Sour Whey and Curds, can yield a sugared taste,
Where sweet Martchpane, as yet was never known*
When empty gorge, has bole of Milk embrast,
And Cheese and bread, has daily of his own,
He craves no feast, nor seeks no banquets fine,
He can digest, his dinner without wine:
So toils out life, and likes full well this trade,
Not fearing death, because his count is made.
Who sleeps so sound, as he that has no Sheep,
Nor heard of Beasts, to pastor and to feed?
Who fears the Woolfe, but he who Lambs does keep,
And many an hour, is forced to watch in deed.
Though gold be gay, and cordyall in his kind,
The loss of wealth, grypes long a greedy mind.
Poor Mountain folk, possess not such great store,
But when its gone, they care not much therefore.
Of Yale a little to be spoken of.
The names of the Rivers of Denbighshire. Keeriock parts Shropshere and
De^bighshere, before Chirk. Dee at new Bridge, and Thlangothlen.

Aleyn in the valley of Yale. Clanweddock in the fair vale of Dufrin Cloyd.

Cloyd receives Clanweddock and Elwye by Saint Ass. Istrade by Denbigh. Raihad
comes to the Vo^^ney.

Keynthleth comes into Rayhad.


THE Country Yale, has Hills and Mountains hye,
Small Ualleys there, save where the Brooks do ron:
So many Springs, that sield that soil is dry:
Good Tursfe and Peate, on mossie ground is won,
Wherewith good fires, is made for man most meet,
That burns clear, and yields a savor sweet
To those which have, no nose for dayntie smell,
The finer sort, were best in Court to dwell.
This Soil is cold, and subject unto wind,
Hard duskie Rocks, all covered ore full dim:
Where if wind blow, ye shall foul weather find,
And think you feel, the bitter blasts full brim.
But though cold bytes, the face and outward skin,
The stomach lo, is thereby warmed within.
For still more meat, the Mountain men digest,
Then in the plain, you find among the best.
Here is hard ways, as earth and Mountain yields,
Some softness too, as tract of foot has made:
But to the Dames, for walk no pleasant feelds,
Nor no great woods, to shroud them in the shade.
Yet Sheep and Goats, are plenty here in place,
And good welsh Nagges, that are of kindest race:
With goodly nowt, both fat and big with bone,
That on hard Rocks, and Mountain feeds alone.
Of Wrythen now, I treat as reason is,
But lisence crave, to talk on such a Seat:
Excuse my skill, where pen or muse does mis,
Where knowledge fayles, the cunning is not great.
But ere I write, a verse upon that Soil,
I will cry out, of Time that all does spoil:
As age wears youth, and youth gives age the place,
So Time wears world, and does old works disgrace.
A discourse of Time.
O Tract of Time, that all consumes to dust,
We hold thee not, for thou art bald behind:
The fairest Sword, or metal thou will rust,
And brightest things, bring quickly out of mind.
The trimmest Towers, and Castles great and gay,
In process long, at length thou do decay:
The brauest house, and princely buildings rare,
Thou wastes and wears, and leaves the walls but bare.
O Cancker vile, that creepes in hardest mold,
The Marble stone, or Flint thy force shall feel:
Thou have a power, to pearce and eat the gold,
Fling down the strong, and make the stout to reele.
O wasting worm, that eats sweet kernels all,
And makes the Nut, to dust and powder fall:
O glutton great, that feeds on each man's store,
And yet thy self, no better art therefore.
Time all consumes, and helps it self no whit,
As fire by flame, burns coals to sinders small:
Time steals in man, much like an Agew fit,
That wears the face, the flesh the skin and all.
O wretched rust, that wilt not scoured be,
O dreadful Time, the world is feared of thee:
Thou flingest flat, the highest Tree that grows,
And triumph makes, on pomp and painted shows.
But most of all, my muse does blame thee now,
For throwing down, a rare and goodly Seat:
By Wrythen Town, a noble Castle throw,
That in time past, had many a lodging great,
And Towers most fair, that long a buylding was,
Where now God wot, there grows nothing but grass:
The stones lie waste, the walls seems but a shell
Of little worth, where once a Prince might dwell.
Of Wrythen, both the Castle and the Town.
The Castle of Wrythen is yet outwardly a marvelous fair and large princely
place.
THis Castle stands, on Rock much like red Brick,
The Dykes are cut, with tool through stony Cragge:
The Towers are hye, the walls are large and thick,
The work it self, would shake a Subjects bag,
If he were bent, to buyld the like again:
It rests on mount, and looks ore wood and Plain:
It had great store, of Chambers finely wrought,
That time alone, to great decay has brought.
It shows within, by dubble walls and ways,
A deep device, did first erect the same:
It makes our world, to think on elders days,
Because the work, was formde in such a frame.
One tower or wall, the other answers right,
As though at call, each thing should please the sight:
The Rock wrought round, where every tower does stand,
Set forth full fine, by head by heart and hand.
There is a Poole here abouts that has in it a kind of fish that no other
water can show.
And fast hard by, runs Cloyd a River swift,
In winter time, that swelles and spreads the feeld:
That water sure, has such a secret gift,
And such rare Fish, in season due does yield,
As is most strange: let men of knowledge now
Of such hid cause, search out the nature throw:
A Poole there is, through which this Cloyd does pass,
Where is a Fish, that some a Whiting call:
Where never yet, no Sammon taken was,
Yet has good store, of other Fishes all
Above that Poole, and so beneath that flood
Are Sammons caught, and many a Fish full good:
But in the same, there will no Sammon be,
And near that Poole, you shall no Whiting see.
I have left out, A River called Aleyn, in the valley of Yale.
a River and a Uale,
And both of them, are fair and worthy note:
Who will them seek, shall find them still in Yale,
They bear such fame, they may not be forgot.
The River runs, a mile right under ground,
And where it springs, the issue does abound:
And into Dee, this water does dissend,
So loses name, and therein makes an end.
Good ground likewise, The valley of Yale.
this Ualley seems to be,
And many a man, of wealth is dwelling there:
On Mountain top, the Ualley shall you see
All over green, with goodly Meddowes fear.
This Ualley has, a noble neighbor near,
Wherein the Town, of Wrythen does appear:
Which Town stands well, and wants no pleasant air,
The noble Soil, and Country is so fair.
A Church there is, in Wrythen at this day,
Wherein Lord Gray, The Earl of Kent lies here.
that once was Earl of Kent,
In Tomb of stone, amid the Chauncell lay:
But since removed, as worldly matters went,
And in a wall, so laid as now he lies
Right hand of Queere, An Anckres in King Henry the fourths time buried here.
full plain before your eyes:
An Anckres too, that nere that wall did dwell,
With trim wrought work, in wall is buried well.
Now to the Uale, of worthy Dyffrin Cloyd,
My muse must pass, a Soil most rich and gay:
This noble Seat, that never none anoyd,
The pleasant vale of Diffrin Cloyd.
That saw the same, and rode or went that way:
The vewe thereof, so much contents the mind,
The air therein, so wholesome and so kind:
The beauty such, the breadth and length likewise,
Makes glad the heart, and pleases each man's eyes.
This Uale does reach, so far in vewe of man,
As he far of, may see the Seas in deed:
And who a while, for pleasure travail can
Throughout this Uale, and thereof take good heed,
He shall delight, to see a Soil so fine,
For ground and grass, a passing plot divine.
And if the troth, thereof a man may tell,
This Uale alone, does all the rest excel.
The Vale thoroughly described.
As it below, a wondrous beauty shows,
The Hills above, does grace it trebble fold:
On every side, as far as Ualley goes,
A border big, of Hills ye shall behold:
They keep the Uale, in such a quiet sort,
That birds and beasts, for succor there resort:
Yea flocks of foul, and herds of beasts sometime,
Draws there from storm, when tempests are in pryme.
Three Rivers run, amid the bottom here,
Three Rivers in this Vale.
Istrade, and Cloyd, Clanweddock (lo) the third:
The noise of streams, in Summer morning clear,
A natural secret touched.
The chirp and charm, and chaunt of every bird
That passes there, a second Heaven is:
No hellish sound, more like an earthly blis:
A Music sweet, that through our ears shall creep,
By secret art, and lull a man a sleep.
The Castle of Cargoorley in Denbighshiere,
CArgoorley comes, right now to pass my pen,
With ragged walls, Thomas Salesburie of Lleweni. Robert Salesburie of
Bachenbid. Foulk Lloyd of Houllan. Piers Holland of Kynmel. Piers Owen of
Abergele. Edward Theleall of Beren. William Wyn of Llamuaire. Elis Price of
Spitty. John Middleton.
yea all to rent and torn:
As though it had, bin never known to men,
Or careless left, as wretched thing forlorn:
Like beggar bare, as naked as my nail,
It lies along, whose wrack does none bewail.
But if she knew, to whom it does pertayne,
What royalties, and honors does remain
Unto that Seat, it should repaired be,
For further cause, then common people see.
But sondrie things, that are full far from sight,
Are out of mind, and clean forgot in fine:
So such as have, thereto but little right,
Possess the same, by leauell and by line,
Or else by hap, or suite as often falls:
But what of that, Cargoorleys rotten walls
Can never bring, his better in dispute,
That has perchance, bin got by hap or suit:
So rest good muse, and speak no further here,
Least by these words, some hidden thoughts appear.
Kings give and take, so time still rouleth on,
Good Subjects serve, for somewhat more or less:
And when we see, our fathers old are gone,
Of time to come, we have a greater guess.
First how to gain, by present time and state,
Then what may fall, by futer time and date:
Time past grows cold, and so the world lukewarm
Does help it self, by Castle, house or Farm:
That reach is good, that rule my friends God send,
Which well begin, and makes a virtuous end.
ODenbigh now, appear thy turn is next,
I need no gloss, nor shade to set thee out:
For if my pen, do follow playnest text,
And pass next way, and go nothing about,
Thou shall be known, as worthy well thou art,
The noblest Soil, that is in any part:
And for thy Seat, and Castle do compare,
With any one, of Wales what ere they are.
This Castle stands, on top of Rock most hye,
The strongest Castle and seat that ever man beheld.
A mighty Cragge, as hard as flint or steel:
A massy mount, whose stones so deep does lie,
That no device, may well the bottom feel.
The Rock discends, beneath the ancient Town,
About the which, a stately wall goes down,
With buyldings great, and posternes to the same,
That goes through Rock, to give it greater fame.
I want good words, and reasons apt therefore,
It self shall show, the substance of my tale:
But yet my pen, must tell here somewhat more,
Of Castles praise, as I have spoke of Uale.
Mark well the situation and buylding of the same.
A strength of state, ten times as strong as fair,
Yet fair and fine, with dubble walls full thick,
Like tarres trim, to take the open air,
Made of Freestone, and not of burned Brick:
No buylding there, but such as man might say,
The work thereof, would last till Judgment day.
The Seat so sure, not subject to a Hill,
Nor yet to Mine, nor force of Cannon blast:
Within that house, may people walk at will,
And stand full safe, till danger all be past.
If Cannon rorde, or barkt against the wall,
Friends there may say, a fig for enemies all:
Five men within, may keep out numbers great,
(In furious sort) that shall approach that Seat.
Who stands on Rock, and looks right down alone,
Shall think below, a man is but a child:
I sought my self, from top to fling a stone
With full main force, A practice by the Author proved.
and yet I was beguyid.
If such a height, the mighty Rock be than,
Ne force nor slight, nor stout attempt of man,
Can win the Fort, if house be furnished throw,
The troth whereof, let world be witness now.
It is great pain, from foot of Rock to clyme
To Castle wall, and it is greater toil
On Rock to go, yea any step sometime
Uprightly yet, without a faule or foil.
And as this Seat, and Castle strongly stands,
Past winning sure, with engine sword or hands:
So looks it ore, the Country far or near,
And shines like Torch, and Lantern of the Sheere.
Wherefore Denbigh, A great glory given to Denbigh.
thou bearst away the praise,
Denbigh has got, the garland of our days:
Denbigh reapes fame, and lawde a thousand ways,
Denbigh my pen, unto the Clouds shall raise.
The Castle there, could I in order draw,
It should surmount, now all that ere I saw.
Of Valey Crucis Thlangothlan, and the Castle Dynosebrane.
THE great desire, to see Denbigh at full,
Did draw my muse, from other matter true:
But as that sight, my mind away did pull
From former things, I should present to you.
So duty bids, a writer to be plain,
And things left out, to call to mind again:
Thlangothlan then, must yet come once in place,
For diverse notes, that gives this book some grace.
The Abbey of Valey Crucis.
An Abbey nere, that Mountain town there is,
Whose walls yet stand, and steeple too likewise:
But who that rides, to see the troth of this,
Shall think he mounts, on hills unto the Skies.
For when one hill, behind your back you see,
Another comes, two times as hye as he:
And in one place, the Mountains stands so there,
In roundnesse such, as it a Cockpit were.
Their height is great, and full of narrow ways,
And steep down right, of force ye must descend:
Some houses are, buylt there but of late days,
Full underneath, the monstrous Mountains end:
Amid them all, and those as man may guess,
When rain does fall, does stand in sore distress:
For mighty streams, runs ore both house and thatch,
When for their lives, poor men on Hills must watch.
Beyond the same, and yet on Hill full hye,
Castle Dynosebraen.
A Castle stands, an old and ruynous thing:
That haughty house, was buylt in weathers eye,
A pretty pyle, and pleasure for a King.
A Fort, a Strength, a strong and stately Hold
It was at first, though now it is full old:
On Rock alone, full far from other Mount
It stands, which shows, it was of great account.
Between the Town, and Abbey built it was,
A goodly bridge of stone here.

The Town and the bridge with the vyolent River before that Town.


The Town is near, the goodly River Dee,
That underneath, a Bridge of stone does pass,
And still on Rock, the water runs you see
A wondrous way, a thing full rare and strange,
That Rock cannot, the course of water change:
For in the stream, huge stones and Rocks remain,
That backward might, the flood of force constrayne.
From thence to Chirke, are Mountains all a row,
As though in rank, and battle Mountains stood:
And over them, the bitter wind does blow,
And whirles betwixt, the valley and the wood.
Chirke is a place, that parts another Sheere,
And as by Trench, and Mount does well appear:
It kept those bounds, from forrayne force and power,
That men might sleep, in surety every hour.
Here Denbighshiere, departs from writers pen,
And Flintshiere now, A little spoke of Fluntshiere.
comes bravely marching in,
With Castles fine, with proper Towns and men,
Whereof in verse, my matter must begin:
Not for to feign, and please the tender ears,
But to be plain, The Author fell sick here.
as worlds eye witness bears:
Not by heresay, as fables are set out,
But by good proof, of vewe to void a dout.
WHen Summer sweet, The writer takes here breath till a better season serves.
has blown ore Winters blast,
And ways wax hard, that now are soft and foul:
When calmie Skies, says bitter storms are past,
And Clouds wax clear, that now does lowre and skoule,
My muse I hope, shall be reuiu'de again,
That now lies dead, or rockt a sleep with pain.
For labor long, has wearied so the wit,
That studious head, a while in rest must sit:
But when the Spring, comes on with new delight,
You shall from me, hear what my muse does write.
Here ends my first book of the worthiness of Wales: which being well taken,
will encourage me to set forth another: in which work, not only the rest of the
Shieres (that now are not written of) shall be orderly put in print, but likewise
all ye ancient Arms of Gentlemen there in general shall be plainly described
and set out, to the open vewe of the world, if God permit me life and health,
toward the finishing of so great a labor.
FINIS.
Thomas Churchyard.

EN^DIEV^ET^MON^ROY^
Churchiards Arms.

blazon or coat of arms


