The Contention bettwyxte Churchyeard and Camel* upon David Dycers Dream set
out in such order, that it is both wyttye and profitable for all degryes.

Read this littell comunication between Churchyard: Camel: and others mo

Newlye Imprinted and set furthe for thy profyt gentill Reader

Imprinted at London by Owen Rogers, for Mychell Loblee dwelyng in Paulls
churchyeard.

ANNO M.D.LX.

The Preface.
Draw ne^e gentill reader and harken to me,
Her stondes David Dicar Dremynge as you see.
He sleapethe, and wak's not, but dremethe on still.
To scanne what he dremeth each man has a will.
Some does him blame for his restles mind.
Which sleep causes him Dreme by natural kind
And some does praise his labouringe rest,
Though Dreminge in sleapinge be not the best.
And so^e says that sleaping needs no Dremes at all
Which yet never has been, nor to come never shall.
And sum would correct David's Dreme to amend,
Before he has Dremed his Dream to the end
And some do interpret what his Dream me^t.
Declaringe the secrettes of David's intent.
And some do immagyne David Dicar to lie
In doges sleep this Dremynge, each man for to try.
But David dreams on and thinks no man ill.
And sufferthe each man to work on his will
And sum men does whisper such neppes in his ear^
which efte now and there David dicar does hear,
Then answeringe sleapinge he momblethe this out,
And ^awllethe the^ fomblers that stondes him about.
As the whetstone being dull good edges does set.
So David dreamynge still, sharp wits he does whette
And causethe the wa^inge, to work all there will.
From sleaping his dreming to fetch out the skill
Yet some will not cea^^ to shake him by the slyue
With taunting poor David from dreaminge to drive
And some in this dreaminge does ponder so deep
That in stoddinge of dreaminge they fall a sl^epe.
And some are so weried that they may no more
Answer david dicar as they did to fore.
And some cannot scarclie answer a whene
Till time does determyne to show forth a thene
Sith certain of uncertain no stronger takethe hold
Let him blow the cole, that is most a could
Sure this is the best way for wisemen to take.
To let slepers and dreamers alone till they wake,
As plainlye apperethe by this fine witted men.
In tossinge and tomblynge of David dicars when.
Thus beating their brains in vain they do toil.
And clokethe there wits for fear of the foil.
The one does affirm the other does defend.
Yet neither of either canons make anende.
The end of the preface.
Dauy Dycars Dream.
WHen faith in fre^des ^ere fruit and folysh fra^cyes fade,
And crafty catchers cum to naught, and hate great love has made.
When fraud flies far from town, and loytrers leave ye field,
And rude shall run a right full race, and all me^ be well wild when gropers
after gain, shall carpe for common wealth,
And wyly workers shall disdain, to fygge and live by stelth when wisdom
walks a loft, and folly syts full low,
And virtue va^quish pampred vice, and grace begins to grow.
when Justice ioynes to truth, and law looks not to meede,
And bribes help not to build fair bowres, nor gifts great glotons feed.
when hongere hides his head and plenty please the poor,
And niggerdes to ye nedy me^, shall never shut their door-
when double dark deceit, is out of credit worn,
And fauning speech is falshed found, and craft is laughed to skorne
when pride which pickes the ours, gapes not for garments gay.
Nor ia^eles wear no velvet weeds, nor wandering wits bear sway
when riches wrongs no right nor power poor put back,
Nor covetous crepes not into Court, nor learned, living lack
when slipper sleights are seen and far fatches be found,
And private proffit and self love shall both be put in pound:
when dete no sergeant dreeds, and cowrtiers credit keep,
And might melles not with merchandise, nor lords shall sell no sheep:
when lucere lasts not long, and hurd great heaps does hate,
And every wight is well content, to walk in his estate,
when truth does tread ye strets and liers lurk in den,
And Rex does reign and rule the roast, and weeds out wicked men:
Then baelful barnes be blyth that here in England won,
Your strife shall flynt I undertake, your dreadful days ar done.
To David Dicars when.
To him that does dream, David Dicars when.
And even so from him, to such othermen.
From when unto when, to come to this when
when fools of your folly, will work like wise men,
And know their own fautes and leave faulting other.
And first me^de the^ selves, and then warn their brother,
Enuiyng none, for that their sort is not
Such as they would be, like others I wot.
Gods of degree, to rule and bear swaye,
whose manners mete not, to stand in such stay,
And yet would have mouths, to rore like the Lion
Being but Asses brute of condition Eso^n^de ^sino ^uge^s

forgetting that order does thus ask and crave,
That each should him self in order behave.
As baestes of low sort, to be mek of their mind,
To those that be higher, and greater of kind.
The Bore not to brag, to strive with the Lion.
The Heart not to stand, with the Bull in contention,
The Ox that does draw, to thyncke him self able,
To run for a wager, with the Horse of the stable.
It grees not, it cords not, nor orderly fyttes
That men should find fault, with Gods and their wits
Jupiters seat stands some what to hye.
For us to judge it, that come it not nigh.
And judgments or guess, in any such sort,
May serve to the Gods, for a laughter and sport
To se how Judas, would feign become Judah.
To just at the life, of Iuli apostata,
Let Beasts that be meet, for carte and caryage,
Lean to their labor, as manne to his marriage.
And since we be members of one common wealth.
Let us join aptly, as fyttes for our health.
The eye as the eye, let him stare and look,
And let the leg learn, to bow and to crook.
Let the hand answer, to help and to do,
As the will of the heart, shall will him unto.
And let not the foot, make murmur and cry.
To ask why our head, is placed so hye.
Our instrument iaeres, it makes no right melody,
If we thus tune not to order our armony.
Then master when, when both you and I,
And every man ^lswyl learn to apply,
To our right metyarde, and keep our just compass,
And look not so deep in an other man's glass.
And leave dreaming dreams of dead David Dicar,
And send such whens home, to our person or vicar.
And there with remember, this verse of Cato,
Whose wysdom does warn us, with these words I trow.
Que soles culpare, ea tu ipse: ne feceris. when we mark this nipse,
And leave drawyng diales, on other men's dooyng
And learn for to look to our own works and brewynge
Then I say then, when you again when:
will say well your self, and such other men,
And all folk will do well. Lo thus I end then,
All things shall be well, which god grant. Amen.
A Replication unto Camels Objection.
IF right or reason, might move you to speak,
I would not you blame, your malice to wreake:
Or if your judgment, were up right and clean,
You would not so rudely, consture what I mean.
How should your foli, so plai^ly be known.
If that your wisdom, abroad were not blown.
You bid me amend, whose life you know not.
As though that in you, there were not a spot.
A tale of a tubbe, you brag and you brall,
Wherein you do rub, your self on the gall.
You touch not one point, w / her of that I wrate.
You leap orethe hedge, and seeith not the gate,
I muse what you mean, to discant and preach,
Upon a plain song, so far past your reach.
why Camel I say, will you needs be fine?
what, will ye be known, for a durty divine?
It seems you are learned, past reason or wit,
Orels you could not, y^ mark so well hit.
You have so good laten, you ^an want no pewter,
Though ye are no fool, yet you are a newter.
You writ like a clerk, or seyene well in Cato,
Forgetting your name, which Therens calls Gnato.
I can do no less, but show what you are,
Since you ar a Daniel, dark dreams to declare.
Your knowledge is great, your judgment is good,
The most of your study has been of Robyn hood.
And Beuys of Hampton, and sir Lancelot de lake,
Has taught you full often, your verses to make:
By sweet saint Benet, I swear by no fool,
you are not to learn, you plyde well your scole.
Your wyts are not breched, who list you to preeue,
you flock and you flout, and smils in your sleeue.
I praise you no more, lest you think I flatter,
I must now return, to thee pith of my matter.
How can you well prove, that I do envy,
At any estate, be they low or hye,
Or that I spy fauts, in Jupiters seat,
why are you so mad, on me thus to bleate,
It grees not* it cords not, it fyts not you say,
That men should find faut, with gods that b^resway
If plain Dauy Dicar with wise men be skande,
He seaketh uprightly, I dare take in hand.
I write not so rashly, but I rul^ my pen.
In faith you mistake, Dauy Dicars, when,
you take chauke for chese, and day for dark night,
Of like you are sourblinde, or ye look not a right:
you purpose I know, you were in such care,
Against this good time, your purs was full bare.
you thought to optaine, some garment or gift,
Then did you invent, to make a foul shift,
To flater the Gods, and get a new cote,
That made you to sing, so merry a note.
you feign me like Judas, you think me not so,
For if I were he, then you would me know,
I bear not the bag, that may you reward,
But yet my good will. I pray you regard.
you say that order, would have each degree,
To walk in his calling: then how may this be,
That you out of frame, do blother and bark,
So like a curre dog, at every good warke.
Is this the order, that Camels do use?
Because you are a beast, I must you exscuse.
A Camel, a Capon a Curre sure by kind,
I may you well call, since so I you find:
Because you have ratled, and railed to mytch,
Now give me good leave, to claw you where ye ytch.
And if that you think, I rub be you to sore,
Then give me no cause, to scratch you no mo^e.
Hold this for certain, and for asure thing,
The ofter you stir me, the more I will styng.
Syns that you will needs, awaken my wits.
I will seek for you, both snaffuls and bittes.
To hold in your head, and make you to rain.
And byte on the bridle, for anger and pain.
Then will I devise, for you such a burden.
As long as you live, you shall bear a lurden:
A Camel by kind, will bear more at once.
Then.iii. great horses. pickout for the nonce.
More meeter for yion, to bem some stable.
To bear heavy burdens, I think you more able.
Then being as you are, wal^ing abroad.
Your lummes ar well made to carry a great lode:
All beasts that be made, for carte and carriage,
Should lean to their lab on as man to his marriage.
with horses and Asses, you are well acquainted.
Their manners in ordere, right well you have painted.
I dout of your shape, some monster you are,
Because such a name, to me you declare.
Your words and your works, ar tokens right sure.
You ar some brute beast, in man's form and picture.
Right happy he were, yt had you in charge.
He should gain much money, to show you at large.
what cause, or what toye, did trouble your mind:
To make you seek fauts, where non you can find,
Your instrument iarres, your mirth is not sweet,
You play on false stryngs which thing is unmeet.
Your ear is not good, you know no sweet sound.
You can not epsy, where faut may be found.
So far out of tune, I never heard none,
Nor so much past shame, nor yet so far gone.
As you in this case, God send you to amend.
which seeks to learn me, to bow and to bend:
Direct well your steps, by order and line.
and sclaunder me not, nor no works of mine.
In all my writings, righthonestly I meant.
If they betaken, to my true intent:
They shall breed no strife, nor no error sow.
when truth shall be tryde, and virtue shall floow.
Thus yet once to when, again I return.
Because yt you seem, against it to spurn.
Until this long, when, do well come to pass.
This world shall be naught, and you shall be an Ass.
Since you do inuci, all vice to maintain,
You show that you have, a folish light brain,
God send you more wit, now keep your head warm.
Or else the next winter, may do you some harm.
Thus here I do enke, and rest for this time,
Except you procure me, to make a new rhyme.
Camels Reioindre, to Churchyard.
To Churchiard or Mannari^g, or for lak of a name:
To Dicar the dreamer, if you know the same.
May a man be so bold (an order to keep:)
To bid you good morrow, now after your sleep?
If I may be so saucy, and make no mistaking.
God speed master Dreamer, if you be waking.
But Dreamer or Dicar, or as you say Dauy:
which shall I now call you as our Lord save ye, He has v. Dramer. Dicar
David. Mannaryng Churchiard.

Three names are to many for one man alone:
And two mo makes five, for faylyng of one.
If you had two other ye men might you seek: Ash him where he named him self
Lord Mnarynge, and how he used it

Then had you a name, for each day in the week.
But no man does doubt, that so sundry name:
Should have other lo^myng then out of good frames.
Parturi^^ mon^es, N^scetur ridiculus m^s^. Churchards aunsw^^^ does but ^ayll.
And the fore I thyncke, they come every chone:
Out of some old house, tho the posts begone
Or else kept in memory, for that they were found:
In some old stock, in some noble man's ground.
And so do remain, for mind of our auncestry:
As Syb to Sybbel, sibbes very properly.
So Iermaines lyps ioynde, and so M. Churchyard:
And Mannaryng met, both in an Orcharde.
And David the Dicar, came in with his spade:
And dolue up y^ Dreamer, till the line was made.
And thus perco^seque^ce, sins your writing does gre it:
Your name for my part: David Dreademer be it.
And good M. dreademer, your reason long sought for.
Has combred your capax, I se very sore.
Snap of the case, and young and whot blood:
Have all to be fumed you, and moved your mood.
That danger it were, in you of a feeuer
If heat and collar, should cuple to gether.
But thanks be to God, a vomet hat rydde:
A culpin of collops, far in wardly hid.
And now that your reason, has fair brought it fourth
It is a fair reason, and a reason well wourth.
And first you reply, to mine objection:
With words of pleasure, as a man of correccion.
Wherbi you would seem, a learned man of art:
And yet Master Mome, you are out of your part
For as your au^swer, does but tatele and tomble:
So you answer not me, but rail out and romble.
And yet had you markte, my then to your when:
I no mo^e falted you, then ^ did other men.
I mean mad raungers, that so raunge at large:
To meddle with matters, not ioyn to their charge.
And such men I bad, as then I had you:
To send such whe^s home, their vicar unto.
And leave dreaminge dr^mes, to bus^ men's br^^nes:
with nedeles matters, and as thankeles pains.
And this little neded, to have netled your noddye,
If you were (as you would be) some pretty wise body. Churcharde wy^^ beein^
bus^ing^ be^

But you will choplogick, and be Be to busse:
but good Master Busserd, be good yet to us.
And tell me in truth, and lie no whit then:
Have not I touched, no part of your when?
If you still dream not, as you do yet:
I trow I have touched, your when every whit.
I need not to bid you, turn my text again.
But take your own text, to answer your brain.
I toutch not one point, that you wrote you say: His ^e^ ca^yon

And yet you call me, a Daniell strayghtway.
Lo how these two now a, gree in themselves:
They both sham their master* these.ii. elui^h elues.
If you give me a name without an effect:
Your mastershyps brain is madly infect.
And foul ouershot, to bring two for witness:
Which are in themselves clean contrary I guess.
But if my first answer, do seem such a mystery:
That you se not your when, there answer alredye
Then to a wake you, and raise you from sleep.
Good master Dreamer, mark this and take keep.
your when has in it, a meaning of who say, His wl^

which ryghtly to mean, is thus meant I say:
That when those things be, which these dais be not.
Then knit you your the^ up in such sort as you worcester.
But whom you accuse, in whenning so large.
I mean not to open, nor put to your charge.
But way with your self, and sober your brains:
And defend not a when, might put you to pains.
I could perchance, make your when larger.
And serve it before you, as broad as a charger.
And point you your when by line and by Leuel.
Against Jupiters seat, and Jupiters Counsel.
But I li^t not so narow, to look to your whanning.
Nor make to your whanning, so open a skanning,
You bid me not slander, you I slander you not.
If your self hurt you, your own is the spot.
You ascribe to me, the ma^ners of Gnato.
Full clarkelye applied good master Thrato
A title as meet, they say that do know me.
As your title of dream, to the matter of Dauye.
But vices in stage plays, when their matter is gone.
They laughe out the rest to the lookers on.
And so wantinge matter, you bring in my coat.
In faith master dreamer, I borrowed it not.
Tho I have heard, that good fellows and so.
Not you (gods forbod) in borrowed gear go,
But when every foul, has pulled home his fether.
The soul and the body, may then dwell together
And make a right summer man, to iet in the heat
For clothes in what wetther, do but m^k me^ sweat
which you sir perchance, er summer come out:
will use for a medecin, in trauailinge about,
And colloure the matter, with a tule of season:
As doutles your mastership, has very god reason
By which all y^ know you, will think you well hable
To thrust a poor Camel, to l^tke in some stable.
And doubtless if dreaming may any thing speed,
I know David dreamer, will do it in deed,
But tho I have heard, a Lion often rore,
I never heard ass, so rore out before.
With bitings and bridellings and raining of necks.
O fine mastet ass, how sharp be your che^kes.
You threatene to bitte me, Gra^^^ lu^orna^ tu^ est pi^^^s Pa^o^^^
to trim me and trick me.
With master ass* what, will you needs kick me.
Camelles and asses, be both mete for burden
Then gip fellow ass, then iast fellow lurden.
No nerer my buthoke, iast jade are you winsyng:
It is merry to see, master ass fall to minsyng.
Did you never ^ere tell of the ass trapt in gold? Churchard is ^ fine ass.

Lo maste asenoll, lo do as you should.
You say I know you not, De Astu^ aure^. The french alms, perchance has
altered him
and yet as I trow:
You cast your old coat* a great while ago.
But if I mistake you, for that a new spring,
Has wrought as a work man, The ass would ha^ a Bell to be know^ by.
to give you a new skin
And that I may not, now know you by ear mark.
Then for a mor knowledge to know you in dark.
Tie a Bell at your tail, to make sometinginge.
And there goes the ass (I shall say) by the ringing.
But whether I know you or else do not know: Churchas^s Po^t^s. Robin (...) Sir
L^^celot aut ^^cuis ^u^^lia ^i^metere ^ilia gra^ali^^

Thus much I know, and am certain I trow:
An ass binds no camels, tho he braye neure so loud.
Robin hode so showed me, out of a cloud.
And when asses forget, to know what they are,
Sir Lancelot then biddes, to nip them more nar.
And Beniz of Hampton, whose clergy I know:
Biddes me serve you with the sams sede you sow.
And not to contend, for the asses shadow.
Whose shadow I leave you, and body also.
And thus. M. dreamer your folli has brought me
To follow you further, then first I bethought me
Beineg much sorry, my pe^ so to spend.
To answer your follyes, and thus lo I end.
The Surreioindre unto Camels reioindre,
WHat life may live, long vndefamde, what works may be so pure
What virtuous thing, may flourish so yt fautles may, endur
What things be past, or yet to come, that freely may rejoice,
Or who can say he is so just, he fears not sla^drous voice.
This Slanderous peals, does ring so loud, he sou^ndes in every ear,
whose craft can fayn, such ple^aunt tunes, as truth were present theare.
But it is falshed, fraught with fraud, and synges a note to hye,
Though that he bring, some plesaunt points, for to maintayn a lie.
The simple wyts, ar soon begylde, through sclaunderes sweet deccayt,
But those that knows, such fishing hokes, shall sone perceive the ^ayt.
Unto whose ears, and iudgegements eke, I do commend my works,
To save me from, the Serpents stynge, which under flowers lorkes.
with healpe of truth, I hope to flee, ye venom of this Beast.
Or else I trust, in his own turn, to cast him at the least.
Although he whet, his teeth at me, and styngs me with his tongue,
Yet with the just, I am content, to learn to suffer wrong
Since Princes pears, and Kings themselves, their Acts and godly laws.
Are sclaundred often, through evil tongues, and blamed wi / thout cawes.
Look what is done, and truly me^t, to put things in good stay
Are wrested, and perverted often, by evil tongue I say.
The Preachers voice, which threineth wrath, the sinful to reduse.
Does purchase hate, for tellyng truth: lo, this is man's abuse.
The child does blame, the byrche^ rod, whose stryps may not be sparde.
Because his wits, unto his wealth, has verismal regard
The wiked sort, whose vice is known, by those which writes their lives.
Can not abide, to hear their fauts, but still against them strives.
The horse can not abide the whyp, because it mends his pace,
Thus each thing hates, his punishment, we see before our face,
Therefore I blame, this man the less, which sclandreth me so much.
And casts venom, like the Tode, because his fautes I touch:
What cause in me, what hate in him, what mattier has he sought,
within this Dauy Dicars Dream, which for the best was wrought.
Unto the good, it is not ill, nor hurtful unto none.
Nor unto those, that loves y^ light, it is no stu^blyng stone.
But those that sta^ds, to watch a time, the innocent to sp^ll,
May wrest the truth, clean out of frame, and turn good things to ill.
Out of the sweet, and fairest flower, the spider poyso^ takes.
And yet the Be, does feed thereon, and there with honey makes.
The Caterpiller, spils the fruit, which God made for man's food,
The fly like wise, where he does blow, does still more harm than good.
Thus may you fee, as men do take, ye things whero^ they look
They may it turn, to good or bad, as they apply the book
But every man, to his own work, an honest meni^g has.
Or else those hasty, sclanders tongues, might do good men mochs cath.
He feels much ease, that suffere can, all things as they do hap.
who makes a pyt, for other man, may fall in his own trap
who flynges a stone, at every dooge, which barketh in the street.
Shall never hau, a just reue^g nor have a pacient sprete.
Therefore I suffer, all your words, which is mine enemi known,
I could you serve, with taunting terms, and feed you with your own.
But I mi^de not to chock your tale, before the worst be told.
Then may I have, fre choice and leave, to show you where you scolde.
Good sir if I should you salute, as you saluted me.
Then should I call you, Dauy too, and so perchauce you be.
Ye multiplye, five names of one, a progeny you make.
As your desent, did comme from thence, where of you lately spoke.
Though such as you, have nyck named me, in gest and half in scorn,
Churchiard I am, in Shrewisbury town, they say where I was borne
You put your name, to others works, y^ weklings to be gild.
Me think you are somewhat to young, to father such child
The truth there of, is eeth to know, a blind man may discus
Ye are in no^bre, mo then one, ye say, be good to us.
You say, I did not answer you: I could no mattier find
Nor yet can see, except I should, at folli wast my mind
The gretest shame, and most reproach, that any man may have,
Is for to write, or scoulde with fools, hose nature is to rave.
Since railing rims, or coms your wits, talk on and babble still,
I not entende, about such chats, my pe^ nor speech to spil.
I neither fume, nor change my mood, at ought that you have said.
The world may judge, your railyng tongue, full like a beast has brayd.
And where you say, you can point out, by line and level both.
Of all the, whens, of Dycars dream, you say you know the troth.
It is a wilful ignorance, to hyde, I know full well,
I fault, against Iuppiters seat, or against his counsel.
You show your self, not Iuppiters friend, if you can truly prove.
A fault in me, and does it hyde for fear or yet for love.
As for my works, and thankles pains, in this and such lik case.
I shall be redi to defend, when you shall hide your face.
Think you I fear, what you ca^ do, my ground is just and true
On every word, which I did speak, I fore not what ye brue
Fill all your chargers, as ye list, and dishes every chone,
when they be full, and runs ore, I will cast you a bone.
which shall be hard, for you to pyke, though that your wits be fine,
I can sone put you out ofsqar from your level and line:
I will not answer word for word, to your reioindre yet,
Because I find no matter there, nor yet no point of wit,
But brabling blasts, and fra^tike fyts, and chyding in ye air,
Why do you fret thus wi^h yourself, fie man do not despair:
Though that your wyts, be troubled sore, if you in Bedle^ wear.
I think you should be right well kept, if you be frended theare:
If you were scourged once a day, and fed with some warm meat.
You would come to yourself again, after this rage of heat
This may be said without offense, if yt your wyts you had
You would not lie nor rail on me, nor fare as you were mad.
But as it is a true proverb: ye threatened man lives long,
Your words ca^ neither hang nor draw, I fear not your ill tongue.
The world is such it does co^tempne, all those that virtue have.
An evil tongue has no respect whose name he does deprave
what is the cause of mortal food, which does in friends arise.
But comenly these sclaunder tongues, which still delyt^ in lies:
who makes war, who sows strife, who bri^geh Realms to ruin:
But plenty, pride and evil tongues, whose voice is nere in tune,
The root and branche and chefeest ground, of mischeefs all and some,
Is evil tongues, whose sugared words, has wise me^ overcome.
The proof where of you put in use, your words ye frame and set,
To creep into some noble hertes, a credit for to get.
The eating worm within ye nut, ye sweetest curnell seek,
So do you draw where gain is got, and there you look full meek.
But under those fair angels loks is ^yd a deuelish mind
I durst lay odds who trust you ^ong, fulfalse he shall you find.
Now to return unto thee cause, which made you first t^ write,
Y^^ show your self to be a fool, to answe^ me in spite,
The first and last that I have seen, of al your nipping gear
Is not well worth when fruit is cheap, ye paring of a pear
Your sudden storms and thu^dre claps, your boasts and braggs so loud.
Has done no harm though Robyn Hood, spoke with you in a cloud.
Go learn again of litell Iho^, to shute in Robyn Hods bow,
Or Dicars dream shall be vnhit, and all his, whens, I trow,
Thus hear I leave, I list not write, to answer where you rail:
He is unwise that strives with fools, where words can not prevail.
A Decree between Churchyard and Camel.
A decree upon the dream made by Dauy Dicare,
with answer to Camel, whose tauntes be more quicker.
Where Dicar has dreamed of things out of frame.
And Churchiarde by writing affirms the same,
And Camel contendeth, the same to deface,
And therefore has put his doings in place.
Sithe both of those twain has set forth in myter
The words of the Author, skyll of the wryghter.
And rune in this race, still chaffyng the bytte.
I think in this case much more then is fytte.
I myndyng as much as lies in me.
To make them both, as moan to agree
Have taken in hand ye dream to defend
And so to recite their ^ace to the end.
Not so to approve my learning or skill
But only because it be com / meth them ill.
From tuning to railing so often to dygresse,
where as reason and wit does will nothing less. Dicars Dream

As Dicar has dreamed so time out of mind,
Some things were amys, that some men did find,
If al things were well, as I would god they were,
we should not be plaged from year unto year,
If all men do right, what needs the law,
what need any justice to ha^ge and to draw,
If no man be wronged nor wydowe oppressed,
Then ne^eth no care to have it redressed,
If no man will ve^ter to rob or to steal,
O England thou have a good common weal.
If no man do hurde nor hydeth in store,
Then England shall have no dearth any more
If no man offend by way of excess.
Then grace does abound, the fault is the less,
If the lusts of the flesh be pute out of ure
The world is amended the people be pure.
If the poor and the nedye be daily re^iued,
what man is so mad, thereat to be greued^
If no man do slander nor styre up debate,
Then Dicar I think has dreamed to late.
If no man do flater, nor fawn for again.
Then may it appear this dream is but vain.
If all thing be well, and in the right way,
why do they not use good laws to obey.
If no man defraude in bying nor sellyng.
Then happy is England, for there is best dwelling.
If faith be unfeigned, and words do once bind,
The dream is all false, and so ye may find.
If truth do take place and in all things encreasse,
dream no more Dicar, but let thy dream cease,
If this be not so then Camel to you.
I fear me this dream will prove to be true.
For it is not so geeson with us for to hear,
But the effect of thee dream does daily appear.
And every man is now in such taking,
It passes a dreme, they find it out waking*
If you be such a one as never had peer,
Then are you fauty in none of this geere.
But seeing your writing does seem some what quycke,
You seem that ye smarted because ye did kycke.
Yet when the dream was to printing dyrected,
I think of the dreamer ye were not suspected.
And where as you contend it does not belong,
For Dicar to dream of right have or of wrong.
In ded you do well if you done amiss,
To show him his fault, and say thus it is,
And if you so well know what does Dicar behoue,
Then ought you to show the same to approve.
But me thincketh you want a frendli good will.
To deface a good matter though the author were ill.
And certes of you both indifferentli to tell
I cannot in your raili^ges commend your doings we^l.
And both of you twain are yet to me unknown,
Yet can I aid your doings, as if they were mine own,
Ye pass from your purpose in such vnworthi sort.
Ye make of your doings a very laughing sport.
Ye close and ye gloss, in seking to be fine,
Ye taunt and retaunt al most in eueri line.
Ye affirm ye have red both Terence and Cato,
Ye count ye do but faletrye well resemble Gnato.
And look how much differs a Fore from a fool,
Su much do you differ from Cato and his scole,
For Cato does affirm there is no greater shame,
Then to reprove a vice, and your selves to do thee same.
And because I will not seem your fancy to embrace,
As touching your debate, I answer in this case.
Me thinks in writing ye both have such skyll,
Ye mar a good matter and make it very ill.
whereby to say the truth it appears well unto me,
Your names and your wytts innumerable be.
Therefore do not think that ye can be forborne.
But such as be readers shall laugh you to scorn.
And when that your doings be thoroughly perused,
Then by the same deeds ye shall be accused.
Cease now in season cast all contempt away,
Be subject unto reason, and make no more delay.
And either of you twane do not refuse to know,
As Cato does enstructe you but straight embrace it so
which though my skill be small here though I to rehearse
The text and sense with all of every kind of verse.
Contra verbosos noli contendere ne^bis,
Sermo datur cunctis auimi sapiencia paucis,
Cum recte viuas ne cures verba malorum.
Arbitri nostri non est quid quisque loquatur.
To strive with men of many words, refrain I the advice
It is not given to every man that he shall be godly wise.
If thou live well do not regard what wicked me^ do say
For whir it lies not in us such wicked tounges to stare
This is it that ye have read which if you list to know.
He will aswage your strudy storms which you have rei / sed so
Take this in worth good Reder now expound it to ye best:
For I have said to their deuyce, now harcken to the rest.
Some thing is a mys and ever shall be so
Scripture writes this as learned men do know.
And some men have the gift thereof to speak and write
which fall yet at a lift to frail and fond delight.
It does behoue us also justly as we can,
To do right well in deed, and eke to write it thanne.
How be it, in him I judge much greater fault, there is
which noght can say nor do, but that which is a mys.
The best may be amended, and that is very true
The moore that have offended, the more we ought to rue
If any fall from grace gentelly him assail,
Burden him with charity, no rygour can prevail,
For why, if that the shepherde do wander from the way,
No marvel if the sheep thereafter go astraye
Some men perhappe there be will take me to the wourst,
I pray you judge of me, as I spoke it at the first
For it becomes ill in writting to contend,
without wit or skyll to make a railing end
Take me to the best, as one to you unknown,
Whose worthy wits I do co^ / mend and would with you be one.
Not minding so assuredli to spend and waste the day,
To make the people laugh at me, and here I make astaye,
Western Will, Wpon the debate betuyxte Churchyard and Camel
Row thy bote thou ioli ioli mariner, and wind well up thy sail,
For thou might never wi^d it up better thine own self for to auaille.
THere ware three meri mariners, that dwell in
Maldon meade
That could skill of wind and ride, of canell and of stream
And eke their compass well direct, from every shore and stead
And ware acqueinted with ye rocks, and sands the might them ^ueame
From Maldon haven to Billin gesgate, as well I undertake
As any three of many years, such course that used to make.
A Craier had they pressed to sail and all their takle yare
And al their fraughty brought a board* to wend to Maldon town
But for the wind was not ye best, before they forth would fare
They thought ye city for to rowne, and view it up and down
If thing uncouth they there might find, where with to move some glee
When they came home to Maldon meade, among their company.
To Poules they hied as place most fytte, for news in their device
Among the printers began they search, and busilye enquire
For things that might for Novelty, at ho^ be had in price
The printer said he thought he had, to pleasen their desire
And drew then nere into his shop, and began unfold then light
A roll of Rithimes, where of the first, the dickers dream it hight.
Then followed answer to this dream, to Dauie dickers when
A solemn process at a blusshe, be quoted here and there With matter in thee
margent set, whereon to gase they began
But they ne wist for ought I knew, but hebrew yt it were A Replication was
the next, which well I understood
For yt I found no word there in, but it was English good.
But loye here ye fourth quod he that makes up the mess
I warrant you a clarkely piece, se how it is be deckte (As selleres are not
now to learn, their wares to praise I guess)
The name there of Reioyndre was a term to them suspecte
Because it sou^ded of the law, as though sum case it war.
Of ioyncture right for way ward wives, to pleaden at the bar
But ay the printer pressed on, and take them all quod he
I notte your nammes, but brethren mine, I you assure can
They be as good as in this to w^in any shop there be
Our names quod he, and one stepped forth, a wight young watere man
Wylkin is my name* and this is watte, and Herma^ high the third
As trusti and sure at tack^e knotte, as ever with cord was gird.
Well Wilkin, Watte, an ^erman gent, by all your names I swear
Ye shall not need upon my word, to stand in any doubt
A merier jest ye can not find, a board with you to bear
So will ye say your selves I know, when ye have red it out.
But if ye be unlearned to red, as mariners lightly be
Then if ye list to hark a while, ye shall it hear of me.
For God sweet bones quod watkyn tho, for bokyshe be we not
we know to halse, and stryke and vicre, and up the anchore way.
And cables fold, and clymbe to top, and then go toss the pot
But if thou wylt of curtesy, of this vssom what say
By god mi peni shall be twain and theyrs shall make a grote.
Though we therefore should go to bed, at night with thirsti throat.
Nay then quod he Saint George to borowe, the day is ours all.
Ye shall it hear each line at length, but first and wot ye what
The parties twain between the which, this strife is now befall.
It me behooves first to tell, good order asks that
wherefore a while give ear I pray, till I those twain set out
And then ye may your fancye say, by turn each one about.
This Diker sems a thryuing ladde, brough up in pi eres scole.
The plowman stout, of who^ I think ye have full often hard.
Aswynckyng swain, that handles well his spade and other tool
Full loath he ware for lake of head, they should be reckly marde
For why in them and in his hand, his living chefely stands
He bragges not ofrentes fees ne of entayled lands
And yet he seems a curtouse ^ind, and comen of good stock
For Dikers feawe in my country, so well ythewed been
I warraunt you who lie him preue, he is no spritelesse bloke
But to mytale, In cockowe time when ech^* thing began to grene
all weried from his work, retournes this Dauy Diker hende
And for to ease him self the bet, full softely began he wend.
Unto his house within a grove a little there beside
His bottle and his bag, he hent, he left them not behind
Wherein remained but small surplus, of viande at that tide
And down he sat him on the benche, of meat had little mind
But began complain his verinesse, and one his hand his bed
He did arrest, and cleped wife as though he would to bed.
Lo dame he said thou wotest I troue, that candle is to diere
To sytte up late and ^raten out our thirft til farther night
And eke I uil no supper have, let be put out the fiere.
And haste we all to bed I say, that rise be times we might
And in he stepte, and sone he was uncased in his couche
And at his head as was his wont, he laid up his pouche.
To weary laboring men, full sweet does seem such rest
He had not lain long, but loud he began to route
And softly by his side his wife her self to bed adrest
The dog, the cat, and syb the maid, each couchen them about.
Into their h^rnes where they war wont, and al was huist and still
And Dauy began* to Dream his Dream, as we de^ysen will.
Then Wylkyn began at once up brayde, and swear by gods dyne heart
A rushe for books, me lever war that I could tell this tale
Then of your scablings for to have, a load by wayne or carte
Straw for such peltry, it is good to stuff an empty male
I durst it take upon my soul in all this lyther thing
Is not a tale that may be found so much to my lykinge.
Yea yea quod wat, my self by gisse, in youth might this have learned
If I so wise or happy had be^ to follow my fathers will
who would have spent upon my scoole so much as he had earned
But I was bent another way, me thought it very ill
All day to rucken on my tail, and poren on a book
It was nothing unto my pay full soon I it forsook.
But Herman here our other mate, it was a wytty elfe
Ado, ado, quod herman then and printer yet go forth
what was the Dream that Dauy met as he it told him self
For yet me thinks by thy fear, that Dream is sum what worth.
Content quod he give hear again, an^ here me what I said.
I shall you read this dre / ame a right, as here I find. it plain
Danye Dikers dreme.
WHen faith in friends bears fruit, and folyshe fancies fade.
And crasti catchers comme to naught and hate great love has made
When fraud flies far from town: and loy terers leave the frlde
And rude shall run a ryghtfull race, and all men be well wild
when grope^s after gain, shall carpe for common wealth
And wyly workers shall disdain to fygge and live by stealth
when wisdom walks a lofte and folly fyttes full low
And virtue vainquisheth pamperd vice and grace begins to grow:
when Justice jones to truth and law lokes not to miede
And bribes help not to buyld fare bowers, nor gifts great glotons fiede
when hongre hides his head and pleinty pleases the pore
And nyggardes to thee nedy men shall never shut thee door
when double dark deceit, is out of credit worn
And fawnyng speech is falshed found and creaft is l^nght to skorne
when pride that pikes the purse, gapes not for garments gay
Nor Ia^elles wear no vel / uette wiedes nor wandering wits bear sway
Nor coueytous crieps not into court nor learned lyuinges lack
when slper sleightes are seen and fare fatches be found
And pryuate profit and self love shall both be put in pound
when depteno sergaunt dreds and courtiers creite keep
And might melles not with merchaundise, nor lords shall sell no shiepe
when lucere lastes not long, and hurde great heaps does hate
And every wight is well content, to walk in his estate
when truth does tread thee streets, and lieres lurk in de^
And Rex does reygne and rule the roast, and wiedes out wiked men
then balefull barnes ^e blyth, that her in England won
Your strife shall stynt I undertake, and dredful days be done
This Diker was no fool I guess, quod watte and Herman tho.
It seems well he hi^ bethought upon the worlds change
And of his drudge and myckel pain, when he to be^ did go
And the^ to dream of such like thi^^es, perdi it is not strange
Such as mitalke and thoghts have been* y^ dai before certain
Such things again at night in sleep, my drem has showed me plain.
And eke I harden ones, a right good doctor tell
that such as farced go to bed, with meat and drink good stoore
Their dreams always to them in more dysorder fell
Then if they empty went to bed, as ye have hard before
That Dauie did whose sup / per was, so slender and so short
That nothing else but weariness, and nature caused him snort
A dream, a straw ^uod Wylkin then, by God it was noswenyn
Men dream of deuyls, of apes, and owls, of naked gyrles and boys
But I ne think this dream is such, it hitteth things so even
It talks with good reason round, of fancies ne of toys
But of such things as I can not, amenden with my wit
Nor never shall I think be found, reformed every whytte.
No quod the printer no, that meant not, thee dream I undertake
But where as many things ben found, that man's wit can not fatche
To mende as many as we can, and thee rest a pattern make.
To bring our stat as reyghe to them, as man's deuyce can mache
As out of Platoes commen wealth, a tale I could you tell
of many things that he would have, and not but very well:
That never yet in earth ware found, as he would have them done
Quod watte no more of Platoes lore, I ^en him not by gysse
Ne care not much except he could sum rules for change of moan
But well I wot algates and am full sure of this
That I have hard the preachers speak, of as much as is here
And of mo things than any man, is able to comme nere
But ay me thinks it is fine, for such a rude vplande
It ware enough for a right good clerk, at instyuynsty taught
He had is help his parysshe pressed I venture durst my hand
what though he could it dream thus right, yet I belyue it naught
That he coud with such quei^t proverbs, his dream at large endite
And eke I think thee sely swaene, did never learn to write.
No watte quod thee printer tho, thou harpest on the truth
This Diker had a friend in court that well could handle pen
with whom he was acqu^einted erst, as play fellows in youth
whofor they then companions war did him vouch safe to ^en.
And loved Dauy evermore, in him such truth there was
And Dauy when he came to town, vnse^e would not hi^ pas.
Befell upon a market day, when he this dreme have had
That he to London lis^ resort, for things that s^od him nied
He found his frinde, and all this dreme, at length unto him radde
And he for yt it seemed a thing the penninge worth in diede
Began draw it into frame, and shapen as ye hard
And one that lust it fantasien, to printinge it prefarde.
Lo now I have ye half performed, that I you erst behight
what manner man this Diker was, and how this dream came out
And now I will to Camel pass, if ye therein dilight
By whom this ioly stir, is chiefly brought about
And tell fro point to point, as carst I did of this
His worthiness as I it know and as the saying is.
The Camel semes to me to be, a great out landishe beast
Quod Herman to the printer then, that long his peace had hold
with bunches twain upon his back, as high as any horse at least
Of which I do remember is in the new Testament told
That every rich gnof, may up to heaven as easyly stye
As may this wild unruly beast, pass through a nidles eye.
And eke we none in England have except they been us brought
Of late that I ne know, out of some far country
And by my troth if I shall say you plainli to my thought
Though none we had, it skylles not much, if they so unruly by
But prynter trust thou me, I nylle it not believe
A beast to speak and wri / ten this, my reason does not giene.
The prynter loud he loughe, and so did all the choppe
And said that Herman spokene as much as might be said
But ware thee Camel here quod he, he would be in thy top
No force quod he, of beasts I am nothing a frayde
Though I do selde on horse bake come, there can no Camel kind.
Ty^l I know more, let me to say, thee fancies of my mind.
Maty know thou then quod he, that Came^l is a man.
Nay printer soft quod wylkin tho and suffer me to speak
what cause had he that moved him, to auswere to this when
Or why should he of other al, so fumysshlye ^ut break
To bark at Dauye Dykers dream that meant him none unrest
Except he ware one of those sorts, that would have redrest
Pardien a Dream is but a Dream, a fansye of thee head
And he ne meant I hope that men, should it for gospel take
But as asweuen or fantasy, that each one should it read
For thy me thynkes accordyngly, the name did Dauye ma^e
And now a man (ye say he his) against a Dream to spurn
Me think it either smelles of craft, or else of sum heart burn.
What soft, mate quod the prynter tho, and he began to lowre
You ginne ware hot I wene, against thee summer son
Ye may be cooled ere ye come home, with sommefreshe A / prill shower
This to much before that I my tall have all ydonne
Here first an end of all, and then pronoucen dome
Or else depart ye calmely hence even such way as ye comme.
Herman was full woe, when he, thee prynter saw thus wroth
And had but little lust to try out the tale
And to his fellows began vpbraide, ye se thee day hence goes
And eke ye know as well as I, the water gynnes to vale
And by the vanes I spy the wind, to be by south at west
That we us haste to Maldon meade, I think it be the best.
And therefore now give us quod he, and take thou here thy grote
And though that wilkin and this wat, have showed their hasty wit
(We Maryneres be salteey frete, we can no but god wot)
I pray the prynter be content and take no grefe at it
We have at homme a mariner that can sum skyll of book
He shall them see and read them us, and so their leave they took.
And I that present was at al, for that I lyked the sport
Ga^ print it in mi fyckle head in order as I could
And for to pen it out the bed did to my celfe resort
And drew it there into a sum, as I had hard it told.
Not with such words as they it spoke, but in such words as I
Had partly learned of my dame, and list to fantasy.
Such hap may hap, to give a second fytte.
If cause shall hap, and lay sure serve for it.
Of such as on fantesye decree and discus: on other men's works, lo Ouides tale
thus.
BUde Pan would needs one day in company
Compare to mend Apolles melodye?
And took his homlye pipe and began to blo
The Ientil god, that saw his rudnes lo
(Although him self knew how for to excel)
Contented stood, to here his conning well:
pan played, and played boystiouslye
Apollo played but much melodiously
And such a tune with such music gave
As well became his knowledge for to have.
Midas stood by to Judge and to decre
which of them both should best in musycke be
And as he herd pan play and use his song,
He thought it such as he had liked long
And wonted was to here of others often
Apolles* harp and song went very soft
And sweet and strange: as none might sweter be:
But yet thought Midas this musycke lykes not me.
And therefore straight full loud he cried and said:
Pan. to mine ears of both has better played,
Quoth then Apollo syns thus thou demest Pan*
Me to excel that God of Connyng am,
And so do judge of things thou can not skyll
Midas henceforth lo thus to the I will
Thou shalt have ears to show and tell I wys:
But what thy skyll and what thy reason is.
which on thy head shall stand and witness be
How thou haste judged this rural God and me
Nay be contend for I have it said
A full sad man stood Midas the^ dismaide
And as he felt to try if it so was
He found he had two ears as has an Ass
Newly grown out where as his own ears stood
Sor changed then his coullour and his mode
But yet for thie, having no word to say
He shook his ears and sadly went his way
I know no more, but this I wot and know
That tho the Phrigian king be buried lo
And both his ears eke with him hydden be
And so far worn that no man shall them se,
Syns such there are that live at this day yet
which have his skyl, his judgment and his wit
And take upon them both to judge and know
To them I wy^he even thus and to no mo
That as they have his judgment and his years,
Even so I would they had his fair long ears.
T. Hedley.

A supplicacion unto mast Camel.
PLease it your maship, good mast Camel,
Te hear a poor man his tale for to tell,
And thou^^ you be, a man of great debilitie,
Denyt not to hear, a man of low ability,
And I sire you, to take it, for no presmountacion,
For y^he ha be brought up, after vnrude facion^
Sy^, now chyll show eye, the matter and the case,
which am com to speak you, and like your fair face,
There is one Churcharde, that has you spleasar done,
And ych am com to sire ye, to be good master tone,
But it was vnleudly do, and after an homly sord,
So fair a beast as you ben, to tiyen up so short,
I pray you holden scused it was but, for lack of nourt
For cham sure, hannot ben, past.vii or.viii. yer a cout^^r
It Was but blockshly y do, of one so vnbase as he,
To spout with such a gema^, of so hie a peti degree:
Yer of a strudy stock, for your fader nere raisde his farms.
Nor nere sold his lands: for ych herd an hasard of arms
Blase all the aunciall proditours, of your old axeltrie*
which com from old* house^ of much inpossibilitie,
And many vpstauncial men were brouded in that nest,
But your mother in her arms (he said) bare a byg best:
Beseech ye good mast Camel, give ore and leave your fume
And chil be bound that Churchard shan no more so parsume
But if he be so sedgious, to written an other, when,
Bum fay chil treat no more do withen what ye can.
Your daily* Belman, at your manndement, Good man Geffer ay Chapel, of
whipstable.
To goodman Chapels supplication.
HArry whobal hark, maste Camel has yzeene
Thy vengeance ^ory byll, and tompes the as I wene,
And is by Christ full zad, that thou come out to late
Thou myghtest have had a place vor Pekehorn at his gate.
But vortune frended not, chote it very well,
The more hard hap thou had, ich do thee plainly tell.
Uor zure charde him swear by goges dygne dayntie bones
Thou shoodes be new yshod to tra^p these oldestons
And westwardes shodeste have zit, for blearing of thin eis
Uor zomer now a trowes, will hurt the zore with flies,
But he no nyggon is, a will vordethe a flappe,
Thou shall have a vortayle man, to put upon thy cappe.
And gods benyson to, tho, Churcharde tie him short.
Churcharde wers a bell atstaill to make his friends sport.
And Camel choppes holy water, for Churcharde and forth.
Uor he will to you both, a holy chaplain be.
And if a wittin not, er twaie days be ago,
He will you sprinkle both, as uarre as I do know.
It Is a vengeance beast, and bygge to bear you all,
And if you zit not vast, bum fay, man to vall
Thomas Camel.

Steven Steple to mast Camel.
BEst ye merry vayre zyr I trow ye be maste Camel,
I chan on message to you zent, vrom goodman Geffray Chapel.
A hate ye zent a bottell a hay, and bad command nia tie ye,
And word dyng he spoke ye to, a preyd ye dat ye wood hy ye,
And zuch kind daintrels as a had, zu^ draf he hate ye zent
A zyerd ye worcester to gnab dero^ vor der is no be terin Kent-
This good and zoote an alzo new, to mende your zy^ / kish brain.
Uor well a zete ye ha great stud, and zet your self to pain,
Him wraid yer wites wud zoro ye veil, ye gin to rave zo zone,
A dynkte ye will be mad, all out beuore dat May be done:
And much he merueilt dat ye wud, zo chorlshly to vm wryghte,
And dat ye zent vm such an Anser, dat zounded noding right,
To Harry Hoball zyr ye wrote, as pearit in your letter,
zwap yer speckles up se nase, and look about ye better,
And Anser Geffray Chap / pell zyr, dat took ye de zupplication,
Uor his name is not Hary whobal, ich zwear by gods zauacion
How zay ye now yore speckles be on, can ye vorstande his byll,
Ych ween a trete ye (zereuerence a you) to do Churchard non il.
And her cha brought yor byl again, corrupt it irich go,
Uor vende gods vorbod man I zedge, to let it go vorth zo:
But well ich zee yor brain is dicke, your wits be curstly vert,
Prey God ye be not zyde yor zyelf, er be to morrow next:
Deruore go couch and sleap a now, and dan com to yor part,
An dyte a wyser dyng dan dat, or all is not wort a vart.
Now ych ha mine arnede a do,
Chud ha ye yor head to heed a
And be good master Chuchard to,
And zo God be yor sprede a.
Camelles Conclusion,
Camelles conclusion, and last farewell then,
To Churchyard and those, that defend his when.
A Man that has mo things then two, to put him unto pains,
Has even so many cares the mo to work him weary brains.
So I, that late have labored hard, and pulcked at my plowe,
Am come to town, where now I find mo matters then ynewe.
Mo then I looked for by much, mo matters to then needs,
Mo makynges and mo medlynges far, then I have herbs or wedes.
And all against me one alone, a sorry simple man,
That toils and travails for my food, to earne it as I can.
And gladly would in quiet be, to swinke and live in rest,
But dreamers will not suffer me, they nettle so my nest.
Asurreioinder, dreamer bringes, the second a decree,
A maryner bringes in his bote, and he the third will be
And so they join and iompe in lease, god grant them well to run.
For I shall show them if I can, course er I have done.
The dreamer first full well I know, I shook him by the sleue,
Whereat the other.ii. I trow, are angrye and do grieve.
But that no force be as be may, here gothe thee beast a broad
Dreamer a wake, mariner row, decree man look a broad.
The beast will turn I lay a grotte, and give you all a tryp,
why now syrs now, now foot it well, this beast begyns to skyp.
And first to master dreamer turns, and his surreioyndre to,
wherein all things be well he says, that he does dream and do.
He dreams he says and truly means, to put things in good stay
Short sir Dreamer, a bandy ho, that baall must needs away.
If that your dream have such intent, that has in an effect,
And that effeecte your western will* would not have men suspect:
But take it as a Dream says he, and fantesy of the head.
A fyner freke b^ Roode then you, I have his works well read.
Although he chop in chorles terms, and carpes in uncouth speech,
Yet know I with a finger wet, where wise men might him seche,
That if he whyp his whyrry so, he may chance lick a clown,
To whyp it under water quite, and craire and cariag drown.
But se^s he is beco^ my judge and judges me amysse,
In nothing me quite out of rule, as his wide wisdom is*
He shall well know, and so shall you, and the decree too,
that for my rule, when I was young, this was I taught to do.
My father put me first to schole, where, I a master had:
Of whom I had precepts and strypes as fitted for a ladde.
He taught me there to fear my god, and love him with my mihht.
To serve the king, and pray for him, and all his counsel right.
Then next to honor those my friends, that kept me so at scoole.
And this while I ascholat was, was every day my rule.
And syns that time, my vicar has full like a christian man,
Taught me to tread in gods high way, and keep it as I can.
To be obedient to the king and to the law also.
And do my duty to the powers, and let their matters go.
Que nostra sunt curare lo, he titled at my door,
And bad me printe it on my posts, anspread it on my flore.
And leele love and labor eke, he had me learn to know,
And keep my plowe for profit sake, and thank god to I trow.
And told me how there hanges a bell, within our parish church,
which he does twa^ge each morning rathe, before we go to wurche,
That toles to me, and others mo, our neighbors there abut,
This term which I shall tell you now, as I can bring it out.
que supra nos nihil ad nos, this bell tinges us to ^enne:
And this he said thee bell warnde me, as it did other men
And when I saw this Dicars when, I was so bold to tell.
That Dicar in his draffishe dream, had not herd this bell well.
And then for thy, forsooth and god my horn and scrape I took:
And scartched in a few fret lines, for dreamers onto look:
And so sir thus I meant no more, but minded him to know
His duty (as I meant mine own) and father not to go,
Till in his toys he tickled me, as lofty ladde on loud
And shope me shares to sharp me with, to carpe out of a cloud.
And if you roll thus out of tune for raynyng him this way,
To kep himself in order such as he should do I say:
And take the judgment to your hand, and term me out of rule,
Then trow me well, you me wid from Camel to a mule
Which Camel can not trouch withal, nor carry with him home.
But shape and shake it to your selves, like lumpes of your own lome,
But wela way, I wander wide, for Churchyard me^t it well,
And so he says, and so say you, and so your writings tell,
So sometimes houses fired are, by meaning well in lyghtes,
And then the meaning is but marde, and they mad meaning wightes.
But sens you will need have me seek the meaning of this when,
Mean it to those whom it does touch, and scuse it as you can
And then let wise men deem and judge atwene Dicar and me,
which of us two is out of rule, I mean or I or he.
And first let me* now are you all, what signifies this when?
That earies with him at his tail, so great a iarryng than.
Hold is it in hand a present tymme, or future tymme to comme*
Or is it admirantis word, as school men call it some.
It must needs mean a matter mad, as far as I can see,
But on go to, your wits are fine, mean you it out for me.
Dreamer does dream, and whens us out, a wondre of these whens,
where of sum whens are wonders well, and mete for whens men's
But some from gammuth gront and groan above ela a note:
And those wild whens at whend to large, I dare you gage my cote,
what when is this, that he whens out, when justice ioynes to truth?
whose seat is that? how ioynes justice? dreamer say on in sooth*
And nodde your noddles now in one, and make a trinity.
Full work manly to work this when, if yt it will so be.
And first way well what justice is, to whom it does pertain.
Who swayes the swoorde, who does decree, look to the matter plain.
From whe^s he coms, what branche he bears, and who and which him use,
And answer justice to the wrong, where with you hi^ accuse
And mean your meaning as you mean, and dream not in your sleep,
And show what ioly ordere now, in this your when you keep.
But short to make of all your whens, to take thee principal,
This is among the rest the worst, and stands thee last of all.
when Rex does reign and rule the roste, lo thus you ra^nge at last
A meruaillous when that such a when, should out in print be paste.
Does not Rex rainge sir dreamer now? what whennyng term is this?
If Rex reign not? who reigns then? a sauci when this is.
And whend at length and large in deed, beyond a subiecres wit,
That god defend that I should dream, or that, or like of it.
And yet I trow I have a byll for cattall that I sold:
That says how Rex has raigeed vi. year almost I dare be bold.
And either is your when full false, or my byl is not true
And which is truest of the^ both, let me now ask of you
As for my self I make no doubts, but that your when is wrong,
And that Rex reigns as he has done, and shall I trust reign long.
which as in scoole I was first taught, to pray that he may do.
So every subsecte let him seek to have that prayer to,
Thus could I touch some other whens, wherein you when at large.
A great deal past your com^passe to, and as much paste your charge.
But those I leave by light of this, for to be scande and seen,
To those that better judgments have, then you or I, I wene.
And now will take your then in hand where with you. knit your when.
In publishing it thus to me and to al other men.
Than balefull barnes be blithe you say, that here in England won:
Our strife shall stynte you undertake, our dreadful days are done.
An assurance her you make that baleful barnes we be,
And that in strife we are al so, and dreadeful days do se.
But God defend it should be true, which your full frantycke hedde:
Has publysht to so open eis for to be seen and read.
For once for me I make no doughtes, nor no good subect else:
But we a moble soueraign have, as al our statuts tells.
And as al orders else besides do will us for to know:
who gouernes us and is our head, and rules us also
And under him have o / there powers to see that law be done:
To gree and tune us in accord, if we be out of tune.
Under whose rule and order eke, al we that subjects be:
do live and ioynes as sytteth us, in one for to agree
And in thee town where I do dwell, I know no strife or dread.
But every man there lives in tune as subjects to their head.
And meddels not but with their plowes, and sometime with their bow.
And prate with Peter and with Paul, their duties for to know.
And learn so for to keep them still, in order as they can:
Except such wranglers wrangle them, with such large when and than
And so I trust they do else where, which for my part I pray,
That long we may so join in one, what so your when does say
But yet such dreadfulle whans and thens, which does the matter mar
were bette quight, pulled out of sight, then showed as they are.
And so show western will from me, and wat and Herman too
And will them wind their t^lke well not as they wont to do.
For if they lean to learn such whens, it will be long I fear,
Ere they will channel well their craire, that should them safely bear
Thomas Camel.
Western will to Camel and for him self alone, although he leudly lust, to
knitte up three in one,

WHen calmely blows the wind, and seas but lyt^e move*
And cloud appears none, to threaten from above
Unwelcomme change of wether, with rage of storms loud,
Ne mistes their manteles spread, the son a way to shroude,
The Master idle ^yttes, and shipboyes stere thee stern,
The course so ^arelesse is, he lust it not govern
But when the sto^me begins to rattle in the skies
And wallowing waves a loft, li^e mountai^es high to rise* And sour^es rouli^g
round, full thick in others tail,
Bethynde and eke before, the Crayer ginnes assail,
Then boys comme fro the helm, and Masters setto hand
That better practice have, the belowes to with stand.
So now with me it fars sith ye begin to blow,
And thonndre in thee air, and sondrie lyghtnynges throw,
And rore against the rocks whereon your water beats
My self to helm am comen to guide her in these heats
Suffised me before, when naught appeared but calm
To laughe and look upon the queitise of your qualme
As does the idle man, upon the plaiers game
where part him self, has none and yeat upon thee same
His fancy commune will, and furthe to other tell
what thing there seemed him good, or other wise then well
But ye no lookers on, in no wise can abide.
To say their fansyes free, what toys in you they ^pied
But each must have his part, when ye begyne to rage.
Ye love a nombre well, ^o furnyshe out the stage
And sith ye will therefore, that niedes I shall come in,
Thus for my self alone, to answer I begin:
A man that bendes him self, to sow thee seeds of pain
No meruaylle though he reap, such travail for his gain.
A wicked ploughe it is, that forowes up a field
To mar a pleasant patth and no good fruit to yield.
who labors so to find with dygging in the mould
Declares well a will, to find if ought he could:
And busieth himself, with matters more then niedes
And roteth up good herbs to plant in stynkynge wiedes.
And yeat would counpted be, a sely simple man
That nothing means but right, to further as he can
And that ye might him rue and pity some what more
He makes as though he war, but one against askor
And yet if all be weighed, in balaunce just upright,
The challenge restes in the^, that first began the fight
But that in diede I hear, ye have the Beau Lugent.
And eke that other one, that such reward has sent
To him that went about, to stille you with decree
As Phe^us gave to Pan, or judgment like says he
Lo here I bring my boat to row ye home to Lynne
But ye such conscience have for punishment of sin
That house and home may sincke, and oxen sterue at plow.
But ye may some what get to carry home wit you
would ye be glad in diede, to swincke and live in rest?
Th^n have ye much a wrye begone to make your neste
And that I trust at ones, in sobre words to show,
Bestirre ye now (...) beast, ye mariner ginnes to row,
A person of such wit, as ye would sieme to be
Of such fore cast and zeal and of such gravity
Before he takes in hand, against a thing to write
And set the same abroche, to all the peoples sight
Will weight what words therein, be not well said or meant
And eke how far the sam from duty do dissent
which thing if ye so did, in reading of that bille
Then found ye all things well or some thing sounding ill
But if you found them well ye rail and lack a ground
But if they siemed so ylle, as ye do make them sound isle
Then duty claymeth this, and specially in you
That in your youth was taught, your duty well / noughe
To have ra^e it fro the post and whem ye warned had
The seller, that this dream was dangerous to be radd
The same in sobre wise, to open unto those
That lawful power have our state, to bind and louse
Of whom you thanks had then deserved for your diede
And taken away ye cause where of more evil might bried
But this thing did ye not, wherefore I may conclude
If any harm there be, by you the woorte was brued
And ye concealed first, the fault ye did epsy
And judged it matter mete, your wra^gling wits to try
Ye ^^^^med ye smelled a spark, which though it ware right small
Ye could by blowi^ges bring, and tindre mirt w^thall
To make a flambe right great, in sight of many a ^n
which straight way of it self would else have quenched alone*
But had the dreamer given the victory to you
And hold his peace at first all had been good enough:
The purging of your galle and hongre of a cote
As sum men do affirm, have chauffed you so hot
Yet if you so have found such sparckles in this dream
Go blow them where they bred, they be without my stream
Although you argue thus, entente will have effect
which western will vould not, that any should suspec^e
where to I answer thus, ye stomble in the plain
And where ye thinck all sure your reasons are most vain
Full little wit ye have, if ye cannot espy
this argument to be much tru^r co^trarrie
For ^ieldomer intent, atteineth to effect
Then as ^e folishelly, thee other do object.
I bydde no man to take it as dream or fantasy
But there I plainly showed, that even so took^ it I
And nothing else did mean in homely western will
But so to choppe in trenchour terms, as folks do at the mill
where each to other carpes in rude and borrell spieche
Of things where with the^ selves, do neither smarte ne itch^,
And if you would for this, we learned b^the to dyue
My boat and I toguether god let ye never thryue
But god be ^hancked ever, that so for us prouides
More noble hearts and wise, our common wealth that guyds
As he them list assign, that reigns in the top
Our true redoubted king, of such excellent hope
As never subjects had a pattern more express
Of kingly virtues all, and learned nobleness
whose persons are to high to, stowpe into this rythme
and better nothing said, the^ spoken out of time
To you my pen I turn that iudgen me amysse,
And pray you well to note the parkinge by of this
Sith ye so well can rack, the mening of ones mind
And have a grace to smelle, that few men else would find
Content your self a while, and neither fume ne freate
Though with your own to you I do like measure meat
And sure I will not choose the woorst among the roast
But take the word wherein you sieme to triomphe most:
Because ye would be thought, to reverence thee powers
(As well becomes us all, to all our governors)
Such name as they right well contented are to hear
And such as of it self a majesty does bear
Contented are ye not, to vse^ in your verse
But by the name of gods ye do them often rehearse
Now if you will allege the scripture uses this
According to your skille: Ego dixi dii estis
Then harken I beseech your, gods how they agree
To him that we call God, and one believe to be,
Lo in your rithmes before, peruse them who that will,
It well appearres, the Gods, whom you them liken till,
ware neither gods ne me^ of cyuyle living good
But fansyes of ydolatres, and dreams of Robin hood,
But grant that they ware gods of old gentilitie
Yet must we take them such, as they them write to be
Then ponder well my friend sith ye the latten know,
what tales in them be told of Jupiter arowe,
And what a worthi clue, ye wynd up of this threade
when ye thee magistrates, conioyne to such a head:
And here if I would bring, e^tent to have effect
I could make some believe ye ware to be suspecte:
Ye mean them honor least where most ye do them glos^
And use such terms, as might be made a shipmans hose:
I could ye hear paynt out, a rabble of those Gods
Betwixt he which and Magistrates, I trow ye should put odds
But that I do avoid, and fear also in diede,
That people in my rithmes such things vnfytt would riede
I am not yet so bold, to talk at large of them
whom always I have feared, if they but wink or hem
But use in you has bred, such skylle by sundry change
That happen what so will, it sieldome seems strange
where practice small is had, in any kind offeate
To such it often happes, that tryf^le seem them great
But stomach so are your, by travail in your trade
with many a wandering course, from post to pyllour made
That nothing mountes so high, ne semethe of such, wait
That ye will not attempt if ones ye wind the bait.
Thus far I am content, to waste ye on the way
And as for all the rest, that you to other say
Let them the answer make to whom it apperteignes
For I have some what else to occupye my brains
And for your lesson, lo by Christ I like it well
And such a like I wiene, does Pierce the ploughman tell,
But yeat leave out this clause, to spread it on thee floor
It was enough to have it written on the door
For if it comme so low, to lie upon the ground
I fear that many ficte, will make it full unsound
And tread it all to durte, in sort I you assure
That ye may hap forgette to put the things in ure.
W. Watreman.
A plain and fynall confutation: of camelles corlyke oblatracion

YE vprighte men which loves thee light, whose hearts be void of gyle:
Condemn no cause till truth be tried, give ear and list a while.
And mark my tale from point to point, let no word skip vnskande:
And hear them with indiffrent ears, and way them as they stand.
First lay aside affeccio^ blind for truethe my cause must plead,
Let nether foe nor fained friend, this matter Judge nor read.
And then I trust to clear my self, and Camel clean confound:
That blows the trompet of defam, which geues uncertain sound.
The tune where of semes yet fulstraunge, so boistrous is the blast:
But ^uiet calmes settes forth still winds, when storms begone and past.
Which ^uyet time I wish to have, that I may be well hard.
And the^ I hope this vypars bryde, shall have his just re / ward.
That forgeth fautes and seeks holes, to crepe and ^eale therein:
And flattereth for no other cause but fame or gain to win.
What thinks this man he has more wit, and learning in his head.
Than has five thousand other men, that (Dicarres dream has read.
Or thinks he that I am so rash, to run so far from square
Or that I make such obcure things, that I dare not declare.
Than is he blind and very fond, and scarce him self does know.
Let him look on his book again, his rule is nothing so.
To you I speak fre^d Camel now, which wrelleth right to wrong:
You say you have been kept at scole, in soothe I think not long.
Your master did but stroke your head, he did for bear the rod:
I dout he did not teach you well, how you should fear your God.
For if he had you would have stayed, to write against this dream:
To spy a mere within my cie, since in yours is a beam
If you might site and judge my cause, I should soon feel your worst:
But God forbid there were long horns, on beasts that would be corst.
I ca^l you beast because you said, here goes the beast abroad:
Thee beast will turn you gage a grote, if he be prickte with goade.
Now turn sir beast and come al often, fling not for fear of whip:
In deed it is a monstruse thing, to see a Camelle skipe.
You say you shoke me by the sleue, than rubde I your gall pack:
If I know how to do you good my healpe you should not ^acke.
We I ompe in leasse, ye gab fire beast, I am but one alone:
But I can prove ( O beavv Camevv) that you are more then on.
My surreioyndrer doethe declrare, this dream was for the best:
And yet you cry, abandye ho at tenues thus ye ieste.
What can you lay unto my charge, of malice or of hate:
Since I do wyshe that every wight, should walk in his estate.
This veerse you hyppe, and yet it stands, next that when rex does rayng:
Both these be good and godly to, hereshall I show you plain.
But as I said, out of fair flours, thee spyder poys^n takes:
And yet the be does feed thereon, and there with honey makes
I do compare this spyder now, to you which so apperes.
For that you run a patheles way, to lead me in thee breerres.
Wheare find you this that dreams can have, any effect at a^l.
Be not they fancyes of thee head and so wise men the^ call why do you write
against a dreme, which has a small effect,
why turn you yt to meaning lewd, to bring it in suspect,
You meant no more but me to learn, so you woolde you excuse:
Sir if you mind to keep a frynde, do not your frinde so use.
You brag you of your master much when you to skool did go:
You said ye larned your duty well good sir it seems not so.
To serve the king and pray for him, I learnede as well as you:
To love him leall for con / cyens sake this lesson well I knew.
His council eeke for to obey my dueti learnes me too:
And with there matters not to mell, nor therein have to do.
This lesson heether to I kept, and shall here after keep:
Tylle I to earth return again, where flesh and fell must sleep
What is thee cause you answerde not, to that which I wrott last:
You do conclude much like a thief, which is conde^nde and cast.
For at the bar he pratethe long, and can no reason show:
To clear him self and sa^e his life when truth does him orethrow.
So you all though with matter now, I do you still assault:
Yet with great shame you are content, to yield unto your fault.
I wrate more things than one or two, yet read them ons again:
I do perceive a littell thing, will soon orecomme your brain.
You have sought council fourteen days, it seems that you did dream:
Or else ye thought to rune away, into sum other realm.
But now I hear a sodayn sound, the beast begyns to braye:
It is much like a Camells voice, that dwelles in lyn they say.
Be as be may you say your self, ye bid me foet it well,
why will the beast now lead the dance, with beasts I will not mell.
But wheare you say, I when out whens, above eala a note,
You gront and groen from gammuth far, I dare you gage my cott.
Sins you will put me to my trompe, with a false card often,
Mark how justice shall ioyn to truth, I will make large this when.
Note Though justice does belo^ge to Rex, whose sword puts that in ure,
Yet every justice under him is not so just and pure.
Because there be knights of the post, which will them selves forswere,
And fained truth will forge a tale, sometimes in justice ear.
And work such wills, justice to blind, and make him credit lies.
Such crafty mistes these men can cast, before true justice eyes.
Though justice of him self is pure and clean deuoide of crime,
Yet falce witness may alter him, and change his mind sometime.
Thee faut there of is not in him, he would fayn ioyn to truth.
But flatteryng faith, may him corrupt, alas the more is ruthe.
When truth is forman of the quest, and right shall vardyt give,
Than justice shall ioyn still to truethe, and so together live.
Thus is this when made manifest, truly as I it me^t
And yet it was full plain before, to every true intent.
Here have I waide what justice is, to whom it does pertain,
who swaies the sword, who does decree, hear have I set out plain.
Now stay a whil, and mark this when, which you call principal,
And is ye beast among the rest* and, stands last of all
Note when rex does reign ( And) rule the roast, a coniuction copulative,
Your master taught you not to know, could he such things discriue?
Now Rex does rain whom god preserve, in long life on us here,
And send him rule the roast him self, as prince withouten per.
That he may find those secret flighes, which now in corners lie:
And such as do abuse his laws and live so wickedlye.
It semes they live as they delyght, and lean not to his lore^
Because he does commend them laws and they pass not therefore.
^owe does the master of the scole, his scollers rule and tame:
when he does give precepts and rules, and none does keep the same.
How does ye king his peopl rule, let this be better waide
when he does give them laws and acts and none of them obeyde.
For though yt Rex do rain and rule, as I believe in deed
Yet does not he for mercy great, yt wicked al out wede
And lyk as God is mercyful so does our king in deed:
Enswe and follow in his steps, (whom God defend and speed.)
His Justice is to punish sine with death and pain extreme:
which is most godly exercis^d and so does show and seem
Yet if al those that do offe^de, should have such punisheme^t
what man is living now a days, that should escape vnshente?
But following the example of, the Lord and king of kings:
Does often suffer us unkind, in vile and grievous things.
Because he would (as it does seem, so merciful and dear:)
Be rather love) the^ obeyed or only dread and fear.
And thi^ his mercy god^y mente, does make us worse in deed:
As scollers when they lack the rod, do live withouten dread.
But when he shall begin again, to punish wyckednes:
which is his justice (or more plain,) to us but ryghtousnes.
Then folk for fear (but not for love,) shall better end their life
As ho^ses whipped, ye then for fear shall stynte and cease our strife.
wherefore if every king this day which ought in deed to raingne:
Do raygne and rule the roast and weed, the wicked out full plain.
Then have they wealth with oute^ strife, which God give us ryghtsone:
That all our wyckednes were paste, and dreadful days were done.
If Dycar said, when Rex does rain, and al me^ do obey
How could you Camel, thus conclude? he raygneth not to day.
Note Or if he said, when Christ is God, and you a faithful mam:
would ye conclude? ergo, (to him,) he is not God now tha^
wherefore if Rex do raygne and rule, as I believe he does:
And I beseech almyghtye god, he may do long in sothe
Yet must you take a another point, contained in this when
when Rex does raygne and rule the roast, and wedes out wyked men.
You must not harken half the tale an leave thee rest behind:
for than in deed you do a / mysse, and feign would quareles find
You Read in faith much like the nun omnia probate
And turned not thee other side quod bonum est rene^e.
Read you no more but Rex does raygne, and left the rest vnspyed:
Is there not to) and rule the roste, the sentences is so tide.
And wede out wiked wordly men, thee spotted from the clean:
whose vice infectes the chosen lambs, lo thus did Dicar mean.
He doubted not but Rex doethe roigne, the truethe it self doethe show:
But yet he tho^ghte it good to wede, out wicked men I trow.
And thus I say did Dicar dream, thee sense doethe plainly tell
If vpryght eyes and rihteous minds, do look and skan him well.
If you should be my judge I se, and deem my dreminge thus
I should have but short, curtesy, and you my cause discus,
But god has sawed your horns so short, no great hurt do you can
He made you nether lord nor judge, nor skarse an honest man,
when Rex does reign and rule the roast, and out thee wicked weed,
Than you and many other like, would first of al preced
But where you set a snare and net, for these that well entende.
To show what is the very cause, of evil and the end.
There you yourself (and if it were, applied well in fram
As he has meant) should certainly be catchid in the same
what if I should cast forth the bone, you thought to choke me with:
Perhaps you may repent to late, you went so nie y^ pyth
Where is your lesson now be come, you lernd so long ago,
That spide such fault in dicars dreme, and yet conceilde it so.
Note If it had raught to Jupiters seat as you affirm in deed
You ought not it have kept so long* but straight it told with speed.
Or if you thought you saw the mist, that no man else could s^rye,
There should no cause have stopte you so* to tell it by and by
If dicars when, as true it is be clear from blame and blotte
Yet your offe^c is no whit less by cause you thought it not.
If ignorance had said a mysse, ye same be my defense,
Yet wilful ignorau^^ in you, does plead your great offense.
Behold of god ye rightuouse scourdge, that now a mydde the gryn:
You laid to trappe the innocent your self is fallen theri^
What say you now wise camelles caulfe, if rex wede wicked men,
You should of right be tide to short, to peruerte dicars when
But till such spyders be wede out, and all their cob webes to,
That sekes to trappe the sell / lie flies, as you begin to do.
The barnes I say that here do won, with in this britain land,
Shall bide alas those dred full days, and dicars dreme may stand.
O Sir you took my then in hand, where with mi when I knit
where I perceive your franityke head, begins, an other fyt.
Note Can you deny the plages of god, which he to us has sent?
And scourges us for our great sins, from which with not repent.
Does not thee plowe man plowe his grownde, and laborith vereisor.
The earth bringes forth his fruit like wise, encreasyng more and more
Does not the heavens give us rain* the watters gyues us foshe?
Does not the counsel seek our wealth, as well as we can wish?
Do not they take great care and pain, all euells to redress
Yes all these things do work as well, as man's to^g can express.
Yet though our king do make good laws, the earth bringes forth much sede:
Are euermor deceived quite whereto they tak great ease.
Perceive and see the beam so great which is before thin eyes:
And tha^ correct thy brothers fault, without fraud or lies
Quench first this your malicious mind, yt burns like the fire.
And tha^ your sclau^der certai^ly will not be thought of Ire.
Remember that you reconcyle you to your brother again:
Or else your offering will not be received, this is plain.
Speak nothing iudgyng any man, ye wise man does eror^ with unadvised
wylfulnes, nor gruing ill report
Tau^te non for virtue, while thou lyuest: for than thou art not wise:
And wylt be truly taken for a fool, maintaining vice.
When Camel folowes any point of this* as it aperes,
And leaves ^eaw and subtle and words: we shall have pleasantyeres. (...)

U^we this good reader following and that which is before
To thend to frame thy life thereto, and mend it ever more.
A Christ bideth us ensue his stepps, and suffer wrong and grief
As he has suffered grievous pai^e, which is our health and lif
You most says Christ observe and keep, for very i^ward zeal,
His Godli and divine precepts and than you shall have weal.
^achary was, for godliness, of will and not constrainde)
Imputed just before ye Lord I know this is not fainde.
^ AND fynali we ought to leave al sclau^der lies and strife
For nothing is more wickedder in man's or womans life
^ CONsidering yt we shall give acco^ptes, before ye lord
Of al our deeds, our wicked thoughts, and every ydel word
Esteem not this as vanytie, and nedelesse matters e^e
For than in y^ (good brother mie) is wysdo^e far to seek
Amend thy life by these precepts, and bear me no disdain.
And than pass I nothing at all though it (...) thank^lesse na^^^.
FINIS.

