A brefe treatise declaryng what and where the church is, that it is known,
and whereby it is tried and known.

Made by John Churchson.

Beati qui habitant in domo tua domine. Psalm. lxxxiii. Blessed be they O Lord
that dwell in thy house.

Anno Dom. 1556.

To the reader.
MAruayle not gentle reader, that I have attempted to pen this brief
treatise of ye church, a matter of such importance as requires a man of
much more reading, knowledge, and judgment. For I have not made this
enterprice of any presumption, but of good zeal, good mind and intent,
trusting that my well meaned attempt, shall ministre occasion to some synguler
clerk of notable name, calling to his pitiful remembrance, the pitilesse
slaughter of no small number of souls, thoroughe contagious factions, and
sects in this realm, to bear up (like as Atlas heaven) in the stead of Me a
pigmey, this weighty cause, to perform and perfyt the imperfection of this my
enterpryce, and that this my offered farthynge shall move some notable man, Mat.
12.
bountifullye enriched with Gods treasure, to bring out thereof both new and
old, to the aduaunceme^t of this matter, Mat. 13.
so necessary to the restitution, reparatio^, and mayntenaunce of evangelical
concord in Christen religion, as the son, fire, and water in earth, is not
the like: not doutyng but that the travail will be most thankfully taken. For
no person (except a reprobate) is so affectionate to untruth, but that he
wylbe at the least, indifferent between truth and untruth, his own salvation,
and dampnation, especially if it be remembered that humayn praise, and painted
flatterye, mouynge to the defense of untruth, be but vanities, and shall not
avail before our just judge, who will judge, not after the face, nor
according to the flesh, but as is the truth. John. 8.
For as he deceyueth not, so is not he deceived by any color, countenance,
hypocrysye, or faced allegations of scriptures against scripture, Ieroni. to 4.
pagin. 374.
which consists not in the vocables, but in the sense, understanding,
spiritual marowe, pyth, and kernyll contained within the^. If we would
remember that the servants of God should not be contentious, but meke,
tractable, mylde to al persons, ready to be taught the truth, which is in ye
catholic church only, we would not seake in the word of peace, concord,
and unity, for scisme, division, and discord, against unity: but every of us
would make the petition that the manne of God king Dauyd, ^sal. 26.
desirous to live in unity, made saying: One thing I have desired of our
Lord: and that also I will require, which is, that I may dwell in the house of
our lord, all the days of my life. This house of our Lord, the house of
unity, is the mylytaunte church of Christ, against whom the light
harneysed soldiers, and foreprickers of Antechryst has often skirmished to
spoil it, (if it might be) of gods precious verities, that Antechryst their
general at his own personal coming with his hugle army, may have the less
to do, the more open way, and the frankar en tree to invade our true messiah
him self, who is the only mark that his fore renners prickethe at, and he
him self woll shoate at. Wherefore god grant to every factious person
repentance and turnyng of mind to truth, and to retire to the unity of
Christ, his catholyke church, that he may be in the safe protection of the
invincible head and capytayne thereof Christ Jesus. Whereunto Gods own
servant our virtuous, and gracious Soueraygne Lady the Queen, casting her
highness pitefull eyes upon our late most miserable state, has by the godly
assystence of our godly and Prudente Soueraygne Lord the king restored this
her Majesty's Realm, consyderyng right well such to be no less then
infidelles, Mat. 10.
and publicans, by christ's doctrine, which do not humble them selfs to the
same, for that (says Austen) yt the soul is in ye natural body of man: Aug.
to. 10 sermon, 186
that is the holy Ghost, in the mistycal body of Christ: and that does the
holy Ghost in the whole Church, that the Church does in all her members of one
body, and as if a corporal membre fortune to be cut of from man's Body, the
soul and life follows it not: but whereas ye member lived being in the body,
and divided, losethe life: semblablye a chrystyan man is catholyke, whiles he
lives in ye body of Christ the catholyke church: but being cut of, he is
become an heretyke, for the spyryte of GOD, folowethe not a divided member.

If therefore you will live of the Holy Ghost, keep charytie, love truth,
desire unity, that you may atteyne to eternytye. Thus this fynyshynge with
Saint Austens words, I commend you to the hands of our GOD of peace,
entyerly even from the pryuye chamber of my heart desyryng you to read this
little book with indifferent eyes, and desire of christian concord, and so I
wyshe you daily increase of godly virtue and knowledge with most hearty farewell
in our savior Jesus Christ.

the Church
FOr as much as of late time, many diverse scismes, sects, and heresies have
sprung up in the church of our savior Jesus Christ, where with ye same only
church has been most contentiously disquieted, most cruelly invaded, and as
it were most piteously rented, and defaced, to the extreme perdition, and
destruction of innumerable souls, boughte, not with corruptible gold and
silver, but with the most precious blood of the immaculate lamb our savior
christ, especially in this realm of England. I thought it right necessary to
declare unto you with no less brevity, than the matter will suffer whereunto
you may, and should constantly cleave, for the sure vpholdyng and continual
maintenance of your true faith against the fradulent thrustyng fourth of
scismaticall and erroneous opinions. That ye shall understand to be ye parmane^t
word of god and the catholic church, 1. Tim 3
which is the house of god, the pillar and fyrme foundation of truethe: as
writes the apostle Paul. The church I add unto the written word of GOD,
because the said word for his profundite, and bountiful sense is not to be
expounded by the private interpretation of this or that private brain, 1. Pet,
1.
but by the universal interpretation of the universal church, inspired with
the holy ghost, because it is most plain the church, to be the faithful keeper
of the scryptures, 1. Tim ^ Romans 3.
concredited and committed unto her custodye, because also, that Christ, Mat.
29 Ioh. 14.16.
who is truth, promised him self and his spirit of truth to be resyaunt,
and resident in the catholyke church, to teach it all the truth, not for a
day, a month, a year or two, but perpetually and continually even to the
worlds end, and therefore only mete, to whom the interpretation of gods
word should be committed, and to whose only judgments and determinations in
all controuersyes of religion, we should fastly stand: wherefore to the^d that
you may the better know the said church, I will god wyllyng attempt to open
unto you according to the proportion of my gift, what the church is, where it
is, that it is known, and how you may know it, that you may the more
certeynely keep your selfs sound in the found faith thereof. For our
adversaries denying not but confessyng to be a church, I will not spend time
in prouyng it to be, but in declaryng the aforesaid points according to my
promise. For the performance whereof, First you must understand that the
militant church of christ edyfyed at the fulness of time, What ye church is
warryng and fyghting against hell gates, Gal. 4. Mat. 16.
scisme and heresye, and having souldyers valyante and faint, stable and
instable, good and bad is a communyon, societye and felowshyppe called by god
from Ge^tylitie and Iudaisme, to the profession of one faith, one Doctrine, 1.
Pet. ^
and one kind of Sacraments and from darkness to his marvelous light: and by
the same visible Sacraments brought into the unity of one visible body,
professing one form of chrystian religion. It is a congregation called, as
well appears by the greek word eccleliae deduced, of the greek verb, (...)
which sygnyfyeth to call out. And also by Paul.

Vocati est sinunum corpu^, Collo. 3.
you are called into one body. Again. Fiaelis est deus: 1. Cor. ^
perque^ u^cati estis in ^acietatem filij eius jesus Christi Domini nostri. God
is true by whom you are called into the society of his son Jesus Christ
our Lord, so that the church is a convocation, a congregatyon and society
called by god out from the dampnable bondage of Satan, unto the lively
communion, and free company of our lively head Jesus Christ, from dark and
blind ignorance, unto the merueylous light and knowledge of christyan
verytye. And the same called society and congregation, is knit together (as is
said) into one body, not in one place, but in one form and profession of one
faith, and one Doctrine, and that by one manner of sensyble Sacraments, as is
manifest by Saint Auguste^. In nullum nomen religionis, seu verum: Aug. to. 6.
co^, fau li. 19 c 11.
seu falsum coagula^i homines possunt, nisi alique signaculorum vel
sacramentorum nisibilium consortio colligentur.

Men cannot be gathered into any name other false, other true of religion,
except they be tied and joined together by the communion and participatio^, of
visible signs, or sacraments out of the which communyon and society, are
heretykes, scismatikes, paynymes, and excommunicates, heretics, and
scysmatykes be not of that congregation, by cause theye of their own mind
went out and voluntarylye forsook the said congregation, having it in
contempt, and contemptuously persecutyng it, nor paynymes, be of that
society, because they another be, nor at anityme were in the church, nor do
acknowledge it, no nor excommunicates, because they by the publyke sentence of
ye church, are separate, excluded and put out from the exterior society of
the church, unto their repentance and amendeme^t of life, but though other
christians falling into deadelye sin, be not joined to the good with the
unity of the lively spirit, and band of charity, but do lose the grace of
the internal communion, nevertheless they are united to ye good with a certain
exterior union of ye visible sacraments (so long as they keep peace with the
Doctrine and professyon of faith) as was Peter the Apostle, Mat. 23.
notwithstanding his thryse denial of christ, as Judas not withstandyng his
avarice, as such whose doctrine our Savior Christ commanded to be observed,
notwythsta^dynge their evil doings, and as are ministers also persystynge in
their several vocations, although by some sin mortal they be internally
divided. For as the dried hand of the man, mencyoned in the Gospel was before
the healynge thereof, a membre of his body, and as a membre, whose bones veins
and synewes be broken and hangs outwardly by the skin continues still a
membre and a part of the body, even so a christian dyuyded inwardelye by
sin, but cleauynge to the body of Christ the church externally, by the
outward union of the professian and vysyble form of one faith, and by the
exterior participation of ye vysyble sacraments, the exterior syghnes, 1. Tim 3
and fourmes of petye is externally still a member of Christ his mystical body
the church, although not profitable and continuethe in the external societye
of the same church. For the militante church conteyneth good and bad, penitent
sinners, just and unjust, as is euydente by the parable of ye field bri^ging
forth good fead and cockle and by ye primative church, wherein was good
penite^tes, and false covetous Judas, and yet of this church milita^t ye
apostles made me^tio^ in an article of our faith as follows. Credo sanctam
ecclesiam catholicam I believe the holy called universal church, congregation
and multitude. Observe here by ye way that this article namethe the church
holy, not because it consysteth of only just ryghteous and perfect
chrystians, for therein be good and bad, just and unjust, M^^. ^^.
constante and inconstante, as is aforesaid as playnelye teaches also the
parable of the net, comprisynge good fyshes and badde, and as plain is, by
the great house, sygnifyeng the great universal church, 2. Tim 2
which contains vessels, to honor and dishoner, and by dyueres other like
scryptures, but it is named holy, because al chrystians which make one church
and congregation, be called of our holy god by his holy word, unto holy life,
be sanctified and made holy by one holy faith, and one holy Baptysme, and do
persyste in the communion of the same, for Paul writes to the Corinthian,
church a membre of the universal church: 1. Cor. 5.
notwithstanding that therein was the incestuous fornicator: contentious
persons, and doutyng in the resurrection of the bodies, as follows, Paul the
Apostle by the vocation of Jesus christ, 1. Cor 15
and by ye will of God, 1. Cor. 1.
Sostenes a christen brother, unto the church, of God, which is at Corynth,
sanctified by Christ Jesus, and called to holiness and holy things. Wherefore we
may not think strange, that the catholyke church, whereof holy Christ our
sanctyfycation, Ephesians. 5
is the undoubted head, conseruer and preserver (as writes Paul) is named the
church of God, and holy, though evil chrystians therein be commyxt with the
good, for that notwythsta^dynge they be all called by one name, as affirms,
S. Austen In una domo omnes sub vno sunt nomine. Aug. to. 2. ^pis. 203.
Quam uis enim moribus diuersi sunt, u^o tamen nomine censentur et professione.

In one house, all be under one name, for albeit they be diverse in manners, yet
they be named by one name, and one profession. The same affirms Ambrose
master to Austen. In uno domo, omnes sub uno sunt nomine, Ambrosi. 2. timo. 2
uno enim domini sui nomine censent ur omnes.

In one house says S. Ambrose, all be under one name, for all are called by
their Lords name. Which is not dissonant from the principle. Euerithynge is to
be named by the best and worthyest part. But our Lord, holiness it self, is
the best part, and worthyeste membre of the church, being head thereof.
Therefore the church ryghtly is called holy, of holy Christ our Lord and
head: yea, and of the holy ghost resydent therein.

Now that I have briefly opened by the way, the cause why the catholyke
church is called holy, ye must understand the said article, to teach us the
holy church, to be a communion of saynctes, Vincent. Airen.
that is to say: of Catholykes, whereby we are taught the catholyke church
to be a community, society, or felowshyppe of catholykes, because they
persyste in the communion of the catholyke and universal holy faith, that was,
and is observed in the catholyke, and universal church, and in the communion
also of the holy sacraments, whereby it is incorporate to our holy head
Jesus Christ, and cleansed in his holy blood, Ephesians. 5.
hallowed with his holy spyrit, has and does holy things, and teaches holy
and wholesome doctrine. Of this conuocatio^, communion, and feloweshyp,
speakethe the elect vessel of Christ, Saint Paul. Multi unu^ corpus sumus in
Christo, Romans 12.
We being many, are one body in Christ. So that the whole many, and
universal multitude, professi^g one holy faith and doctrine, and being
partakers of ye same holy Sacraments, are the mystycall body of Christ,
which is the Catholyke church. Therefore S. Ambrose says: Corpus Christi non
unus aut duo christiani sed omnes. Ambros. in 1. cor 6
The body of Christ is not one or two Christians, but all Chrystians. As in a
natural body, one, two, or three, members make not the whole natural body,
but all the members ioyntlye in their places: so the mystical body of Christ
which is the Church, is not constituted by one or two christians, but by all
the Christians in their vocation (wheresoever they be) joined and lynked
together by ye communion, and participation of the same Sacraments. The like
doctrine also S. Paul taught ye Ephesians, Vnum Corpus, Ephesians. 4.
You are one body. Whereupon Erasmus did write as follows. Vnum corpus estis
omn^s, ab uno pendetis capite. You are all one body, and do depend of one
head. Thus it is manyfeste, all Christians to be the body of Christ, and
that the integrity of Christ, his mystical body, consystethe by no less,
then all Christians, and that thereof is one head, Christ himself, of whom the
said body, the Catholyke church depends. Albeit that in namynge the
church to be Christ's body, Christ is named the head thereof, for else it
could not be his body: yet you may read many Scryptures, that he is by
express words named the head thereof, whereof I will rehearse this one
following. Et ipsum dedit caput supra omnem ecclesiam, Ephe. 1.
que est corpus ipsius. And GOD the fathermade him (meaning Christ) head over
all the universal church, which is his body. Hereby you may euydentlye se,
Christ to be head to all the church, and all the church to be his body, and
by that word all, Paul teaches the church to be a universal congregation.
Likewise to the Corynthians, and to al christians professynge Christ, as the
Corynthes did, Paul did write: 1. Cor 12
Vos autem estis corpus Christi. You be the body of Christ. Whereupon
Primasius says Omnes corpus al be ye body of christ for the universal and ye
whole body of Christ was and is of all faythfulles, Prima^^us.
and not of Corinthe only. Chris. h^ 23. in. 1. Cor. 12.
Therefore Chrysostom says. Vniuersum corpus, non illa Corrinthiorum est
solum sed que vbilibet toto exta^ terrarum orb.

The universal body of christ is not the Corinthian church, only, but the
church that is every where, through the whole world, for the church of
Corinthe, was but a particular church, part, or member of yt universal
church. To be short Paul proves the same by the symylytude of a natural
body, 1. C^. 1^
saying. Sicut enim cor^us unum est et membrahabet multa omnia autem membra
corporis cum sint multa, vnum tamen corpus sunt. ita et christus. For as a a
natural body is one, and has many members, but though all the members of
that one body be many, yet they are but on body, even so is christ, that is to
say, even so is christ, his church as Chrysostom, Iherome, Primasius,
Theophilact with other old aunciente writers, do expound it, as the body and
head in man makes one man, in likewise the whole congregation and flock of
faythfulles, and christ the head of them, make on church. Chrisos. ibidem.
And for that cause Chrysostom affyrmeth, christ in the said scripture, to be
put for the church, naming the church by the worthyeste and best part
thereof. And S. Austen says. Aug. to. 9. ho. 17. trac. 108
Vnus est christus caputet corpus. The head and the body is one christ.
Wherefore the body, which is the church, may well be named by christ. As
bread also is made of innumerable graynes, so the mystical body of Christ the
church consysteth of innumerable faithful members, how soever they be
locally distant, for Vnus panis et unum corpus multisumus. 1. Cor. 10
We being many (says the Apostle, Paul) are one bread and one body, that
is to say, we being many (like as many graynes make one bread) do make one
body, by on baptime and one faith incorporate to one head our Lord Jesus
Christ. By a fold also of sheep, is sygnified the catholyke church: as is
written in the tenth of John, Io. 10.
and by Ciryll upon ye same so that the catholic church is called also by
scripture. the foelde or flock, pasturynge and feadynge through the whole
great field the world, Mat. 13.
wherein is the catholyke church of ye which Jesus Christ is the head sheperd.
Now that I have co^petently declared what the catholyke church is, my promise
byndethe me to enterprise the declaration where the same is.

Where ye church is
By this word catholyke, which is to say universal, added unto the whole
Church, most manyfestly we be taught where Christ his Church is, for it
declares the said church to strecth out her branches and members in to all
and every part of the universal world, as well affyrmethe, famous Austen. Aug.
to. 7. co^. epi. pet. de unitate ecclesie. c. 2
Question certe inter nos versatur, ubi sit ecclesia, utrum apud nos an apud
illos, quae utique una est, quam maiores nostri catholica^ nominarunt, ut ex
ipso nomine ostenderent quia per totum est, secu^dum totum enim catholon greece
dicitur.

A question is among us, where the church is, whether it be among us, or among
them (meaning the donatystes) the which church truly is one, ye which our
forefathers named catholyke, that they by the very name it self might
declare that it is through all, for this word Catholon, is in greek, expressed
in and by all ye whole. This of Auste^, teaches the holy church to be called
catholyke of the forefathers to s. Austen, Aug. to. 2 epi 170
that by that very vocable, we might understand, ye same not to be affyxed,
or tied to any one Realm, nation or people, but to extend to al men of every
country, excludynge no man, that does communycate in christ's one faith and
one baptysme, which agrees to the holy king and prophet, Dauyd postula a me
et dabo tibi gentes hereditate^ tuam, et possessione^ tuam termi nos terre.
Ask of me (says the heavenly father to his only son our savior Jesus
christ) and I will give to the nations to thine inheretaunce, and for thy
possession the extreme borders of the world, consonant to David is this of
Christ himself. Math. 8.
Multi ab orient et occidente uenient et recumbent cum Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob in regno celorum. Many shall come from the East, and from the West, which
shall rest with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the kyngedome of heaven, Euthimius
Euthimius.
a greek author up on this text, says. That by East and West is signified
all places of the universal world so that of all the parts of the whole
world there be, that do obey the Gospel taught by ye Apostles and their
successors, which has, does and shall witness with mouth or pen the
catholyke faith, unto the furthesse people of the world, according to Christ,
Acts. 1.
his saying unto them, you shall witness me in Jerusalem, in all Iurye, in
all Samary, and so fourth to the vttermoste parts of the Earth. By this
Scryptures, it is most plain, the holy church to be catholic and universal
and not particular, as in England, or any other partyculer realm or country,
and therefore the Apostles taught it and named it catholyke saying, I believe
the holy catholic Church, which is the co^munyon and felowshype of saints,
Vincent. Lirinens.
that is to say of catholics, as expounded it Vincentius Lirinensis, above a
leven hundred yers past, because the church extends to all parts,
universally of the whole world. By Paul also it is euydent, that the church
is universal, saying.

Romans 10
Non est distinctio iudci, et grecae, There is no difference between the I we
and the gentle. Act. 10.
And by Petre. Non est personarum acceptor deus, sed in omni gente qui timet
deum et operatur iustitiam acceptus est ^lli.

God does not partially accept men, nor is an affectionat estemer of persons,
but he that fears him, and works ryghteousnes, is accepted of him in all and
every nation and place, so that no country, Prosp. ^t cap. 29
excludes from God any person fearyng him: for as Joseph made barnes
throughout all Egypt, to lay therein their whete not moveable with every
wind, even so Christ our Lord and governor, did consecrate his church
thoroughe the wholle world: therein to place his faythefull, constant, and
immovable in all storms of temptations, moved against the materyall point of
christen relygio^ Bye the barnes, the church is signified, bye all egypt,
Prosper.
all the world is represented says prosperus, whereby it is enforced the
holy church to be catholycke and universal, that is to say, to streatche
into every realm regyon and natyon of this world. Wherewith that singular
doctor. S. Austen makethe most manyfestlye. Ecclesia est corpus Christi
capitis, Augu, in Psalm. 57.
non ista aut illa, sed toto orb diffusa. The church is the body of Christ the
head thereof, not this or that church, but the church which is defunded, and
spread abroad all the world. It is to be marked that the church, which is the
mystical body of Christ, is not a particular Church, included in this or that
corner, but a catholyke congregation spreddyng abroad her beams, and
branches, into all nations, for this purpose makes fully also this notable
saying of Saint Austen following.

Credimus s^nct^m ecclesiam catholicam, Au. to. 10 sermo. de temp. 181
sciendum est quod eccles^am credere, non tamen in Ecclesiam credere debemus.
Quia ecclesia non est deus, sed domus dei est, catholicam dicit toto orb
diffusam, quia diuersorum hereticorum ecclesiae ideo catholice non dicuntur,
quia perloca, atque suas quasque prouincias continentur, hec uero a solis or^u
vsque ad occasum, fidei splendore diffunditur

We believe the holy catholyke church, we should learn the church to be, but
not believe in the church, for the church is not God, but the house of God,
catholyke he calls it, because it is spredde through all the world. For the
conuenticles of our aduersaunt heretics, are not for that called catholyke,
because they are contained within certain particular places, and their own
several prouynces, but this church stretches from the risynge of the son,
to the going down of the Son, with the splende^t and shyning light of one
faith. As bye the interpretation of this word catholyke, s. Auste^ teaches us
where the church is, that is, the church to be in all places of the world,
even from the east to the west, so he teaches the vnleafull assemblyes of
heretics to be but in anguler places, and several prouynces. Wherefore they be
not the catholyke church of Christ, but the malignaunte church of Satan.
The places also named by Peter in the Acts, as Pontus, Galatia, Capadotia,
Asia, Bithinia, Phrigia, Pamphilia, Mesopotamia, Egypt, the parts of Lybye.
etc. And Smurna, Pergamus, Sardis, Thiatris, Philadelphie, Laodicea, the
Ephesians, to whom S. John did write the Apocalypse, The Romans, Corynthes,
Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, Collocensians, Thessalonians, Hebrews, to
whom Paul did wryghte. The dispersed tribes to whom James did write. The
people dyspersed as strangers at Pontus, Galathians, Capados, Asie, Bythinie,
unto whom Peter did write, do testifye the church to be catholyke, and
universal, and universally to extend into al realms, regions, nations,
provinces, and countries, through the whole universal world, and therefore
to be, not in this or that countreye only, but to be in all the world, to the
uttermost people of the four parts thereof. Psalm. 18.
For the sound of the Apostles, and preachers, went into al lands, and their
words into the ends of the world. Therefore I may well conclude with Austens
saying following. Sicut per uerba dei nouimus ubi sit plantatus para^isus, Aug,
to 7 ^ont. lite, petil. li. 2
sic ^er uerba Christi, ubi sit ecclesia, didicimus, per omnes, inquit gentes,
incipiens ab Jerusalem. As by the words of God, we have known where paradise
was set, Luke 24.
so by the words of Christ, we have learned where the Church is: it is (says
Christ) through al nations, beginning at Jerusalem. So that to persons
demaundinge where the church is, the said Austen answers thus. Aug. inc^
pist. Ioh. tract, 1
Inuenimus ecclesiam, in omnibus gentibus.

We do find the church in all peoples and nations. Again in the same place.
Ecce habes ecclesiam, per totum mundum. Loo, thou have the church thoroughe
all the whole world. To this somwyl peradventure object, that all nations,
Jews, and Gentyles believes not in Christ, nor worshyppeth him, but are
infideles, and so infer ye church not to be every where. To the which
objection, Euthi. in psa, 71
Euthimius and ancient greek doctor shall first make answer.

Non dum tamen omnes adorauerunt, tametsi ex omni gente sit qui adoret et
seruiet, Although of al and every nation and people there be, which does pray
unto God, worship and serve God, nevertheless al do not yet worship him. Thus
this notable author affyrmeth that although all do not worship God yet to be
some of every nation, which do worship and serve him. With the same makes
Saint Augustine, saying. Dilectio ex vniuerso genere humano quod defunditur
toto orb terrarum, Augu, in Io. tra 67
facitet colligit populum nouum, corpus nouae nup^ae filij dei vnigeniti
sponsae. Chrystya^ love makes and gathers a new people the body of the new
married spouse of the only begotten son of God, out of all mankind, which
is sprede through the whole world, so that the new people is not al
mankind, but gathered out of all mankind. This confyrmeth Saint Ihon in his
reuelatyon. Apo. 7.
Vidi turbam magnam quam dinumerare nemo poterat, ex omnibus gentibus and
tribubus et populis et linguis, stantes ante thronum and in conspectu agni
amieti stolis albis and palm in manibus eorum

I did sea a great multitude which no man could number, of al gentylles,
tribes, peoples, and tounges standing before the throne and before the la^be
clothed with whyght roabes, and Palms in their hands: here is to be noted,
that ye great multitude is the great cathotholyke church, which is not al
nations, trybes, and peoples, but of all nations trybes, and peoples, so that
of every nation some there be, which do profesie and worship God according
to the mind of the aforesaid aucthorities, affyrmyng the church to be
universal through all the whole world And Paul received the Apostleshyp, Romans 1.
that by faith, Christ his name might be obeyed in and among all nations,
thereby signifyeng not all natyons, but that in all natyons and contryes some
wuld by faith obei his name.

The church is visible.
Now that you know what and where the Church is, ye shall understand, that the
same church is not insensyble inuysyble and hydden, but sensyble visible,
manifest, and known, as playnelye teachethe the good and godly prophet Dauyd
saying. Psalm. 1^
In sole posuit t^bernaculum suum. God has set his tabernacle in the son,
Au. to. 2. epis. 166
which tabernacle as wyrteth Saint Austen is the church set in ye son,
that is to say, manyfestly known to all men unto the furthest borders of ye
world. Likewise in the canticles, the same Austen makes this exposition.
Augu. de cant. ca, 5
Insole posu t tabernaculum suum, hoc est, in manifesto, posuit ecclesia^ suam.
He has set his Church in manifest sight. With this makes Christ him self
who instituted the Church. Croma i^ math. 5.
Non potest ciuit is abscondi supra montem posita.

The City which is set upon the hill cannot be hydden this City Saint Austen
affyrmethe to be the church, whose words be these, Facile est tibi uidere
ciuitatem super montem constitutam de qua dominus ait in euangelio, Aug. to. 2
epi 170 ad sever.
quod abscondi non possit ipsa est enim ecclesia catholica. It is easy for the
to see the city set upon the hill of whom our Lord speaks in the gospel,
that it cannot be hydden, for it is the catholyke church. Hanc ignorare nulli
licet, Augusti. Ibidem.
ideo secundum uerbu^ domini nostri Jesus Christi abscondi non potest. It is not
lawful for any man to be ignoraunte of this catholyke Church, therefore
according to the word of our Lord Jesus Christ, it cannot be hydden, if it
were hydden, and unknown, it were lawful to every man, not to know it, and to
be ignorant thereof. Albeit that this be sufficient to satisfye any
pers^asible person, yet you shall read other most plain sayings, Aug. to.
7. de unitate eccles. c. 14
of the same Austen. Non est ista ecclesia operta, quia non est sub modio, sed
super candelabrum ut luceat omnibus qui in domo sunt.

This church is not hydden nor secret for it is not under a busshell or
stryke, but upon the candylstycke, that it may give light to all being in the
house. Whereby it is manifest, that as a candele kyndled is set upon the
candelsticke, Math. 5.
to be visyble and to give light to al being in the house. So the church the
house of Christ, is open and manifest to all, being in ye same, you have
therefore (says Austen) the church to be sprede every where, Aug, ibi.
and to increase until the harvest, (which is the worlds end.) You have ye
city of the which he that made it said. The City cannot be hydden, that is
set upon a hill. Ipsa est ergo quae non in aliqua part terrarum, Augusti.
Ibidem.
sed ubique notissima est. That is therefore the Church it self, which is
most euydently knoen, not in any particular part only of the world, but
every where and in every place. Therefore Christ commanded his faythfulles
to complain unto the church upon such yt after due admonyshyon, persysteth
irreformable, saying. Dic ecclesie, si autem ecclesiam non audiet rit, Mat. 18
sit tibi sicut ethnicus and publicanus. Tell the church, but if he will not
hear the Church, take him for an ethnycke, and a publycan, if the church were
not vysyble and known, it had been a vain commandment commau^ding to
complain to it. To take therefore vanity from the commandment of Christ and
to grant truth and effect to be therein, we must needs confess his
catholic church to be visible, and that it may be as it wear fingre pointed
as appearethe, bye. S. Austen in this following. Nunquid sic oste^ demus
ecclesiam fratres mei, Augu, in Io. tract 1
quomodo oste^ditur hominibus noua luna? no^ne aperta est? nonne manifesta?
no^ne obtinet omnes ge^tes? Shall not we (my brethren) show the church, as
the new moan is showed to men? is not the church euydente? is it not manifest?
rayneth it not in all nations? To the which manifest church, he gave manifest
and visible ministers, as Apostles Prophets, Ephe. 4.
euangelystes pastores and doctors, which are were and shall be to ye worlds
end vysyble and not invisible, Math. 5
for to them Christ said. Vos estis lux mundi You are the light of the world,
which cold not be true, if they were not seen and perceived. If the church be
not sensible, but insensible, then the sacraments, the ministerye and
ecclesiastical offices, the Ecclesystycall mynysters, the vocations to
Ecclesiastical offices: Yea the word of GOD written and preached should be
insensyble, which should be against Saint Paul, saying. Romans 10
Faith is by hearing and hearing by the word of Christ. Seeing therefore
by these aucthoryties, I have although brefelye: yet suffisientli proved the
catholycke church which is eueri where, to be manifestly known, I will
likewise god helping, prove the same not to err in the materyall points of our
religion: although some corrupt me^bres be thereof. The catholyke church does
nor err.


For albeit in this universal church, which is vysyble, be many bad, so well
as good, iniust as just, folyshe vyrgyns, Mat. 25
as wise, euel seeds, as good seeds and in the net badde fyshes, as good, Mat.
13
yet we may not think ye same catholyke vysyble Church, to err in the
necessary points of Chrystyanitye: no more then did the apostles in there
belefe, preachinges, and doctrine, because traiterous Judas was of there
fellowship, we may no more bring the doctrine, ordinances and interpretations
set fourth to us by the universal Church in doubt, by cause there be some
bad therein, then we may call in doubt the Apostles doctrine because evil
Judas was of yt congregation. If it be an untruth to affirm that all the hole
company of Aungelles in heaven, did err, because some of them did err and
fell from heaven. Who will affirm to be a truethe, the whole multitude of
Christ his Church, which the scripture calls ye kingdom of heaven, Mat. 13
to err: because some evil chrystians therein do err. The arche of Noe,
Gene. 7.
an expressed figure of the Church: having therein beasts clean and unclean
having therein (...) Cham the wicked child of Noe, with the rest that were good,
erred not from the tuition and protection of God, nor were drowned, in the
deuouryng whaues of the ragynge floude, but was co^tynually in the sure certain
and safe custodye of almighty God, and so preserved and kept in most certain
safetye, to the full end of the said floude, shall we then say or think, the
catholyke church, of christ, the very veretye represented by that arc, to
err and wander from Christ, Ephe. 15.
and Christ his regiment, the head thereof: seeing that he is Seruator corporis
sui. The Savior and preserver of his body which is the Church, as teaches
the Apostle Paul. Seeing Christ who is verytye, has been, is, and wylbe
contynuallye with his church to the worlds end. Ioh. 14. and. 16.
Seeing (I say) that the holy Ghost, the fyrme co^forter has been, is, and
will be without surceasse during this world resydent in the same, to teach it
all the truethe, and therein to comfort confyrme and establyshe it. At Antioch
were certain Iues, which taught the Chrystians, that except they were
circumcised after ye manner of Moses, they could not be saved, after great
dysputation had thereupon with Paul, Act. 15.
and Barnabas, ye Iues would not be satysfyed (as sects commonly be not) in
so much that Paul and Barnabas, with others were sent to the Apostles and
senyors at Iherusalem, for the decision of this question, among the which,
certain that had been of the pharisaycal sect, and then christened, affyrmed
that christians ought to be circumcised and that the church should command
the law Moysaicall to be kept, and yet Peter and James, with other the
congregation there decreed to the contrary, that the christians should not be
cyrcumcysed, and were bold to say and write. Visum est spiritui sancto and
nobis. etc. It pleases the Holy ghost and us, to burden you with no more,
but with these necessaryes. etc. Although in this council and congregation
were some that erred, as they which had been Phariseis, yet we cannot without
impiety say, that the whole holy assemblye did err. Which truly did
say: it pleases the holy ghost and us. Wherefore to affirm the whole
catholyke church of Christ to err in matters of our fayeth, and necessarelye
appurtenau^t to christian manners, because some evil be amongst them, is a
wicked sclaunder to the mistycall body of Christ, and an ungodly blasphemye
to Christ himself, the head thereof, yea, and to the holy ghost
contynuallye resydente therein, to whose inspirations revelations,
instructions, and regiment, the catholyke church always is obedyently
subject, or else the holy ghost wuld not contynuallye abide in it, according to
Christ's promise, Ps. 14^.
which promise cannot be untrue, for he is faithful in all his words. So
that although that euel be mixed with the good in the church, yet we must not
think it to err in the wayghtye matters, 1. Tim ^
but to stand to it, as to the pyllar of truth, and not to forsake it, as
aduertyseth us Saint Cypryan. Ci^ epi 3 lib. 3.
Et si uidentur in ecclesia esse zizannia, non tamen impediri debet aut fides
aut charitas nostra, ne quoniam zizannia in ecclesia esse cernimus, ipsi de
ecclesia recedamus.

Although corrupt seeds do appear, and be seen in ye church, Yet our faith or
charity should not be let, molested, nor troubled, so that because we se
corrupt and noughty seades growing in the Church, therefore we should
relinquyshe and forsake the church, but to suffer the evil by charytie, being
studious and careful to keep the unity of the spyryte, by ye ba^d of peace,
as wylleth S. Paul and rather to be strong in toleratyng the badde, Ephe. 4.
then to be ungodly in forsaking the good But forsake not they the church for
corrupt seades, which for naughty chrystians sake do deny, refuse and reiecte
the Decisions, determinations and ordinances of the church, and her
understandings of scriptures, and in slaunderynge the church to err in
points of our faith and of christen relygyon, because corrupted chrystyans be
among the incorrupte. Let us remember that no man having the right use of
his wits, will refuse corn, because chafe or cockle is myxt with ye corn,
no more can he be esteemed a right christyan, that reiectethe the universal
church of Christ for ye baddes sake therein. Forasmuch as they which do
forsake the good wholesome and true Doctrine of any preacher, for his evil
lyfes sake cannot be accounted obediente to this commandment of Christ.

Omnia quecunque dicunt, seruate et facite, que autem faciunt, nolite facere:

Observe keep and do you all things, Mat. 23
whatsoever they do speak and teach agreeable to truethe, but do you not
those things, which they work dissonant from ye same, then truly he that
refuses the felowshyppe of the just for the iniust sake may not be rekened an
humble child to god our father, nor to the universal church our mother. As ye
great house wherein be vessels not only of gold, 1. Tim 2
and silver, to honor, but of woade and earth, also to dishonor, is not to
be forsaken and refused for the vessels sake of dysshonor therein. No more is
the catholyke Church, which is the great house nor her determynations, to be
contempned, for the euilles sake therein permixted with the good, for in the
church the good and the bad, be to gyther as chafe is with the corn says
Austen.

Mali et boni sunt in ecclesia sed apud hereticos soli mali sunt. Aug to 9 in
Io tr. 6
etc. nos fatemur in ecclesia catholicorum, et bonos et malos esse, sed tanquam
grana et paleas.

Good and evil be in the church but among heretykes be only evil etc. We
grant in the Church of catholykes to be good and bad, but as corn and
chafe. Here is to be noted that by Austen among the heretics be none good, but
in the church of catholics, to be not only evil, but also good, yea and
that like as corn and chafe, be together. For as good corn suffers no
detriment ne damage by myxture of the chafe, but is rather conserved and
preserved good therewyth, likewise the good people receives no corruption,
contagion, nor infection in the substance of their religion, by the society
of the evil.

But rather bye continual company, famyliaritye and sight of their fructles
life, do learn to detest and abhor the same and do use there leuitie
comparable to the light moveable chafe, to the establyshyng of their own
godly grauytye, and the inconstant, corrupt and deformed errors of the
unjust, to the trial and confyrmatio^, of their own constante pure and
right doctrine. For as the wicked, evil uses ye good works of the virtuous,
so the virtuous, well uses the ill works of the wicked, to their own
exercise and much profytte, according to the example of GOD him self, who
uses the euylles of the noughty to the exercise, and profytte of the good and
holy, that bye the peruersytye of the evil, the good may profit, be proved
and tried: as learn we may also by Job, and Tho^^ which by tempting Satan
received no damage, 2. cor. 12.
but were proved and tried to their much good, according to this of Paul.
Virtus in infirmitate perficitur. Virtue by infyrmitye as temptatyon,
persecution and adversity is made perfect, strong, and invynsyble. And as
good wheat being winnowed with the wind from ye chafe, is manifest and
manyfestly appears good, so ye good people, by the stormye temptation of the
evil, are tried good, and by the trial are manyfestly known to be good.
Therefore Paul writes.

1. Co. 11
Oportet hereses esse, ut probati manifestifiant, Sects must needs be, yt
they which be good may be known amongst you, for by scisme, in doctrine,
they are stirred to learn the truth, and by diuisyon in living, they are
excyted to seek virtue, and to be the more vygylant in Doctrine, and
circumspecte in living, so that the good faythefulles, takethe no more
detryment, by the company of the badde, then does wheat bye chafe, then
gold by the touch of fire, the^ the patience of Job and Thoby, by the
temptatyon of Satan, 2. cor. 12.
then Paul by the sharp afflyction, messe^ger of Satan, in his body, then ye
Apostles by the company of traytorous Judas. And for as much as Sodom had
been preserved and saved from destruction if therein had been but ten good
persons, Genesis 10.
why should not we believe the catholyke Church of Christ, wherein be
innumerable good to be preserved, conserved and saved holy pure, and clean
from the destroying heresies and damnable errors. To be breife, yt holy father
and learned Doctor Saint Austen writes as follows.

Ecclesia dei inter multam palcam, multaque, Au. to. 2. epist. 110 ad Ianua.
cap. 19.
zizannia constituta, multa tolerat, et tamen que sunt contra fidem, uel bonam
uitam non app^^bat, non tacet, nec facit.

The church of God ordained and set among much chafe and much cockell, does
tolerat many things, and yet nevertheless it another approuethe, another
concealethe, another does those things, which be against the faith, or good
life.

Thus you may understand, that the church in and among the chafe, which
signifies inconstant and frutelesse christians, and cockle, signifying corrupt
christians, suffers mani things indifferent, infirmities fraylties and euels
not making against our faith, nor contagious to christian manners for vnyties
sake, as Christ did tolerate Judas a theffe and a traitor, but the church
(says Austen) nothere does it self, another allows in the badde, no nor
concealeth, nor yet winketh at any thing in any wise repugnaunte to our faith
or chrystya^ life, especially it does not tolerate heretyckes, nor scysmatykes,
because theye be intolerable evil, for scysme, vyolation of peace, breach of
unity, and seperacio^ from the inherytaunce of Christ, the church spredde
through all the whole world, and stretchyng into all ages, be intolerable. And
no meruel, for the church is the kingdom of heaven as teaches the parable of
the net and of the ten vyrgynnes etc. Mat. 13. and, 25


Therefore it erreth not infernally, nor does tolerate any thing that is
infernal, for the kingdom of heaven is not the kingdom of hell, of falsytye,
scysme, nor heresye, leadyng to hell, but of verytye; concord, and unity,
bryngyng to heaven. No cause is therefore, why we should call the doctrine of ye
whole catholyke Church, in doubt, for no person unfeignedly, professyng
Christ, will affirm any one of the Apostles, which were but members, of his
mystycall body, the said church, to err in his writing, shall then any
chrystyan person hold the whole universal body of Christ, to err in the
great matters, of our profession. Paul was but a child, of our mother the
Church, and yet we are bound to believe his Doctrine, to be true. For christ
spoke in him, as he him self witnesses to the Corynthes, saying. An
experimentum queritis eius, 2. Co. 13
qui in me loquitur Christus (...) Do you seek experience of Christ him self,
which speaks in me? Shall not we then believe the Doctrine of his, and our
holy mother the catholyke Church? spouse most obedient to our Savior Jesus
Christ, truth it self? in whom he has, does, Au. to. 9 tract. 89
and will speak to the worlds end, seeing he promised to be in, Mat. 28.
and with her contynuallye no less time. No man can but believe it, except,
any be so perverse, that will deny the Church to be his mother.

To whom S. Cypryan says. Non potest habere deum patrem, Cipri. de simpl. pr^
qui non habet ecclesiam matrem. He cannot have GOD to be his father, which
has not the Church, his mother. Like wise in not believing ye church our
mother, we do not believe god our father and so consequently we do dege^dre from
all filial nature, to the abrydgement, of our lives, here in earth, and to the
achiuing of ye long endless death in hell, wherefore let us with humble obedience
honor our said holy mother the Catholyke Church, in embracing her precepts,
that we may be long living, not only beneth hear in Earth, but attain also
to the long life, above in Heaven. Hitherto I have declared the Church, not to
err, because some evil persons, be therein, wherewyth, if any be not
satisfied, but does further affirm, every membre of the church to be a liar,
and therefore does infer the whole universal church, to lie, and err. To
them Saint Austen shall make answer as follows. Deus per seipsum uerax,
Augu, in pist. Ioh. tract, 1
tuper deum uerax, nam per te mendax. God is by him self true, but thou art
true by GOD, for by thy self thou, art a liar, so that although every person of
him self, Psa. 115
and by his vityat nature, be a liar, yet by the pertecipation of gods grace
and truth in the Church, many are true, as well appeared by the holy
Patryarches, Prophets, and many others, before Christ, his incarnation, and
since that time, by the Apostles, Dyscyples and holy Martyrs, wytnessyng the
truth with their blood. For else Dauyd himself had lied in saying. Every
man is a lier, ye Euangeliste Paul, and other the Apostles had lied in their
preachynges, and erred in their wrytynges, the which no chrystyan heart can
suffer to be affyrmed, but admyt, that the Devil is some time permitted to have
power on a synguler and pertyculer person in the Church, yet it follows not
yt he has power to seduce the universal congregation of christ, his universal
church. For where Christ is, there cannot the Devil be, co^syderynge that no
agreament is or can be, 1. Cor. 6
between Christ and Belyall.

But in the universal catholyke church is Christ, therefore is not therein the
devil, Christ is therein, for he promised unto the said catholyke church, not
only the spirit of truth, to teach it all the truth, but promised him
self also very verytye, therein to be continually even to the worlds end.
For that cause Paul calls the church ye temple and house of god. Apo. 20.
In ye Apocalipse moreover it is written, the devil to be tied, and shut up
in hell, that he nether might, nor may seduce the peoples and nations.
Whereupon S. Austen writes i^ his book de ciuitate dei, these words, Au, de
ciuitate dei li. 2. ca. 7
Ad hoc ligatus est diabolus in abisso, ut iam non seducat gentes, ex quibus
constat ecclesia. Furthermore the devil was tied and shut up in hell, that
he might not seduce the peoples, of whom consists the church. Here ye may
learn of Austen, that the devil has not power to seduce the peoples and
multitudes of faithfulles, of whom the church consists. After it follows
Nec enim dictum, Aug, ibi.
ut non seduceret aliquem, sed non ut seduce et iam gentes, in quibus ecclesiam
procul dubio uoluit intelligi.

It is not said, that he should seduce no man, but that he should not
seduce now the peoples, in whom undoubtedly he would to be understand the
church. Note here, that s. Austen writes, that it was not spoken, that the
deuell should seduce no man, for so promised not Christ, but that he should not
seduce the peoples, that is to say: the whole congregation of the church, to
whom only the spyrite of truth was promised to continue for ever. Thus plain
it is, that the devil may deceive and seduce some certain persons of the
church, and yet cannot seduce the whole multitude, and congregation thereof.
For so long as an army stands together in array, it is impregnable, and
invincible, but divided, disseuered, and scattered abroad, it is most easy
to be vanquysshed. Likewise Chrystyans, singularlye, and privately may sometime
take an overthrow of Satan: but the main army, and host of Christ, ye
universal militaunte church, has so valyanut, puyssaunt, and expert a
captain in the mids thereof, and that continually, that it cannot goo out of
array at any time, to take any notable discomforte or overthrow. 1. Co. 10
Non enim patietur uos, tentari supra id quod potestis, sed faciet etiam cum
tentatione prouentu^, ut possitis sustineri For he will not suffer you to be
tempted, and assauted above your power, but so will do in the temptation, that
you shall be able to sustain it, escape it, and to have good success therein, so
that he can and will keep his promise, which was, Mat. 16.
yt Hell gates should not prevail against the church. Which promise he made
not, to the particular members thereof seuerallye, but to the whole church
vnyuersallye. Therefore, although some straglynge, waueryng, and wandering
Christians, do at any time err, yet the whole congregation does at no time
err, in the weyghtye matters of Christianity. If the church may err, then
may Christ and the holy ghost err, which be resyaunt therein, then is not the
Church builded upon an immovable rock, stone, Mat. 16.
and fundatyon, according to scripture, then is not the Church, the pyller and
fyrme vpholder of truth, 1. Tim. 3
then cannot the church say truly, it pleases the holy Ghost, and us, then
is not Christ the Savior and preserver of the Church, his body, which to
believe were to much ungodly, but Chrysostom says. Homini si bellum inferas,
Act. 15. Ephesians, 5 Chris, to. 2. ho. 20.
forte uinces aut forte uinceris, ecclesiam uincere nulla uis poterit.

if thou war upon a man, perchance thou shalt overcome, or be ouercommed,
but no power forse or strength can overcome the church. Wherebye you may well
understand that a particular person of the Church may be conquered, but not
the whole catholycke church Non de^rit enim dominus ad tuendam ecclesiam suam.
Au. to. 2. epis. 169
For our lord will not be wantyng to defend his church which he bought and
purchased with no less, then with his own most precious blood, the
infallyble euydence of his dear love toward it, which will not suffer it
unarmed and without his defense. Vain therefore be al scysmatycall rebellyons
conspirynge against the same. Thus this fynyshed, I think it expedient to open
to you the infallyble tokens, whereby ye may know and infallyblye discern the
catholyke Church, from ye factious church of scysmatiks which tokens
(amongst others that I do ommit because our adversaries, most vntruelye do
chaleng to be among them where in deed they another are nor can be, but in the
catholic church) be these three, universality, antiquity, and unity.

The first token which is universality, Universality.
although I have proved sufficyentlye before, in declaryng where the Church
is, the which I pray you now in this point also to have in memory, yet I
will bryfely say somethynge more for it. The scysmatycall churches, be but
partyculer multytudes in partyculer places, as the donatystes in Affryke, the
hussytes in beam, the Lutherans in some certain provinces of Germany, and the
Sacramentaryes of late hear in England, wherefore it is most certain, that
our late particular church, was not the church of Christ, which is catholic
that is to say, universal thoroughoute all the universal world, as ye may
perceive by the promise of God, made to Abraham, which is this.

In semine tuo benedicentur omnes gentes. All natyons shall be blessed in thy
sede, Genesis 22.
that is to sai, in Christ as interpretethe it, Gal. 3.
S. Paul in his Epistle to the Galathians, so that by God his benediction
through al nations.

A solis ortu vsque ad occasum (...) nomen domini From the rysyng of ye son
to the going down of the same, Psa. 112
the name of our lord is praised and gloryfyed, as witnesses the Prophet
Dauyd. According whereunto Christ said to his Apostles. Et eritis mi^i testes
in Iherusalem, Acts. 1.
et in omni Judea et samaria et usque ad ultimum terre. You shall wytnes me in
Jerusalem, in all Iurye Samatye, and so in all places unto ye uttermost parts
of ye world. Thus ye may perceive that our head Jesus Christ renewed not, nor
newely builded his mystical body the church, to be included within any
pertyculer corner or part of ye world but to be universal in Iherusalem in all
Jury in Samarie and from thence in all realms and countries even to the
extreme parts of the Earth, after the ancient prophecy of ye said good king
and prophet Dauyd, Psa. 71.
which is this. Dominabitur a mare usque ad mare et aflumine, usque ad
terminos, orbis terrarum. (He meaning Christ) shall rule from sea to sea, and
from the sea unto ye extreme ends of the world, and therefore Saint Ihon
the Apostle says. Ipse est propitiatio pro peccatis nostris, 1. Ioh. 2 Aug.
tra. 5, in epist Johan. 2.
non pro nostris tantum sed pro peccatis totius mundi.

(he meaning Christ) is the propitiatio^ for our sins, and not for our
sins onleye, but for all the sins also, of all the whole world, that is to
say of all faithfulles dyspersedde thorough the world as vnderstandethe it S.
Austen. The same doctrine. S. Paul taught the Romans Per quem accipimus
gratiam et apostolatum ad obediendum fidei in omnibus gentibus pro nomine eius.
Romans 1.
Bye whom we have received grace and thapostolicall embassye. That by faith his
name may be obeyed, in all nations and countries: by these and other great
number of scryptures, all and every catholyke writer affyrmethe the Church to
be universal, and not nacyonall, not I say affyxed to this or ye nacyon.
Whereof ye shall here that old aucthor Ireneus. Iren. li. 1. cap. 2.
Ecclesia per vniuersum orbem vsque ad fines terre seminata, et ab apostolis
and ^ Discipulis eorum accepit eam fidem, quae est in vnum deum. The Church
being sown and planted through out the universal world to the furthyest
ends of the same, received of the Apostles and of their dysciples, that faieth
which is in one God. The self same saying has Epiphanius in his first book of
his second Tome, so that I shall not need to rehearse it, but now here that
great clerk Saint Austen. Aug. to. 2. ad b^ni. ep. 50
Ecclesia catholica sola est corpus Christi, cuius ille caput et saluator
corporis sui, extra hoc corpus, neminem, uiuificat spiritus sanctus

The universal Church, only is the body of Christ, whereof he is the head and
the Savior of his body, out of this body the holy Ghost gives life, to no
man. By this we are taught, corner and partyculer churches, not to be the bodi
of christ but the catholyke and universal Church only, and that out of the
same, catholic and universal church, the holy Ghost gives life to no man. Let
us therefore beware of corner churches, wherein is not the life gyuing spirit,
and earnestly follow ye counsel given by the same Auste^, Augu. de agone
Christia. cap, 29
which is this. Nec eos audiamus qui sanctam ecclesiam quae vna catholica est,
negant per orbem esse diffusam. Let us not here them, which do deny the holy
Church, which only is universal, to extend thorough the whole world,
wherefore it is manifest, that corner Churches, in this or that nation
dyssentyng in relygyon from the whole not to be the church, nor of the church
of christ for Christ said not that Geneua or this, or that country is the
field, Mat. 13
but said ye universal world is yt fylde, wherein ye sede of god vniuersalli is
sowe^ does and shall grow until harvest the worlds end, which if they did
remember, they wuld not say that Geneua or this or yt country only had
received gods word, but that in every country through all the universal
world, it is embraced, consyderyng that by Salomo^ In multitudine populi est
dignitas regis. Pro. 14.


The honor of a King, is in the ample multitude of people, and contraryly in
paucitye or few is the debilitie and weakness of a king, if we therefore will
acknoledge our heavenly king to be of honor and puissaunce, we must confess
him not to be a pertyculer or a nacionall king and head of this or that nation
only, but to reygne in every country thorough the whole world, Psalm. 2.
except we should say that Christ has lost his inherytaunce the universal
church, spread thoroughe the universal world, and that he is driven to a
corner of Germanye, to be but a dymye anguler king, or countye, which were a
plain blasphemye, so that, whatsoever multitude settythe fourth a doctrine
dyssentyng from the universal doctrine of the universal Church, may well be
judged, not to be of the catholyke Church of Christ. Of the which church we
be says. Vincentius Lirinensis. Lirine^^.
Si hanc fidem uera^ esse fateamur, quam tota per orbem terre^, confiretur
ecclesia. If we confess this faith to be true, which the whole Church
through ye whole world does confess. Again. Si id teneamus, quod ubique
creditum est. If we hold and keep that, which is every where, and in every
country believed. Some peradventure will inueye against this, saying. The
flock of Christ is little, Luke 12. Math. 7.
and the way to life is narow, therefore the church cannot be large and
great. To that answers that holy and renowned father S. Austen in his
epistle, ad Vincentium, against the Donatistes, Augu. to 2 epi 48.
Ipsa est de cuius paucitate dicitur in comparatione multorum malorum. Quia
augusta and arcta uia est, que ducit aduitam, Genesis 22.
and pauel sunt qui ambulant in illa. Et rursus ipsa est, de cuius multitudine
dicitur, sic erit semen tuum, sicut stelle celi, et sicut haraena maris, ijdem
quippe fideles sancti and boni: et in comparatione plurimorum malorum, pauci,
and perse ipsi multi sunt, quia multi filij desertae, Gala. 4.
magis quam eius, quae habet uirum, and multi ab orient and occidente uenient
and recumbent cum Abraham Isaac and Jacob in regno coelorum. Math. 8.
Et exhibet sibi deus populum habundantem, emulatorem bonorum operum, and multa
milia, quae numerare nemo poterat, ui^entur in Apocalipsi, ex omni tribu et
lingua in stolis albis, palmisque uictricibus. Apoca. 7.


That is the church, of whose fewnes it is spoken in comparison of many
evil. For the straight and narrow way is, which leads unto life, and few
there be which walcke in it: and contrarylye, that is the church, of whose
multitude it is said, so shall thy seed be as the stars of the firmament,
and the sand of the sea, for the same faythfulles be holy and good, and in
comparison of many evil, be few, and by them selves the same be many: for
the children of her which is desolate of a husband, be more in noumbre, then
the children of her which has a husband, and many shall come from the East
and from the Weste, and shall rest with Abraham Isaac and Jacob, in the
kyngedome of heaven, and God does exhibit unto him self an abundaunce of
people, followers of good works. And many thousands, whom no man can number,
be seen in the apocalypse, of all and every trybe, and tongue, in white robes,
and victorius palms. Here is to be noted, that S. Austen affyrmeth the
catholyke church of Christ, to be of a few noumber, if it be conferred with
the evil multitude, which being compared to the good, incomparably in number
do excede. The pylgrems and sober passengers, thoroughe the narowe way, are
but a small multitude, being compared unto the huge noumber, raungynge and
rouynge thoroughe the bread ways. Christ his redolente flock of meke
lambs, is but a little flock, in comparyson of the great stynckynge heard of
the deuyls sturdy rammishe goats, but if the straight passengers thorough the
narowe way, and the little flock of Christ, be accounted by them selves,
without collation, and comparison to the evil, wandering thoroughe the broad
way, they be many and innumerable, like as be the sterres in the fyrmament,
and ye sand in the sea, as most manyfestly appears by the scriptures above
alleged of the said Austen and is truly called by the Prophet Dauyd Ecclesia
magna, the great church and congregation, Psa. 21.
because it extends in to all the furtheste parts, and borders of the
world, and because it contains many thousands whom no man can number, as is
alleged out of the Apocalypse.

Antiquity.
Now to the second token which is antiquity or au^cietie whereby ye may
descerne ye ancient catholyke Church, ye mystical body, of our savior Jesus,
from the late spronge up anguler Churches, Whereof Satan is the head, for the
church whereof Christ is the head, is of such antiquity, yt he him self,
which is. Antiquus dierum, Dani. 7.
ye old ancient, and which said Antequam Abraham fieret, ego sum. Before
Abraham was made, or borne, I am, did found it: and that before any written
Scryptures, for Adam, Eve, Abell, Seath, Noe, Abraham, Loathe, with many other
faith fulles, ware before Moses, a long time, before the commandment,
written in stonye tables, and before Scryptures, written in an outward
substance. And the same Church Christ being vysyble hear in Earth, according
to his promise, Mat. 16.
mentioned in Matthew, which was, upon this rock, and fyrme foundation, I will
build my Church, did newlye edyfye, renew and repair out of his own side,
as witnesses Saint Chrysostom, saying.

Chris, to. 2. homil. ad Neophitos 26 Ihero. to 4. sermo. de resur. domini.
Prosper. de promis et predic par. 1. ca 1
Ex latere suo Christus edificauit ecclesiam sicut de latere Adam eius coniunx
Eua pro lata est. Nam hac de causa Paulus quoque testatur dicens. De corpore
eius et ossibus eius sumus, latus uidelicet illud significans, nam sicut de
latere illo, Deus fecit femina^ procreari, sic et de suo latere Christus aqua^
nobis et sanguinem dedit: unde repararetus ecclesia. Christ builded his church
out of his own side, like as out of the side of Adam his wife Eve was brought
fourth for Paul also witnesses, for that cause saying, we be of his body and
of his bones, sygnifyeng surely his side. For as God did procreat the woman
out of the same side, even so Christ gave out of his own side, water and
blood, whereby the church should be repaired and renewed, so that all the first
orygynall being of christ his church, was not originally begone even at the
giuyng of water and blood, out of his side, but the new building,
reperation, and renewynge thereof, as says the Prophet Amos, and Saint
Chrysostom, Amos. 9 Act. 16.
and the reedifyeng to a perfection, according to this of Dauyd. Deus uirtutum
respice de celo, Psalm. 79.
et Vide, ^t uisita uincam istam, et perfice came quam plantauit dextera tua.

Look down o God of power from Heaven se and vysyt this vyneyard and make it
perfect which thy right hand has planted, Thus the Prophette desired not the
extirpation of godds old vyneyard, and the plantynge of a new, but desired
the perfectynge of the old, by his mighty power, al ready planted. The which
vyneyarde is the Church, as affirms the Prophet Esaias. Esaye. 5.
Vinea domini domus Israel. The vineyard of our Lord is the house of Israel,
and the Chrystyans be ye spyrytuall Israelytes.

This spyrytuall vyneyarde Christ his church, is newlye builded and brought to
a perfection, by propagation, dilating, and enlargynge the same out of Iurye in
to all regyons and contreies, by connecting and coupplynge the Iues and
Gentyles, the old church and the new together in one, Ephesians. ^
him self being the head corner stone by repayrynge and renewyng it with a more
habundante spirit, with a more plentythe of grace, with open verytyes, with a
new and perfect law, new and perfect sacraments, with new priestehoode, and
new perfect sacrifyse, the old imperfectes being abolyshed. And so the
churches old worn garments the fygures put of, she proceeded not into a
corner, but into all the world, not under a veyle couertelye, hyddenlye, and
invisibly, but manifestly, openly, and vysiblye, adorned with a new vysyble
habyte, and tire, as it were with a new distynct shape from her self, in her
old form before the fulness of time unpolished yea she came fourth of Christ
his side all perfect and new in the water and blood, Galat. 4.
guyshyng out of his said side.

Ephe. 5.
For Paul says, that Christ gave him self eue^ to death for his Church, to
sanctyfy it, clensing it, in ye lauacre of water by ye word of life, and did
wash us from our sin in his blood, as teaches Saint Ihon. Apoc. 1.
And as the Church was first was first builded before the written scryptures,
of the old Testamente, so was the same reedifyed, repared, and renewed before
the written Scripture of ye new Testament For Christ and his Apostles
preached, before that any external writing or printyng was thereof, as it is
most plain to all men, exercysed in readyng of Scripture, and ye ancient
learned writers. And yet no true chrystyan woll defend the doctrine of Christ,
and of his Apostles then unwritten to be untrue, but to be of no less verytye
unwritten, then after being written. For it is not true, because it is written,
but because Christ (who is verytie) spoke and taught it, which verytye
unwritten aunciette to the verity, after written, took not authority of ye
after written verity, for then Christ being Master, and his word unwritten
taught by mouth only, had taken authority of the word after written by
Mathewe and Ihon, but his Apostles and servants, yea and of the written word
by Mark, and Luke, but Dyscyples to his Apostles, ye which notable
inconvenience to avoid, we must rather affirm the written word by the
Dyscyples and minysters, to receue credence and estimatyon of the unwritten
word taught by Christ him self there master. And that because the word
written was, and is conformable and agreeable by the testimonye of the church, to
the ancient unwritten word, which the said church had receued of Christ
truethe him self. So that ye written truth came not after to bring
authority to the unwritten, but godly to admonyshe, put in mind, and witness
to the chrystian posterity, that the church ancient to ye written word, had
received the same of Christ his mouth, and used it, before the outward writing
thereof, and that we should believe Jesus to be Christ the very son of god, and
that so beleuynge we might have life eternal by his name. Wherefore the
antiquytye of of the Church, is not to be rejected, but most reuerentlye and
obedyently to be embraced, as teaches that great clerk S. Basyll. Basil. de
spu^ sanct.
Veneranda sunt uetusta dogmata, quod obantiquitatem, ceu canitiem qua^dam,
habeant quiddam reuerendum.

The ancient decres and ordinances, are to be reverenced, because for their
old antiquity, and as a man might say, for their hoar auncietye, they have
certain great reuerente matter in them.

Eccl. 6.
That notable wise manne Jesus Sirache gave this commandment. Non te
praetereat narratio seniorum. etc Forget not the sayings of the elders for
they have learned the truth of there forefathers, and of them thou shalt
learn understanding, and thou shall learn to give wha^ need is, a wise
answer.

Shall we then contrary to Gods word leave our auncyettes, and elders, to
follow the fond sayings, of our inconstant and rash yonglyngs and young
phantastycall imaginations, which Jesus Syrache, Pro. 22.
makes wise Salomo^, in his proverbs. Ne transgrediaris terminos antiquos,
quos posueru^t patres tui. Pass not out of the old ancient borders, which
thy forefathers has appointed. The borders and lymytes undoubtedly he does
pass and transgress as writes that holy and learned clerk Alexandre the
first. Alexa. 1. epist. 1.
Qui statuta patrum postponit atque confundit. The which regards not but
omitteth confounds, and dysordereth the determynatio^s of our ancient
fathers The scripture commands us to be myndefull of old ancient time
paste, Deu. 32.
and to ask our forefathers, and they should tell and teach us, but now some
endeuorynge to turn antechrystly the roots of trees upward, to set the
carte before the horses, to make all right order preposterous, and to confound
all Christ his ordinances and doctrine, do teach contrary to Christ, to
contempne antiquitye as dotage, and to ask and beleaue the inuenile
successoures, bearinge men in hand, dampnable ignorance, to be in our holy
learned ancients, and knowledge with wisdom to be in their after coming
posterytie, to thend that children should contrary to the scripture, set their
fathers to scole. It is therefore very notable, that by scripture it self, we
are premonyshed, taught and commanded to be ware and cyrcumspecte, that in no
wise we vyolate the laws, ordynaunces, and determynations of our holy
forefathers, but with reuerente obedience to obey and follow them, because
next unto gods holy word, and his catholyke church, our most comfortable
godly and infallyble stay, consysteth in them, persistyng in ye unity of the
Catholyke faith, and the same has delivered, unto their successors, as
though it were with one pen written. If therefore any question or doubt do
arise, we must (says that old writer, Lirinensis) have recourse to the
sayings of our holy fathers, Vin. Lir.
which in their several times, contynuynge in the unity of Christ his
church, has been approved master, and therefore ye ancient learned father
Leo, writes as follows. Leo epist. ad Martianam Augustum.
Qui etiamsi principuis meritis optunoque iudicio, legi time fui^set ac
solemniter ordina^us, contra reuerentiam tamen canonum paternorum, contra
sancti spiritus instituta, contra antiquitatis exempla, nullis posset
suffragijs ad iuuari. Whosoever although he being of excellent merit and of
excellent judgment were leafully and solemnly ordered, yet doing against the
reverent canons of our ancient fathers against the ordinances of ye holy
Ghost, against the examples of antiquitye, he can by no suffragies, be helped.
Mark hear I pray you, that this synguler clarke, of our adversaries, never
reproved, affirms amongst other things, that against examples of antiquiti
we can by no suffrages nor prayers be helped. Wherefore in the name of our
sauyoure Jesus Christ let us bannyshe and exyle all the profane new
doctrynes, according to ye mind of Paul in Tymothe, who commanded us not to
eschew antiquities, 1. Tim ^
nor old nor ancient, but new doctrynes, seeing therefore new doctrynes are
to be avoided, antyquyty is to be embrased, and seeing by Paul that new
doctrine is profane, a^tyquity must needs be sacred and holy, the which
sacred antyquytye (says Vincentius Lyrynensis) an old aucthor we shall
follow Si ab his sensibus nullate^^s recedamus: Vincentius.
quos sanctos maiores ac patres nostros celebrasse manifestum est.

If that we do by no means go back from those vndersta^dinges, and
judgments, whom it is plain our holy aunciettours, and forefathers, to have
preached and publyshed.

Of the same antiquity Saint Paul admonyshed the Corrinthians saying: If any
man appear to be contentious, he must understand that we have no such custom,
nor the church of God, whereby it is most plain, that the church of God in
S. Paul's time did much and highly esteame customs, how much more then should
ancient customs, prescryptions, and traditions deryued, deduced and brought
from christ's primatyue Church, to the next age, and so from age to age,
contynuallye until this present, be much esteemed, earnestly embraced, and
reuerentlye obeyed of us in these latter days wherein many arroganthedes are
desirous of never received doctrines, procedyng of proud singularity, contrary
to our ever approved and r eceyued doctrine, religion, customs, prescriptions
and traditions even from the beginning.

The which Saint Iherome, having in much remembrance said reuerentlye. Ieron.
ad Oceanu^ et pan^^
^llam senex tenebo fidem in qua puer natus sum I being an old man, will keep
yt faith that I a child was borne in, knowing right well not only
vnyuersalytie, but also antyquytie of the universal Doctrine and relygion to
be a sure and an undoubted token of the catholyke Church, and therefore he did
wryght unto Theophilus. Scito nobis nihiless^ antiquius, quam nec Christi iura,
Ihero. in Theophilum,
nec patrum transire terminos, Know thou O Theophile, nothing to be unto us,
more acceptable, than not to transgress and pass the laws, of Christ, and
the determinations of our forefathers. Galat. 1.


And no merueyle for Paul him selffe called immedyatlye by Christ, and
bountifully breathed with the Holy ghost, ascended to Iherusale^ to know his
auncyettes and predycesoures the apostles, Galat. 2.
and to consulte with them, lest he had run in vain, that is to say,
lest he had not believed as they believed and had not preached, Tertulli. contra
Merchio nem. li. 9.
as they preached.

Forasmuch as Paul so notable Apostle, and the chosen vessel of Christ, did
so much esteame the authority of his aunciettes, with the which he desired
to aduau^ce his faith and preachinge, how much more then shall it become us
ignorau^tes and graceles, in comparison, to obey and follow the universal
antiquity of the catholyke doctrine, an infallible sign of the catholic
Church? And not to enclyne to a Doctrine never received nor practysed in Christ
his universal church, but in all ages, and in all countries, professing Christ,
justly condemned for heresye. Therefore most plain it is, the late Doctrine
hear in England, not to be a sound, but a corrupt Doctrine, not catholyke,
not universal, but partyculer and, pertiall, not acknoledged, nor known, but
strange to Christ his ancient catholyke Church, the only treasure house of
GOD, and of the right wourshyppyng of God. Here because I would be loath to be
tedious, I will surcease to speak any more of antyquyty, and proceed to the
declaration of the third sign, which is unity. Unity
Where is not consent, unity, and agreament in doctrine, there is scisme,
division, and heresye. Wherefore the catholyke Church (whereof Christ is the
head) who is our peace, Ephesians. 2
and has made of both Iues, and gentyles, before dyuyded, in relygion, one
body, is not a myshapen, confused, and disordered multitude, but it is a
convocation, most ordrelye shapen, of most consonant order, and proportion,
and that of beleauyng people, united and lyncked together in one religion of
our Savior Christ, by one faith and his visyble sacraments, Aug. ^o^t Faust.
lib 9. ca. 11.
and therefore the Apostle Paul taught the Corynthyans, brought then by false
teachers, into scysme, to embrace unity, saying. Obsecro uos per nomen domini
nostri Jesus Christi, 1. Cor. 1.
ut id ipsum dicatis omnes, and non sint in nobis scismata, sitis autem
perfecti in eodem sensu, et in eadem sententia.

I exhort you in the name of our lord Jesus Christ, that ye all say one
thing, and that there be no scismes among you but be ye perfect in one sense
and one mind. The same unity Paul teaches by the similytude of a corporal
body, which as it is compact of many members, in such a harmonye, that there is
mutual communion and participatio^ of co^me^ and mutual nurriture co^moditi and
health among them, even so the mystycall body of our Sauyoure Jesus, the Church,
is knytte together in one spyrytuall socyetye, with such a unity, that there
is a common and a mutual participation, of the whole mystycall body, the
universal church in those spyrytuall things, which be spyrytual nurriture of
the souls, in chrystian relygyon, unto the atchyuynge of life eternal, scysme
and contention be so contrary unto the unity of Christ's Church, yt Paul did
write unto the Corynthyans, being in diuisyon and contention, these words
ensuyng. 1. Co. 11
Si quis autem uidetur contentiosus esse, nos talem consuetudinem non habemus,
neque ecclesia dei. If any man do appear to be contentious, he must know yt
we have no such custom, nether the church of God. Note here that contention
concerning faith and christen life, is not among the catholykes, the
universal congregation of God, accustomed to unity, and not to contentious
division. And therefore we read in scripture Deus qui inhabitare facit vnanimes
in domo. Psa. 67.


It is god which makes people of one mind, to dwell in his house, which is the
Catholic Church.

Whereby it is most manyfeste that scysme, diuysion and conte^tyon be manifest
signs of the vnleafull assembles of heretykes, and unity the most undoubted and
manifest token of the leafull and godly congregation of faythfulles, ye which
unity plainly to declare, the scriptures affirm to be but one church as ye
may read in the genesis. Gene. 6.
We had but one arcke the express figure of ye church, therefore Christ has
but one church, that the veryty may answer the figure. Also in the second
book of Moses it is written. Cipri. de coena domini.
In vna domo commeditur agnus The lamb shall be eaten in one house, the which
house Saint Cypryan understands to be the church, saying. Vna domus est
ecclesie in qua agnus editur. There is one house of the church in the which
the lamb is eaten. The like saying has S. Austen adding unto Church, this
word Cotholyke, which is this. In una domo agnus comeditur, Aug. de sermo. de
uigil. pen tec.
quia in una ecclesia catholica uera hostia redemptoris immolatur. The lamb is
eaten in one house, because the true and very host and oblation of our
redemer, is offered in one catholyk Church. Thus Saint Austen teaches to be
but one church, and the same to have the title of Catholyke, which sygnifyeth
universal, to the condempnation of the particular Church, of scysmatykes, and
in the same one catholyke Church not a figure of our redeamer, but the very
true host of our redemer, to be offered. The which catholyke Church, Ioh. 10.
Christ also calls, Vnum ouile, Romans 12
One fold and flock, and Paul both to the Romans, and also to ye Ephesyans,
Ephesians. 4.
affirms the multitude of faythfulles to be one body, and therefore S. Austen
against the Donatists says. Aug. co^t Donatist li. 1. ca 10
Vna est ecclesia, que sola catholica nominatur.

The church is one which only is named catholic, for ye union whereof Christ
becam the hedde coppelinge corner stone, Ephe. 2.
whereupon and by whom the universal edyficer the universal church of both
Iues and Gentyles, should be builded, brought, and reconsyled in to one body.
To be brefe, Epiphanius a notable greek writer, has written of this unity as
follows. Ecclesia velut vnam habet animam et idem cor, et predicat, Epiphan.
to. 2. li. 1. Iren. li. 1, capi. 3.
docer et tradit, velut vno ore predita.

The Church has as it were one mind and one heart, and preaches, teaches,
and gives traditions as it were endued with one mouth, as had the primatyue
Church, by this testimony of Luke following. Acts. 4.
Erat omnium qui credebant cor unum et anima vna. Of all which did believe, was
one heart and one mind. So much did Christ our head require unity in his
Church, that he required it in two or three, and to the^ made most comfortable
promise saying. Mat. 10.
If two of you do agree upon earth of any thing, whatsoever they ask, it
sha^be given them of my father, which is in Heaven, as was unto the three
Children, Dani. 3.
agreyng in one faith, in ye bournyng furnace. To commend among other godly
things unto us this most necessary unity, our peace maker Jesus Christ,
ordained his very real body and blood, in those things, which be of many
reduced and brought to one, as in bread and wine, for of many grains is made
one bread which euidentlye proves an indivisible societye, and an inseparable
vnyty to be in and among ye whole universal multitude of beleuyng people,
spredde abroad in all the world, which notwtstandynge their corporal
dystaunce, be brought into one body by consent of minds, unity of faith,
of Sacraments and of charytye, the band of peace, as is manyfeste by this text
of Paul, the Apostle. 1. Co. 10
Vnus panis et unum corpus multi sumus.

We being many are one bred and one body for all we partakyng of one bread the
body of Christ, do declare our selves (although many in number) to be one
lofe of bread, compact of many graynes, that is to say, to be one body of
Christ, counited of many members, having one faith, one baptysme and one Lord.
And as all the members of Christ, are by one faith and one manner of Sacraments,
made one body, so are they by the same, united to one head our Jesus Christ, of
the which inseparable unity, that notable union and conjunction of ye
husband with the wife, is a great Sacrament and a holy perfect sign, as this
of Paul witnesses Sacramentum hoc magnum est, ego autem dico in Christo et
ecclesia. This is a great sacrament, but I speak of Christ and of his
church, that is to say, this sacrament (meaning matrymony) is a great and a
worthy sacrament not of nor in it self, but because it is by deuyne
institution a holy perfect Sacrament, and sign of the indivisible union and
unity of Christ the head with the church his bodi. To be brefe, al Christ his
sacraments, mysteryes and doctrine, do tend fully and holy to the
auauncement of unity and concord.

Aug. to 2 epis. 152.
Quisquis ergo ab ecclesia catholica fuerit seperatus, quantumlibet
laudabiliter se uinere existimet hoc solo scelere, quod a christi unitate
defunctus est, non habebit uitam sed ira dei manet super eum. Whosoever
therefore shall be separated from this catholyke Church, albeit he think him
self to live never so commendable, yet for this only myschyfe, that he is
separated from the unity of Christ, he shall not have life, but the wrath of
God rests upon him. Ephe. ^.
Thus you may evidently understand unity to be a sure token of the Catholyke
Church, from the which those fragementes, that be dyuided and broken, do
publyshe and thrust fourth dyssonante, pugnaunt and contrariant Doctrine, by
the vyolente perswasyon, and instruction of ye proud spyryte of error. As now
in our time, it is most open to every learned man, what a co^tagious noumber,
of contrary sects has issued, yea brast out of the puddle sprynges, of
Luthers heresies, as Coral Estadians, Ecolampadia^s, Swinglyans,
Anabaptystans, Libertines, yea Nouatians, and Arrians, with many other, whereof
every one disagreeth from another, and from verytye it self, consenting
against consent, agreyng almost in nothing but against agreement, divided in
all things but in persequutyng the unity of Christ his vnicall church (as
Pilate and Herod in nothing accorded but only against our peace Christ him
self) being more vyolent, Luke 23.
then the Iues, which would not deuyde Christ his coat, without seame or
particion, sygnyfyeng the unity of his church, saying. Non scindamus came.
Ioh. 19.
Let us not cut or deuyde it. They are not therefore to be credyted, nor to be
taken for ye church, nor for members thereof, but to be fled, eschewed,
abhorred, as sedicious members of the dyscorderable of Satan which sitting in
the chair of pestilence, do with pestyferous doctrine, Psalm. 1.
corrupt and dissolve, so much as in them is, the quyete concord of Christ,
his mistical body, the universal church, and do resist ye truth as Iannes and
Mambres resysted Moses. Thus we knowing what the Church is, where it is, and
that it is sensible, vysible, and manifest, 2. Tim. ^
and the infallyble tokens, as vnyuersality antiquity, and unity thereof,
whereby it is dyscerned from the Church scysmatycall, we cannot without
extreme injury of our head Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost contynually
resydent therein, forsake the holy unity, vniuersalytye, and antiquitye of his
holy Catholyke church, to follow the newelye publyshed and the late crept in
profane fantasy, divised in the divided co^uentycles, of heretycall
scysmatykes, conspiryng against the whole aunciet church, for whosoever
forsakes that old au^ci universal church, only consenting in one true
doctrine, they forsake Christ himself, the head thereof, and the spyryte of God
abiding therein.

We cannot forsake the body but we must needs forsake the head Jesus Christ who
is truth we cannot depart from ye house of god the church, but we must needs
depart from god dweling in ye same house And as god is unity, and ye god of
unity, so has he united to him one spouse, ye catholic church of unite,
whereof every faithful severally accounted is a child, and as he is but one
head, so has he but one mystycal body the church, united, to him, by one
faith, and one baptysme, of the which body every Chrystian rekened singulerly
a part is a member. As he is another a partyall nor a partyculer God, of this or
that country, but God of all realms, Empyres, and natyons. Likewise his only
spouse and body, the Church, is not a pertyculer multitude of people in this
or that nacyon only, but of ye universal christian multitude in all nations,
realms and co^tries, through out ye whole world. As god is not a young or a
new god, lately sprung up, likewise his said spouse and mistical body, is not
yo^g new and late, but of old antyquyty even from the beginnynge.

Wherefore you can in no case excuse your selfs at the dredefull day of
Judgment, but ye you may well dyscerne ye new and late spronge up scysmatycall
churches, dissentyng from the universal aunciette consent of the universal
aunciett congregation of Christ's faythefulles, agreyng constantlye in one
faith and in one true religion from Christ's time continually and perseuera^tly
to this day and so will continue to the worlds end.

So that it is in you, whether that you will believe that late vpstarted anguler
and pertyculer Church of contentious dessention, whereof lying Satan is the
head, or the universal aunciett church of unity, the head whereof is Christ, who
is verytie. Whosoever will be, partaker of the lively suck, and sap,
descendyng from ye lively head Jesus Christ, into his only body the catholyke
church, and into every synguler, member thereof.

Let him not disme^bre him self from that lively body by any kind of new
doctrine, dystrepant from the old auntiette and universal doctrine received
from Christ and his primative church, for he that disme^breth him self from
the church, dysmembreth himself from christ the head thereof Non tenens ca^ut,
ex quo totum corpus per nexus et coniunctiones subministratum et constructum,
Collo. 2. Ephe. 4.
crescit in augmentum dei.

Not having nor holdyng the head, of whom the whole bodi by joints and
ioyninges receauyng nurriture and co^pact in one, grows to a godly
perfection, the whole body is the whole universal Church, the head is Christ,
who is life, and the joints wherewith the body is joined to the head, Ioh. 14.
be faith charity and the Sacraments, by whom spyrituall nurryshment, and
life, be derived into the said universal body ye church and to every member
thereof, so that consequently, he that disseperateth him self from Christ,
seperateth him self from life, let us not therefore forsake the unity of
Christ his church, for that holy martyr and excellent clarke. S Cipryan says
also. Hanc vnitatem qui non tenet, Cipri. de simp. pre
dei legem non tenet, non tenet patris et filij fidem, vitam non tenet, et
salutem.

He that kepethe not this unity, keeps not the faith of our father, and of
his sone, he has not life and salvation, and to thend that we should keep this
unity peace and concord, we are called into one body the Church, as writes
Paul to the Collossyans. Collo. ^.
In whose holy lap the universal aunciett co^se^t, and the sea Apostolyke,
kept that aunciette father, and incomparable clerk, S. Austen as is uydent by
this followyng. Aug. to 6 in epi. ma ca. 4. qua^ uocant fu^damenti.
Multa sunt, quae me in ecclesie gremio iustissime tenent, tenet me consensio
populoru^ atque gentiu^, tenet authoritas, miraculis, inchoata, speuutrita,
charitate aucta, uetustate firmata, tenet ab ipsa sede petri Apostoli, cui
pascendas o^es, suas post resurrectionem suam dominus, commendaui^, usque ad
presentem episcopatum, successio sacerdotum, tenet postremo ipsum catholice
nomen quod non sine causa interiam multas hereses, sola obtinuit.

Many things says Austen there be, which do keep me in ye lap of the
catholic church The consent of the people and nations keeps me, the
auctorytie thereof begone by miracles, nowrished by hope, increased by
charytye, confyrmed and established by antiquity keeps me.

The succession of prystes from the seat of Peter thappostle, unto whom our
Lord committed after his resurrection, his sheep to be fed, unto this
present Byshoprycke, last of all keeps me the churches name of catholyke,
because not with out matter, among so many heresies, she only has had ye
vyctory. This obedient child of our holy mother the church, Saint Austen,
declares four pryncypall points, which did hold him in obedience unto her,
which be these, consent of al chrystia^ nations in one faith the antiquity of
the churches authority, and the vniuersalitye of the same, sygnifyed by ye
name of Catholyke, yea and ye authority of the sea Apostolyke of Peter, from
whence procedethe the succession of pryestes in the Church, of Christ,
against the which sea, Hell gates has not prevailed, but from Peter's time to
this day has continued the next head under Christ of the catholyke church,
and has stand in the faith thereof, and so shall persevere to the worlds end.
And yet against al other the Apostles seas, hell force has so auailed, that it
has the^ subverted, Forasmuch as these fore points did keep Saint Austen, in
humble obedience unto the Church, out of the which is no salvation, what shall
al good chrystyans reckon one such, whom the fame nothing do move, surely
that they have Christ and his Church in contempt, and that the spyryte of
truth resydente in the church is with them of no credence, and yet they know
the Church, for that, that the spyryte of verity is contynuallye resyaunt
therein, to be called in scripture the house and temple of God, as for examyle
An uescitis quod templum dei estis, et spiritus dei habitat in uobis? 1. Cor. 3.


Do not you know says Paul, that you be the temple of God, and that the
holy ghost, does dwell in you?

Wherevppo^ that old auntyent and excelent clarke Lacta^tius, Lacta. de uera
sap. li. 4. c. 30
groundyng himself did wryght this following Sola igitur catholica ecclesia
est, quae uerum cultum retinet, hic est fons veritatis, hoc est domicilium
fidei, hoc templum dei, quo si quis non intrauerit, uel a quo si quis exiuerit
aspe uitae ac salutis eterne alienus est It is ye only catholic church which
has in it the true worshyppinge of god, this is the fountain of truth, this
is the mansyon house of faith, this is the temple of God, wherein if any do
not enter, or out of whom if any do depart, he is a stranger and far distant
from hope of life, and salvation eternal. Wherewyth accordethe, that holy
learned Bishop and S. Epiphanius saying. Est uia regia, sancta dei ecclesia
et iter ueritatis. Epiph. 10 1. Cap. 2,


The holy Church of God, is the Heavenly Kings hygheway, and the path of
truth. Wherefore seeing that salvation and truth be only in christ's catholyke
and universal church, and not in particular conuenticles, let us in all kind
of scysmes, divisions, factions, sects, ehresyes, and erroures, cleave stick,
and stand, with constant obedience to the inviolable judgment, determynation,
and tradition, of the catholyke Church. For seeing that Christ is in the
mids of.ii. or.iii. gathered together in his name, it must needs follow yt
he is in his own body the church, the whole socyetye and universal
congregation, of all beleauynge people, lyncked and gathered together, by
consent in his name, and united to him as the body to the hedde.

Than cannot we but grant that the church of Christ must needs be the true
interpretesse of holy scripture, and truly to decide and determyne the
controversies which mani do stir up after every of there pryuate immaginations,
for as Saint Austen accurseth him yt other beleaueth to have aucthorytye or
has in reuerente any scriptures, Aug, ser, 129
besides those scryptures which the catholycke church has received.

Likewise undoubtedly he curses such, as make or do believe or reuerenceth any
interpretations, made of the scryptures, against and contrary to the Churches
interpretations, for being not leafull to receive Scryptures unproven by the
catholyke Church, it is not leafull to receive straung interpretations
thereof, and not approved by the same Church, co^syderyng, that in the Church
only, is the truth, as witnesses that old author Ireneus writing these
words. Iren. li. 3. cap. 4.
Vbi ecclesia, ibi spiritus, et ubi spiritus dei, illic ecclesia et omnis
gratia, spiritus autem ueritas. Where the Church is, there is the spyryte of
God, and where the spyrit of Godis, there is the Church and all grace. And ye
spyryte truly is troth, which most playnelye agrees with the Doctrine of
Paul. 1. Tim 3 Psalm. 88.
Domus dei est ecclesia dei uiui, colu^na et firmame^tu^ ueritatis. The house
of god, is the Church of God, the pyller and the fyrme vpholdyng of truth. And
therefore the said Ireneus writes also thus. Iren. li. 5 page 319.
Ecclesiae predicatio uera et firma est, apud quam una et eadem s^lutis uia in
uniuerso mundo ostenditur. The preaching of ye church is true, firm, and
sou^de, in whom is one very way of salvation, showed and manifest through
the whole world For every where says he the Church preaches the truth,
Likewise Orygen taught yt only to be the beleaued truth, Orige. in prodemio
petiarcho^
which in nothing dysagreeth from the churches tradytion, and therefore Saint
Austen, did write as follows. Aug. contra epist. Man. ca 5
Ego uero non crederem euangelo nisime catholice ecclesiae commoueret
authoritas I would not beleaue the Gospel if the authority of the Church did
not move me thereto for if the Church had not approved and wytnessed the truth
of ye Gospel, we should have been no less uncertain of it then we are of
the Gospelles ascrybed, to Thomas Bartylmue and Nychodeme, ye may further
read in Chrysostom. Chrisost. tom, 2. in Manh. 10. mundo.
Ecclesia habet veres oculos, ^idelicet ecclesiasticos atque doctores, qui
vide^t in scripturis misteria dei, de quibus dicuntur videntes. The church
has true eyes, that is to say preachers and teachers which do se the
mysteryes of god Wherefor theye are called Videntes, that is to say seeing,
perceiving, and understanding the said mysterye, To be bryfe Saint Hilary,
calls the church the mouth of Christ saying. Os christi ecclesiam esse,
Hilari. in psalm. 137.
et prophetica and apostolica aucthoritas est. The prophetycall and the
apostolycall aucthorytye is, that ye church is the mowthe of christ The same
affyrmythe Austen saying. Au. in Io. 15. t^ 88
Christus per ecclesiam suam loquitur gentibus. Christ speaks to the
gentyles, and people by his church, for Christ said Non uos estis qui
loquimini, Mat. 10.
sed spiritus patris uestri qui loquitur in uobis. It is not you which do
speak but ye spirit of truth which speaks in you, Luke 10.
he therefore that hears you my mowthe, hears me. Wherefore in all
controuersyes and dowtes arysynge or wrested out of written scriptures, which
can nether hear, judge, nor speak the will and pleasure of god therein contained.

We must needs take for our refuge and perfect instruction the lively temple
of God, the lively orgayne, and instrument of the holy Ghost the church,
lively and fully represented by the general counsels, as this realm is fully
represented by the parliament, because all and every member of the Church nor
all and every member of this realm, cannot be assembled conveniently together
in one place, the which general counceles authority. is most wholesome and
sound, as teaches Saint Austen. In so doing, we shall follow the example of
the good chrystians of Antyoch, which when Paul and Barnabye were molested
and troubled with the great dissension, and seditious disputation, of their
adversaries the Iues, did send unto the Apostles and prystes in Jerusalem, for
the discussion of the question, contended upon according to the old law
commaundinge the Iues in all diffycyll and doutfull Deuteronomy. 17
mattyres to ascend unto the prystes, and not to the law it self, and of them
to require the truth and the mind of the law, Agge^. 2.
from ye which they should declyne to no side, for the law is to be required as
affirms the prophet at ye pristes mouth. Mala. 2,
To the which chrystyan brotherne, ye Apostles and prestes gathered to gether
in one, did wryght. Acts. 16
Visum est spiritui sancto and nobis It pleases the holy ghost and us. They
said not it pleases the holy ghost and scripture, which is but a dead do^be
and a not speaking letter, but it pleases the holy ghost and us, us the temple
of our living God, 2. Cor. 3.
the Epistle and scripture of Christ, written, not with yncke, but with the
spirit, of our living God, 2. Cor. 3.
not in stonye tables, or in other outewarde substance, but in the fleshye
tables, and inward substance of man's heart, wherefore doubts moved out of
Scripture, are not to be determined by the dead lettre written with yncke, but
by the lively scripture written with ye holy Ghost in faithful men's hearts,
for scripture written with yncke although it conteyneth Godds most undoubted
truth, yet because it hears not, speakethe not, compares not, nor pondereth
the matters incontrouersye, it cannotte judge, nor pronounce sentence of the
truth. The holy counsel thereof assembled at Iherusalem, said it pleseth the
holy ghost and us, the lively scripture of Christ, the speaking mouth and
lyuelye instrument of the holy ghost, Whose determination, Act. 15.
when the brethren had readde they ioyed in the comfort received theirin,
wherefore let us relynquishe the dissentions, and contentions proceadynge out
of private presumptuous brains and humbly obey and ioyfullye receive the
decisions and determinations of Christ's catholyke church, whom the spyryte
of verytye teaches to speak all the truth. ^o. 16.
Let us (I say) follow the counsel of S. Austen Diuinam ueritatem in una
ecclesiateneamus, Aug contra cona^is. post cellat ca. 19.
et humanas, lites aliquando finiamus Let us keep says Auste^ Godds truth
which is in the church of unity, and so let us once fynyshe humayne
conte^tions. Non enim dissensionis est deus, 1. Cor. 14
sed pacis. For god is not the god of dissensio^, but the God of peace. To
whose mouth. which is ye universal catholycke church, Io. 10.
and to the doctrine proceeding out thereof, as obedient sheep of his flock, we
are most bounde^ to herke^ and obey according to this of Christ, my sheep do
here my voyse, do believe mye words, and do follow me, so that his Disciples
do hear, believe, and follow him, speaking in his chosen and lyuelye mouth
the church, for the manyfolde wisdom of God, Ephe. 3.
is made open and known by his Church, as affyrmyth Paul. Wherefore the
Church being his own mouth, must needs expound, interpretate and open his
own Scrptures, most agreeable to his own mind, and since that in the mouth
of two or three witnesses, Mat. 19.
consysteth every matter, 2 Cor. 15.
then the Testimonye of the mouth of Christ the universal church, must neds
and of necessity stand.

And his churches true eyes, as preachers and teachers called by the church,
the mouth of Christ, does truly see, and perceue the mysteries of ye
scriptures. Let us leave therefore our arrogante presumptions, the mother of
all heresy in ha^dlyng of the holy word of god, ^^co. 3.
the which God resysteth and let us with meke humility, 1 Petre. 5
to whom god gives grace, submytte our private fallible judgments, to the
infallyble aunciet Consent of the whole universal Catholyke Church. which with
one heart and mind beleuethe, with perfect eyes sees, and with one mouth
preaches one truth, as affyrmith the ancthorytyes before rehearsed, let (us I
say) during this our Pilgremage in the desert of this world, walk in the
catholyke church, the heavenly kings high way, the way of truth, the which
truth they yt be out of the church, 2. Timo, ^
be always seeking and never finding that we may in the end of this our said
iorneye hear in the Mylytant Church, acheue up to the Church above tryumphant.

Where we may in truth, unity and peace honor with one heart, 2 Cor. 13.
one mind, one mouth, our ever living god of peace, to who^ eternal, be al
praise honor, and glory eternallye. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the holy Ghost, by
Ihon Cawod, Printer to the King and Queen's Majesty's.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


