BEAWTIE dishonored written UNDER THE TITLE OF SHORES WIFE.

Chascun se plaist ou il se trouue mieux.



LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf. 1593.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR EDWARD Winckfield Knight.
SIR since such is the industrious nature of our own Poets, as though Italy
sleeps in the charm of a sweet Hierusaleme, and France waxes proud in the
week labors of her toyling-mused Bartas (the first as conceiptiuely
Allegorical, as the other is labor some significant) yet our own clyme,
challendging unto her self hardly a second esteem, to the first: and having
produced such witty, and so happy conceiptes, as wandering in the secrecy of
some passionate Elegies, blush at their own appearance: How might I be esteemed
guilty of mine own disgrace, that daring to make myself privy to the
knowledge thereof, should not stick, to argue my self improuide^t, in not
bequeathing to silence the first invention of my beginning Muse? not first to
the last, nor better to the worst, of many, that conceiuyng lower opinion of
their own merit, then the merit might think worthily due unto herself,
remain content with that praise, which in her guist inuieth the pure
excellency of the deseruer: But young conceiptes, as they are young: are
withal seeking increase of them selves, and therefore choose what they hold
most aunswerable to such desires: And will less stand on desiring pardon after
offense, then be careful at all not to have offended: Wherein if I note mine
own fault, I crave that pardon, which those will not deny, that respect the
nature of confession. And therefore humbly desiring your self would be
pleased, to hold excuse, to be as great an Argument of your own honorable
disposition as it might be esteemed a passing stayne to mine infant labors: I
wish as many worthy applauses may attend your own sweet inventions, as the
worthiness of them selves deserve, and I have ever desired.

Your worships most bounden. A. C.

SHORES WIFE.
SIgh, sad musde accents, of my funeral verse,
In lamentable groans, (wrought from true piety)
Sing you the wept song, on her wronged hearce,
Is grateful obsequie to her mortal deity:
Sighe: o; sing Actuallie the beauty pained,
With bewties wonder honorably stained.
Bleed pen in black tears, dombe, yet pity moving
The weeping Elegies to the worthiest fair:
Weep pen in warm blood, to the world approving
How fair, how good, how dear, old age did way her.
Bleed tears: weep blood, pen, sing, sighe on her hearce
Her grateful obsequies in a funeral verse.
Careless, so sleep our Loethe drincking eyes,
In present bewties, deemd deuinely rare
Neglecting the Ancient wonder time did pryse
For such a trophie as had no compare,
That now she seems as if she had bin never,
Whom even eternity said should live for ever.
The high-musde period of the story reader,
(Wondering or war, or matter causing terror)
Omits her fortune, to her fates arreader,
(Precisly censuring beauty by her error)
So she that even the fairest she surmounted,
Now of the fairest, is the fowlest counted.
So variablie diverse in her willing,
When vulgar rumor feeds on base suspect,
Impeaching jealousy the best worth ylling
Augments the matter of the least defect
And bad suggestions secretly inuected
Give vild dishonor to the thing suspected.
For whilst not priuiledgd from monster fame,
The beauty (of the not so fair inuyed)
Lies subject to dishonorable name,
With hate, and emulous surmises eyed,
We find it daily true amongst the best
He Is most inuyed most exceeds the rest.
Hence haps her fortune to be yld so much,
Whom fourth king Edward, excellently prised,
And hence it haps, because there was none such,
Shores wife, most fair, the most foul is surmised
And hence it haps, that dead to all disdain her
Her wronged ghost suruyueth to complain her
Who whilst she liud the subject of impiety,
Ground of a thousand voices disagreeing,
The matter of vnhollowed fames variety,
(Which from her good hap had unworthy being)
Even on her dying bed deuinely sorry,
Pensive in heart she weeps forth thus her story.
But when back flying from her paled cheek,
Bash full Aurora did recall her red:
And white-lockte Hyems, on her face did seek,
His Iuorie mantle, doubting she were dead:
When red fled white, white red, and both had left her
And wan appearance of her fair had reft her.
When sincking down, weakness dissolud her eyes,
From vital spirits Actuallie moving,
To waterish heaviness dimd in drooping wise,
In slow neglecting looks their end approving,
And with their often opening toward heaven
Seemd of their virtue and their power bereauen.
When through her often and soft, expyring breath,
(That still reentring moved her panting breast)
She seemed with every sigh to draw in death,
That willing gaspes held her eternal rest,
Then when her head heavy did lean awry
Seeming even then she could not do but dye,
First tears, deuining speech, denouncing passion,
That meet in greatness of their several motions
Fall from her eyes in that unwilling fashion,
Argued her hearts grief, and her greefes commotions,
Tears, the hearts dombe pleas: (words with grief restrained)
Like loath departing pearls her eyes down rayned.
Then through transparance of the white was left her,
Freshly peers secret glory of her blood,
When even that death, of life that would have reft her
With fear and reverence amazed stood,
Doubting, though at the last gasp she did lie,
A beauty so divine could never dye,
When tears the mother issue of greefes restraint
(Bound in the greatness of their own condition)
Passive in Action, had performd complaint,
In seen, not heard plea of her hearts contrition,
When eyes were dim, when panting she lay wan,
Tears having played their part, her tongue began.
Ah whence shall I quoth she, (she wept again
Opening her eyes, opening her hands to heaven)
Produce the story of my lives remain:
My life of hap: I of my life bereauen.
Or why should I unto the world complain me
If all the world for my mishap disdain me?
Then where from silver streamed Isis lying,
Sylent in Swans: and quiet in her brooks,
Forsaken Thames, into her self back flying,
With muddie countnance, and unwilling looks,
As discontent, does make her sad resort
As far as now decayeng Caesar's forte:
There records witness of mine education,
And vulgar Parents, of a mean degree,
To whom my dying day has just relation:
Yet was this mean a happy mean to me:
That living fairest far above the best,
Hapless in life, in death I might be blessed.
But madding thoughts, ambitious of promotions,
Nursed in suspect of ages alteration,
As swollen with fury of the minds commotions,
Deemes all things doubtful, breeds not contentation,
And this did discontent their minds did guide me,
That being young, there were too many eyde me
For look how matter, admirably rare,
Draws musing thoughts, to studdying contemplation:
And time not hable to produce compare,
Confermes the wonder with more admiration:
So, and such was my bewties quaint compare
Wonder it self did make me more then rare:
Yet humble, honorable, chaste, and divine,
True looking, pure, and bashfully reflecting,
Were all the honors of my maiden eyne:
In perfect Act true modesty affecting:
And this Decorum I did ever seek
To grace my beauty with a blushing cheek.
Mine eye no look, no wanton wincke affected,
(The false fair notes of Siren incantations)
No rash gase of immodestie detected,
My chaste mind, bent to wandering alterations,
And yet, nor quoy, nor proud my looks were wayd
But purely such, as might befit a maid.
Strange gestures used not I, nor quaint behauing:
Such as the seeming loath-to-looke, do practice
With fainte denial absolutely craving:
(The outward fault wherein dishonest lack lies)
To these I left the light behauiours leaning
As modern subtleties of immodest meaning.
But in my looks, civility, and cheer,
Bashful, and decent, did import a pureness:
And where my beauty brightest did appear,
A low regard argued a perfect surenesse:
That even the graces seemed to say with me,
If I were not, them selves could never be.
Angel aspects, of gazing window wonders,
Angling at eyes, with beauty in the air:
Bewties that nature from appearance sunders,
With stolen shame of imaginary fair:
These like to monsters ever I esteemed,
Worship their own selves, for a beauty deemed.
I looked: and in my decensie precise:
(Yet women look, one, to envy an other)
I found that even the ancient wholly wise,
Their young conceits yet in their age did smother
And even the crooked old should now despair
At least do hold them selves pure aged fair.
And infant younglings, sucking from their mother,
Selfe-like-dregs, of unwomanly surmises,
Add boldness to the malice enuies other,
For even the young begins as beauty rises:
And this peculier to their sex did see.
Both old, and young and all would fairest be:
Which when my self in more iuditiall measure,
(Grown to conceit upon mine own perfection:)
Saw held of all men, yearthes eternal treasure,
And of the most never worse then sweet subjection:
Disposd to virtue, chastity did will me,
Leave self conceit, for self conceit did ill me:
When intertaining to my bewties honor,
The true instructions chastity did teach me:
Noting what hap, what heaven did wayt upon her,
Whilst no dishonoring blemish did impeach me,
By nature and desire to this disposed
Soon had my will my thoughts thereto imposed.
I saw my self was absolutely fair,
Yet alterd not that virtue to a sin,
I knew a small fault quickly would impair
The purest beauty that should fall therein.
I saw the sin, and saw that most had done it,
And yet I had the grace to know and shun it.
My thoughts that then were bashful, pure, and true
Clean from impiety: from ill: from stayne:
Of nature wise, had reason to eschew
The thing my nature did so much disdain:
I saw both beauty and the good that blist it.
Yet by seducing error I have mist it:
For lo, those eyes, whom jealousy had framed,
To false suggestions of mine unstained youth:
What they misdeem'd, deuiningly they blamed,
Fearing suspect might after turn to truth:
When seeing my self (clean in thought and deed)
Unworthy blamed: my heart begun to bleed:
Then waxt I wanton as I grew to see,
Doting suspect dishonor me so much,
My self, yet chaste, and pure, defamed to be,
And to be deemed false, though I were not such.
And this was even the first cause that I wrought false
That though I were yet true, yet I was thought false.
Such hap they have, have such attending eyes,
Needlessly careful of the not transgressing:
But careful parents do the worst surmise
In doubted error secretly redressing:
Yet often we see, so careful some do prove
They kill their car'de for with their too much love.
Which proof confirmed in me was loved too much:
Whose beauty then, when in her April grace,
It stood vnequal'd, fellowed with none such,
As might the excellency of my fair abace:
Lo then began my beauty first to weame
When first my beauty began to be extreme.
My fathers house obscure, and I not known,
But cloisterd up to secrecy, and sadness,
My friends misdoubting that as I was grown,
Tempting desire might win my will to badnesse
Wise-indiscrete, perforce they me constrained
To wed my self to one that I disdained.
Then holy rites of matrimony vowed,
I sold my beauty, and my self unwilling,
To him, to whom I, and my beauty bowed,
Not for his love, but for his minds fulfilling.
For though in birth my match did equal me
My beauty was unfit for such as he.
And I that scorning tributarie love:
Should have enioyn'd me to an after duty,
Fearing his vnrespect of me might prove,
Th'incapable tyrant of my subject beauty.
Before our contract came unto conclusion:
I knew his love would be my lives confusion.
Yet miser avarice: (doting aim of promotions)
Gaping at rich showers of a golden age,
As feed proud vultors by the winds commotions,
Act monster wonders in a wealth rage
Careless to what account the fair be wed
Nor forcing discord of a loathed bed:
Who sees the secrets of that widow thought
The silent musings, and the discontent
Moving impatience in her mind has wrought.
Whose bewtie's subject to inforst content?
Or how may we think she her passion brooks
That dares not speak but plead her grief in looks.
Discenting unity of a discord bed,
Burning in vapors of suggestious quiet,
Strained concord of th'infortunatly wed,
Dissembling love; and framing wonders by it
Who sees this, may quickly judge the ill
That mind indures is wed against her will.
In her raynes jealousy full of a self suspect,
Deeming all eyes as doubling as her own,
Fearing her self, her own self might detect
(For she think, what to her to all is known)
And this is still peculier to her vain
To hate the thing she fears may doubt again.
Which haps from hence, that she suspecteth ever,
That adverse jealousy will come and see,
The close wrought Act her secresies endeavor,
And Act again, against her as close as she,
And though no fault nor any deed detectes her
Yet will she hate the thing she fears suspectes her.
Thus waking to her self and watching all:
Discentious union in her self discording:
Fearing the fortune worthy may be fall.
Onel' in a diverse Sympathy according:
By fear and doubt unto her worst hap led
Thus does she work still in th'vnwilling bed.
She shrynes her grief up in a secret fashion,
(Which musing silence Agonies increase,)
And ever dombe, in discontented passion,
She shakes her head, and sighs, and holds her peace:
Her grief and fear is such she cannot say it
Till her complaining eyes in tears bewray it.
Look how discountnanst in her eyes slow moving
(The wakefull residence of a discontent,)
Heauely sighted, sad quiet sits approving,
The awd condition of enforst content
And how her drooping, notes her minds disquyet
To be so great she seems down wayed by it.
Mark how the down cast looks her eyes reflect,
Argues her life, sequestered from her minds ease:
And every gesture, secretly detect,
The note of silent passion never finds ease:
And though she seems unwilling to bewray it,
Yet in that seeming so she seems to say it.
She sits and hears, even passionatly attentive,
How better fortunes joy the happy wed,
When in a sudden thought heartily pensive
She castes her eyes up, and she shakes her head
Whilst many thoughts concurring all in one
Makes her grieved soul yield forth a deadly groan.
Lo so united to a discontent,
Departed from my self, to live t'vnkindnesse,
Too soon my ill-bestow'd youth did repent,
My parents avarice, and desaster blindness,
That could not see the loathing that is bred,
In discordiarring of an unkind bed:
And what is worse: o this is interdicting,
The fellow ioyings of a true met love,
More then her own ill, this is still inflicting,
Which never did the willing bridgroome prove,
That loves but one, and gaynes such good thereby
He Is loved again and so does live and dye.
But soon had Suitor eyes, with privy look,
Noted the loathing that I bare unto him,
And moved by this, they quickly undertook,
Or shame, or some dishonorable Act to do him:
And that this might better performed be,
They seemed to malice him, and pity me.
As song the Sirens to the wandering knight,
Th'illusiue stanzaes of their charming song:
Pleasing th'Attentiue ear with sweet delight,
But hateful Actors of intended wrong:
So sweetly song they songs of love to me,
They seemed, or Sirens, or more sweet to be.
For look how in a solitary guise
The virgin querester of the listening night,
Chantes her sweet descant, in a flattering wise,
Togayne her little freedom if she might:
And sings the sweeter by how much the more
She minds the liberty she had before.
So when imprisoned in precise constrainte,
Mine eye kept watch and my brow tyrannised:
Those that their free enlargement did awayte,
In arguing pratle sweetly subtelised:
And as their passion did increase in fear,
It pleased so much the more my stranger ear.
And so much more as does the churlish rich,
Keep gold the safer, as the culler's pure
So much the more my beauty did bewich,
Them to continuance as they were more sure:
And these I knew so well to entertain.
They would not leave love, to be free again.
For lives that Philosophy precise
Whom documentes have quyte strained from this?
Lives that ancient old, and aged wise,
Whom years have known to make to hate their bliss?
Then blame not yeouth if want only he wooes:
Since doting old and bookewise cannot choese.
Nor let my beauty be impeacht with this,
That I was woman like, though Angel fair,
For him does puretie fortunately bliss,
That is not blemished with some black impair:
For this we see almost in things divine
It Is quickly stained is the purest fine.
Never did flock to old Ulysses Queen,
In weary absence of her straying knight,
Never more woers in her court were seen,
(Although perhaps more worthy persons might)
Then there were Suitors still importuned me
For I presume I was as fair as she
Nor could my seeming true to him I chose,
Give answer to their often suites renewing
My fained love to this, fayn'd hate to those,
Could be no obstacle to their ever suing:
And I not knowing quaintly to disdain them
Through want of Art was forced to intertaine them.
When often entreaties breeding emulation
In the corriuall thoughts of fellow lovers,
Wrought quyte changed being, and strange alteration,
As oftener vows their constancy discouers:
For that will issue to her full perfection
Has grounded being by the minds affection.
Then equal in my thoughts making compare,
T'wixte old forlorn, and personally young:
I quickly saw the Abuse my beauty bare,
And my hearts grief sat fresh upon my tongue:
When noting this, my heart began to cry:
And I exclaimed against a doting eye:
What Sympathy of love (quoth I) can be
Twixte crooked old, and excellently fair
Discording years will ever disagree,
As different age to grave does make repair:
And this to old men proper still does prove,
To sigh they are so old they cannot love.
Such one was he rest my youth of her bliss,
He could no more of love, his days were don:
Crookt old, and cold, his years denied him this,
And therefore grieved he had so soon begun
oist not grief that age should so defame
The reverent title of so grave a name.
But how can I, how can all women brook this,
Decrepit years from pleasure should restrain them?
Ner lived they happy day that undertook this
But of their fortune after did complain them:
For what is dotage that we should affect it
Or moody age that women should respect it.
Old quyte for lorne and ouerworne with years,
He makes an infant humor of his age,
And in his lined brows dotage appears,
A witless babie in a loving rage:
And such a humor in his senses rain,
And being old he is made a child again,
He calls his Kate, and she must come and kiss him,
Doting his madded love upon her face:
He thinckes her smile has where withal to bliss him,
Thus franticques his love to the fayres disgrace
Which not withstood she dares not say him no
o is it not pity bewtie's used so.
But do not therefore blame the tripping fair
For even the fairest has her imperfection:
Let not precise respect the lighter way her,
For even the maiden seeming has affection:
And now a days the chaste devout will show love,
That having learned they may the better know love.
Let the ancient doting therefore be precise
The quick eyed young will have a time to wincke it,
Outward appearance can deceive his eyes,
And she play wanton when he does not think it,
For this as sure as self truth shall ensue
If age be ielious youth must be untrue.
Suggesting fear shall make the newly wed,
Be false, because she fears she is suspected,
And fear by Art, to fayning shall be led,
To double closly with the false affected:
For what is their arm'de fortune better noting
Then double Act to express their privy doting?
So may his marriage bed a love bewray,
Is fayning true and fearfully rebellious,
Whom after age in time to come shall say,
Is doting old, and cold, and foolish ielious:
And let this title from his name never sunder
He Is loves head monster and his armed wonder.
But leaving this an ordinary shame,
To that grave being of a reverent age,
Whose ag'de grave decensie it does defame,
With madding matter of an idle rage:
As made her monster by her childish folly
Is reverent old, and honorable wholly,
Of often entreating suitors I will say,
Whose often vows tempt me to further sin,
And hoping time my frayltie might bewray,
They use all art to teach me to begin:
Yet though I lou'de not him that I had chose,
I knew not how to candescend to those:
But hence grew hate, for now I grew admired,
And by degrees begun to learn to sin,
Then when I saw I was so much desired,
I seemed transformed as I had never bin.
And self opinion wrought so strong effect
As now I grew to leave all chaste respect.
For chastity by wyles grew to be cold,
My modest beauty began to alter wanton,
I that from me, my self, my self had sold,
Found this hard fortune for my heart to panton
I now began to exercise mine eye
And gase on all would gase as well as I.
My speech from humble, decent, pure, and true,
That hid no secrecy in a plainly meaning,
To Courtlike, wanton, pleasant did ensue:
I left my nature to my follies wearing:
And I by practice learned the worst so well
In wanton art the best I could excel:
Thus I both wild and absolutely fair,
Charmed with my beauty, with my wyles allured;
My want of shame, mine honor did impair,
As long as I my self to sin inured,
Which if I sinned or did with sin dispense,
My life must say, (to whom I was offense:)
Yet not defamed for other fault then those,
The wanton Cittie-dwelling count their grace,
But every tongue upon suspect did gloss,
And being apt new made reports t'imbrace
I now was famed the fairest she was ever,
(Which fame in that age was extinguished never.)
For sooner had no motives of desire,
Taught me to exercise my wit, and beauty;
But my conceit could set delight on fire
And wanton looks impriuiledge all dewtie
And I grew fayrer and the oftener named
As quainte conceit me for delightful famed.
When lo: (for who lives so hid so obscure
So secret from the world, remote from eyeng,
As holds him self of doubtful talk so sure,
But fame into his fortunes will be pryeng?)
Even then when we of obscure life do boast
It proves at last that then we are known the most.
For then pronouncing from incertaine thought,
Th'vngrounded story of a liar muse:
What secrecy from subtle eyes had wrought,
Incertaine fame with falsehood will abuse:
Fame secret witness to the guilt conceald
Mads all infurie till it be revealed.
Mindful remembrer of a secret will,
(If secret may import worthy dishonor)
The perjured counsailor of the close wrought ill,
False testimony of a hope, relyeng on her,
Both truth, and falsehood, in one period bounding,
Contrary to her self, her self confounding:
False glosing tongue, credulities rely,
Error of nature, bad seed of base sedition,
Suspectes false daughter, never borne to dye,
Nursed of Erinnis, and of false suspicion:
Proved all the worlds plague and inured to sin:
Happy had I lived, had thou never bin:
For till thou first with thine unhappy story,
Ecchoing relations of my worth and me:
Intitul'dst my name to my bewties glory,
Unworthy known, of such a worth to be
Though not performed in so royal measure
Yet then I joyed a life of quiet pleasure:
So fares th'infortunate whom monster fame,
Glosing, ambitious, false mused, makes her subject,
Enioyn'd by praise, to bide eternal shame
And rest the worlds dishonorable object
Such fate had I, that was so highly famed
First to be held fair, after ever shamed.
For now ambitious in her fabling humor,
Unto my king, my beauty she dispences,
To whom sh'impartes a wonder working rumor,
In speech Authentical, to charm his senses:
With Act his eyes his ears, with words she won,
His heart, his love, his soul, ere she had don.
She seemed sober hearty and precise,
Framing her false looks to a pleading fitness:
T'vnthought-on truth sh'adaps her humbled eyes
And every Act seemed her tales truth to witness:
And what she thought could win the king she wrought-on
In Act, and speech she let not pass vnthought-on.
So as when at his oracles disclosing,
Deuining Proteus, prophesying small things
His self from culler from his shape disposing,
Deludes the suitor hold by seeming all things
Making him self a monster to the view
Before deceit can bring him to tell true:
Monster fame so, deuining on supposes:
Suspicious of her self, (her self a liar:)
In altering tales her flattery discloses
Wrought to report ill by her own desire
Whilst that the king credits her tale for truth
Which after turned a shame unto his youth.
For had she bin more ready to report-it
His apt belief had sooner given it credit:
His willing harkning ear did well import-it,
Was so attentive to the tale that spread it:
For this fault even is incident to kings
Too much to credit over pleasing things
She told him now my bewties April bud,
Fresh bloomed in honor of my flowring prime:
In high degrees of excellency stood,
Ages admire, and wonderment of time,
Amongst the best, so far exceeding many:
As it was never seconded by any:
(Quoth she) behold how in her wanton fair,
Rosy Pallantias (new stolen from her bed)
Blusheth her glory on the morning air,
In bashful decensie of vermillion red:
And from his stand the Northern watchman frayes
With brighter coming of her summer rays:
Or as: whilst Thetis in her cu'ning greeting,
Smileth her purple on the suns decline,
And with her Tytan in the West seaes meeting,
Appears a wonder, bashfully divine,
Such is her face (quoth she) her self so fair,
She seems as bewtious as the eu'ning air.
Have thou not seen how in her hemispheare
The morninges henchman, and the star of love
Vales in her beauty at the suns appear
And seems dimmed his glory to approve?
Even so her eyes (quoth she) exceedes so far
As does the son the sitting morning star.
More beauty, more divine does her adorn,
Then all Diana's, mesken virgins graces
Those froes that in the dewy of the morn
Trip on the flowers in those silent places,
To which the feathered queresters resort
And chante them many a musical report.
Often have I seen, when to the strond of Po,
The floating swans did make their last repair,
And silver plumed, as white as any snow
Blemished Indimions Scynthia in her fair:
Yet never did she, never did they excel:
The Iuorie white upon her brow does dwell.
As when before old sleepie Tython dawnes
(Dew'd in the wept tears of Auroraes eyes,)
Sweet savoring flowers of the meddow lawnes,
With sweet perfumes, up into heaven arise
So breathes her brethes perfume, so sweetly smelling
It seems her breath the flowers are excelling.
Sung never at Euridices redeeming
The Thracian Harper to the god of hell
A song more honor worth, worth more esteeming
Yet Orpheus touch pleased deuinly well
Nor yet Arion ever so behau'd him
Although he song so sweet the Dolphin saved him.
Nor that old man, whose musical records
The following walls of ancient Theb's did rear:
Nor Poean, pleasing in her sweet accordes
The curious judgment of the nycest ear
Did ever sound were ever song so well
But her sweet words, her voice does far excel.
Never did her Nymphs, at bold Acteons gase,
Nor combly Phoebe: (seen with privy eye)
Man's sense, man's thought, with sweeter smiles amase
With richer glory, of a wealthier dye,
Then would this beauty naked as was she,
Were you your self but privy to it as he:
To this she ads (o strange impiety)
Vicious intycements of alluring sin,
And with licentious words, altering variety,
She drownes his senses, and him self therein:
So well the Siren knew her song to sing,
She soon had luld a sleep the willing king:
And that she might the better bring to pass,
Shame to my Lord, her self, and shame to me,
She ads how wanton, bucksome, young I was
Fit consorte with his younger years to be
And when at length she had discourst her fill,
Away she flies: abominable ill.
But he that stands enchanted with the wonders,
By secret stealth dishonorable sin,
Him from his sense, his sense from virtue sunders
And now in madding love lust does begin,
And that foul stayne his fury is incenst with
By majesty (says he) shall be dispenst with:
Then to mine ears (diuyning my misfortune,)
Secret reports came whispering stranger wonders,
And with their oratorie pleas mine ears importune.
Whilst blind conceit me from my good hap sunders:
With charming profers still my king salutes me
As one for absolutest fair reputes me.
And those, to whom he secretly commended,
The inquisition of my bewties being:
Those my attract, my change of fortune tended
My bewties worth and excellency seeing:
Report my beauty to be so divine;
As now he prysed none so much as mine:
And soon had gifts, soon had my Lords desire,
My soul from chastity, my self from me,
With often presents taught how to retire
Tasting the profers of a high degree:
And then me thought though I ner proved before
A kings embrace was even a heaven or more:
Lo then to Court, unto my king I came,
Monarke aspect of my recusant eye:
Mine eye, the matter of my bodies shame,
As long as shame, or sin were nursed thereby,
With niggard favor, at the first did seem,
As one that held his crown scarce worth esteem.
For now my scholar eyes had learned to fashion
Their looks authentical, and quainte precise:
My quoynesse argued a stranger passion,
To make him so, more plyant to mine eyes:
And I, whom he esteemed easy won
Made him my subject, ere mine eyes had don:
For now I saw: when equally precise,
He saw the honor was due worth my beauty:
My brows recusancie began tyrannise,
And of my king exact a tribute duty
And if he proffered love, I would forsake it
For women first say no, and then they take it.
I wrought so well, my face did seem to say,
I prysed chastity, but even too much:
My apt framed countenance seemed to bewray,
A purposd fermnesse to my seeming such:
And my pretext by working so before:
Was but to make him love me so much more:
For now in me variety of love,
Had wrought such knowledge, by my seeming prone
As whom I knew quickly sedu'st did prove,
I knew was quickly got, and quickly gone:
And therefore now opposed I seemed the stronger,
That late ere won, I might be loved the longer.
For when I saw, him fawningly respect me,
I played upon him with a stranger No:
And so much more I saw he did affect me,
As I seemed further of in saying so,
Yet then I knew my quoynesse so might prove
A king would hardly bow too low to love.
In equal mean, therefore did I contain
Th'impatience of my seeming loath to sin,
No beggar humbleness my face did stain,
With apt desire to throw my self therein:
And if my quoynesse made him loath to woo
Then would I lend him smiles, and kisses too,
Nor did I in denying faintly so
But secretly seem to desire again,
The hoped profers my consenting No,
In secret wish already did contain:
But long alas could not persist therein
For ere I left I sold my self to sin.
Who sees the chaste lived Turtle on a tree,
In unfrequented groves sit and complain her?
Whether alone all desolate poor she,
And for her lost love seems to restrain her?
And there sad thoughted howleth to the air
The excellency of her lost-mates fair?
So I when sin had drowned my soul in badnesse,
To solitary muse my self retired:
Where wrought by greese to discontented sadness,
Repentant thoughts, my new won shame admired,
And I the monster of mine own misfortune
My heart with groans, and sorrow did importune.
Behold (quoth I) how in her Iuie hidden
The eu'nings shame, Pallas adulterate foul,
The sitting sons sight, and the day forbidden,
With a sherle scritch her former sin does howl:
And peering in the day but from her tree
Is wonderd at of all the birds she see:
So haps to thee, whom so thy sin has shamed
And made the night-eyes wonder of thy time:
So haps to thee, that has thy self defamed,
In tender springing of thine April pryme
But now too late to have sinned thou do repent thee,
When thou have lost the good that nature lent thee.
A wonderment, and monster of her age,
Following posterity will account thy fall;
And this which even no passion can assuage,
Nor mittigate thy payned soul with all:
When death in grave shall low have layne thy head
Thou shall be yet desam'd when thou art dead.
Thus in thy life, thus in thy death, and boath,
Dishonored by thy fact, what may thou do?
Though now thy soul the touch of sin does loath,
And thou abhorst thy life, and thy self too:
Yet cannot this redeem thy spotted name,
Nor interdict thy body of her shame:
But he that could command thee, made thee sin:
Yet that is no privilege, no sheeld to thee:
Now thou thy self, have drowned thy self therein.
Thou art defamed thy self, and so is he:
And though that kings commands have wonders wrough*
Yet kings commands could never hinder thought.
Say that a Monarke may dispense with sin,
The vulgar tongue proves impartial still,
And when mislike all froward shall begin,
The worst of bad, and best of worst to ill,
A secret shame in every thought will smother
For sin is sin in kings, as well as other:
And yet again, when to suspicion wrought,
I saw the holly sin, and sullen game,
Whilst secret act disclosed no hidden thought,
To prejudice an honorable name:
And those to be such saints that best could seem such
As one would think suspicion would not deem such.
Lo, too secure of variable rumor
I gave my self to pleasing disposition:
Love charming wantonness and delightful humor,
Forced now no longer peevish eyed suspicion,
And I thought none could testify my fault
Because I thought there was not any saw't.
And though my life had stain, yet this did mend it,
That I was sorry such an one to be,
My pity my respect did still commend it,
And this was commendably praysd in me,
That Suitor wrongs my self to right would bring
If right might be procured from the king.
And now so deemed so highly was I prysed,
No honor was too good, too great for me,
I could command what ever thought devised,
Delight to sense, or joys to mind to be:
And whilst I sat seated alone so high,
The king could but command and so could I.
But long my fortune had not traded so,
In doubt full highness of prosperity:
Ere murder death had framed a worser woe,
A true example unto all posterity:
That those that mount so high so far and fast,
In tract of time come headlong down at last.
For now, the doomes day of my fortune's near,
The day, the dome, peculier unto all,
Now in a death vnthought-on does appear,
My bewties ruin and mine honors fall
Such sightes are these unto the pleased eye
As are not sooner seen then they do dye.
So as when for his drowned son pensiuly sorry,
Three times in black, three times his golden vrne,
The sadder eye of heavens restrained glory,
In black, and heavy secrecy did burn;
And moodie, by restraining so his light,
In three days absence brought a triple night.
Or as, when from some high clift sadly looking,
A mistie tempest from the South arises,
And disagreeing blastes no sails stop brooking,
The merry sea-mans wandering bark surpriseth
We sorrow at the sight upon the shore
But in the bark would sorrow ten times more.
So now, eternal night, now desolation,
Deuining horror to the nighted land:
Insues to all by sudden alteration,
That of a tyrant ill suspected stand:
But I whom this imported most of any
Where all had but one fear: I one, had many.
Ah death old father of our common end,
Nursed of the mother night, and discontent
Inuying hatreds never pleased friend,
Incertaine accedent, and unknown event,
In what so much have I offensed thee,
That by my kings death thou should murder me?
Thou art the father cause I am forlorn,
It was thy too much pity that procured this,
Why did not make me dye ere I was borne?
That being dead I might not have endured this?
Cruel in what may harm in what may ill me
But thrice more cruel that thou would not kill me.
Did my face fear thee from thy murdering will
That being young, thou letst me live so long?
Or having such a beauty at thy will,
Thoughtst thou the rape would be esteemed a wrong?
O if thou did, withal thou wild'st that I,
Should live so long that I should shame to dye:
It was the avarice of thy list to kill,
Founded my downfall on my kings decease:
Such is thy nature, and so much so ill:
One murder with a second to increase:
But thus we see who on a king relyes
Finds death a live whilst living yet he dies.
See how my end brought me to my confusion
The common wonder of the wisest eye
My end the period and my lives conclusion
Turns to my deaths shame, that I grieve to dye:
And that whereof dying I am ashamed,
I grieve to live because I live defamed,
Dead unto life, living unto my death,
The end of shame, and yet my shames beginning:
Thus do I araw the self disdayning breath,
Has worthy shame by mine unworthy sinning
And whilst at once I would both live and dye
I do them both yet am not cured thereby.
For when true penitencie does begin,
With contrite sorrow, and repentant zeal,
To mind the greatness of displeasing sin:
That shame in hidden silence does conceal.
When these faults in our selves our selves do see
We think that all know them as well as we.
But stay thee here, and plaintiu'ly rehearce,
The funeral tenor of thine after fortunes;
O wash his toombe with tears weep on his hearce,
Whose death gave life, to grief that thee importunes:
For now behold unhappily he dies,
On whom the essence of my good relyes.
Even as the gloomie sighted night, with clouds,
Obscures the sunbright beauty of the air,
And in her deadly look frowningly shrowdes,
Black desolation and forlorn despair,
Threatening with sad aspect some future woe,
By black deuining looks presaging so:
So seemed the black air, that with foul aspect,
Feeds lowering heaviness through a duskie light,
That ouglie looking darkness does reflect,
From caued bowels of the fearful night,
So at his death, darkness seemed to bewray,
Eternal blackness to the heavy day:
That so dissolved to everlasting fears,
That sun-reft-ages after posterity,
Might weep his funerals in complainyng tears,
As rightes belonging to a dead prosperity,
And sing his obsequies in consorting woe,
Sorrowing their light should be bereft them so:
For now their son gone to his home for ever,
Pronounces from declining of his rays,
A worser night with tyrannous endeavor,
Would dark the beauty of their after days
And proud ambition aiming at a crown
Would pull the dead kings true-borne issue down.
When lo, discentious in her own proceeding
Suspicious in her thoughts, styled in her musing,
Carefully thoughted, on her own self feeding,
With ielious doubt her proper wits abusing
Sighes-and-greefe-breeding fear to heaven does cry
And wished with him posterity might dye
For the infant live of his blood left a pray,
To vultar greediness of an easy crown,
In tyrant practices did soon bewray,
Cruel protection would the land confound,
And then as doubtful minded as before,
Fear would increase her sorrow ten times more.
Thus stood suspected of incertaine fate
And drawn by often fears to a dead despair
The neuter subject, that did know too late,
What hell it is to have a different heir.
And that which all their discontent had sown
To have a king to come not to be known.
Now began the trembling rich, and fearefull-wanting,
Bequeath their fortunes to their hap of war,
And trembling woemen-harts, with sorrow panting
Grieve that their fate should be unknown so far
As whilst they yet thought no ill could assay them,
Vnthought-on death should sudden come and slay them:
And those, whom diuersly-affecting humor,
Drew to the adverse part an other would not,
When running motions of deceiving rumor,
Make them affect the matter that they should not
At last exclaim as on a heavy thing
That none should know the man should be their king.
Then what might I do, where with all to save,
Me from confusion, that I might not dye,
Now when dead sleeping careless in his grave
My king was gone, on whom I did rely,
What rests for me, a poor distressed woman,
But hold me patient at my fortunes sommon?
And what is worse, impriuiledge from hope,
Of my reflowring time, of my new being,
I saw the bands, I saw the narrow scope,
Wherein my sin must secret sit from seeing:
And this so narrow, and so strickte to be,
As all the world might my misfortune see:
Why have mine eyes wept idle tears till now?
Why has my groaning heart sighed to relieve me?
Or why has grief eclipst my sadded brow?
Since now, I would weep, groan, and sigh, and grieve me,
And now I need them, now I can do none,
For grief, and sighs, and groans, and tears, be gone,
Weep eyes, groan heart, grief sighe and take again
Your second quintescence from my second woe,
O never will I wast your wet in vain,
Nor groan, nor grieve, nor sigh, nor weep you so.
But with my days, date all your discontent,
And weep you truly, till my self be spent.
O you are comfort in your issuing motions,
Unto the mind with passion is afflicted
Whom wearieng greatness of her own commotions
Of words and speech, with grief has interdicted.
Werte not for you, th'opressed heart would break
When grief does grow so big we cannot speak.
Werte not for you (and yet I want you too)
My hearts distress, that makes you her rely,
Could never know, nor how, nor what to do,
But live in silence, and in dombnesse dye:
O none can tell, the ease the mind does gain her
When eyes can weep, the heart groan, or grief complain her
But wanton tears have dryde mine idle eyes,
And wayn'd away the beauty of my fair;
My heart, for want of groans distressed dies,
And sighs are vanished to unworthy air:
Then what remaynes for me forlorn thereby,
But know my grief, and hold my peace and dye,
It Is now that I should weep a thousand tears;
Now, when my stars in fixed opposition,
Denounces sorrow to my greeuing ears,
And tells me I must change my lives condition:
And trust to favoring destiny no more,
For I must beg my bread, from door to door:
What fortune ere thou art enuiest our age,
A tyrant monster, in a madding vain,
Return in fury of thy prowdest rage,
And Act the Scene of all thy hate again;
And if ere any bad like woes as I,
Yet give me ten times more, but let me dye.
Said ere Philosophy hell was confind
Below the earth where never any were?
O if it be so, yet withal I find,
That hell's above the earth as well as there
And never could Philosophy approve,
That there was one below but one above.
It Is but th'inuention of th'highe-witted wise,
Allowed of any there, more then to express,
The Extreme of tortures, that might tyrannise
Them being dead, that living did transgress:
Nor have they left us any confirmation,
But deemed surmises of imagination;
This it was rayn'd on the earth, and prayed on me,
It Was this which I esteemed a heaven before,
And more infernal cannot any he,
For hell is but extreme, yet this was more:
And we ner know what it is in heaven to dwell,
Until we know what it is to live in hell.
O could my words express in mourning sound,
The ready passion, that my mind does try,
Then, grief all ears, all senses would confound,
And some would weep with me, as well as I:
Where now because my words cannot reveal it
I weep alone enforced to conceal it.
O, and alone, let me weep mine own fortunes.
Peculier to my self, am woe begone:
Me whom it ever secretly importunes
As willing I should weep my fate aloane:
O therefore weeping let me live and dye,
For none can weep so worthy tears, as I:
Well may some sorry, greeuedly supposing,
Suggest a passion excellently strange:
And in true Act pitifully disclosing
An inward grief, near at my fortunes range:
But none can Act grief in complaint so right
As he that is him self agreeued by it.
O God what error is in natures will,
That nature so unkind, so bad should be,
The poor improuident should endure such ill,
As through security not this ill to see,
For had I seen before what now I try,
Or I had feared to live, or learned to dye.
But ill brooks the high aspiring thoughts surmise
Coward respect of vulgar education:
And hungering greediness of attempting eyes,
Deem nor divine their after alteration,
But mind their minds will, not their own condition
Thus mads the aspiring in her minds ambition.
This was my fault had worthy fortune by it,
And worthy was it, since I could not see,
How discontent is ordinary quiet,
To wakefull minds, that never contented be.
To joy the sweet mean of a low content,
But mount so high they after must repent:
Had I bin fair, and not allured so soon,
To that, at which all thoughts level their sadness
My sunbright day had not bin set ere noone
Nor I bin noted for detected badnesse
But this is still peculier to our state,
To sin too soon, and then repent too late.
But even as soard the feathered boy so high,
(Reaching his infant thoughts unto the son,)
By whotter rays, in all his highth did dye,
And gained his prides meede ere his pride were done:
So I unto the low was made the nighest
Whilst now I thought I ouertopt the highest:
For now rained tyranny in ambitious throane,
A true-borne-infant-bloud-spilling murderer:
Usurping monster, yet contrould of none,
Foul guilts Appeal, and mischiefs furtherer,
Proud Richard Gloucester in his pride I saw
Act all things at his will: for will was law.
He says (and then he shows a withered arm
Dryde at his byrth-day lame and vselesse still)
Quoth he it was thou by charms wroughtst me this harm
And therefore doomes me to his tyrant will:
For never is the offended mighty Armelesse
To wreake his fury on the hated harmless.
Bear hence quoth he (and there withal reflected
Fire sparkling fury from incensed eyes,
Whose madding threat his lunacie detected,
And told me he was taught to tyrannize)
And then again in more incensedrage
He cries, bear hence this monster of her age.
When lo the servant sworn performs on me,
Th'vnwilling office of a grieved sorry:
And whilst he yet lays forced hands upon me
Noting my beauty, and my bewties glory
He does his duty: yet his loookes do shoe,
He craves pardon for his doing so.
For what eye framed to envy and disdain
Would not enforce the heart to shake the head,
When that pure maiden blush that did destayne
My purple cheek with fainte vermillon red,
Seemed constant fair not changed for threatening will
But fearful true and modest comely still:
I seemed unwilling that the tyrant should
By force of will have tyrant-like compelled me
And therefore made the little shift I could
To burst away out of their arms that held me,
But as I strugled beauty grew the more,
Which seen, they held me faster then before.
And those unwilling hands that prayed upon me
(Happy they held me to behold my beauty)
Imbraste me faster with still gazing on me,
To feed their eyes-listes not perform their duty
For had it bin in them I am assured
Such tyrant laws I should not have endured.
But he, whom hell nurst-furie has infected,
Threats death to them, and me that him offended
And from his knitted brows horror reflected,
The Enraged doom his fellon thoughts intended:
Impatient, moodie, mad, and full of ire,
He swears by heaven that shame shall be my hyre,
Posterity says he (and then again
The knit veins of his prowdly-looking brows
Swelling with malice, and extreme disdain,
Like to an yrefull bore he prowdly bows)
And swears by hell heavy revenge shall date
Th'incenst displeasure of his falling hate,
Posterity shall know thine Act (quoth he)
And then he bids that my attyres be rent,
And terms the habit unbefitting me
A Sorcer witch full of her foul intent:
And that which words for anger could not say
A furious act in iesture did bewray.
When I reft of my habit and attire,
Stood yet as modest, as a maid should be,
Bashfully feared with the new admire,
Of this base tyrants rauishing of me.
Who not content with this commandes that I,
Be turned into the streets and beg or dye.
Even as an angerie Bull incenst with ire,
Bellowing his menaces with a hollow rore,
Impatient, madd, wanting his lusts dosire,
Augments his madded fierceness more and more
And yet no quiet any murder bringes
Although he prays upon a thousand things.
So vnappeas'd, unquiet, mad, and yrefull
Rages the insatiate fury of his will:
And in his look, fierce, wan, and pale, and dyrefull
He seems impatient, moodie, madded, still,
And not content with this disgrace to grieve me
He says that all shall dye, (that dare relieve me.)
(Then from the Court, the martirdoome of me,)
All solitary, alone, forlorn, I went
Thither where coffeehouse I did see,
Threatening my misery ere my days were spent
And needy want as naked as was I,
Told me that thus perplexed I should dye.
When I unapt to frame alyer-tale,
Unapt to crave my bread with beggar prayer,
My poor discountnanst look all wan and pale
Through hungers nature wayned from her fair
I could not: oshame would not then that I
Should beg at all but rather choose to dye.
And yet necessity did vrdge constrainte,
To brook th'impatience of her proper will,
Whilst silence breaking out to no complainte,
In secret passion hid her sorrow still:
And shame with fearful blush all grieved did cry
And wished she did but know but how to dye.
Nor could remembrance of my high degree,
Brook my resorting into public place:
For I did sigh as often as I did see,
Or think that any thought on my disgrace
And who dispayres in such a kind as this
Thinckes that the whole world knows all amiss.
But o, why do I thus weary prolong,
The woeful Tragedy of my pleasures wayne,
Suffices that I knew to bide the wrong,
And brook with patience what I did sustain,
Idly we grieve when greeuingly we plain us,
For that must be performed that needs constrain us.
I can no more delate my further ill,
It Is sooner judged then told, the grief is such,
The wise-iuditiall may if so they will,
Sooner conceive then I can say so much:
Since so much now would call again the pryme,
And those that tell grief feel it for the time.
I must (quoth she) address my self to death,
And therewithal, clasping her hands in one,
And wresting often sighs with a deep fetched breath,
She pants forth a poor complaining groan,
When closing fast her eyes (first open to heaven)
She now seems both of speech and life bereauen.
When coward death, fainting, and fearful slow,
Looks on her fair face, with a vultar eye,
And nils him self his force upon her show,
As doting fearful she could never dye,
And yet he would: and yet he does despair
And fears she cannot dye she is so fair,
And yet her tongue now styled could say no more
She panted, and she sighed, and gave a groan,
And even that beauty was pure-fayrebefore,
Wayn'd with her lives expire, and now was none,
Yet death suspected still, does still despair,
And says she cannot dye and be so fair.
For even as looks at the suns late sitting
A witherd lilly, dried, and saplesse quyte,
And in her weakened leaves, inwardly knitting,
Seems dead: and yet, retains a perfect white:
So seemed her face, when now her fair did fall
That death still feared she would not dye at all.
He saw't, and sighed, and yet he could not see,
Cause to induce his hope-perswading eye,
To think that there was any cause that she,
Could be so passing fair and yet could dye:
He thinckes the bewtious never life should loose
And yet withal he thinckes, she should not choose:
O what a combat wrought her life and death,
Both clayming interest in her end, to spill her,
Life would not that the fair should loose her breath:
Death would not loose his right, yet would not kill her,
But looks upon her with a curious eye,
Doubting (though she were dead) she could not dye.
At last, persuading palenesse seems to say,
O she is dead, her breathless senses failed,
Her life has lost her joy, her death his pray,
And now nor her life, nor her death auayled,
O then did any ever ought else try
Then life or death that makes us to dye.
Death took delight in her, until she dyed,
Life fed upon her looks, he did so way her,
Death and his life upon her end relied,
And greeuing life likt her she was so fair
This lent her living: that prolonged her breath,
O then there is something else that kills then death.
For he wished that he were not death, she might not dye,
Pittieng in this, he greeues he wants piety,
Tyrant in Act, his will does this deny
That her death should conferme him in his diety:
And rather then of life he would bereave her
He would give leave to all, to live for ever,
Rather then she should not, he would not be,
Or to a mortal being he would bow,
So she might, all should live as well as she,
(For death did never doubt until it was now)
And yet by death if she might gained be,
The world should dye and none should live but she,
But as a Crystal with a tender breath
Receives dim thickness, and does seem obscure
So darkt with palenesse of a breathed on death
(If it were death that did this dark procure,)
She seems alive and yet ah she was gone
And then life grieved, and death did fetch a groan.
Yet would they part the remnant of her being
Her body went to death: her fame to life
Thus life, and death, in unity agreeing
Dated the tenor of their sonderie strife,
Death vowed her body should be eyed never,
Yet life has vowed her fame should live for ever.
FINIS.

