A reuyuing of the dead by Verses that follows: Which makes worthy men
known, by the examples of King Henry the eight: King Edward the sixth: Sir
Walter Mildmay: the last Earl of Warwick: and Sir Christofer Hatton, lately L.
Chaunceller of England.

With a declaration of the names of all the most honorable Counselors, that
have dyed since the beginning of the Queens Majesty's reign.

AT LONDON Printed for Edward White, and are to be sold at his Shop near the
little north door of Saint Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gun. 1591.

TO THE RIGHT HONOVVRABLE M. I. Wolley, Secretary for the latin tongue and one of
her Majesty's Privy Council Thomas Churchyard wishes increase of honor,
abundance of knowledge and blessedness of life.
IN calling to mind right honorable, the continuance of your favor and
amiable countenance toward me: I found my self indetted and unable (but by
affection or good will) to deserve the least part of your courtesies, yet
looking on your many years spent in learning and knowledge (for the which
virtue, God has called you to an honorable place) I thought by some study
(albeit my judgment weak) to lead on your good liking so far into my
labors, that you should not only affect my writings: but also accept the poor
present I offer. which although they be but papers stuffed full of verses, yet
the plaiines of the matter and good meaning of the writer I hope shall purchase
some small season (as a passing of the time) to make you behold the willing
pains I bestow. This first presumption penneth out the Epitaphs of 2. good
Kings that governed this land of late, and shows by Epitaphs 3. other most
honorable Counselors that dyed not long ago: unto the which 5. great
personages I was bound for benefits received, and so in the end of my days
(which cannot be long) to be thankful for good turns and discharging of duty,
I have set forth by the passage of those that are gone before, shows here is
no certain habitatio^ or sure dwelli^g place for those that are left hind,
placed here below (a little while) to look for a better world above. The
Tragedies in my next book called my Challenge) shall make manifest at the full
the effect of those passages: of which Tragedyes you shall have a sufficient
portion, that thereby the world shall see what wrong I have suffered to endure a
denial (by busy tunges) of mine own works: Shores wife shall speak in her
kind, to defend me and such as waits on her (because her good fortunes were
worthy waiting on) shall tell the world I have been abused, and not justly and
rightly understood: and in gods good gifts for his glories sake, my book of
Challenge shall challenge all honest labors that ever I did in my days, deny
them who please. Now these bare verses and barren Epitaphes bringing no better
fruit but the death of some one or other, makes every line unwelcome that
shows no cheerful news: but time that discouers all accidents (and death in
his fury) brings pardon by the truth that is found and such as in seasonable
time do truly utter that becomes them, are half excused though their boldness
be great: So neither fearing the open barker that makes a great brute, nor the
privy byter that makes a great wou^d, to the mildnes of your sweet censure I
offer these plain Epitaphs that follow, partly to make you believe I am
mindful of my promise, and cheefely for that I know my L. Chancellers death
was sorrowful unto you, so knows God who increase your honorable credit.

Yours in all humblenes at co^maundment: Thomas Churchyard.

The Epitaph of the most Triumphant King, King Henry the eight.
THe flower whose smell is past, lies dead like withered weed:
the blosom burnt with scorchig blast, yields nether senxt nor seed
The Sunnie day declined, looks like di^^e darksome night:
Clear clouds over cast with blustering wind; soon loses former light.
The tree that axe hewes down, lies flat where bows do fall:
And greater things of more renown, are scarce thought of at all.
When their decay draws on, bid rotten fruit a dew:
When old delights are dead and gone, world welcomes fancies new.
Old Kings whose glory shone, as bright as Phoebus face:
Lies low in Windsor now alone, with no great-Princely grace.
To write of Henryes reign, a true discourse to tell:
A world of wit it would contain, and please the readers well.
For such a King as he, (though here bewailed with pen)
Ought still of duty honored be, among all English men.
His love to Countries soil, (like-Father to his son)
Kept all true subjects free from foil, how ere worlds course did run.
His word no sooner past, but at a beck obayd:
He stood like Fort full firm and fast, and made his foes afraid.
His bounty did abound, his largess had no end:
Gave freely where desartes he found, yet had enough to spend.
A flowing Fountain head, that ran fair streams of gold:
To every place (through pypes of lead) and Conduits treble-folde.
But cheefely to those men, whose service crau'de reward:
There sprouting springs gusht now and then, great grace with great regard.
A glory great he took, in giving gold as dross:
As one that still for fame did look, disdaining mucke and moss.
A Lion in the field, that made wild tigers tame:
And many a worthy Town to yield, so fearful was his name.
A King that made Kings stoop, and held them all in awe:
When he him self did never droop, for any thing he saw.
A King that took no wrong, of none in deed nor word:
But would have right ere it were long, or try the same with sword.
The Emperor Charles the fifth, came here his love to crave:
The French King met our King at Guynes, his favor for to have.
And when he was in France, as fortune flong the maine:
At Flowdan feilde as was the chance, a noble King was slain.
Whose Lords at Sollo moss, the old Lord Wharton took:
The fleet of France at Portsmouth to, durst not on Henry look.
His Ships burnt Trayport than, and causd that Coast to quake:
He went before to T^^wyn town, and so Turney did take.
Won Bulleigne after this, built near it many a seat:
All yeeldes where King in person is, his presence was so great.
Whiles these things were in hand, as doutfull balance stood:
In Scotland many a warlike band, he had for causes good.
He never card for peace, nor how began the jar:
If he his Kingdom could increase, or honor win by war.
Shall such a King now sleep, with crawling worms below?
Nay rather we his loss should weep, that did defend us so.
Praise Caesar you that please, and looks into a state:
There was not borne beyond the seas, nor yet in England late
So great a King in deed, for many special things:
Turn ore your books, both look and reed, among your famous Kings
And Henry theight shall go, amid the noblest sort,
When Trump of fame shall shrillie blow, to sound his true report.
A famous Soldiarlike King.
FINIS.
The Epitaph of the most toward ympe of grace, King Edward the sixth.
THe lamp is out, that lightened English hearts,
Whose lively show, and beuty shone so bright
And gave such joy, to all our inward smartes,
That well was him, that had thereon a sight,
Edward I mean, that was our King by right.
The golden torche and candle matutyne:
Did burn and blaze amid his Crystal eyes.
But well a way, those looks their life has lost:
Full dim and dark,
is now the spark,
That whilom was the stay of Englands boast.
Now death has dried this pleasant princely pla^t
And hent our hap, an high above the Skies:
who knows the loss, but they that feel the want
Wherefore the tears distilleth from our eyes.
But since this Lamb has made his sacrifice,
And offered up his life and vytall breath:
What can we blame but hasty cruel death?
which plucked therose before his leaves were spread
yet shall his name,
remain with fame,
And flourish still although the flower be dead.
A face so fraught, with favor blooming still, A description of his Royal
person.

A cheer so chaste, subduing each desire:
A head so ripe, with grace and cunning skill,
A tongue so decked, and clad in trothes attire,
A heart so meek, and clean deuoide of ire.
An ear so pure to hear the poor man's cause,
A wit to judge, a zeal to make good laws.
A hand so clear from blood, look well thereon:
was seldom seen,
in youth so green,
Alas the while, our Lanterns light is gone.
His wit wan praise, as by his ways appeeres, His inward gifts of grace.

His virtuous steps, wan fame among the wice:
His tender youth, did teach the aged years,
His sober life rebuked every vice,
His words and works did pass the pearl in price
His iestures all, if they were grau'ne in gold,
A mirror were to learn both young and old.
Wherefore unmeet the earth is for his grave:
His place of rest,
is Abraham's breast,
A worthy Tomb, for such a King to have.
FINIS.
The Epitaph of the right honorable Counselor, Sir Walter Mildmay Knight.
IN thirty years there dropped away, from mighty Caesar's train:
Of cheef account that bore great sway, twice 10. twice 4. and twain.
That ruled by course in Senate seat, whilst glass of life did run:
Whose fearful frown* and angry threat, good subjects sought to shun.
Each one found friends to wail below, their death with grief of breast
When from this world these guides did go, to place of greater rest.
But few in Court, gaind more good will, the^ wise grave Mildmay did:
In whose mild show and worthy skill, were heaps of virtues hid.
In Court not only loved alone, but Country yields him fame:
and boasts, that there his bounty shone, and burnd with que^chles flame
Like blazing torche on mountain top, that could all blasts abide:
Yet seemed but little twinkling Star, which is far off espied.
But every word and sentence sweet, he did in world let fall:
Expressed an hye and noble spirit, and knowledge great withal.
His silence spoke by stayed looks, but when he moved his tongue:
Like tinging bell of silver sound, the Counsel chamber ronge.
His inward man was armed and clad, with priuye coat of proof:
To use and wear, for others weal, but not his own behoof.
No malice, wrath, nor angry rage, nor sullen nature strange:
Could move his mind in all his age, nor make his manner change.
A Father that could rules set down, of law and learned lore:
Knit up such points in sentence short, as few had heard before.
To Princ and state a member fit, that Country could not spare:
Right sharp of sense, profound of wit, of judgment deep and rare.
To suitors all of nature good, but to the Princes men:
A ready help from root of heart, with head, with hand and pen.
Not sour, but full of sugared speech, that quonched bitter gall:
As honey dropped from his lips, where liquour sweet should fall.
Sir Walter Mildmay water brought, to nourish fountain head:
Yet gave to those that water sought, and were with fountain fed.
His promise wrought performance straight, yet ware and wise to speak
Not won with gifts or worldly slight, that makes men promis break.
But drawn by judgment and desert, to show his godly zeal:
That lodged in loving harmles heart, that honored public weal.
His credit so through God began, whose grace was his defense:
That daily he great credit wan, and went with credit hence.
When pangues of death approch't apace, and would have closd his eyne
He spoke with mild and cheerful face, glad words that were divine.
Of each degree as though some Saint, were sent from God above:
To show how he should served be, in faith, in fear and love.
Whereat the hearers all began weep, that then their Jewel lost:
Whiles Mildmay mildly fell a sleep, and so gave up the ghost.
Not dead, death has but broke the stamp, in Ca^bridg lives this knight
Where he set up so fair a lamp, that gives all England light.
FINIS.
The Epitaph of the right honorable, Lord Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick.
Leave off to write, spare speech a space, be mute O muse of mine:
Let blubring tears bedeaw thy face, O wail with weeping eyne:
The course of life that draws but breath, in dollor all his days:
Till heart stringes burst, till hour of death, til pilgrim goes his ways.
Vain pomp is but a puff or toy, so is both rule and reign:
For all that here we do enjoy, is naught but woe and pain:
Have thou not seen the highest tree, receive his falling blow?
Death has respect to no degree, when life from hence must go.
Satte Leyster not in Senate seat, as hye as man might clime?
Was never here, none half so great, nor happy in our time.
Yet lo, a so daine leave he took, and went where God assignd:
His Brother that like Mars did look, a man of noble mind.
Who all good men did praise and love, is packt from us in post:
Thus when of force men must remove, and world desires him most.
His glass is run, his date is done, and he must bid farewell:
to all the pleasures under Sun, and all that here do dwell.
But Warwick that won great good will, too soon was hastened hence:
For Warwick was most warlike still, to stand in rightes defense.
To serve the Prince, his pursse, or power, was ever ready pressed:
Like Fortress or like stately Tower, in arms among the best.
To spread in feilde the ragged staff, against all foreign foes:
As wind that drives both dust and chafe, in the air where tempest bloes
So had he mind to thrust them down, that fight with stained troth
To harm or touch onr land, our Crown, our Prince and country both.
Glad was Earl Warwick every way, to do the good he might:
In Court and Town the world does say, he never harmed wight.
He kept the even balance just, that each man had true weight:
He was a man of special trust, clean void of craft or slight.
Most plain of words, most plain of deeds, plain dealing led him through
Amid these briers and scratching weeds, that wounds plain people now
No storm nor change could make him turn, he stood like brazen wall
Against fine world, proud minds, false faith, untruth, and treasons all
At Norwich in King Edwards raygne, amid rank rebels rage:
The horse he rod on there was slain, in prime of Ambrose age.
Saint Quintins where Lord Harry dyed, sets yet his valor forth:
At seige of Hawne was Warwick tried, and found a man of worth.
New-hauen till the plague began, he held full safe and sound:
Where many a valiant Englishman, made Ringraue give them ground.
No grief, no tort, nor torment sore, could daunt his courage great:
A Lions heart in breast he bore, where hammers long did beat.
Of one device or other still, and sounded like a bell
To Gods great glory and his will, that conquered death and hell.
To Heaven held he on his pace, for when his time he knew:
He did but turn from friends his face, and bad the world adieu.
FINIS.
The Epitaph of the most honorable, Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, late Lord
Chaunceller of England.
LEt drops of blood from wounded heart, bewail our loss of late
Tears are too base to show the smart, is felt for this great state.
No mourners voice, nor yelling cries, nor sighs nor sobs may serve:
Nor all the cunning under skies, from death can life preserve.
No worldly pomp, nor Princes grace, can lengthen life an hour:
All glory lasts but here a space, it withers like a flower.
A mighty man of great account, whose fate the clouds did clime:
Whose fortune daily did surmount, great numbers in his time.
Tel^es that and much more matter shows, of honors tickle stay:
That like a candle out it goes, and quickly steals away.
Long is it ere a tree be grown, to answer our desire:
But soon are mighty oaks ore thrown, and flong in flaming fire.
No grief so great, as see flowers bud, in gardens where we walk:
And when their sent should do us good, a storm striks down the stalk.
O happy Hatton long in growth, now at thy cheifest years:
When Prince and Country lon'd thee both, as by their plaints apeers.
An angry planet took thee hence, that by thy virtue rose:
And stood like Fortress of defense, against all foreign foes.
The Lawyers joy, the lands delight, the Countries comfort to:
A ready head and hand to write, where help some good might do.
To friend most fast, to foe most stern, to poor full frank and free:
A wit that could deep doutes dezerne, and troth from falsehood see.
Called for good gifts to special place, and special fortune found:
Durst show in world a heart and face, with conscience clear and sound.
That room and credit he possessed, required a man of worth:
Which he in substance so expressed, by setting justice forth.
That common people still salutes, his soul with blessings sweet:
A tree that brings forth such good fruits, for common weal most meet.
A chosen Chaunceller from above, to please the best below:
Won open fame and secret love, of those that wisdom know.
Held house where bounty largess cried, and kept so great a train:
As argues now when that he dyed, good mind did glory gain.
Loved friends and servants more then gold, and precious was the poor
Sought help by suit or mildly would, crave alms at Hattons door.
In suits he held an even hand, as balance goes by weight:
The worst to fall, the best to stand, and hear their judgment straight.
The Judges of the law can tell, the justice of his mind:
And so the world can witness well, what grace good men did find.
The good he did shall never dye, and so O worthy Knight:
Though low in earth thy body lie, and soul have taken flight.
A higher place we hope thou have, and do with Angels dwell:
For brunt of worldly broiles are past, as shows thy last farewell.
FINIS.
Lenuoy.
WHo mourns more then he that made this Verse?
To whom good turns, this Lord did often send:
Come noble Guard, and kneel before his hearse,
Whose helping hand, your wages did amend.
Come servants all, and do his fame defend*
That made you clime, up the great Chamber stayres:
And come (...) with me some tears.
Come come away, (...) lies,
That cou^^ance ga^e to more then I will show:
Come every one, in black sad mourning guise;
And wait on him, that to the grave does go,
Come fall in rank, that does your Captain know.
And trayle your s^^ues, along hard stony ground:
And cry la mort, when doleful drum does sound.
This body must be buried all with shot,
Because he once was in a Princely band:
And of a Prince, such grace and favor got,
He bore the sway and Seal of all this land,
Come Pencioners, that by your standard stand
And bring to Church, in shining armor bright:
In Marshall martch, this three fold happy Knight.
FINIS
Thomas Churchyard.

The names of all the most honorable Counselors that have dyed since the
beginning of her Majesty's Reign.
Sir Thomas Cheyney. Treasor. The Earl of Shrewsbury. Sir Edmond Peckham.
Thomas Parry, Treasorer. Francis Earl of Huntington. Doctor Wotton. Sir John
Mason. Sir Richard Sackuild. Sir Edward Rogers Comptro. The Earl of Pembrook.
Duke of Norfolk Sir Ambrose Cave. Earl of Darby. M. of winchester, L.
Treasorer. Marquis of Northampton. Sir James a Croft. Contr. Sir F. Walsingham.
Secret. Secretary Smith. Secretary Wilson. L. William Howard, L. Cham. Sir
Nicholas Bacon L. Keeper. The Earl of Sussex L. Chan. The Earl of Bedforde.
The Earl of Lincoln L. Ad. Sir Henry Sidney. Sir Ralphe Sadler. Sir Thomas
Bromley L. Chan. Earl of Leicester. Sir Amyas Paulet Sir Water Mildemaie.
Earl of Arundell. Sir William Peter Earl of Warwick. Last Earl of Shrosbury.
Sir Christopher Hatton. L. Chauncel.
FINIS.

