A HANDEFVL OF GLADSOME VERSES, given to the Queens Majesty at Woodstocke this
Prograce. 1592.

By THOMAS CHVRCHYARDE.

At Oxforde printed by JOSEPH BARNES, Printer to the University. 1592.

TO THE QVEENES MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
MOST gracious and sacred Sovereign, if hope of your princely favor did not
carry me beyond the compass of my ordinary judgment, I had long a go
surceased the common course of writing in verse to your Majesty, But a sweet
and comfortable conceit of your gracious goodness toward me, ever and at all
times commanded my muse, my pen, and uttermost power, to go about no other
earthly felicity then the serving and pleasing of the only Phoenix of this
world, my betters far have been full of that fortunate humor, and thriuen
well thereby, and my self desires never to be discharged of that sweet
servitude, pleasant to the mind, profitable to the body, and a safety for the
soul. Now in this quenchles desire of mine that increases a continual thirst
to do well, there rises a restles cogitation, making me think, that verse,
that book, or that piece of service (as often I have put in practice) will be
happily accepted, But beholding (most redoubted Queen) a multitude of people
as well desposed as my self, that are running and preasing apace before me,
some with rare inventions and some with deep devices to the honoring of your
Majesty. I fear they have carried clean away so much knowledge fro^me, that
there is left no device, nor matter to study on, such is the bounty of our time,
and forwardnes of their wits which are learned, that all fine inventions are
smoothly reaped from my reach, and cunningly raked away from my use or
commodity. Then am I forced, to search what substance or sle^der stuff of
poetry lies cowching in mine own shallow head, and so happening on a few
voluntary rimes I have as it were by good fortune, peeced or co^pounded up a
book, which I call a handful of gladsome verses, God grant they be pleasing,
but the best is they are devised for a pastime, inverted for a merry conceyt,
and presented of a harm les mind, to the sweet and sacred consideration of
your Majesty. Thus hoping they shall have free passage to your princely
presents I pray humbly for the preservation of your most Royal person.

Your Majesty's dutiful and loyal servant, THOMAS CHVRCHYARD.

A few volu ntary verses to the general readers.
IF aged days, had dried up my Muse
As summer drouth, has partcht both herb and grass
Yet now compeld, my pen again to use
That world shall see, my mind is as it was
Look for no gold, when I can give but glass
My morning dew, sun beams has taken hence
And troubled springs, yields puddle water sense.
Take edge away, the knife can cut no more
Hard stony ground, can bear but little corn
Old appels sone, are rotten at the kore
Ne Figs nor Grapes, can come from pricking thorn
The glass soon goes, from silk that long is worn
Hope for no fruit, when leaves forsakes the tree
So falls out, between my verse and me.
When youth was fresh, and florisht as a flower
The wits were quick, and ready to conceive
When age did frown, and brows began to lowre
My skill grue scant, the muses did me leave
Then tract of time, in head did cobwebs weaue
So rusty grew, the reason of the brain
And ever since, I lost my Poets vain.
What though ripe wit, be now but bare and blunt
And fine device, of head is far to seek
And age can not, do that which youth was wont
And pen scarce makes, a verse in half a week
And all my works, not worth a little leeke
Yet what I do, but bad or worthy praise
I never robbed, no writer in my days.
It is mine own, I bring to Printers Press
I have by hap, a Hatchet in my hand
To hew the wood, (let it be more or less)
In what strange form, I list to let it stand
though some be chips, let all be justly scand
Ne chips ne choice, nor nothing else I knew
But was well meant, and may abide the view.
A Book in Press, that I my challenge name
Shall tell you more, of works that I have done
But blame me not, (since each man strives for fame)
To hold on right, the course wherein I run
I ought to wear, the cloth my fingers spunne
I will so Iowd, for books and verses cry
That sure no bird, shall with my feathers fly.
Some Peakocks then, will spread their tails no more
Small boast is best, let touchstone try out gold
I have as yet, some tragedies in store
That like Shores wife, in verses shall be told
Condemn no man, though he be waxen old
A rough barkt tree, whose bows but crooked grow
When season serves, some mellowd fruit may show.
A great old Oak, long time will akornes bear
And small young graffes, are long in sprouting out
Some say old wine, is liked every where
And all men knows, new ale is full of grout
Old horse goes well, young tits are much to doubt
But sure old gold, is more esteemd then new
No Hawke compares, with Hagard in the mew.
Old men know much, though young men call them fools
Old books are best, for there great learning is
Old authors too, are daily read in Schools
New sects are naught, old knowledge can not miss
Old guyes was good, and nothing like to this
Where fraud and craft, and finenesse all would have
And playnest men, can neither pole nor shave.
Old fathers built, fair Colleges good store,
And gave great goods, and lands to bring up youth
Young men think skorne, to make of little more
And spends away, their thrift to tell the truth
Old minds were full, of mercy grace and ruth
And pity took, of those that seemd to lack
Young gallants gay, from poor do turn their back.
Old customs good, at length becam good laws
Old laws are likte, and honored of the wise
Good men obey, the evils old order draws
New fond delights, old fathers did despise
In old grave heads, great skill and wisdom lies
Sound council comes, from age in time of need
Old men's advice, is that which does the deed.
Old beaten ways, are ready still to hit
These new bypath, leads men on many styles
An old proverb, has no more words then wit
New fangled heads, at each light fancy smiles
Old wisdom far, surmounts young fondlings wiles
Experience is, the doctor eury day
That carries close, all knowledge clean away.
Young hounds are fleet, the old hunts slow and true
Old dogs bite sore, if all his teeth be sound
Old ancient friends, are better then the new
In younglings love, there is small surety found
For like a top, fine fancy turns round
Old colth or silk, made in our elder days
Wears long and firm, when new things soon decaies.
No further now, of age but to my task
I took in hand, to show my duty throw
Yet licker sweet, comes none from empty kaske
With vargis sour, is filled old barrel now
But reason must, invent the mean and how
I do discharge, my duty as I ought
To make a book, shall answer writers thought.
Now must my Muse, go borrowe if I may,
My betters works, to fill my matter full
Tush world grows hard, each man will say me nay
Some cannot spare, a little lock of wool
So greedely, for pealfe they pluck and pull
But namely some, so watch and pry for fame
That they with words, will hinder men's good name.
Spite is a spark, of fire that flies in thaire
And makes a crack, like powder in a dagge
Spite hides foul thoughts, in looks and speeches fair
Whose words rests not, as long as tongue may wagge
Spite of himself, will boldly boast and brag
To hurt by hate, the heart that harmeles is
For spite like snake, in every hedge can his.
Who flings a stone, at every dog that barks
A weary arm, is surely like to have
Though envy shootes, his bolts at many marks
Pride wins not all, the glory he does crave
Some will not give, the dead good words in grave
How should the quick, then get bad worlds goodwill
When hollow hearts, but harbors hatred still.
March on plain book, although thou pass the pikes
Some marshall man, will save a soldiers life
Hold in thy head, from those that thee mislikes
In skornefull days, I know disdain is riefe
Thy gladsome verse, stirs up more mirth then strife
So Prince thou please, thine own desire thou have
Come clear from court, care not for enuies blast.
Thus Readers all, I bid you here farewell
And to the Prince, a simple tale I tell.
FINIS.
A HANDEFVLL OF GLADSOME UERSES GIVEN TO THE QUEENS Majesty at Woodstocke this
prograce.
I Most presume of all
(A boldness more then needs)
To come where flowers sweet sent lets fall
And I bring naught but weeds.
But though the fountain springs
From whence all learning flows
By study great, great science brings
And therewith duty shows.
The barraine ground of mine
That seld sweet roses bears
May yield some word or pleasant line
Shall please your Princely ears.
But as an Oaten pipe
When shepherd plays a round
Can move no matter of delight.
By strangnes of the sound.
So verse puffed up with quill
And cunning sleight of brain
(Where swift conceit conceiues at will
Some grace of Poets vain.)
No pearsing passage finds
To enter as it would
In great estates, whose noble minds
Knows quickly glass from gould.
A tale of plain plowe man
That roughly runs on
Finds frowns for favor now and than
When gracious lokes are gone.
What means my Muses weak,
In heat of humor new:
So near grave heads to write or speak,
Of things I seldom knew.
As one start out of sleep,
Tells dreams and visions rare,
To those that talk of dreams no keep,
Nor does for fancies care.
Our english Idle rimes,
To this is here compard:
Whose rouing reasons often times,
Reapes naught but small regard.
For learned sages wies,
That much have seen and red:
Who knows the course of stars in skies,
And what may well be sed.
And all the liberal arts,
Have at their fingers ends:
They for their gifts and special parts,
Which God to scholars sendes.
Are worthy hearing still,
They bring the sugared cup:
They are the nurses of good skill,
That fosters children up.
They with the muses talk
As all things were their own
And like the Gods do closely walk
In secret clouds unknown
Uaine verses have no power
Great virtue to persuade
They are but blossoms of a flower
(Whose beauty soon does fade)
That pleases men a while,
with words of no great weight:
A speech that may some ears beguie
A fine and pretty slight.
A ripe invention rare,
That springs on deep device:
But verse is worn so weak and bare,
It bears but little price.
Because so many brains,
Runs verses out of breath:
And posting wits with thankeles pains,
Has ridden rhyme to death.
Though Poets in time past,
As Virgill and the rest:
Go^e crowns and many a famous blast,
To make them hold up crest.
Yet most of them poor men,
Like birds but newely plucked:
For Ovid that through gift of pen,
Did seem that dry he sucked.
The springes of learned lore,
He had hard hap withal:
Homer had no great gold in store,
Nor worldly wealth at call.
And since, few Poets rose,
To any worthy place:
And some scarce got meat drink and clothes
So poor was Poets case.
If Poets luck be such,
That daily they decline:
And writers never can be rich,
For all their flourish fine.
Then seek a better trade,
And fling away thy quill:
And take a mattoke and a spade,
And dig down Maulvorne hill.
Twere better labor so,
By sweat of brows to live:
Then like a threedbare Poet go:
That has no bread to give.
Yet men may seek to thrive,
By verse or stately prose:
Against ill chance, or stream to strive,
Both strength and time we lose.
Uerse well deuisde and framde,
Wins friends and fears foes
So writer shape, vnharmd or blamd,
For treading on men's toes.
Where angry corns does grow,
Yea verse breeds merry blood:
When each sad word to world does show
A lively sentence good.
Uerse makes many known,
That else forgotten are:
Who brings odd versis of their own,
And prints no borrowd ware.
Who watches not their hours,
To steal and pick away:
From others gardens goodly flowers,
To make their posies gay.
Thus some do borrowe much,
And then on braues do stand:
A beggar so may soon be rich,
Ne borne to rent nor land.
Great princes have made verse,
And favred poetry well:
Uerse has a grace the clouds to pearce,
And clime where Gods do dwell.
In verse great virtue is,
If work well pass the ^ile:
And verse gets grace, with that or this,
To make the Prince to smile.
Then many knacks we prove,
Our credit well to keep:
And tell how Lords for Ladies love,
Will lie all day a sleep.
And feign when they awake,
In verse or letters long:
That they do die for mistress sake,
And suffer too much wrong.
A large discourse thereof,
Twere good to tell in deed:
But some would say I jest and scoff,
And speak more words then need.
Nay better talk of bogges,
That walks in dead men's shapes:
Or tell of little pretty pogges,
As Monkies Owls and Apes.
A tale of two ours long,
Blind peoples ears to please
Nay that were like a Syreins song,
That shipmen hears on seas.
Strange Farlees fathers told,
Of feendes and hagges of hell:
And how that Syrses when she would,
Could skill of sorcerie well.
And how old thin fast wives
That roasted crabs by night
Did tell of monsters in their lives
That now prove shadows light.
And told what Marlin spoke
Of world and times to come
But all that fire does make no smoke
For in mine ear does home.
Another kind of Be
That sounds a tune most strange
A trembling noise, of words to me
That makes my countenance change.
Of old Hobgoblings guise
That walked like ghost in sh^etes
With maids that would not early rise
For fear of Bugs and spreets
Some say the fayres fair
Did dance on bednall green,
And fine familiars of the air
Did talk with men unseen.
And often in moon shine nights
When each thing draws to rest
Was seen dum shoes and vggly sights
That feared evry guest.
Which lodged in the house
And where good cheer was great
Hodgepoke would come and drink carows
And mounch up all the meat.
But where foul sluts did dwell
Who used to sit up late
And would not scowre their pewter well
There came a mirrie mate.
To kitchen or to haule,
Or place where spreets resort:
Then down went dish and platters all,
To make the greater sport.
A further sport fell out,
When they to spoil did fall:
Rude Robin good fellow the lowt,
Would skime the milk bowls all.
And search the cream pots too,
For which poor milk maid weeps,
God wot what such mad gests will do:
When people soundly sleeps.
Then world full merry was,
And gossips made good glee:
And men for wealth did little pass,
Good minds were frank and free.
And some found heaps of gold,
Long hid in hollow ground:
And tript with timbrels where they would
Full many a frisking round.
These are but fabuls faind,
Because true stories old:
In doubtful days are more disdaind.
Then any tale is told.
These toies cuts of the cares,
That worldly causes brings:
And draws the heavy mind unawares,
To think on better things.
As when a may game comes,
Before a sort of states:
With morris daunsers flutes and drums
That common weals debates.
The motion of the mirth
Though simple be the show
May move the saddest man on earth
To gladsome thoughts I trow.
But how far of am I
Now brought from wit and sense
To tell a tale smells like a lie
Before so great a Prince,
O pardon my rash wit
Sweet Queen and sovereign dear
For he that does in heaven sit
Knows mine intent is clear.
From all offense in mind
For when I took this task
Each toy and fancy head could find
(as man disguisde in mask.)
To make you laugh or smile
I took in hand to write
But now with troth another while
(And banish fables quite.)
My pen shall armed be
In this sweet cause and soil
To sheeld my muse, my verse and me
From blemish blot or foil.
Now as by heaunly grace
You past through many a sheere
So Roial Prince this ancient place
Path hap to have you here.
Old Woodstocke house is glad
It shall have stone and lime
That long with Iuy has bin clad
To show the ruen of time.
This seat nay sure this shrine,
That thousands now does praise:
That did preserve, by power divine,
The Phoenix of our days.
And in a cruel age,
When might did right great wrong:
This house was made the Phoenix cage,
And held her here so long.
That no proud tyrants power,
Had force to touch her then:
True hearted people eury hour,
And prayers of good men.
Kept Phoenix safe and sound,
And brought her to the crown:
Who does in virtues so abound,
She reigns with great renown.
And further flies her fame,
And spreads for gifts most rare:
Then all the princes we can name,
Let foes speak what they dare.
Now humble subjects true,
Whereof you have great store:
A triple crown, presents to you,
Of fame for ever more.
And such as never saw,
Your Majesty till now:
Full near the coatch do daily draw,
We see wherefore and how.
The people swarms like Bees
When Prince abroad does ride:
And some climes up to tops of trees,
As soon as she is spied.
Yea such as saw her first
Do after trudge a maine
Who have in heart, so great a thirst
To see her once again.
That they stand gazing still
A fresh on Phoenix face
As though they never had there fill
Of looking on her grace.
Comes this of custom old
That subjects ows a king
No sure it rather does unfold
An inward secreet thing.
Of kindly zeal they bear
By nature not by art
Joined fast with duty love and fear
That flows from faithful heart.
A special warm goodwill
For never King was seen
More truly serude, more followd still
More honored then our Queen.
Some noble cause there is
That works such wonder now
Then who has sense to view of this
And can search causes throw.
Discus this cause a right
But if world credit me
In lively sort, and open sight
I do such graces see.
In your most gracious reign
That daily shines so clear
As never none shall reach or stain
Nor ever could come near.
This grace which God does give
Whereon great graces groe
Makes Prince love peace and long to live
And long a prograsse go.
This grace great Jove has sent
To guard your grace from harm
That Practice foul, nor false intent
Nor words nor deeds nor charm.
Nor foreign force nor wars
Nor proud attempts shall fear
For God that guides sun moon and stars
Shall save you eury where.
O sacred Sovereign sweet,
Our fair red rose and white
We fall on knees at Cesars feet
To see our worlds delight.
And on her life depend
That now the sword does swaie
The Lord of hosts does her defend
In such a kind of way.
That nothing may impeach
Her heaunly graces great
For sure it passes humane reach
To touch her sacred seat.
So reign good Queen in rest
Full free from all anoye,
As one the Lord above has blessed,
To be all Englandes joy.
FINIS.
^erse of variety to all those that honors the only Phoenix of the world,
which verses are but xx. lines and has in them ten ways, find out the same
who pleases.
^Y PHOENIX feathers fair, as Phoebus beams bespreades the sky
Shades face from partching air, in hot extremes and wether dry
^t by the air she lives, dame kind her self will have it so
and life and breath she gives, as far as Phoenix force may go
(...) them she lists advance, the faurets of our happy time
(...) whom her eye does glance, unto the clouds she makes them clime
^^t where does Phoenix frown, as fortunes wheel were turned quite
^e flings proud Pecockes down, some fauls in lash and worlds despite
(...) Eagle mounting skies, in royal sort like stately King
^oth daunt each bird that flies, if he but clap his feathred winge
and where he lists to pray, on any foul that life does bear
^o Hawke makes flight that day, nor dare come well in presens there)
(...) Phoenix in her guies, with princely pomp as you may see,
^oth dazell clearest eyes, and dailye conquers each degree:
and strikes base people blind, that makes their God of worldly dross:
^ho bears no noble mind, and digges and delues for mucke and moss:
therefore you courtiers now, the prime and buds of youthful bliss:
^onfesse your duty throw, if you can judge what virtue is.
^ut one in these our days, and she a Queen now note it well:
^eserues immortal praise, that does in worthy Britain dwell.

