A Psalm of thanksgiving, to be Sung by the Children of Christ's Hospital,
on Monday in Easter Holy days, at Saint Mary's Spittle, for their Founders and
Benefactors. Anno Domini. 1628.
Chorus ^ FRom depth of heart, moved by desert, we Orphants mean and poor, ^
To Christ our King do praises sing, for plenty and for store.

Versus. ^ GReat and most gracious is the Lord, to all that he has made, The
poor distressed ^ by him are blessed, each state by him is stayed: Yea God which
rules the hearts of ^ Kings, a godly King did move, To work our weal, our
griefs to heal, and Patron dear to prove, Whose ^ prudent care, did soon
appear the groundwork of our loy, in thee (O City of the Lord) to shield ^
us from annoy.

Chorus. From depth of heart, etc.

O London, blessed may thou be, with plenty, peace, and rest,
A Staff thou art to impotent, a Prop to poor oppressed.
Eyes to the blind, Feet to the lame, Fathers to Orphants poor,
You are, O worthy Citizens, praise be to God therefore.
And as your bread, thus bounteously, you on these waters cast,
The Lord grant you may find the same, an hundred fold at last.
Chorus, From depth, etc.
Power down thy blessings on our King, prolong his peaceful Reign,
And grant his Subjects loyal prove, thy peace for to maintain.
Our Noble Queen with grace iinspire, the Council grave instruct,
The Peers and Nobles of this Land with piety conduct.
Elesse (Lord) the Mayor, and Aldermen, and Commons of this City,
For their great care of our welfare, and move them still to pity.
Chorus, From depth, etc.
Reports of the Hospitals.
CHildren kept and maintained at this present, at the charges of
Christs-hospitall, in the said House. in diverse places of this City and
Suburbs, and with sundry Nurses in the Country, which are still to be
maintained by the said Hospital, until they shall accomplish the age of 15.
years. 804The names of all these are Registered in the Books kept in Christ's
Hospital there to be seen from what Parishes, and by what menes they have
been from time to time admitted. Children put forth Apprentices, discharged,
and dead this year 111 THere has been cured in St. Bartholmewes Hospital,
from Easter 1627. to Easter 1628. of Soldiers and other diseased persons 792
All which were relieved with money and other necessaries, at they departure.
Buried this year after much charges in their sickness, 138 Remaining under
cure at this present in the said Hospital 281 THere has been cured in St.
Thomas Hospital, from the feast of Easter 1627. unto the feast of Easter 1628.
of Soldiers and other diseased persons, 678 Of which number many were relieved
with money and other necessaries at their departure. Buried this year last
past, after much charges in sickness and otherwise, 185 Remaining in the said
Hospital at this time under cure and abroad else where at the charges of the
said Hospital, 278

THere has bin brought to the Hospital of Bridewell, within the space of one
year last past, of wandering Soldiers and other vagrant people, which have
been passed thence into their native Country by Passeports, according to the
Law in that behalf provided, to the number of 2483. persons, of whom many have
been chargeable to the said Hospital in their diet, in the time of their
being in the same, some more, some less, as they might conveniently be removed
thence, besides other help, there ministered unto them, as case required, viz.
In apparel, Hose, Shoes, Shirts, Bands, money and snch like, which cannot be
avoided by reason of their misery, nor they thence passed without charge to the
said Hospital, in respect they are to be examined and considered of, to what
Country to be transported. Also there is in the said Hospital maintained and
kept in Arts and Occupations, and other servile works and labors, at the
charge of the said Hospital, of Men, Women, and Children, to the number of
156. persons, whereof 100. and upwards, are poor Boys taken out of diverse
Parishes and streets of this City, and now bound Apprentices in the said
Hospital, to be made Freemen of this City, at the end of their several
Terms.

Toward the which good and charitable Foundations, King Henry the Eight, and
King Edward the Sixth, were most Gracious Founders, and liberal Benefactors.
And our most Gracious Sovereign King Charles, a most Religious continuer and
maintainer of the same.

Printed at London by Eliz. Allde, dwelling near Christ-Church. 1628.


