THE True travail of all faithful Christians, how to escape the dangers of
this wicked world.

Whereunto is added a Christian exercise for private householders.

HEBR. 12.1.2. Wherefore let us also seeing that we are compassed with so great
a cloud of witnesses, cast away every thing that presses down, and the sin
that hangs so fast on. Let us run with patience the race that is set before
us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith.

Printed at London, by John Charlewood. 1585.

To the right worshipful Ma. John Thin Esquier, his very good Patron and
Master.
THe continual favor I have found at your hands (right worshipful)
especially of late in London, as well hy writing as by your personal travel,
does charge my mind with so many gnawing cogitations, that I can never
express a sufficient thankfulness, nor render some token of a partepay, such is
the hardness of my hap and the straightnes of present time, that now I can
not match wishing with will, nor sufficiency with desire. How be it, I yield
my self to your accustomed acceptance, and my hope which shall be a pledge de
attica fide, do I bequeath unto future time. I hold you so firm my good
freende, that notwithstanding the subtiltye of interceptors, you stand vngaged,
to my no small comfort, wherefore seeing I have no thankful signification of
good will, I present unto your worship a portion of my profession, not as a
sufficient workmanship for your worthiness, but as a token of my grateful mind
It is (...) and therefore the untimely hatching may bring forth sickly Byrds.
But I humbly beseech you worship that as you are already patron of my poor
living, so you will freendly allow of the patronage of my self, and this my
slender work, and so I shall not only be so much beholding to you as process
of time cannot wear away the remembrance, but evermore bound in hearty prayers
that the Lord may prosper your affairs, and daily bless your self and all
yours to whose merciful tuition I commend you.

Your worships to be commanded during life most faithful W. Chub.
From Zelwoode the 8. of September.
To the godly Reader.
IF a man should sit still but a little while and behold this present last age
of the world, and view the contents of this time, Catastrophe.
and pawse upon it with indifferent reason. It would in a manner amaze a well
settled mind to consider it. But if one should sit in an open place, where there
is daily concourse to and froe of great multitudes, and should scarce see one
sound and perfect man to pass by, would you not think it were a crippelled
world? and that they had been among mighty enemies in a dangerous
skyrmish? Surely if we consider the whole parts of a man, and weigh in
conscience that he should consist of godliness, reason, and virtue, and do find
that either the spiritual adversary, or the worldly consort, has so grappled
and battelled, that some are become Heteroclites, and some Monsters. It is a
very hard thing in this last age to find a sound and perfect man, but that in
one or other of these former parts he seems to have a defect, and that is
perceived in the common society of man. For wherein we ought to communicate one
with the other in godly exercises and heavenly council we jar, we vary, we
disdain, we envy, backbite, and slander one an other yea of the same
profession and religion, as though we were strangers to each other, and
fauters to our adversaries, and I have found them most busy to speak behind
a man's back, that have had never a word to his face, nay never a matter but
by heeresay and surmise. I sorrow to hear it, I sigh to know it, and I desire
God to amend it, for I dread me in these days in the fairest Rose is sonest
found a Canker.

Reason that in times past has been taken for a ^age Coun^^^o^^ in the common
wealth, and a governor as well of natural as of moral yea and oeconomicall
matters, and has been distributed into diverse degrees for their direction,
and in all sorts of people she has been advanced to the highest woman, and
without the which, neither the body of a common wealth has been any thing
worth at all, neither with out it has man been esteemed as a man, now she is
abased like and old schoolmaster that has taught many good scholars, in the
end comes to teach one the poor A. B. C. For whereas she has been a
public teacher of all men, both for counsel, comfort, and help, now she
teaches men to look to themselves, and if they will be wise, to love their
own selves, and to care for their own selves, in so much, that all her
scholars are become in a manner singular fellows, neither imparting to
others, neither communicating with others, and yet it is a lamentable matter to
see those whom they so council, if they follow it, they are now called
snudges and pigges, that erewhile were called beggars and bankrupts. ^uo tene
(...) vultus ^^tantem ^^tea no^
A pitiful world, to see such a forcible doctrine, where is the law of God,
which commands all not one? Love God, and thy neighbor as thy self where is
the Law of nature? which gives general commandment, Fac aliis fieri quod
cupis ipse tibi. Do to others as thou would be done unto. Where is S.
Paul's counsel? Do good unto all men, What is there become of Tullies
sentence? Non nobis sed patriae nati sumus. we are not borne for our selves
but for our Country. In times past, wisdom was accounted of, at this time
wealth and they that have it, be they never never so bare and base seruelinges
are best esteemed, the time may come, that a man may be had in reputation, in
mean time, Gods will be done, et caetera infinita. Again if we behold
virtue considering her noble beauty and shape, and that she was a singular
branch and member to set forth and adorn man, how she is now disfigured,
and dismembered and defaced with infinite actions of vice, it is pitiful to
see that her ornaments, namely Justice, temperancy, chastity, equity, truth,
pity, charity and such like etc. are quite cut of, and the twigges little
esteemed. I fear me where the mighty boughs are so often and so unseasonably
cut of, in the end, they will hazard the whole tree and stock, God of his
mercy preserve his little flock.

For thy better preservation (good Reader) I have here composed a small piece
of work, The Argument.
in the which I have breefely laid down the sufficient survey of a Christian.
And first he shall see himself what he is naturally, what sin reigns in him.
How it is nourished, how many grievous enemies he has by reason of sin, last
of all the ease and remedy he has against the force of sin. Which I have
done, the rather because I see a great many Travelers in opinions, and some
ouerrech themselves, and some ouerlabor them selves, which is more for want of
wit, then for lack of will. And for that I pity their weary and unprofitable
travel, do in Christ's name inuit them to this Harbor, as the best
preparation I have for mine own part to entertain them, beseeching the Lord
to give them knowledge, judgment, and a hungry desire. It is but shortly
composed, because it shall not be loathsome and chargable unto thee gentle
Reader, a small alms is enough for this hard world. Read it over with
discretion, and where thou find any thing toothsome, take it as thankfully,
as I bestow it heartily, and if thou hap with any gross or unsavory matter,
pass it over as freendly as I shall take it sorrowfully, and if thou be one of
them that love me, thou will take it howsoever it be, in good part, but if thou
be one of them that of late condemned me of Idleness, I sorrow no more to be
slaundered, then thou do shame to be deceived, and yet as charity binds
me, I will pray for thee, and bid thee heartily farewell.

Author calumniatoribus.
NOn ego conticui, iacui neque desidiose,
lingua licit fi^uit penna locuta fuit:
Nec me delituisse putes, reticente talentum,
En patet officii, cura, laborque mei
Fatur, et in seculum conscriptus sermo perenne
Viuit, et in longa posteritate manet.
Vade liber, causa domini, damnabere forsan:
Sed quos, sunt docti, consulit ille prius
Inuidiat, pro me, vel si te nauseat vllus
Dic, sibi quod nullum scripserat author opus
Sim licet indoctus, tibi dico perlege, disce
teque monere mouet me, tua causa, lege
Meue alios legito si fit tibi cura salutis
Sera nisi capiat te Metanaea nimis. (...)

Plurima namque fluunt totum peccata per orbem
et genus humanum crimine polluitur.
VV. Chapter

What man is.
Since it is, and has been always the desire of man, Cap. 1.
to know things natural what they are, what operations, virtues, and effects
proceeds from them, and to what purpose every thing is ordained, and thereby
does best seek for those things that are necessary, and auoydeth those
things that are hurtful, and measures his knowledge by times and seasons
fittest for his purpose, by the which he has looked so into the bowels of
natural things, that almost no faculty wants yt knowledge, wherein he has
a delight, either for the preservation of his body from noisome things, or his
estate from poverty. He knows the disposition of the heavens, the yielding
of the earth, the virtue of the one, and the best season of the other, neither
is there a corner of the heavens, or of the earth, or of the seas left
vnserched, as for example. The Astronomer flees to heaven, and shows his
skyl. The Husbandman searches the earth, and shows his skyll. The Marryner
the Seas, and likewise shows his skyll. Every Artificer on the earth
profits his skyll, with an increasing knowledge, and as touching the estate
of our bodies every man desires that knowledge to preserve it both in health
and also in prosperity, according to natures expectation. But above all these
knowledges, me think I see not man to run so near home as to know himself
whereof he is made, what proceeds naturally from him, and wherefore he is
made, how he is compassed about with many calamities and miseries, and how
death does follow him step by step, whether so ever he goes. A thing to be
desired by the Heathens example, who said Nosce teipsum, Psalm. 8. Psalm. 144.4.
Likewise by the good prophet David, who said, What is man that etc. and that
he may be the better acquainted heerewith, conferring it with his own estate,
I will lay down the opinion of our auncesters, who with experience and
knowledge, have given us a true light thereof. The Hebrews described man wholly
by three proper names that were given unto him which in the Bible, especially
in the Psalms are found in many places, that is Ish, Enosh, Adam, Three names
given to man.
which according to the true interpretation of the words, and true meaning of
the writers, I will lay down, the rather that by them (as by a brief table)
we may not only quickly survey our estate, but excellentlye Calender in our
minds, the true proportion of our selves, and I will describe the
signification of them, as they are and first with Adam.

Adam is a name of signification given to our first parent Adam, not only
properly to be called by it, but by signification to witness as well to himself
as to all his posterity, what God meant by it, and does signify Red earth,
which name does put us in remembrance of what substance we be of, and whereof
we be created, that is, of ye very brittle earth, according to Gods own
saying, Earth thou art, and to earth thou shall return again, Genesis
and this change is not attributed to one man, or to one nation but unto all
people in the world, of what estate or degree soever. As appears well by the
History of Zerxes, who had a very great Army of Soldiers, and as he marched
on the side of an hill looking back on his great host, did not glory in them,
but received a sudden motion, and therewithal wept, his uncle Artabanus
being present, and seeing so sudden a change, demanded the cause, to whom
he answered, now I record in my mind, how short the life of man is, when of
this great multitude after and hundred years not one of these shall remain
alive. Horace says, Quo pius Eneas, quo Tullus dives, et Ancus, puluis et
vmbra sumus. Whether are those Kings gone, the godly Eneas, rich Tullus, and
Ancus? answer is made, we are but dust and as a shadow. The prophet crying out
unto all the world, does speak unto man kind, O earth, earth, earth, now
upon this true certificate of our substance, we are to learn three good
considerations, 1. The frailty of our substance: Three considerations to be
learned.
2. What fruit it yields. 3. Thirdly what regard we should have to it. As
touching the frailty of man in his natural substance; we se by the course of
his time, is but sho^^, as Job says, Job. 14.5.
He has but a short time to live, and comes up like a flower, and suddenly
is cut down. Likewise, in the 39. Psa. 39.6.7.
Psalm. Behold thou have made my days as it were a span long, and mine age is
even as nothing, in respect of thee, and verily every man living is altogether
vanity, for man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain
etc. Plutarch.
Anaxagoras did express this frailty when news came unto him that his son
was dead, he answered. Sciome mortalem eum genuisse. I know that I my self
being a mortal man did beget him. So that in all ages and times we have seen,
that all sorts of people have vayled their cheifest top sail unto death, and
have showed that they have had no strength at all to strive against him. In
consideration whereof, let us go farther and see the second point, which is,
what fruit this frailnes yields. As we have proved the very substance of
man to be but earth, 2. Consideration.
so let us consider that the very earth of it self (without great travel)
brings forth nothing but thorns and briars and weeds, according to the
curse of God, which happened to it for man's disobedience, as appears in
Genesis. Genesis 3.18.
Et spinam et carduum proferat tibi. It shall bring forth thorns and thistles
unto thee. Even so, if we behold the fruit of man's nature it brings forth
unto us nothing but thorns and unprofitable weeds, as it is recorded in the
Prophet Ezechiell, Ezech. 2,
when he was wylled to go unto a stony hearted people, and such as had a
harlots face, and whether they will hear or no, go thou unto them, and be not
rebellious as they are, for thou shall go amongst thorns and Scorpions says
the Lord, now we must consider that the nature of the thorn is to choke up
every good seed that is sown near him, Math. 13.
as appears in the Gospel, where some seeds fell among thorns, and the
thorns grew up and choked it, so when this ground of man's flesh is such, that
can bring forth nothing but thorns, that is, worldly care, covetousness, just
or any such vice, it will not only choke up the good seeds of virtue and
honesty that are sown in man's ears, but when the same thorns are rooted up
to be cast into the fire, then shall it draw up by the roots, such seeds as
have had but small root, growing among ye same thorns, and to the fire they
shall both together. O woeful life, when honesty and godliness shall be sown
among such thorns as shall choke it up, and bring it to the fire of eternal
damnation, such there be a great many, which have sown their godliness among
thorns, of whom S. Paul makes mention, having a taste of godliness, but
denying the virtue thereof, furthermore, we see that if a man go among
thorns, as he trauelleth, sometimes this twig catches his clothes on this
side, sometimes a twig on that side, that it does not only rent his clothes
but his very skin also. Even so when as we pass through the thorns of this
world, sometimes our minds, sometime our conscience is tied by a twig, but
eftsoons our heart is rent and defaced, in so much, that beholding some men,
^re laketh ^ogenes ^th his ^ndle at ^one day
they are so defaced, that you shall scarce know a man from a monster. Besides
these thorns, our corrupt nature, or rather cursed ground is such as does
bring forth so many bad weeds, (if we look into nature it self) that we
cannot as much as think one good thought, but as the Evangelist says, even
from the seat of our thoughts and affections, ^ath. 15.
that is from our heart proceeds evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, murders etc. yea such abundance, and so continually, that of our
selves we may well he called a barren ground, (...). 4.4.
not able to yield any one good fruit, unless the dew of heaven, even the
manifold graces, favor, and goodness of God be powered upon us. And yet (because
I will approach to the third consideration) notwithstanding, Considetion.
we find our substance but frail earth, and our fruit unprofitable
thoughts, we seek daily to pamper the same, as though it were made of pure
nobility, or of a heavenly and imaculate substance, for we must have it cased
in silks, veluets, and rich robes of diverse colors and strange fashions, we
must have it stuffed with tostly and delicate choises of meats and drinks,
with diverse confections of ^^ly deynties, we must have it preserved in huge
houses, and rested on easy be^^, with all as they are appointed to man; so are
they necessary for man, if man would use temperancie and not forgetfulness,
which forgetfulness makes him many times, that he neither knows his
substance whereof it is made, nor his creator wherefore he made it, that in the
one he might be humble and lowly, in the other always thankful, by reason
whereof we find our understanding darkened, our conscience hardened, and our
hearts translated, in so much, that if we should reason with our selves in this
our proud elevation of minds, what if the poor creatures of ye world did see
and know our boasting hearts? and had reason to discern it, would not the
silk worm, whose web we wear, or the sheep whose fleece we put on, or the
byrd, on whose feathers we easilye lay our carcases, rather perceiving a
superfluity then a necessary use, and therewith a monstrous fashion rather then
a contented mind, would they not laugh more at us then the byrds did, at the
Chough which did put on the Peacockes feathers? yes no doubt, and tell us of
our naked coming into ye world and of our naked departure, ^clesi. 1.
yea and say that all is but vain vanity, better then we our selves do
express in our selves. Thus much for the first name of man, wherein I have set
forth his substance with the fruits thereof, now to the second man.

Enosh.
This word Enosh, which in English signifies a man, ^osh. ^sterus.
comes from ye Radical Anash, which betokens a person or a thing so
overcome with evil, that it is in a manner desperate or void of any hope of
safety, even so mankind after his fall did first see his substance, whereof
he was made, as I have said before, then he felt the reward of his
disobedience, which is signified by this word Enosh, which is as much to say,
as a miserable man, mortal, and desperately lost, and although the name was
first given by Seth unto his son 3727. years before Christ, and after Adam
236. years, yet so was the inuocasion of Seth unto God; and likewise the will
of God unto man, Ally.
as to signify unto Seth (being not only a member, but a head of the
generation of the godly) that in the whole members of the Church should be
seen among the elect as long as they lived in this world, nothing but misery,
affliction, trouble, calamitye, and persecution, according to the saying of the
Apostle, As many as will live godly in Christ Jesus, 2. Tim. 3.
shall suffer persecution. Since which time ye godly have very well seen, not
only the disobedience of Adam, but tasted the inheritance and lot of his fall
for many miseries, persecutions, troubles, and changes, have been so heavy and
burdensome to the godly, Phil. 1,
that they have wished themselves to be released of this life, for to be with
God, some have suffered such imprisonment, such bonds, such banishment, such
torments, sometimes to be rent with wild beasts, sometimes to be boiled in
lead, sometimes laid on the Grydiron some their tongues plucked out, some
their eyes, some let blood to death, and some their heads cut of, that it were
a most lamentable matter to lay down such a blody record. It was no marvel
that Saint Paul, David, Stephen, and a great many more godly, desired to be
with the Lord, ^ita quasi ^ia taesa.
for that this life seemed to be no more but a weary travel unto them. Job
describing the estate of man, ^ob. 14.1.
says, Man that is borne of a woman is of short continuance, and full of
trouble, and truth it is, that many troubles and chaunges do happen unto him,
now healthy, suddenly sick, now rich, and now poor, sometimes up, and
quickly down, and never continuing in a peaceable stay, sometimes beloved of
one, and sometimes hated of twenty, now merry, and suddenly sorry, now a
live, and to morrow dead, as the wise man says, hodie mihi cras tibi, to day
to me, to morrow to thee, this we see the inconstancy of time. Besides that,
if we look into the care of our education, the care for the provision of our
necessaries how to get them, and how to hold them makes many a man amazed, to
see the running wheel of Fortune. I might speak very much of the sorrow and
care of men, but it were too long, it shall be enough to yield the reader to ye
Map of this present age, wherein we see parents to slide away, and children to
wexe stout, friends to fail, charity to grow cold, truth banished, faith
feeble, again, iniquity to reign, envy and malice to bear the sway, and
these do show the estate to be so sorrowful, that a man would rather wysh
death with quietness, then such a life with miserye.

Ish,
An other name that the Hebrews do give unto manne is Ish, which is found in
diverse places of Scripture, but above all, I note one place cited out of the
second of Genesis, Therefore let a man forsake Father and Mother, Genesis 2.
etc. which by the Evangelists and the Apostell is translated (...) a man, some
suppose this word takes his root from the very essential power of man, Ish.
and some from his qualityes, and both of them do accord with my purpose in
this signification: this is manifest, that he is flesh, he is earth, so are
ye beasts of the field, yet notwithstanding, God has made a difference in
shape, proportion and honor, as Ovid says: Pronaque cum spectent animantia
cetera terram Os homini sublime dedit celumque videre, While brutish beasts
do groueling look,
and downward hang their eyes:
Man's countenance is lift aloft,
and looks to the skies.


Yea and though among a great many Philosophers, their substance shall be made
equal, yet I find the greater excellency in man, by how much he is made the
more honorable, not only in this life, wherein he is made Emperor of all
Gods creatures, and all things are put in subjection under his feet, but in
the world to come, Psalm. 8.
where he shall be assures of immortality and life everlasting, whereas the
beasts themselves do lose the benefit of honor.

Before man's fall, in the time of innocence, there was no such power attributed
to any creature, as there was unto man, since which time, though man be decayed
and fallen into miserye corruption and deprivation of life in this world, by
his disobedience, yet by Christ he shall have restitution to his former
beauty and state, so that the true definition of Ish, in my poor judgment, is
a man in power, decaying himself, and therefore may justly be called Anthropos
according to the translation that is to say, a subuertion or overthrow, which
never happened neither by Gods appointment, nor by any means, but by man's
own disobedience, for as man being then in power and honor, would wylfully
fall and dishonor himself, as appears in the 49 Psalm. Psalm. 49.20.
Man being in honor has no understanding, but is compared unto the beasts
that perish. Even so we see in these days of restitution, wherein Christ Jesus
has appeared perfectly in comfort, in acceptance, in redemption and
knowledge, and has crowned us with glory, and brought us into favor with his
father again, we not accounting this favor nor regarding our restoring to
honor. Do wilfully and wyckedly, fall unto our old vomit again, and in our
selves do deface the nobility that God has given us, always expressing our
overthwart disposition, and making it agreeable to our overthrown nature,
which is as much to say as a nature turned up side down, even as one
demanding once of a Philosopher what a man was, answered, a tree turned
vpside down, for said he, as the tree has his root downewarde, and grows
upward, has his nutriment below, and spreads her limbs above, even so man
has his root and nourishment in the higher part, and spreads his twigs
downewarde, for behold his brain which feeds every artery downewarde, and
behold every limme, bone, heayre, arm, leg, etc. and you shall find them
all to grow downewarde, not as though nature were an author or president of
ouerthwartnes, but rather that it should be a remembrance and signification of
our growing downward to the earth (concerning our flesh) from whence we came,
and that our root being fedd above the earth, did look up into heaven, in
the which he has his perfect feeding, and assured life, and although the works
of God are so wonderful in their kind, that we are not able to search out
the deepenes of them, nor to reason why it should be made this way or that, yet
we may have an honest and godly guess in the framing of our overthwart nature
when we survey and judge our dispositions agreeable to the same, to be fit
fruits for such a tree, and the better to understand this, do we not see that
we account least of that thing which is best for us? and best of that which is
worst for us? do we not break that which is commanded us, and follow that
which is not commanded us, do we not in steed of godly exercises, delight in
fleshly pleasures, in steed of charity put on envy? in steed of pity, use
stony hearts? do we not for patience use vengeance? for love hatred, for
humility pride, for liberality covetousness, for virtue vice, for honesty
ungodliness, as the Poet says, Nitimur in veticum semper cupimusque negata, we
endeavor our selves in things unlawful, and always desire things forbidden,
we find the like in Adam, who delighted in the Apple that was forbidden him,
and likewise in Lots wife, that looked back to Sodom which was forbidden her,
and so we see and find in all men their untowardly disposition, wilfully to
lose the nobility and power of their image and creation, and to cast their
honor in the dust, manne may very well be compared in all his actions unto the
Snayle, Man compared to a Snayle.
who in his nature has these three properties, he is slow in going, blind
in sight, and defiles the way that he goes in, for commonly you shall see his
trace. Even so mankind, in going any the ways that a man should travel in,
namely the way of godliness, of truth, of faith, of honesty, of mercy, of love,
of equity, which are the only ways we should tread in this world, we find
him wholly to be very slow and slack in his pace, and touching his sight,
even as he has lame legs to tread his paths (even a snailes pace) so has he
blind eyes to see the same paths as they ought to be seen, and behold, but
rather in his slow and blind travel, defiles his passage, either with
ignorance, pride, whoredom, envy, theft, murder, or some one filthye sin
or other. In so much, that if man do but account the wandering motions of his
mind, the wylling consents of his heart, and the wicked actions of his body,
he shall in himself behold such a filthy account, as if with a conscience
and consideration, he look back and be hold but the travel of a few days
(I will not say many years) peradventure he shall be ashamed to behold his
defiled paths, and the steps that he has left behind him so filthy. O
Lord how many desires arise in the concupisence of man's flesh, how many
wicked wyshes spring out from the bad affection of his heart, how many vanities
have taken possession in his eyes, and how many felons are written in his
bloddy hands, how many bright days he has occupied in drousie sleep, to
wander in the dark night, how he has obeyed satan, and refused his sweet
savior. How he has followed fables, and refused the comfortable counsel of
the Gospel, how he has turned his eyes from his poor afflicted brethren,
and followed the wicked crewe of infidells, how he has shut up his compassion
from the poor, and opened his liberality to drunkards, wantons, and light
persons, what greater loss of nobility cane there be, then to refuse the
glorious company of heaven, yea even that sweet Christ himself, and to be
conversant with satan and his crew, what greater deformity, then to flee from
the protection of the almighty, to be subiecto either to the flesh or to the
world, and what greater shame, then to cast of the jewels of honesty and
godliness, and to be bankerupt with the infidels of this world, not able to
boast of one good work, no not so much as delighted with one godly thought. God
himself has proclaimed all his service to be done in the open light, and
open places, and in all congregations, namely faith, love, charity, pity,
patience, equity, the preaching of his word, the using of his Sacraments,
insomuch, that he that is his servant, in these things may boldly knock his
breast and say, Hic murus aheneus esto nil conscere sibi, Horace E^isto. 1.
nulla impallescere culpa. To know no guiltines, and to blush at no offense, is
a brazen wall, on the otherside, satan shuts up all his works in hugger
munger, he will have none of the come in light, as for example, the thief, the
whoremonger, the drunkard, and every evil dooer will not be known of his
action, neither commit any of these wicked offenses in the sight of the
world, but secretelie and in fear of danger, yet notwithstanding, such is
the folly of this world, and ye perverseness of man's nature, that notwithstanding
that light be come into the world, John 3.19
yet men love darkness more then light, because their deeds are evil. Thus you
see the whole state of man described, and his life to consist of a weak
substance, his estate in mysery, and his honor cast down to the ground.

A prayer.
O Eternal God and most merciful father, who of thine own goodness haste
vouchsafed to frame us of a vile substance and made us to thine own
similitude, and likeness, and did set our first parents Adam and Eve in the
pleasant Paradise and did crown them with innocence and immortality which
they lost by their disobedience, plucking upon themselves and their posterity
thy just curse, by the which we always in this transitorye world, savor of
sin, sorrow and death, yet thou of thy goodness O Lord, forgetting thy wrath,
and remembering thy mercy, did give us thy son Jesus Christ to restore us
again to our estate, and bring us again into thy favor, who has already
entered the gates, and taken possession for us in thy heavenly Paradise, where
we shall be assured of everlasting comfort, joy and blessedness. Vouchsafe (O
Lord) we humbly beseech thee, to comfort our hearts with thy holy spirit, and
open our understandings with the continual preaching of thy holy word, that
we may truly acknowledge thee to be our only creator, preserver and redeemer,
and that we may so view and behold our own lamentable estate, and having our
own insufficiency always before our eyes, may always flee to thee for
succor, grant O Lord that we may so acknowledge our own weakness, that we
be not carried away with vain pomp, nor fed with filthy pleasure and lust,
nor drawn away by the allurements of the world, but may always settle a firm
confidence in thee, which art the only stay and gage of our frail and casual
estate, for thy son Jesus Christ his sake, our only mediator and advocate.
Amen.

How Sin does always budde forth and grow in our nature, and how it is
nourished and increased in our flesh.
^p. 2.
SIthence the fall of Adam, there is a certain defect, and corruption of nature
in man, by the which he is prone and ready to commit sin, and never able fully
to satisfy the Law of God, this corruptnes lies hidden and takes root in
that nature of ours, which proceeded from Adam, and buddeth or breaks forth
by the thoughts and will of the heart, being inclined unto evil, even in ye
whole course of our life, en. 8.21.
as God himself said, The imagination of man's heart is evil, even from his
youth. Although we see in youth no such apparent show of sin, as we do in
ryper years, yet that evil which is called original or inhabiting, does
assuredly so remain, that sometime is seen anger, revenge and untruth in
them, and then concupiscence, which sticks in nature from the beginning, and
aptnes to sin does appear every day more and more, even as age does
increase, and then as S. James faith, Ia. 1.14.1^
He is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is enticed, then when lust
has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished
brings forth death. Sin it self is found in our corrupt nature, but the
order and increasing thereof, is seen in the maturitye and ripenes of years.
Touching the first sin and simple sin, which is called Original. The prophet
speaks, Psalm. 51.5.
Behold I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.
Likewise S. Paul does say, By nature we are the Children of wrath. Hence we
gather in the very generation of man, when by the Law of nature the issue is
conceived and framed, then the spotte of sin does pass into them begotten,
and so from age to age, and from one to another passes sin even with the
framing and conception of nature, and then (as the Prophet says) in an there
place, who can make that clean which is conceived of an unclean seed. If that
seed then be unclean, needs must the fruits be agree able which do appear
in order as in a seed, first there is the very grain, from thence the stalk,
last, the very same fruit: so in man, first the dokled nature by descent even
from Adam, then his thoughts, lastly his actions and deeds. Now touching the
first, we receive our contamination in generation, from the defiled generator,
then our thoughts begin to frame a consent and shape of sin, and it is
working in our hearts and minds when it is said, we cannot as much as think
one good thought, as appears in the Gospel. ^th. 15.19.
Out of the heart come evil thoughs, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts,
false testimonies, slanders. So that first in ye heart is the seed, then from
thence proceeds the thought or imagination, which in ye 8. (...) 8.
of Genesis is called Gezer, a cogitation or cuspicence, which does shape a
delight, a pleasure, a will and desire to sin, and last of all appears in
the same workmanship of nature, the very fruits of our corruptnes which
shows ye which is called Atoxia, which is a confusion of order, not framing
our selves according to the Law of God, forasmuch as in our selves, we behold
not that which is necessary for our selves, or required in our selves, as the
Apostle says: The natural man beholds not those things that are of the
spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2.1.
and for this cause are we called (...) wicked, and lewd, for when we have
done of our selves what we can, yet we are unprofitable in respect of our
own abilitye and power, which I speak not to dismay ye weaker sort, to
signify unto the^ their valor before God and the world, to be nothing worth,
and so to be rejected and not regarded, but rather to their great comfort,
that being so vile and wicked in their kind and generation, it pleases
almighty God to beautifye them with the spyrite of knowledge: and allow of
them in his favorable acceptance, and to bless them with his continual
mercy and love in his son Jesus CHRIST, especially those that feel the
heavy burden of the flesh and will hearken to the loving call of the Lord, and
come unto him, but such as will not hearken and return when they are called,
but persevere and continue in the hardness of their heart, in such this hroode of
sin is nourished and increased two manner of ways. ^wo ways ^ne nouri^ed.
1. By the diligence of satan, secondly by the pleasure of the flesh. As
touching the diligence of satan, when ye shall perceive manne to go astraye
from God, which is his preserver and sheepeheard, and from the comfortable
flock of the Church, and company of the godly, then as a straying sheep is,
he the sooner taken by the Woolfe, and so devoured of him, for satan
diligently goes about as a roaring Lion, seekeing whom he may devour, and
when he has taken him, even as the flesh of the sheep is digested in the
stomach of the Woolfe, even so is this wicked man resolved into the
inticements and suggestions of satan, so that where as the motions of the
flesh do prick and stir, there is satan ready to set forward and egg
man unto the accomplishing of every sinful desire, until it be performed,
and then follows the resolution and consumption of the whole man, either in
shame or confusion, this happens cheifest in those that go first astray and
forsake their loving GOD, Strayers.
to whom he has lovingly called and offered himself, and then afterward shall
follow the wandering of their own will, as appeared in Judas, who first
forsook his God, followed his own will, and then was taken of satan, and so
consumed. And now to conclude in this point, there is no root or seed of
sin in the heart of man, but satan is always watring it, and attending it,
to make it grow and wax ripe, and being so, it is reapt either with shame, or
rewarded with confusion, as the Apostle says, What profit had ye in those
things whereof ye are now ashamed. David to avoid it, said in his prayer to
God, Psalm. 25.2.
All they that hope in thee shall not be ashamed. so likewise after the
continuance of sin comes confusion, as we have seen by experience, many
whoremongers, have been brought to extreme poverty or to most horrible
diseases, the drunkard unto the dropsy, and extreme pal^yes and seeblenes,
the tyrant unto utter ruin hatr^^ and corruption, (...). 7.
as appeared by Antiochus, who did so rotte where he lay, that his
Chamberlayne could not abide the smell of him. The covetous, God does abhor,
as the Prophet says, the Rebel is rewarded, (as woorthely) with the loss of
his life, besides their temporal punishments laid upon some of the ungodly.
The Apostle says unto all the ungodly, Neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, Co.
6.9, 10.
nor wantons, nor adulterers, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkerdes, nor
raylers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God, this seems to
be grievous and terrible sentence, and all these sins are styrring in our
flesh, but urged and set on by satan, who seeks (as I said) nothing but
shame and confusion. Now there rests an other sort of nourishing of this sin
in our fleshly nature, when we give over our selves as servants to uncleanness
and iniquity, ^om 6.19
to commit iniquity, and be overcome either with pleasure or with idleness, or
with abundance, if any of these take hold in our fleshly minds, and we anchor
our wylles thereunto, then that sin which stirs in hidden nature, appears
in open actions, as for example, the man that is given to pleasure, whether it
be the pleasure of the mind, or of the flesh, as Herod was given to both, ye
effect of them was murder against his own conscience, and if you give scope
unto the wandering mind to have his delights wherein he will, as we see many
delights in the world, as hawking, hunting, dycing, carding, pyping, dancing,
bare-bayting, and many other such pastimes, sometimes they are taken for
recreations, but that is among the grave, that knows how to rule (not to be
ruled) but give ye carnal mind an inche, and it desires an Ell, and hardly it
can be removed or appeased because it is in league and lincked to the flesh,
which always desires contrary to the spirit, and that is ye cause we see
greater flocking, and more delight in any these pleasures among the greater
company, then in resorting to Sermons, or to the Church, hence grows the
great abuse of the Sabbath day, in bowsing, drinking, gaming and pastime. The
heathen Poet did give good counsel, Animum rege, qui nisi paret imparat hunc
frenis hunc tu compesce cataena. (...).
Rule thy mind, unless thy mind rule thee, bridle him, and fetter him fast
with chains. For this cause did the Apostle give counsel, that we should
mortify our earthly members, that is to say, Kill our carnal affections and
delights. But do we go about to kill them when we water them? and allow of
them? nay rather prefer them before godly meditations. I will not condemn
pleasures (as I say) that are used of the wise and well settled for their
recreations, nor yet our English music, unless it be among wanton minds or
light brains, for if it be used among them, Effect of Music.
you shall see what a monstrous effect it uses, it makes their thoughts and
minds to run astray a great way of, and fall into diverse and sundry desires
and unlawful wishes, and ambitious appetites, besides that, it shapeth a
thousand fantasies and imaginations in their conceits making themselves in
their fantasies to be of great valor, and estimation, whereas they are nothing
toward, to what proportion either of behavior, ambition, or desire they frame
themselves that be lovers of Music, they can best judge that have delighted
it, but this I am sure, though preferred in many houses before the preaching of
the Gospel, yet I know the Gospel delights the godly so much, as they
utterly refuse music, in respect of the greater, for in the Gospel we find
this sweet harmony, Ioh. 14.
the gates of heaven are open, mercy and love is sent unto us, everlasting life
is prepared for us, in the kingdom of heaven, and what better melody. The
other yields but uncertain soundes, not distinct, lightlye heard and quickly
gone, and therefore fitter rather for an insensible flesh then for a reasonable
spirit, and this pleasure of the mind being first grown strong and ripe in
the mind, does work in the flesh so mightily, that all good order being
excluded, these are placed. First idleness, then the delight of evil company,
thirdly evil and filthy words, and last, immoderate diet, and what proceeds
from all these 4. you shall judge by the sequel. As for the first, which is
Idleness, the Poet says, Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis ercus, Idleness.
Take away Idleness, and thou do break Cupides bow, again.

Queritur Aegistus quare sit factus adulter? In promptu causa est, desidiosus
erat. Why was Aegistus an adulterer? because he was Idle. King David came from
his fluggish bed at noone day, and walked on the roof of his house, when he
beheld from thence, Bath-sheba the wife of Vriah, 2, Sam, 11.2.
and did by his idleness engender his adulterous practice. The wise man says,
Idleness brings much evil. Eccl. 33, 26
Likewise S. Paul speaks of young wyddowes to Timothy: Being idle they learn
to go from house to house.

1, Tim. 5, 13.
Now to the next vice, which is evil company, which is a great occasion to
translate a good disposition, and make it become very bad, Evil company.
as the wise man says Ex malo consortio malus eris, by company of the wicked,
thou shall learn wickedness. Genesis 6.2.
The children of God being in the company of the daughters of wicked men,
discending of ye stock of Cain, were ravished with their beautye, and took
them against the will of God, insomuch as he beholding the wickedness of their
hearts, said: It repents me that I made man, Eccl. 13.1.
It is said in Ecclesiasticus, He that touches Pitch shall be defiled with it.
Also in the Revelation it is said, by the whore of Babylon: Go put of her my
people that ye be not partakers in her sins. Reu. 18.4
If a Lamb stand by a Woolfe, or towe near the fire, the one shall be in hazard
to be devoured, the other to be burned. If a man go among briars, he shall be
plucked, scratched and defaced in every side, evil company has wholly consumed
many a man, discredited his house, blotted out his good name, impouerished his
estate, and consumed the body in most horrible diseases. The Prodigal child,
that fell into bad company, is a good example to many prodigal children in
England, to make them avoid that thing that brings shame, diseases, poverty,
hanging, or some other bad death, there is no man so unreasonable, but he will
avoid the plague, leprosy and such contagious diseases, and shun and detest
such as are infected with them, but those spiritual diseases, as do infect
both body and soul, are never avoided nor detested, nor the company of them
that have them: the horrible punishment whereof, is expressed in many places of
Scripture, especially if you read ye Homily against adultery, there is a most
terrible punishment ordained of God in all ages, against adulterous persons,
of all estates and degrees, yet we have a great many stony hearts, having
vysardes of impudency on their faces, that do know God, have heard his word and
his threats against such horrible sin, and yet notwithstanding will delight
in that filthy and damnable sin, and will build (presumptuously) on the
mercy of God, but this let them be warned, and in the bowels of Christ I charge
them take heed, that they build not their pleasure and lust, but their faith
upon the mercy of God, if they do, the building will fall even as Sampsons
house did upon their own pates, and crush them to pieces, for the servant
that knows his Masters will, and will not do it, shall be whypped with many
scourges, If such adulterers will not be terrified with the temporal
punishments of which before are laid down, yet let them look to the day of
judgment, where the upright Judge Christ sits who has pronounced the
sweet sentence already in Matthew. Math. 19.
Verily I say unto you, that when the son of man shall sit in the throne of
his majesty, ye which followed me in the regeneration shall sit also upon the
xii. thrones and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. And whosoever shall
forsake house or brethren, or sisters, or father or mother or wife or children
or lands for my names sake, he shall receive an hundred fold more, and shall
inherit everlasting life. Let them look into this sentence, and they shall
find a promised pleasure, which shall drown all carnal and filthy delights,
if at least wise he have any desire to be the child of God, and do expect and
look for the life to come.

The third vice, which corrupts a man is filthy talk, 3. Vice filthy talk
which indeed does set our nature so at liberty, yt we shame not to fall in
the sands and shore of filthy pleasure, for if the tongue, as the Apostle
says, ^m. 3.4.
be the helm and guide of the ship of our body, needs must the ship run at
large, whose guide is unruly.

^. Cor, 15.
S. Paul recording the words of Menander, said: Evil words corrupt good
manners. Likewise David describing the ungodly, among other things says: Under
his tongue is ungodliness and vanity. ^am. 3.6
Yea James says, The tongue set among our members, defiles the whole body,
and sets on fire the course of nature, and especially you shall note it in
those whose inclination is to evil, and in whom there is found a towardnes,
and a wylling readiness to a wanton, wicked, and filthy life, wherefore I
freendly admonish with S. Paul Fornication, ^ph. 5.34.5.
and all uncleanness, and covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as it
becomes Saints, Neither filthynes nor foolish talking, neither jesting,
which are things not comelye, but rather gyuing of thanks.

Last of all, there remains an other sustenaunce to carnal pleasure which is
immoderate diet, Immoderate diet,
an ^^im^^d to all temperancy, an overthrow of knowledge a r^fer out of
reason, a disfigurer of shape, and a murderer of virtue. Likewise, a freede
unto vice, a maintainer of appetite, and a copartner with ^^^^lines, for if you
behold the man in ^^ned either to gluttony or drunkenness, you behold him that
does so stuff the flesh, as he seems to be wylling to feed the effects
and desires thereof, which appeared shamefully both in Lot and in Holophernus,
to their confusion. And as Marcinus says, Tu ganea indulges Ciprian sectare
nefandam, So thou do favor gluttony, that in the end, thou do nourish
venerye. The wise man says, Ecc. 31.30
Drunkenness increases the courage of a fool, till he offend, it dimisheth
his strength, and makes wounds? Also in the Proverbs of Solomon. Pro. 23, 31,
32, 33.
Look not thou upon ye wine when it is red, and when it shows his color in
the cup, or goes down pleasantly, in the end thereof it will bite like a
serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrice, thine eyes shall look upon strange women,
and thy heart shall speak lewd things. Herein you may see the lewd forces
of excessive wine, it maintains venery, gives courage to offend,
diminishes strength, wounds, stingeth as a serpent, hurts like a
Cockatrice, turns the eyes to strange women, and makes the heart speak
lewd things, what greater overthrow can there be to the honor and dignity of
a man. Now behold what God pronounces against such. In the Prophet Esaias he
says? ^sa. 5, 11
Woe unto them that rise up early to follow drunkenness, and to them that
continue until night, till the wine do inflame them. And a little after, in
the same Chapter. ^rse, 22,
Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and to them that are strong to
power in strong drink. ^el, 1, 5,
Likewise, the Prophet Joel cries out at them. Awake ye drunkardes, and weep
and howl, all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine, for it shall be
pulled from your mouth. Now because man's nature is apt and prone hereunto,
God did not only give a threatening to this reason to be terrified but an order
to his body to be mortified, and therefore ordained and proclaimed fasting,
Fasting.
as a most godly and commendable constitution of the body in temperancye, and
that we should so order our diet, that we should be feeders of nature, and not
releuers of appetite, neither should this fasting supersticiously consist in ye
choice of meats and drinks, as the Maniches did, August. d^moribus. Manich,
l^ 2, cap, 13,
which refrayned flesh, and yet in other dainties were distenti and crepantes,
but rather that we should take to relieve nature, and no more. To this end
says Calvin, was fasting ordained, Institu, li, cap, 12. sec^ 15,
first to supprosse the flesh, least that it should were wanton. Secondly they
should be the better given to prayer, and thirdly it should be a testimony unto
humility, in those that did use fasting orderly, that is to say, in refraining
overmuch stuffing and pampering of the bellye, the Lord God grant it speedily
in all good Christians for his Christ's sake. Amen.

A prayer.
O Merciful God, forasmuch as we see that we are but very dust and ashes, and
though we grow up gloriously as the flower of the field, yet we are cut
down quickly and wyther as the grass, and forasmuch as out of this
corruptible nature of ours, proceeds no good thing, but wicked thoughts,
deuilish inventions and most damnable actions. We humbly beseech thee, give
us grace that we may so behold our vile nature and wicked inclination that we
may be ashamed at the fruits thereof, that by shame we may be ^^uen to shun
the wickedness of sin, and forced to shadow our selves under the wings of thy
protection, and learn to put on the beautye of thy son Jesus Christ, that in
him we may be restored to the shape and form of virtue and godliness, to the
honor and glory of thy holy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

How many grievous enemies we have by reason of sin.
COnsidering how ouglye and monstrous sin is in the mind and flesh of man,
Chap. 3.
and how diverse it is in his will, as it is a thing impossible to
proportionate it, so is it a thing so detestable, that by reason thereof, (I
mean sin only) we have many most grievous and intolerable enemies. As for
example, Gods vengance and wrath, our own conscience, death and damnation, of
the which, some of the^ are enemies unto our sin and friends unto us, as are,
Gods vengeance, and our own conscience: and some of them are friends unto
sin, and enemies unto us, as are, death and damnation, but by reason that
sin reigns in us, and we favor it, and water it, and cannot nor will not
separate our selves from the hazard of it, but keep a society with it. We
are like the Corn that is is found among the chafe, which is gathered up and
cast into the fire, and so they perish together: Even so, when sin is found
to exceed in our mortal bodies, and that we overmuch defile the house of the
Lord, (I mean his Temple) he shall come with his Fan in his hand, and purge
his flower, and that seed which is not seen, but covered with the Chafe, and
dust of the flower, shall be cast away, and that man whose multitude of sins
do cover him so, that neither repentance, nor any good conversation does
discover, undoubtedly either the broom of Gods vengance shall sweep him away,
or else ye worm of his conscience shall gnaw him, or the sting of death shall
confound him, or else the fire of hell shall consume him, for all these are
enemies unto us for sins sake. Now therefore, least sin might reign among
us too abundantly, without the cutting off of the buddings and blossoms of
it, either with amendme^t, with grace or with fear, I will lay down what the
force of all those enemies is, that we may see how that daily by the
entertainment of sin, we provoke grievous enemies against us. And touching
the first, which is the vengeance of God upon sinners. Vengeance of God.
I will begin with the Hystory of the Isralites expressed in the Books of
Exodus and Numery, where the people for their murmuring, wyshing of their
fleshpots for worshipping the Golden Calfe, Exo, 15, 16, 17, 19, 32, Chapters.
and many other sins, had the plague, leprosy and grievous diseases among
them, and many of the Idolaters were slain. And in Numery, such as rebelled
were swallowed up in the earth, Chapters, 16, 21, 25,
such as murmured, had firye Serpents sent among them, and such as commitmitted
fornication among them, had the plague, in so much, as there dyed in the
plague twentye four thousand. We read also that for the sins of the
people, the world was drowned, and for the sin of Sodom and Gomor, Gen, 6,
13,
those Cities were consumed with fire and brimstone. Horosius reports, Gen,
19, 24,
that for sin the two great Cities in Asia, Colossa and Hierapolis, suncke
into the earth, and were swallowed up. Jericho was besiged by Joshua, and the
Cittye was taken, Iosu, 6, 21,
and all the inhabitants (saving Rahab, and they that were with her) both old
and young were put to the sword, and the City burnt, but of all lamentable
plagues sent from God, the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus and Vespasian, may
be a terrible example unto us, for they had the Law, Prophets, Math, 11.
yea Christ himself, who bitterly wept over them, and yet they would not turn
from their wicked sin, but hardened their hearts, and cared not for the Lords
sweet warning, and comfortable calling, nor yet for their own harm and
confusion, which was so near at hand, but ever they thought that the Lord
would not destory his Temple among them, nor yet that they should be spoiled
for their Temples sake, and besides that they were so many, they boasted of
their multitude and strength, and thought all the world could not overcome,
but all the world cannot prevail, where God him self do set against, as
appeared by this great and populous Jerusalem. Whereof Josephus makes mention,
that they were besieged so long, that a bushel of Corn, was worth a talent,
yea they were so hungry, that they did eat the Leather of their Targets and
shoes, Anno salutus. 73.
and glad were some of them to eat the dunge of Oxen, the mother killed her
own child to eat if, which was a most lamentable and unnatural thing, there
were x^.C.M. besides Ga^^leans slain by Vespasian, xvii.M. sent to Alexandria
by Titus, to be kept (...) vile bondage. Two thousand to be brought (...) Rome
for a triumph, which afterward were devoured of wild beasts, ^^ll^es that,
xxv.M. Jews were sold, all this gr^^ multitude, (which man (...) ha^^ thought
could have conquered the whole (...)) the Lord (...) their sins, and for the
contemning of his word and truth, delivered up to the bloddy hands of their
enemies. What har^ is so hard that will not tremble to he^^e this lamentable
vengeance and wrath (...) God, with so sharp punishment upon his own people,
which before he loved so well, and among all other nations of the world, chose
for his peculiar flock.

Besides this, ye hayle, thunder, lightning, storms, tempest, fluds, mists,
palpable darkness, frogs, caterpillars, and firye serpents, which the Lord
has sent unto his people for sin. The Prophet says that for the sins of the
people, ye Lord will send a dearth upon the^, not of bread and oil only, but
of his holy word, and therefore for their Idolatry and iniquity, Eze. 14,
the Lord sent false Prophets among them, and the Lord sent word unto the
people by the Prophet Ezechiell. That if they did sin by committing any
trespass against him, he would stretch forth his hand and break the staff
of bread, and send such a famine upon it, that man and beast should be
destroyed, likewise be would send ^^^so^e beasts into the land to spoil it,
a sword to destroy them, or a pestilence to overthrow man and beast, and their
if Noab, Daniell, and Job were among them, they should deliver but their own
souls, but their sons and daughters should not be delivered. How bitterly
were the offenses of A^hab and Iezabel punished for the taking away of a little
piece of land. I would to God it were seen in England, by them that takes
away great livings and manours, and sends a whole household it begging, if
the sons of those men were so used as Achabs sons, their heads cut of all
in one day, and likewise their hungrye Iezabels, were used as Achabs. Iezabel
devoured of dogs, and fowls of ye air, they would (I think) consider what a
a God there is, that seeeth into ye hearts of wicked offenders, and does
behold the multitude of their sins, not only entertained in corrupt nature,
but allowed in corrupt will. Good Lord considering the ripenes of sins in
these days, it is to be lamented, that we fear not the vengeance of God.
Eze, 16, 19
The Prophet David could say, If thy wrath be kindled O Lord, who may abide it.
Ezechiell does show how greatly the Lord cried out against Jerusalem,
showing the offenses of Sodom, for the which they were destroyed, which were,
pride, fulness of bread, Idleness and contemning the poor. But alas we have not
only this, but an infinite more of most horrible sins reigning amongst us. As
disobedience, murder, envy, covetousness, horedome, extortion, usury, false
accusation, drunkenness, lying, dissimulation and perjury, from the just
judgment of which sins now ripe among us, I beseech God of his mercy defend
us, and be favorable unto us. Truly our own sins of England being so many,
and so boldly and openly used, do blind vale a great many that they neither
behold the majesty and authority of God, not yet the justice he may lay upon
us, as barrennes, dearth, famine, and pestilence, and in steed of our great
plenty, to send us scarcity, in steed of our peace to send us war, and for
the quietness of our habitations and families, to banish us from our own
houses, and to scatter our families before our faces, and to deliver them and
us into our adversaries hand as a pray. This God can do, and unless we speedily
repent, undoubtedly this first enemy to sin, which is Gods vengeance, will be
powered upon us.

The second enemy unto sin, is our own conscience, Second enemy to sin.
which forasmuch as it has an inward taste of ye law of nature and a knowledge
of our deformed conversation and a sight of our going a stray from the image of
our good creator, does always at the rebellion of sin (especially when we
join our wills thereto) stir in our bodies as though we had ye feeling of some
living thing there, crawling, Synteresis
gnawing, clogging, accusing, pressing down as a heavy lump of lead, shaming
at, and condemning our own reasons, and wills for giving entertainme^t unto sin,
in as much as sometimes ye shall find the torments, and greeues of conscience to
work greater sorrow and care in our minds, the^ if we were either in prison or
ready to go to execution, and although there be 2. consciences, the good and
the bad, Two consciences.
forasmuch as I write unto the good people of God, I will have to do but with
the conscience of the good, referring ye other to his continual hardness. And
although oftentimes we see not the conscience of the good, by their wickedness
of sin, for that they are not yet called, yet if their consciences do not show
her force of accusation, no doubt it is imprisoned, and so hid in ye great
heap of corruption that though it cannot now speak in the end will break
forth, and that we see in many disordered persons in these days which in
the hardness of their hearts have continued in their sin a long time,
untouched or vndisclosed. Yet in the end, when God will call them, or satan
bring them to shame, or when no man can justly accuse them, (how be it suspect
them of evil living) being called to examinacion before any magistrate, then
who can better accuse then the conscience, (who does first condemn and then
strike a great fear) in ye end produces two witnesses, that is either the
stammering tongue, or else the blushing face to accuse the guilty with his own
mouth, and make him speak although he see either shame to discredit him, or
the magistrate to punish him or the Gallows to confound him. Therefore is the
conscience called Mill testes, a thousand witnesses, because it does more
evidently know that which is hid in him, then a thousand men, and does boil
and burn in the hearts of wicked men like a fire. As Tully says, Nolite putare
(quemadmodum in fabulis sepenumero videtis, In oratione pro Roscio
eos qui aliquid impie, scelera te que commiserunt agitari and perterreri
taedis ardentibus sua quemque fraus suus terror maxim vexat, suum quemque
scelus exagitat, amentiaque afficit, suae malae cogitationes, conscientiaeque
animi terrent etc. Think not as Poets have feigned, that they that have
committed something ungodly or wickedly, are vexed and scourged with burning
Torches, it is our own guile, and our own fear does most trouble us, it is
our own wickedness does torment us and amaze us, our own wicked thoughts and
consciences that does affright us etc. There is a great accusation of the
conscience in the heart of the sinner, as when the Scribes and Pharisees had
taken a woman in adultery, they brought her to Christ to see what sentence he
would give against her, because they had found in Moses Law, that such a
one should be stoned to death, but they did it not for Justice, but to tempt
him. Then he writ with his finger on the ground, and said: (being urged by
them for his sentence) Let him that is among you without sin cast the first
stone at her. And when they heard it, Ioh. 8.7.9
being accused by their own consciences, they went out one by one, beginning
at the eldest even unto the last, It is most true that Iuuenall says: ^^t, 13,
Euasisse putes quos diri conscia facti
Men's reddit attonitos, et surdo verbere caedit.


Do thou think he can escape, who^ the conscience of a most horrible fact
makes amazed, and whippeth with a deaf scourge. And as the same Iuuenall
says in an other place. Nocte dieque suum gestat in pectore testem.

But day and night, where that he go or rest, he ^till does bear a witness in
his breast. Conscientia
S. Paul speaking of the Gentiles, shows that they have the effect of the
Law, written in their hearts, their consciences bearing witness, Rom, 2, 15,
and as long as we live in this world, God grant that this witness may always
stir and sting us, till we be ashamed of sin unless after this life, it be
opened as in an indictment to accuse at ye judgment seat, Reu. 20, 12
as John makes mention. And I saw the dead both great and small stand before
God, and the That is their consciences.
books were opened, and an other book was opened, which is the book of life,
and the dead were judged of those things which were written in the books
according to their works. Thus we may see the conscience in this world that
accuses, and the conscience in the world to come that condemns. God grant
ye we may in this world so behave our selves, as with Horace to say. Hic murus
ahaeneus esto. This is a brazen wall when a man may knock his breast and say, I
know nothing here that makes me ashamed or a feared. Miscellan prelect sep^
time, To^ primi.
He yt will see more of the conscience, let him look in the Bishop of
Exceter his book Not in Ally, though indeed he write of conscience at large.
But D. Wolton that is now Bishop, who write larger in his book called the
Conscience, dedicated to a godly zealous knight, S. John Gilbert, mine old
good master and loving friend a fit Patron for such a book and title, there
he shall find enough, touching the conscience. The third enemy v^ to sin,
An other most terrible enemy unto mankind for sins sake, is death, who by
reason that our body is all spotted and corrputed with sin, has his lawful
access unto mankind, and follows him step by step, from place to place, of
what estate or degree soever he be, either King, Prince, Duke, Marquis, Earl,
lord, baron, knight, or whether he be rich or mighty, wise or politic, till at
last he plucketh him down, and depriueth him of life, wife, children, houses,
lands, goods, and all those things in the world, wherein he settled his heart.
The cause of this his power is, yt man being corrupted with sin, is rewarded
with death: a certain appointment of God in our first parent for his sin and
disobedience. ^n, 2.17,
As appears in Genesis, 2. In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall
die the death. In that he did eat, he disobeyed, and so sinned, which sin
has run into all his posterity by descent hitherto, ^m. 5, 12
and shall unto the worlds end, and that is the cause that Death triu^pheth
over us in this world in overthrowing us. S. Paul says: Stipendium peccati
mors, ^om. 6, 23
The reward of sin is death. Likewise the Apostle James says: ^m. 1.15.
When lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished
brings forth death. So that there is no doubt among men, but by reason of
sin death has taken hold in them, ^om, 5.12,
and as sin is entered into all the world, as the Apostle says: even so death
is like to run upon all the^ which are in the world by reason of sin. But now
some will object, Resp.
if any man shall thereupon boldly presume on sin, and feed the humor
thereof, Short de terrible. Deu. 30.18.
he shall not only hasten death unto him, but also pluck upon him a most
terrible death, as appears in Moses. If thy heart turn away so that thou wylt
not obey, but shall be seduced, and worship other Gods and serve them, I
pronounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, you shall not prolong
your days in the land. S. Paul charging the Corinthians for abusing the
sacrament, said: 1, Co. 11.3
For this cause many are sick among you, and many fall on sleep. And yet it
is not a general rule, that they which are cut off, that their days are
shortened thorough sin, for John Baptist, and the Innocents that were
murdered by Herod are no such examples, for such the Lord does not only
take away because they are unworthy of the world, but sometimes they are
arguments of condemnation unto their oppressers, again in them was not seen
such manifest sin whereby they did draw unto the^ Gods wrath to cut of their
days, but in those in whom plentifulnes of obstinate sin does reign,
undoubtedly they shorten their days, as on the otherside, they which serve the
Lord, and follow his precepts and laws, their days shall be prolonged. (...)
^0, 20,
As appears in the commandments. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy
days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. K n, 20, 6,
Was there not xv. years added to Ezechias in serving ye Lord. The prophet
David says. ^sal, 34, 12
What man is he that lists to live, and would feign see good days: keep thy
tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile. The very same and
like words has the Apostle Peter, also when the Lord appeared unto Solomon in
Gibeon, Pet, 3, 10,
and had given him the excellency of wisdom, he advised him saying, ^ Kin. 3,
14
If thou will walk in my ways to keep my ordinances and my commandments, as
thy father David did walk. I will prolong thy days. And yet not only this
blessing of prolonging of days shall be given to the servant of God, but even
in the end, they shall die a peaceable death, as happened to ye good king
Josias, to whom ye Lord said, 2, Ki, 22, 2^
for his good embrasing of ye book of the Law, and fearing him. Behold I will
gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shall be put in thy grave in peace, and
thine eyes shall not see all ye evil which I will bring upon this place. O good
God, what sweeter words to a christian heart, and what greater joy to a good
conscience then to depart in peace, ye neither God in vengeance, nor the
world in exclamatio^ lay any thing to our charge, neither this length of life,
nor this peaceable death shall be assured to the ungodly and wicked, but as I
said, their days shall be cut of, and their end shall be in terror and fear, as
it appears in Ezechiel, Ezech, 14
either by famine, pestilence, sword, or wyld beasts. How terrible was the
death of the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomor, O how lamentable and most
dreadful was the end of Jerusalem when it was sacked by Tytus and Vespasian.
How fearful was the end of Iezabell, being rent a sunder with dogs, and
devoured by peece-meale. How was the end of rebellious Absalon, which was
caught from his horse, and hanged by the hair. How odious was ye end of
Antiochus, which putrified and rotted where he lay, that his Chamberlain
could not abide his smell. Most horrible was the end of Holophernus, who was
beheaded in his drunken sleep, and all these with a great many more abridged
their days, and ended them in most terrible and fearful manner, and that for
their wicked and abominable living, in most detestable sin and wickedness,
some in horedome, some in pride, some in disobedience, some in extortion, some
in tyranny and cruel murder, etc. I remember I was by the bedside of an old
preacher, Hunting (...) who di^n froo^ Zel^^d.
who lay in his death bed, and said unto me. Even as the water which is
poisoned, kills all the multitude of fish in it, so I tell thee in this
world, the whole air is so corrupted with the sin of man, that I doubt me
it will bring all the world to a confusion in a short time. I pray God deliver
me, and give England repentant hearts.

The most horrible and most fearful enemy that yet was spoken of against the
sin of man, is hell, The last enemy to sin.
a place of damnation for ever, without release, appointed for satan, and all
such as have stoutly served him, without veyling their banner of repentance to
almighty God: an enemy so dreadful, as me thinks the very remembrance of so
terrible a place, should seem to revoke and draw back a sinner, although he
had never so great a delight in his journey. A place not only full of all
pains and torments, but also continuing and enduring for ever, and ever, a
place void of release, or mitigation of pains, thither comes neither mercy
nor bail, compassion nor pittye. The lamentable out cries and scriches of them
that are tormented, do never come from thence unto the ears of help, or unto
the compassion of pity. Esa. 30, 33
It is described in the Prophet Esaias, Topheth is prepared of old, it is even
prepared for the King, he has made it deep and large, the burning thereof is
fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a fire of Brimstone does
kindle it. He speaks figuratively, that as the state of heaven in many places
of the new Testament is set forth by similituds, because other wise we cannot
conceive of it, even so hell in this place is called Topheth, Topheth
which was a vallye of the children of Hinnom near Jerusalem, 2, Ki, 23, 10
where the children were sacrificed to Moloch which was a great Image of
brass, Lyra.
proportioned like unto a man, and being holow within, it should first be made
fire red hot, and when the child should be put into it and closed up, then
the priests would make such a noise with Targets and timbrels, that ye parents
should not hear the voice of the infant, whereby they might be moved to
co^passio^, but believe yt the infant died peaceably with out pain, and yt the
Gods did presently receive ye soul of the infant: this was their abominable
Idolatrye, in this valley near Jerusalem, which yet is called Ben-hinnom, which
is as much to say by interpretation as the son of Hinnom, afterward for ye
filthy abuse of the place, and for the contempt thereof Josiah caused dead
carions to be cast there. Now Topheth takes his deriuation from Toph which
signifies Timphanu^ a Tabret, Psa. 81,
or dromslade which they used as I said, in this valley, to take away the
pitiful cry of the child, frying in this Images hot hollow place. And in our
own capacities we see a certain description of hell by this figure, a place
full of torments, in the which the tormented shall suffer such pains, Mat, 13,
42
as shall provoke weeping and gnashing of teeth, yea such as are intolerable,
on ye otherside, the children of God, shall not be moved to compassion to
behold them, no although they see their father, mother, children, kinsfolk or
such like, for as the Tabret, and timbrell took away the child's cry in the
Idol Moloch, so shall the joy and sweet melody of heaven, stop their pittye or
compassion of them which shall dwell in heaven. And although this similitude
holds not in all parts to the reason of them, that would discourse upon it,
yet so far it holds, as we must conceive the matter, although we omit the
manner. As the valley of Hinnom was a place near Jerusalem, wherein afterward
Josiah caused all the filth and carions of the city to be laid, as fit for no
better thing, because of ye horrible abuse and Idolatry therein sometimes done.

Even so the heavenly Jerusalem does purge it self of all those filthy
carions, I mean the reprobate that stincke of their sin, before the face of
God, and are ordained to be cast out into this Topheth as a place fit for
such a receypt.

Now as there is a damnable place, wherein the fire is never quenched, and the
worm never dies. Even so there are some men, whose sins are so many, and
offenses so great, that never seeks the grace and favor of almightye God,
never repent them of their sins, these (I say) shall be possessors and
inheritours of this place of torments, Math. 13.41, 42,
as our savior Christ says: The son of man shall send forth his Angels,
and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them
which do iniquity, and shall cast them into a Furnace of fire, there shall be
wayling and gnashing of teeth. Likewise Saint Paul to the Hebrews. If we
sin wyllingly, Heb, 10, 26, 27,
after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful looking for of judgment and violent
fire, which shall devour the adversaries. Also it is said in ye second Epistle
of Peter. 2, Pe, 2, 9.
The Lord knows to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the
unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished. Also in S. John his
Revelation. Reu. 20, 15,
And who soever was not found in the Book of life, was cast into the Lake of
fire. How woeful and terrible shall the dreadful day of judgment be unto
the wicked and reprobates, when Christ Jesus shall sit and make division the
Goats from the Sheep, when he shall say to the sheep. Come ye blessed,
receive the kingdom prepared for you etc. Math, 25 34
And to the Goats, that is to say, the wicked, he shall say, Verse, 41,
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
devil and his aungells.

Wherefore while we are here in this world, let us with terror behold the
dreadful sentence of damnation, and with all diligence and care, call our
selves to account, Ephesians, 5,
redeeming and purchasing again, the time which we have wickedly spent, and
become not only new, but steadfast members, and then, if thy hand or eye cause
thee to offend, cut them off, and cast them from thee. Mat, 18, 8, 9,
It is better for thee to enter into life halt, maimed, or blind, then having
two hands, two feet, or two eyes, to be cast into hell fire. And because
satan goes on still so busily with his work, and all the world in a manner
seems wyllinglye to be his workmanship. It is necessary that now, even now,
we reclaim our selves, according to the caveat of the Evangelist. Now is the
axe laid to the root of the trees, Luke 3.9,
therefore every tree which brings not forth good fruit shall be hewn down,
and cast into the fire.

Thus have I breefely laid down the most grievous enemies to mankind which
prevail the more against him, by reason of the sin which he seems to
nourish, and make ripe in his ready will, and wylling inclination. I would it
might be so surueyed, that it may be lothed, and so lothed, that it may be
th^oughly mortified, whereby these enemies may not so lay siege unto ye soul of
man, that in ye end, he may be taken captive, and led to an vnbailable jail,
the Lord grant it for his Christ's sake.

The prayer.
O Lord God, full of all pity and compassion, look down upon us miserable
wretches and sinners, who are not only laden and ouerladen with the multitude
of sins and wickedness but are ready to be swallowed up and utterly destroyed,
unless thou of thy pity and mercy, which have been ever of old, vouchsafe to
guard and defend us, for the enemies are at hand ready to overthrow us, thy
vengeance hangs over our heads, ready to fall upon us, our conscience
burns in us, ready to consume us. Death wayteth daily upon us, and calls
us, hell gate is open, and we shall be utterly consumed. If thou O most
merciful God extend not thine accustomed favor. Although we have sinned O
Lord, and that most grievous in thy sight, we are heartily sorry for it, and
forasmuch as thou requirest a humble heart, and a penitent mind, accept O
Lord, the repentaunt tears of thy humble servant, and vouchsafe to restore
thy Israel again which has gone a a stray and though we be wylling to cast
away our selves, yet O Lord be thou our guide and director, we see not the
deepenes of our own sin, not yet the sweetenes of thy mercy, nor yet the
bitterness of the scourges, which thou have ordained for sin, open our eyes O
Lord and give us thy holy spirit to mollify our hearts that we may wholly
become thine, and save us for thy mercy sake at the last, for syn is so ripe,
and the time so corrupted, that vengeance is at hand, and when it is ready to
fall, we are not able to abide it, wherefore O Lord call thy whole flock
speedily, and deliver them out of Sodom, as thou did thy servant Lot,
that they may not be partakers with the infidels, which know not thy name, nor
come when thou call, but are gone to the world, and followed the
concupiscence of their own hearts. Grant unto us O Lord, the sweet
consolation of thy spirit, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

How we shall in Christ Jesus, take away the force and accusation of sin, and
remove the siege of those enemies aforesaid, and how we shall become good
Christians.
THe mean how we shall reform our selves, Cap, 4,
take away the force of sin, and to cause almightye God to become our good
and merci^ull father and protector, omitting the sacrifice of Christ, which is
all in all, and showing our own duty. I will lay down in these six points.
1. 6, Things learned makes us new creatures in a christian shape.
We must look into our creation and see what we are, and what we should be.
2. We must hear ye word of God, and what is to be gathered out of it. 3. We
must use hearty prayer. 4. We must suffer affliction. 5. Forsake the world and
ye flesh. 6. We must look in to the sweetenes of the second life: and all
these being well looked into as they are, and as I purpose by Gods grace
effectually and briefly to lay them down shall be enough for a christian man
to learn for his office and duty.

The first thing yt we ought to look into, and the first lesson that we
should learn is, to know our creation and form, not our quallities and
disposition, that by the view thereof, we should in all behavior show, that
neither in mind or in action, which is agreeable to our title, name, calling
and kind, that as we are the image of God, so we should frame our selves to
that shape of godliness, and as we are reasonable creatures, so we should use
our knowledge with understanding, and as we have the dominion over all other
creatures, so we should keep our honor and estimation, not communicating with
them. So long we be men, and so long we keep the honor of our kind, as we
use our selves not only after the Law of God, but at least wise according to
the Law of nature, for we are endued with a reasonable soul and spirit, Heb,
4, 12
not to affect wicked, sinful, and deuilish things, nor yet to will and
desire things that are against the glory of God, for if God be glorified in
his creatures, even so much ye more we ought to set forth his glory, by how
much he has exalted us above all other creatures with true holiness, with
perfect charity, with sound knowledge, with continual devotion, with thanks
gyuing, with equity, with mercy, and so forth, as it becomes a man endued
with a reasonable soul, again, forasmuch as he has set us above all his
handy works, and has set all things in subjection under our feet, let us
not loose that honor and dignity, and become brute beasts our selves in our
behavior, but rather as I said be like men, as we are created, and keep the
image of God in perfect knowledge, justice and temperance, sanctification and
holiness, according as the Apostle says. This is the will of God, 1, Thessa. 3,
4
eue^ your sanctification, and that we should abstain from fornication, that
every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in holiness and
honor, but as soon as we give over a holy conversation, a reasonable spirit,
a chaste mind, and a good behavior, then we fall into beastly behavior, and
brutish manners, and from men quickly become beasts, and called by the name of
beasts, because then from reason we fall even to the corruption of nature and
lusts thereof, and do not see the violation of Gods commandment, defacing of
our image, nor the overthrow of our honor. Therefore is it, ^e, 2.12
that the Apostle calls us beasts, saying: But these as brute beasts, led
with sensuality, and made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of those
things which they know not, and shall perrish through their own corruption.
(...), 10, 14
Likewise the Prophet Jeremy says. Every man is a beast by his own knowledge.
Horace in his time called the people of Rome for their inconstancy, and
unstableness, and changable desires. Episto.
Bellua multorum capitum. A beast of many heads: there are many (which for
their affections and qualities in scripture, are called beasts, some by the
name of a Lion for his tyranny. ^on. ^anny.
Of such the prophet David spoke, when he did flee to the Lord for succor,
saying: O my God, (...). 7, 1, 2,
in thee have I put my trust save me from all them that persecute me, and
deliver my soul, least he devour my soul like a Lion, and tear it in pieces
while there is none to help. Such we have not a small store in England, which
through tyranny and oppression have devoured many a poor soul, and eat them
out of house, living and all, and may well be called Lions, for in their
tyranny as they have no compassion nor pity, Scorpion flattery
so who dare of all the beasts in the field, to take ye Lamb out of the lions
claws, and what man dare speak or control some of our lions for their pray.
Some are called Scorpions for stinging under the show of fair flattering, as
the prophet Ezechiel, Ezech, 2, ^
being wylled to speak unto a stout hearted nation, should not fear them, as
it is written. And thou son of man, fear the^ not, neither be afraid of their
words, although rebels and thorns be with thee, and thou remainest with
scorpions, fear not their looks etc. The nature of the scorpion is thus
described, Plini et Barth, A^
Blandiuntur facie sed cauda pungunt acute, they flattet with their face, but
they sting with their tail, many a fair word, and many a fair show has
deceived many an honest English heart, sweetly pypeth the fowler, when the
poor byrd goes to wrack, many a fair promise, loving look, and bidding to
bankets, has deceived many a one of his living, deprived many a one of his
life burdened many a one with cares, I will not say, that in causes of marriage
by fair words many a one has been deceived, but especially the poor old
widows, (...) race,
Sunt qui frustis et pomis viduas venentur auaras. ^yne for ^hines,
Some are called Swine for their filthiness, and sluttish wallowing in the
dunghill of lust, and for yt they esteem not their own clenlines, as
appears in Matthew. ^at, 7, 6
Cast not pearls before swyne. And as S. Peter says. The sow that was
washed, Pe, 2, 22
is returned to the wallowing in the mire, and we that have been washed in
the fountain of Christianity, are returned into the puddell of adultery and
filthy fornication, if this deformed shape, were seen in form, as it is
known in desire in all the world, there be a great many magistrates and
Officers, yea and such as be shepheardes might be ashamed to see that now they
are swyneheards. Brybery affection and negligence has (the more pity)
engendered to many swyne in these days. Some are called by the name of Bulls,
^s Oxen (...) Kine their ^ression
Oxen, and Kine, for their oppression and cruelty, and they are said to be of
Bashan, which was an hill of excellent pasture in the Country near Jordan,
where Og was King. A signification in those whose bellyes being full, are most
cruel and fierce against the poorer sort. Psalm, 22,
The Prophet David cries out against them saying, Many Oxen are come about me,
fat Bulls of Bashan close me in on every side. Likewise the Lord himself
cries out against them in ye prophecy of Amos. Amos 4
Hear this word ye Kine of Bashan, that are in ye Mountains of Samaria, which
oppress the poor and destroy the needy. Fox for subtilty*
Some are called by the name of a Fox, for their subtilty, which is naturally
in the Fox. As appears in the Prophet Ezechiell. Ezech. 1
where the Lord himself cries out against the subtilty of the prophets of
Israel, saying. O Israel, thy prophets are like the foxes in the waste
places. Also in the Gospel of Luke, Our savior Christ calls Herod by ye
name, when the Pharisees came and wylled him to depart, least that he would kill
him, saying to them. Go and tell that fox, Luke. 1
behold I cast out devils, etc. We have a great many foxes in England, (God
help us) which keep their holes a day time, and go about mischief in ye
night season, many subtle practices, they imagine in their idle lurking dens,
some to destroy the estate, and some to alter religion, and some to make a
confusion of order, the Lord turn their hearts, or speedilye confound them. We
have besides them a great many hungry foxes that go about to spoil the poor
Lambs of the country, as the buier and seller under ye color of swearing,
lying, facing, etc, deceives many a simple needy man, especially he that
buieth upon lend, and cannot forbear, he that buieth of such foxes, shall
assuredly have the worst, and pay well for the best. But we have worse foxes
then these, that is, our usurers, for they bite not only but devour up quite,
and their subtlety is to beguile God almightye, and to cozen the law, for they
have no money of their own, but can borrow of a friend, and yet he shall have
none of that, but if he will take ware, (beware the fox) he will fleece you
and skin you also, and make you pay vii. skore for the hundred, before the year
be out, for he says, it is lawful to buy and sell. And yet we have worse
foxes then these, which are some of our Lawyers (God forbid I should say all)
they will so draw men and win men, with their warranting of good and sufficient
matter, till they have sucked out all the blood in his purse, then they care
neither for him nor his matter. I remember Isope speaks of such a beast,
which saw the Raven having a piece of cheese in his mouth on a tree, to whom
this fox said. O what a fair byrd you are, and how bravely you can sing, I
marvel men say you are a foul byrd, and a bad singer, I promise you I like
your singing of all ye byrds in the world, with that the Raven offered to sing,
and opened his mouth, and down fell the cheese, which the fox took, and ran
away with it laughing, and had no more to do afterward with his beautye or
commendation: neither have our Foxes to do any more with men's matters when
they have the cheese.

Some are called by the name of dogs for their disdainefullnes and envy, Dog
for disdainfulnes and envy
for that the nature of a dog is always to disdain and envy his own kind,
as the old saying is Dum canis os rodit sociari pluribus edit.
While the dog does gnaw the bone,
He does desire to eat alone.


For this cause he does show his surfaiting nature, which is rather then he
will impart to an other, we will over charge his own stomach with eating, to
his own anoyaunce. Therefore it is that Peter says. 1, Pe, 2, 22,
The Dog returns again to his vomit, to seek physic for his surfeyte,
when his belly is ouercharged, for that carrying an envious mind, and a
disdainful to others, he would rather hurt himself, then leave any thing to
pleasure others, and for that cause they were called also dogs by Christ, to
whom holiness was not imparted, partly because they would make a surfaiting
meal of it, keeping all to themselves, and yet doing no good to themselves,
and partlye because they would not impart to others, when he said, Math, 7, 6
Give not holy things unto dogs. for that indeed things ought to be
bestowed on them that benefit themselves, and do good with it unto others.

Many more such beasts there be in men's shape, as the slothful man is called
an Ass, the deuourer is called a Woolfe, the scornful, as Ecclesiasticus
says: Eccl. 33, 6
is like an horse, that neyeth. Pitiful it is, that Circe reigns to bewitch
such men, and to transform them from their honorable estate and shape of
mankind, into the disfygured show of brute beasts, but this happens, when
men fall from God, and obey their own appetites, and lusts, then they become
brute beasts, that have no understanding, and God gives them up unto their
own vile affections. Woe be unto that people whom God has forsaken, but
double woe unto them that fall from their estate, Rom, 1, 26
and lose their shape of reason virtue, and godliness, and become brute beasts
in their doings, they are so disfigured, that he will not know them at the
day of judgment, from the shape of beasts.

The second mean to take away the force, of sin, 2. Point
is that we must hear the word of God, and learn what is to be gathered out
of it, and herein we must take this order.

1. What the word of God is. 2 How we must hear it, and use it. 3 What we must
gather out of it.
First, What the word of God is.
because I will not stand upon the large definitions and interpretatio^s of
learned men. I will deliver out of the scripture what the reward of God is.

First in Deutronomye it is called wisdom, Deu, 4, 6,
where it is said, Keep them therefore and do them, for that is your
wisdom, and your understanding in the sight of the people, which shall hear
all these ordinances, and shall say, only this people is wise, and of
understanding, and a great nation. Therefore it is necessary that Magistrates,
councellers, and officers, (who are chosen for their wisdom) should learn
their wisdom and knowledge out of the word of God, Psalm, 2, 10
as David said. Be wise now therefore O ye kings, be learned ye that are
Judges of the earth, that their knowledge, policy, and government might,
proceed from a godly direction, and from the rule of Gods word, which would
not only terrify the people the more from their folly, but inflame the^ a
great deal the sooner with obedience, because it proceeds from so good a
fountain. Also the prophet David called it a Lantern, A Lantern or Light.
Psa, 119, 105,
saying: Thy word O Lord is a Lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my
paths. that forasmuch as we walk in a dark sinful world, by the word of
God we should be directed how to go, and which ways, least we knock our
selves in every block of sin, our savior Christ by the same light, gives
light to them that sit in darkness, Luk, 2,
and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the way of peace.
What greater comfort unto travelers then ye day light, and what greater
discomforte to wayfaring men then the dark night, God be thanked that has
given us the light of his holy word, therefore while it is day let us not
harden our hearts, as in the provocation, Power of GOD. Rom, 1, 16
and in the day of temtation. Likewise S. Paul does call the word of God the
power of God to salvation, to every one that believes, he says not that it
is a secret revelation, or the Hystorye of profane matters, but that it is
the same wherein the virtue and power of God is hidden, to help succoure,
defend and comfort the believers.

Also it is called a mighty worker as S. Paul says: A mighty worker. Hebr. 4,
12,
The word of God is lovely and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two
edged sword, and enters through, even to the dividing a sunder of the soul
and the spirit, and of the joints and the marowe, and is a discerner of the
thoughts, and the intentes of the heart, so that as we have many maladies,
sores, byles, aches, and inward diseases. Even so God has ordained such an
excellent ointment, even the ointment of his holy word, to pearce through every
artery, joint, sinewe and bone, to purge us, ease us, and cure us. So that now
what greater comfort then wisdom to our knowledges, light unto our dark
paths, defense for our poor vnshielded bodies, and health for our sick
souls, which the Lord of his mercy has imparted unto us, by and in his holy
word.

Now it reasteth how we hear the word of God and use it. First we must
consider that we use all diligence and humility in hearing the word of God, and
put of all fantasies, cares, heaviness, and worldly imaginations, and that we
put on true understanding and knowledge, as it is said: He that receives
the seed (which is Gods word) in good ground, Mat, 13, 23
is he that hears the word, and understands it. Otherwise if we endeavor
not to understand, if the Trumpet sound an uncertain sound, 1, Cor. 14, ^
who can prepare himself to the battle, there may be a fault in the
Trumpettor, there may be a fault in the hearer, therefore, let the one be
diligent to teach truly and sincerely, let the other hear attentively, and
understand fruitfully, and when we have so done, it is not enough to learn
and to leave off, but to follow the rule of Moses in Deutronomy, who says:
These words which I command thee this day, Deu. 6, 6,
shall be in thy heart thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and
shall talk of them when thou tarriest in thy house, and as thou walk by the
way, and when thou lie down, and when thou rysest up, and thou shall bind
them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between
thine eyes, also thou shall write them upon the posts of thy house, and upon
thy gates.

It is not enough to hear ye word of GOD, but to exercise it, to the building
up of the men of GOD, and for the preservation of his Temple in safety. The
Evangelist says, Whosoever hears the word of God, Math. 7, 24
and does the same, I will liken him to a wise man, which has builded his
house on a rock. But now because there are many doubts and repugnances in
scripture that it seems to be hard and obscure, which will loathe many a man
to the reading or hearing of it. It follows not that therefore he should be
weary or shrink back, for he is wylled to seek and shall find, to knock
and it shall be opened, and again on the other side, the Lord will not leave
his church desolate and comfortles, for he willed Phillip to join unto the
Eunuch that was doubtful, he caused all his Apostles to go preach in all the
world, and says that he will raise up prophets unto his people, yea and has
truly said him self Ero vobiscum, I will be with you unto the worlds end.

Last of all we must consider what is to be gathered out of the word of GOD,
which is the fruit, and benefit that we receive by it. Whereof the first is
knowledge by the which we may discern things and know our creator, Knowledge
and what he has and does for us, and also our own duty how we should behave
our selves in his service, this knowledge did Saint Paul wish, and pray to be
increased, in the Collosians. Col. 1.10.
When he said. For this cause we also since the day we heard of it, cease not
to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be fulfilled, which knowledge of
his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. Likewise the prophet
Hosea says. I desired mercy, Hos. 6 6.
and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then burnt offeringe.

The second benefit, is faith, by the which we are assured of the promises of
God, Faith.
and eternal salvation in his son Christ Jesus, Heb. 11.1.
Saint Paul does call it the ground of things which are hoped for, and the
evidence of things which are not seen, which is as much to say, as the
certainty of those things to come. That is, acceptance, redemption,
sanctification, everlasting life, and the kingdom of heaven, which things we
do expecte, and it is the writing or evidence of the same hold, and we are
persuaded, that though we are unworthy of our selves, of those heavenly
riches, and graces to be bestowed upon us, yet by the death of Christ Jesus,
and by his only sacrifice we shall enjoy them, which writing an evidence of
faith he has written in our hearts, and sealed with his own blood, so that as
in every evidence or indenture hold the tenant owes due loyalty unto his
Lord, and consents unto, and obeys all couenaunts comprised in the same
writings, so we should obey, serve, and assent unto the Lord, and his
statutes, and couenauntes. For so is the nature of faith, according unto the
Greek word, to assent unto the word of God, and to have a sure trust in God,
that he will of his own mercy perform all those things that are written in
the word of God, so that to have faith, or to be faithful, is spoken by
correlation, that is, that God simply and absolutely offers not his mercy and
grace unto all, but unto such as do acknowledge it with thanks gyuing, accept
it with ioyfulnesse, and become his servants in new obedyence, and then they
are called just or ryghteous, by imputation, and therefore it is said. The
just shall live by faith. Now because God is known to be merciful, Romans
1.17.
there be that follow their own lusts and appetites, and put of from day to
day their returning unto God, buylding neither on faith, nor yet on Gods
mercy, but on their own lustye wylles and desires, and that buylding cannot
stand, neither can that be a sufficient pleasing of God, that is done without
faith. Yea, James.
and yet faith of it self in some points fails, that is, where it does
trouble, or is inconstant, Mat. 7.21.
as for example. The Devils believe but they tremble. Again. Not every one
that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but
he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. But this faith fails,
How ye shall know true faith.
because it tastes of weakness, fear, and sin. The true faith is tried by
constancy in Trybulation, as appears in Saint Paul to the Thessalonians, 1.
These. 3.5
and by perfect Love as appears in Saint Paull to Timothye, where he says.
The end of the commandment is love, 1. Tim. 1.5.
out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. The true
faith has a free access unto God with boldness. Ephesians. 3.12.
By true faith we resist the Devil, and overcome the world, 1. John. 5.4.
as S. John says. This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our
faith: And Peter says, 1. Pet. 58.9.
your adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour, whom resist steadfast in faith, by true faith we are preserved unto
salvation, as Peter says. Which are kept by the power of God through faith
unto salvation. 1. Pet. 1.5.
After all this we must consider that as knowledge goes before faith, so
perseverance and steadfast continuance, follows after faith, which steadfast
continuance has been found in all the godly Patriarchs, Perseuera^ce
Prophets, and Apostles, vnremooueable, and which is so necessary in a
christian man, and so much required in a Christian man, as fruit is expected
of the tree, without the which the tree is not esteemed, for it is the trial
of a man in temptation, or affliction. For the Devil will seek to remove
him, the world will seek to shake him, the flesh will seek to weigh his Anchor,
then if he be unsteadfast, or if he be not found to be the good fighting
soldier of Christ, what avails all his christian doctrine, yea wat avails
his sword and buckler, if he run away from his adversary, as Demostenes
Demostenes.
having written in his Target. (...) good fortune, as who would say, fortune
was his guide, yet in the face of his enemy he ran away, so that whether it
be in prosperity to hold fast the Lord, and not to be vainly puffed up in the
world, nor to settle his heart in the world, nor to turn his eyes away from
his poor brethren, not to oppress, nor covet or desire an other man's goods,
This is steadfast abiding in the Lord in prosperity. Or whether it be in
adversity to be patient in all tribulations to be thankful for all crosses,
and to tarry the Lords leisure, to suffer every burden that is laid upon
him, whether it be sickness, poverty, imprisonment, slander, or whatsoever.
Christ said, He that will be my disciple, must take up his cross and follow
me. He said not take his cross and stand still, or go back, but to follow
him, this is steadfast faith in adversity. As touching his persecution which is,
that we should not slide back from almighty God, there are many notable
examples in scripture of it. Iosu. 1.8
Iosuah says. Let not this book of the law depart out of thy mouth, but
meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe and do according to
all that is written in it. The Prophet David says, in his first Psalm. Psalm.
1.12
Blessed is the man that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly. etc.
But his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law will he exercise
him self day and night. Job says. Although he kill me I will not forsake him.
Our Savior Christ says, happy is he that continues unto the end. By the
law of reason we ought so long to be the Lords, Heb. 8.13
as the Lord is ours, but Christ Jesus is ours yesterday, and to day, and for
ever, he finds us every day, comfort us every day, sends to us his grace
every day, increases his blessings on the earth for us every day. Even so
every day we should be faithful and steadfast servants unto him. Psalm. 116.33
The Prophet David desires the Lord to teach him the way of his statutes,
and he would keep it unto the end.

Besides these benefits, knowledge, New birth Phil. 1.
faith, and perseueraunce, which we gather out of the word of God, we find the
regeneration, the new birth or new shaping of our selves, for that in deed we
were disfigured by reason of Adams fall, and lost the shape of righteousness,
and true obedience, which now in Christ are accepted, and now we should
fashion our selves not according to Ada^ in disobedience, and the lust of the
flesh, but according to the children of God, and like our forerunner Christ
Jesus, as Saint Paul says. 1. Pe. 1.23.
Let the same mind be in you, that was in Christ Jesus. Of this new birth the
Apostle speaks. Being borne a new not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by
the word of GOD who lives and endures for ever. O what great comfort do the
decayed members of Adam receive by the word of God, when by reading or hearing
it, they see their restitution in Christ Jesus, how much we are bound to
almighty God for his word.

Peace.
Also in the word of God we find peace, even that peace which is concluded by
God to us ward. Which as the Apostle says. Ep. 2.13.14,
Passes all understanding, for as much as he was to stout an enemy to be set
against us, and great was our overthrow where he was an adversary, and there
our City was like to be sackte, and we confounded in our dwellinges. Where the
Lord besieged it, but now in Christ Jesus, ye which were once far of, are
made near by the blood of Christ. For he is our peace which has made of both
one and has broken the stop of the partition wall. And he has commanded his
disciples that into what City, Mat. 10.13.
town, or house so ever that is worthy that they came into, their peace
should come upon it. This peace if it be well weied and well considered, what
the value of it is, it shall be esteemed the most precious jewel that can be hid
in our mind, and the sweetest embassage that ever was sent unto mankind, for
the great accusation that was laid against us, is now pacified, and God is at
peace with us.

An other benefit we gather out of the word of God, which is consolation,
Consolation.
that is to say, the comfort, joy, and delight of the mind, and the lifting
up of the heart from the oppressing cares, the burden of sin, and torments
of this miserable life. The Prophet David being plunged in many miseries, and
broils, said. In the word of the Lord will I rejoice, in the word of the
Lord will I comfort me. Psalm. 119.92
Also in the.119. Psalm. Except thy law had been my delight, I should now have
perished in mine afliction. And again in the same Psalm.111. verse. Thy
testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever, for they are the joy of my
heart. And so undoubtedly in our extreme misery, in our banishment, in our
sickness, and article of death, when affection is quite dead, and natural
appetite and digestion gone, yet the word of God being read or heard is a
great comfort and consolation unto the mind.

The third mean in Christ to vanquish the force of sin.
3. Mean. Prayer.
The third mean to vanquish the force of sin, is humble and hearty prayers,
not such as proceeds a primoribus laboris. From the teeth forward, but such
as comes from the very heart stringes, and feeling of the conscience, which
is the same that pearceth the gates of heaven, and knocks in the ears of the
Lord, and whereas some have called it the messenger between God and man, Ang.
see. 26 de tempore. Chris, sup. 22. Nath.
some the keye of heaven, and some the strength of man. Yet for mine own
experience, I acknowledge this definition. Prayer is the acknowledging of sin,
the feeling of the burden of conscience, the virtue of ma^s helples trust, and
the appealing to gods mercy. By the which I see mine own weakness. I
confess mine own necessity, and I fly unto him that is the only help, but
the manner how we all should flee unto him, is, that as he is a spirit him
self, so in spirit we should come unto him, we use not to have a Clown of
the Country, or an Husbandma^ to be our attorney in the common laws of this
realm, but a Lawyer, and such a one as may lawfully have access to the
pleading place, even so in spirit and soul, which is the seat of knowledge,
we should come unto the Lord, for the soul is that part of man that sees,
knows, and affects the best. Psalm. 25.1
David when he prayed unto the Lord said, Unto thee O Lord will will I lift
up my soul. and the Virgin Mary said. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my
spirit has reioysed in God my savior. So that the spirit must labor, the
conscience must feel, and the heart must flee unto the almighty, and none
other. A good example was showed in David when he said. Psalm. 86.4
Comfort the soul of thy servant, for unto thee (O Lord) do I lift up up my
soul. Likewise in an other place he says. O let me hear thy loving kindness
betymes in the morning, for in thee is my trust, show thou me the way that I
should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto thee, and this is not to be used
only for necessities sake, when any occasion or extremity does urge us, but
continually as our Savior Christ does warn us, Luke. 21, 36
saying. Watch therefore, and pray continually, that ye may be accounted
worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass. Romans 12.12.
Likewise Saint Paul to the Romans says. Rejoicing in hope, patient in
tribulation, continuing in prayer. Ephe. 6.18.
Also in the.vi. to the Ephesians. Pray always with all manner prayer, and
supplication in the spirit, by reason whereof, as long as we are in the
flesh, subject to misery and sin, and as long as Satan and the flesh
continues always to stir, or provoke us to sin, so long should we be
careful, and diligent to continue in prayer.

So that now to know what prayer is, is necessary and how to use it is more
requisite, and what is got by it, and what effect it works. We may see by
good examples in many places in scripture.

The effect of prayer.
The Lord says by the Prophet David, Psalm. 50.15. 1. Kin. 18.45 1. Sam. 1.20
Call upon me in the days of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee. Eliah
prayed for rain, and it was obtained. Hannah being barren, prayed unto the
Lord for a child, and she conceived, and bare a son, whom she named Samuel.
Iehoahaz being delivered into the hands of the Sirians, for his wickedness,
was by prayer delivered again from the King of Aram. Solomon prayed, 2. Kin.
13.4.
and obtained wisdom. When all Bethulia with the elders therein, could by no
means remove the siege of Holophernes, with his mighty host. By Iudithes
prayer, her hand was strengthened, and obtained the victory. Nu. 16.14.18.


Aaron in the time of Plague, prayed for the people, and the Plague seized.
When Joshua fought agayng the Amellekites, he did vanquish them, not so much by
his own might and policy, as by the continual prayer of Moses, Exo. 12.
who as long as he held up his hands unto god, so long did Israel prevail,
but when he faynted and let down his hands, then did Ameleck, and his people
prevail. In so much that Aron and Hur, stayed up his hands till the going
down of the son, otherwise they had been put to flight and disco^fited.
Joshua. 10.


Joshua caused the son to stay his course one whole day. At the beseeging of
Gibeon, when he made his prayer to almighty God.

Thus we see prayer to be a messenger from man unto God, and works most
effectually in the faithful and humble minded man, 4. mean. To forsake the
world and the flesh.
as it has appeared in these places, and in many more expressed in the holy
scriptures.

The fourth mean in Christ, to vanquish the force of sin.
An other mean for us to use that sin may with less force take hold in us,
is to forsake the world, and the flesh, and the Devil, according unto our
first promise made unto God in Baptism, for so mighty are those enemies in
man's inclination, that they remove his good affections, and lead him to a
kind of vain delight and wicked affection, so mighty is this world,
especially with his contents, and the flesh with her desires, that hardly can
a man look upward, whose eyes are fixed downward, and scarce can a man be of
God, whose felicity is set either in the flesh, or in the world. An
innumerable offenses it does cause to be provoked, and many virtues and honest
actions thereby are quite extinguished, and because I have spoken heretofore of
Satan and of the flesh, I will now only speak of the world, as one of the
mightiest enemies that man has in these days, for by it the word of God is
little regarded, and for the love of it the Sabbath is the more profaned, by
reason whereof justice is corrupted, truth is banished, charity is cold,
pity is removed from men's hearts, friendship faynteth, and natural affection
is quit altered, again by it, blindness rules, lies are used, perjury is
suffered, honors are desired, offices are bought, blind bayard is a good horse,
and a slow Jade is a good Gelding, by it manhood is not regarded, chastity
is not esteemed, worldly mariags, and unfit matches are not gainsaid, virtue
had in small price, trust is had in little estimation, and learning in no
account, we see that for the words sake, natural love betwixt the father and
the child is altered. For the father that is a worldling accompteth not of
that child that is liberal, no although his liberality be godly and
commendable bestowed on the poor, and how many do prefer their children to
learning for the ministry sake, or to the law for justice sake, or to any
faculty for the same faculties sake, but rather because they shall live, and
bear a countenance in the world. On the other side, we see the good nature of
the child changed, for whom the father has taken great pains, traveled
much, watched often, to procure liuinges unto him, he thinks to long the
father does live, every day wishes his death, to have his goods and living,
besides that, what going to law, and mortal hatred betwixt friends of nearest
kinrede, and all for the world. A friend changes his friendship in respect of
the world, and so long as the other has, he is a friend, and when he has
nothing, then is he gone, and his friendship begins to dissemble, wisemen,
tal men, honest men, trusty men, and such as have good qualities not esteemed,
if they have no worldly show with all, many a one have shut up his compassion
from the poor, putting on ungodliness, lying and swearing, that these things
and these they have given alredie, and diverse ways they are charged, which is
very oftentimes an untruth, many under the pretense of Christian profession,
hid their wicked actions, and are like Cleophas they go with Christ but they
know him not. It is not without cause that Esdras said that the world was full
of unrighteousness and wickedness, 2. Esd, ^.27
and because of the sin and wickedness of the world, the Lord has Prophesied
unto the world a mighty curse in Esa the prophet. And therefore as the Apostle
says. Esa. 24.1
Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world, if any man
love the world, the love of the father is not in him, for all that is in the
world (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life)
is not of the father, 1. Io. 2.15 6.
but is of the world. There is an old saying, Vide homo ne sic hereas, vt cum
mundo pereas. Take heed man, Augustine.
that thou stick not so to the world that thou perish with the world. The
young man in the gospel had fulfilled all the commandments, Mat. 19.21.
and was desirous of the kingdom of heaven, but when Christ bid him go sell
all that he had, and give it to the poor, it touched his delight, wherefore
Saint Barnard says. Durus est hic sermo. etc. This saying seems very hard.
Sell all that thou have. etc. But yet it is a hard saying when Christ shall say.
Go ye wicked into everlasting fire. The great love of the world as I have
said, is the cause of much sin, as covetousness, oppression, extortion,
usury, wresting of justice, and putting poor men from their right, and their
thirst is so great, that a great many will break their bellies, then leave or
moderate their lust, they be like the fly in a Tarre-barrell, the more he
stirs, the faster he is. They are not like the Dogs of Egypt, which running
by the river Nilus, and being thirsty, will but lap, and begone for fear the
Crocodiles take them, but these worldlinges will so long lap, till the Devil has
wrapped them up, they force neither for the fear of Satan, nor the favor of
God. Saint James says. James. 4.4
Who so ever will be a friend of the world, makes him self an enemy of God,
we daily see how little me^ will be at charges for gods glory, in mayntaining
preaching, or in bringing up scholars, nay, they will rather take away both
preachers and scholars liuinges from them, then add any thing to it. It is a
pitiful matter to see ye hardness of the rusticke worldlinges, for some murmr
at charity, some grudge at substance, some strain at the charges of
soldiers, not looking into the commodity and ease of it, but think they have
a gut drawn out of their body, when they have a penny taken out of their
purses. For these purposes, and I think they have cause to grudge sometimes,
because their charge is the greatest burden, though they be the poorest iades.

The.v. mean in Christ, to vanquish the force of sin.
When two valued things of like quantity shall be laid together that are of
estimation, as gold and silver, The sweetness and estimation of the second life,
will not every man make choice rather of the gold then of the silver? Nay
rather if something and nothing, or good and bad were set together, would there
not be an easy choice: I make no less difference betwixt heaven and earth,
this life, and the life to come. For in the one there is misery, sorrow
affliction, tribulation, disdain, contempt, malice, slander, infamy, envy,
poverty, nakedness, sickness, and death. In the other there is joy,
felicity, acceptance, health, sufficiency, company among the whole fellowship
of heaven, and everlasting life, Psalm. 84.1.2
touching the description of ye place of joy, David says. O how amiable are
thy dwellinges thou Lord of hosts, My soul has a desire and longing to
enter into the courts of the Lord. Esa. 35 10
Likewise the Prophet Esaias says. The redeemed of the Lord, shall come to Zion
with praise, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, Esa, 51.3.
they shall obtain joy and gladness. The same Prophet also says. Surely the
Lord shall comfort Zion, he shall comfort al her desolations. and he shall
make her desert like Eden, and her wilderness like the garden of the Lord, joy
and gladness shall be found therein, John. 16.22.
praise, and the voice of singing. Our savior Christ him self says. And ye
now therefore are in sorrow, but I will see you again, and your hearts shall
rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you. O most comfortable relief,
even the very dead may be raised up to hear these great and comfortable joys
yt are provided for the Lords beloved. 1. Cor. 2.9.
Which joys as. S. Paul says, although our hearts cannot conceive, yet let
our hearts believe those unspeakable joys, and although the worthiness and
excellency of the place be such as we may despair of, in our own judgment,
because of our great unworthiness, and the multitude of sins: yet if we
believe that Christ is yt son of the living God, and that he has paid the
ransom for our sins, and yt he has nailed our sins to his cross, and
also if we turn unto him, love him, and obey him with all our heart, with all
our mind, and with all our soul, then will he assuredly bring us unto that
place of consolation, as he says in John. And though I go to prepare a place
for you, John, 14 3
I will come again and receive you unto my self, yt where I am, there might
ye be also. Ma. 19.28.29.
Also the Evangelist Mathewe says. And Jesus said unto them, verily I say
unto you, that when the son of man shall sit in the throne of his majesty, ye
which followed me in the regeneration, shall sit also upon the twelve thrones
and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. And who so ever shall forsake houses,
or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands,
for my names sake, he shall receive an hundred fold more, and shall inherit
everlasting life. These words are not spoken by a mortal man, who may lie,
and deceive, but they are spoken by ye very son of God him self, whose word
shall stand and endure for ever, time shall not change it, nor age shall not
wear it out. And furthermore forasmuch as the nature of man is desirous to be
resolved, whether we shall know one another after this life. I thought good to
answer briefly, that as our state shall be far better, so shall also our
knowledge be far clearer, for in this world we are the more ignorant, and
our senses deceived by reason of a corruption. But in the world to come, when
we shall be changed into an incorruptible estate, then our senses shall be much
more clearer, and we shall know far the better, and let us be thus persuaded,
that that world is a world of knowledge not of ignorance, as our savior
Christ him self says unto the chief priest yt would know whether he were
Christ the son of God or no? He answered, thou haste said it, nevertheless
I say unto you hereafter shall ye see the son of man sitting at the right
hand of the power of God, Mat. 26, 24.
and coming in the clouds of heaven, which is to no purpose that they see his
sitting, and his coming, unless they know it, and yet he speaks this unto
ye wicked Jews that did crucify him, that they should see it, and know it.
Much more assuredly shall the righteous, see him and know him. The Apostle
Paul touching this matter says. 1. Cor. 13.12.
Now we see through a glass darkely, but then shall we see face to face, Now I
know in part, but then shall I know even as I am known. So that now what
remains more comfortable to the godly, and to them that thirst after Christ
Jesus, then to go to a place after this life replenished with all joy,
comfort, consolation, and everlasting life, unto ye which also our savior
christ Jesus shall conducte us by his mighty power, and in the which is all
fulness of knowledge and perfection of a blessed state. The God of all blessing
and comfort for his son Christ Jesus his sake, speedely bring us unto that
celestial joy, and peaceable estate. To whom both with the holy ghost, be
all glory, dominion and power, now and for ever. So be it.

A Prayer.
O Merciful God, the king of all creatures, and governor of all things,
which of thy mercy and goodness did bring thy people out of Egypt from the
bondage of Pharo, and did conducte them through the red sea, into the
comfortable land of Canaa^, we beseech thee of thy accustomed mercy, deliver us
from the bondage of sin, the tyranny of Satan, and the persecution of the
world, and conduct us unto the heavenly Jerusalem, the only Canaan of our
everlasting inheritance, where we may reign in eternal felicity, with thee
and the son Jesus Christ, to whom, both with the holy Ghost be all honor
and glory now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A Christian exercise for private Householders.
Question.

WHat do you chiefly profess.

Answer.

Christianity.

Question.

What is the badge of a Christian.

Answer.

Faith.

Question.

What is faith.

Answer.

The very same thing that cannot plainly be expressed in words, for it is
above the reach of man, and therefore not under the reason of man. How beit, we
may give each to other intelligence of it by words out of the Scripture, and
by the deeds of the godly, which is, that it is the seed of assured
reconciliation, sown by God in our hearts, for his son Jesus Christ his
sake, to stir us to comfort, and to bind us to obedience, to give us a true
certificate in our consciences, that we are called again to be the children of
God, and that we are ingraffed into the body of his son Jesus Christ, and to
be his members. So that although faith be such a thing as is given ^^om above,
as a seal of gods mercy. Yet it is required here be low of us as a talent of
assurance and knowledge, Luke. 19.
received of him to be increased by us.

Question.

What does faith work in us?

Answer.

The knowledge of God, the assurance of our redemption, and the consolation of
conscience, through the holy Ghost.

Question.

Let me understand at large your meaning by this.

Answer.

By the knowledge of God, we learn that he is our creator, our governor, and
defender in all necessities and dangers. And as he has a special care daily
to provide for our bodies, in giving the plentifulnesse of the earth, so are we
persuaded that he has a more care for our souls, to preserve them to be
honorable ornaments in his heavenly mansion.

Furthermore, by this knowledge, we confess him to be the Almighty God, to
whom all honor ought to be attributed, of things in heaven, and things in
earth, whereby we abandon all Idolatry and superstition, as mere invention of
man, and as persuasions of Satan to delude men, and deface the knowledge of
the high and mighty God, whom we worship, as our maker, and acknowledge to be
our defendour, in all euilles, ghostly and bodyly.

By the assurance of our redemption, we are persuaded that Christ Jesus has
paid the ransom of our sins, and is the sufficient sacrifice to appease gods
wrath, and has for all the church fulfilled the whole law, has vanquished
death, sin, and hell, and has don all that for us, which is required of us,
so that in him, God is well pleased, and by him the gats of heaven are opened,
and everlasting life is promised.

By the consolation of the conscience through the holy Ghost. We receive an
inward feeling, quickening, and stirring up of our minds. That whereas the
flesh, sin, death, and Satan, do seek daily to suppress us, and burden
us with many miseries and infirmities, and lead us even unto the gate of
desperation, the holy Ghost does certify our spirit, that we are gods
children, he will preserve us, that the gates of hell shall not prevail.

Question.

Why then, faith is a knowledge and an assurance sent from God to us, and
nothing else? It requires nothing in us?

Answer.

Yes. It is a loving consent and embrasing of the same knowledge, and
assurance on our part, yea and does require in us a framing of our selves
agreeable to all those duties, and services as are expressed in ye word of
God, and as do become good Christians.

Question.

What benefit have you by faith.

Answer.

By faith we are justified, that is, we are accepted of God as righteous,
because of his son Jesus Christ, and shall be restored again into his favor,
and have the fellowship of the blessed saints, in everlasting joy, and bliss.

Question.

If then by faith we are justified, we need not good works.

Answer

Faith only does justify, but this word (only) does not exclude good
works. For faith is not a perfect faith, unless it be of it self fuller of
good works, so that faith, and the works proceeding from that faith, are not
diverse but one. As a tree and his twiggs, or lymmes, is but (all) a tree, and
such a faith is accepted, and known to God. And yet many deceive man. For the
hippocrite may do good works, and yet have no faith, so likewise faith it
self, generally is not allowed. For the Diuelles believe, and yet they
tremble, and that makes their faith to be nothing worth. Wherefore we must
neither judge nor learn faith by imagination, unless it proceed from the
word of of God. For that faith which is sown in our hearts by the holy
Ghost, and watered by the same spirit, cannot stand as an idle and fr^^tlesse
tree, but brings forth abundance of fruit, for we may not think that the
gifts of the holy ghost, (whereof faith is the chiefest) are barren, but
fruitful.

Question.

Then by your comparison and meaning, unless God water the tree which he him
self has graffed. There is no fruit, so that in him is all, and he is all in
all, what need here any thing to be required in us?

Answer.

We are likened to good trees, not too badde, for our capacity, not for a
captiousnes, for in us there is affection, reason, and will, which are not in
trees, and therefore we should govern and direct our selves according unto the
rule of faith. Even as the ship-maister coming with his vessel on the Seas;
lets not the ship to run whether she list, but looks to the North
star, and is guided by the winds, and with all diligence and care auoydeth
the sands, and the Rocks, and yet all this is in gods hands. And so we may
reason infinitely. God does send us abundance of Corn and victuals, but we
receive it, order it, and use it, or else we may starve.

Question.

What good works be there best known, and seen in a perfect faith.

Answer.

Many, both spiritual and temporal, ye spiritual works, are love, prayer,
patience in affliction, hearing and daily exercising of gods holy word,
using the Sacraments, and such like. The temporal works are generally to do
good to all men, to give Alms, to Fast, to pity the poor, and help their
necessities, to do equity and justice, to use our selves honestly, faithfully,
and orderly: in obedience to our Prince, Maiestrates, Parents, and superiors.

Question.

Then if we have faith, we need no more but to leave of by the same.

Answer.

If we have a good father, it is enough, but we may not leave of by the same,
for as the life of man is not mayntayned by one meal, and as he ought not
afterward to be careless for his maintenance, but to have a care for the
daily provision thereof. Even so should he always mayntaine and strengthen
faith, that it might live unto life, for in our corrupt nature, it may weaken
and sterue, if the flesh, or the enemies reigning in the flesh, should have
the upper hand. A spiritual thing cannot be maintained with a carnal thing,
although it be mayntained in a carnal thing, faith being a spiritual thing,
may not be mayntayned, neither with us, nor of us, but in us, and that thing or
things that are agreeable to the propriety of faith, is the sufficient
maynteynaunce, our nature is not agreeable to the property of faith, and
therefore our nature cannot be the maintenance, and unless this faith be
maynteyned, it will be ouergrowen, with the weeds of the flesh, and so will dye,
and then we perish with it.

Question.

What is the true maintenance of faith.

Answer.

The exercising of gods holy word, continual prayer, and using the Sacraments.

Question.

How shall we exercise gods word?

Answer.

Not only by reading it, but by hearing learned preachers to expound it, and
not by hearing it expounded, but by understanding it, when it is expounded, and
not only by hearing and understanding it, but afterward by applying and using
it unto the honor of God, and our everlasting comfort and reformation.

Question.

How shall we pray?

Answer.

Not with the lips, but with our heart, not ignorauntly, 1. Co. 14.15
but with understanding, having always in the very bottom of our heart, the
sorrofulnesse of our sin, and the ioyfulnesse of Gods mercy, shaking of ye
one with defiance, never to put it on again, and embracing the other with
affiaunce, always to hold it fast, Psalm. 25.1.2.
lifting up our hearts cheerfully, and believing verily that the Lord does
hear us when we call unto him, and will help us.

Question.

why should we pray continually.

Answer.

Luke. 21.36 To. 12.11.12 Ephesians. 6.18.19 Mat. 26.41. 1. Pet 5.8.
Because we are so commanded, and for that our enemies do continually hang
about us, and tempt us, and seek every day, and every hour, to bring us to
destruction both of body and soul.

Question.

Should we pray but for our selves only, and for none else.

Answer.

Yes, we ought to pray one for an other, Acts. 7.60. Ex. 23.11. Acts. 12.5. Nu.
47.48.
as well our enemies as our friends, that the virtue and force of the prayer
which shall proceed from the mouth of the godly, may extend as well unto the
ungodly for their amendment, as also to the oppressed, for their ease, and
also to the needful for their help.

Question.

Ought we to pray for the dead.

Answer.

No.

Question.

why?

Answer.

Their estate is not such as needs our prayers, for God in his secret
wisdom, has elected whom he will, and his determination will he not alter,
wherefore those which are appointed to salvation, cannot be in better state by
our prayers, and those that are damned, can we not redeem by our prayers,
unless we will make our prayers of greater force then the blood of Christ. The
Apostle would not have us to pray for them that be a live; 1. Io. 5.16.
which do sin unto death, much less for them that be dead. For whose sins
sake, they are rewarded with vnbaylable death,

Question.

But some in saying. Lord have mercy upon him, or God take him to his mercy,
when their friend is dead, do say that it hurts not, but is a word of
charity.

Answer.

It hurts, in that it continues ignorance in the speaker, and gives a
boldness and ill example to ye weaker who in their ignorance, takes every thing
for a president yt is agreeable to their own mind, neither can it be a word
of charity, because it is fruitless, for charity ought to have either pity,
remorse, aid, or good assistant action, as feeding the hungry, clothing the
naked, assisting them that want, or such like, but this word helps not,
neither assisteth any thing at all, therefore no charity.

Question.

How shall we use the Sacraments?

Answer.

Reverently, penitently, and faithfully: according to gods institution set
forth in his holy word.

Question.

what is a Sacrament?

Answer.

A Sacrament is the pledge of gods mercy and love toward us, which being
received and used of us reverently and worthily, is as a comely and decent
ornament, to fashion and shape us to the form of Christ Jesus.

Question.

How many Sacraments be there?

Answer.

Two.

Question.

which be they?

Answer.

Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Question.

what is Baptism?

Answer.

It is a sign of our new birth, and regeneration, that as we were conceived
and borne in sin by Adam, and continue the course of our nature unto the full
age of man, so are we new shaped in Christ, and continue to grow unto the full
age of Christ in righteousness and holiness, not that the water in Baptism
has the force to do it, but as with water we wash away the spots and filth of
our garment, so by the holy Ghost, whose figure the water is, we wash our
inward man from all the corruption of Adam, as appartayning to death, and put
on the fresh and clean garment of holiness, and new conversation, by the
which as God has made a perpetual league and covenant of his mercy, with man
under the figure of Circumsition, which represented Baptism, so is there a
covenant in man, in the which is required faith, new obedience, and new
conversation, and the putting off, of the old man, and putting on of the new,
which is shaped in true holiness and righteousness.

Question.

what benefit have we by Baptism?

Answer.

First remission of our sins, secondly, the planting of gods grace and all
good virtues in us, thirdely, the uniting of us into Christ, and fourthly our
salvation, as appears by these testimonies of scripture following.

Acts. 2.38.
Amend your lives, and be Baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy
Ghost.

Romans 5.2.
By whom also we have access through faith, unto this grace wherein we
stand.

By one spirit are we all Baptized into one body, 1. Cor. 12.13
whether we be Jews or Grecians.

Go ye into all the world, Mark. 1.6.6
and preach the Gospel to every creature, and he that shall believe and be
Baptized, shall be saved.

Question.

Is there nothing required of us in baptism?

Answer.

Yes, faith, for it is said, whosoever believes and is baptized, shall be
saved, and again Saint Paul says. Know that a man is not justified by the
works of the law, Gal. 2.16.
but by faith in Jesus Christ.

Question.

why then, are Infants Baptized in whom there can be no faith, because they
have not heard the word of God.

Answer.

It is necessary that Infants should be Baptized as soon as they are borne,
because at their first entrance, they should take possession of the Lords
couenaunte which he granted to our forefathers, and to all the posterity yet
unborn, when he gave the sign of Circumsition, Deuteronomy. 29.13
which is the sign of Baptism, under which league and covenant, all Infantes
are inclined, and as they did in circumsition, circumcise Infantes. So in
Baptism ought we to Baptize Infantes. To whom (as unto the posterity of our
forefathers) this covenant extended.

And as touching their faith, Saint Paul calls the same the seake of
righteousness of faith, The faith of Infants.
which is as much to say that the same sign of Circumsition which was a
figure of Baptism, Romans 4.11.
and now Baptism it self, was that covenant wherein was sealed the
righteousness of faith, which in deed works from the beginning by grace. In
the elect secretly, and in ryper years apparauntly, otherwise it should be
thought, that faith sprang from our selves, which cannot be, least there might
follow an error, that we Justify our selves, because faith justifies. How
be it in our selves we take the better hold thereof, because it is the better
strength of life, like good children which esteem the best things, and leave
the worst, and direct our selves according unto the same. Besides all this in
the innocence of our infancy, we must believe touching the very ceremony it
self, that the believing parent sanctifies the child, which is as much to
say, that God has blessed the posterity of the faithful, with faith, 1. Pet.
3.21.
by giving that figure of salvation, which to all the godly generation, 1. Cor.
12.15
is called the figure of faith, and if among them any be reprobated as some of
the godly affirms, that is not unto us, but we must leave it unto God, who
has reserved his secret judgment to him self, not acquainting man with it,
and yet has left Christ to be the sweet savor of life, to them that are
saved, Romans 3.22.
and the savor of death, unto death. For as in the elected, Christ him self,
is for them faithful, and by his faith, God has showed his righteousness
unto all and upon all, so is he unto the reprobate and wicked, the savor and
taste of death, unto death.

Question.

Then Baptism is nothing worth, but unto the faithful.

Answer.

No, for Simon the sorcerer was Baptized, Acts. 8.21.
but because he received not the holy Ghost (which was for lack of faith) he
was damned

Question.

What is the Lords Supper?

Answer.

It is a gage of our resurrection, and a mainteynaunce of that life which is
begun in Baptism, whereby we feeding by faith, on the body and blood of
Christ, receive a strong nourishment to eternill life. Or it is the sound
joining together of the Church into the body of Christ spiritually: whereby
the head and members may be knit together in unity. And this supper of the
Lord cannot be a perfect Sacrament, without two special means, whereof the
one is the holy Ghost working in us effectually, and opening our minds to see
the truth, and feel the consolation of the participation of Christ his death
and passion. The other is the godly affection in us, Faith cannot be separated
from a godly affection. Call. institu. Lib. 3. Cap. 2. Sect, 8.
sanctified by the same spirit, and directed by a perfect faith, which works
thankefully, charitably, and penitently, stirring in us a new continual
conversation, which makes a worthy receiving. And unto this two means, is
added a figure, which is bread and wine, and unto the bread and wine are added
similitudes, and then it is a full Sacrament. And the similituds, as diverse
writers says, do importe these operations, namely Nourishment, Unity, and
Conversation; whereof the first, which is Nourishment is this, that as bread
and wine do nourish and comfort our bodies, so the body and blood of Christ,
do nourish and comfort our souls.

The similitude of unity is, that as many seeds make one lofe, and many
Grapes, one Cup of wine, so we being many, are united as one in Christ, and
Christ in us, he is our head, and he our members. The third similitude, which
is conversation is this, that as the bread and wine are digested and turned
into the substance of our bodies, so are we one flesh in Christ, and Christ in
us, as the Apostle says. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members for your
part.

Question.

Have you any more to say?

Answer.

That which is spoken, is spoken briefly, 1. Cor. 12.
how be it Christianly, wherefore we conclude with this counsel, that for as
much as the sacraments are ordained of God, and their dignity consists of the
word of God, we ought to have them in high estimation and reverence. And for as
much as we are promoted (from a low) to an high estate, and esteemed greatly in
the favor of God, by using them, we ought with all carfulness and diligence,
to embrace them. Which to do, the Lord give us grace, for his son Christ his
sake. Amen.

A Prayer.
WE see and behold our own estate (O most merciful father) to be very
miserable and lamentable, and we are compassed about with many forcible
enemies, which do seek to make it worse and worse, and to bring us to the
utter overthrow of our selves, our souls and bodies, and to heap a curse upon
our posterity. We are so secure, that we are made as the fat Bulls of Basan,
and as the wild Bores of the wood, so that we fall into al filthy
conversation, lewd lust, abominable sin, and devilish desires, in so much
that our conscience is putrified, our hearts are hardened, and our souls do
faint, thy word is not esteemed, thy messengers not regarded, godly exercises
neglected, and we are like to perish, unless thou O Lord come spedely with
thine acquainted mercy, and help, for vain is the help of man, fained is the
love of man, man is quit gone from man, truth is banished, and iniquity
rayneth, Justice is perjured, and falsehood has taken the regal seat. The
septer of righteousness is broken, and our honor is cast down to the ground,
the gates of hell are opened, and the floodes of Satan has overflowed the
whole world. We feel no comfort in the society of man, no joy in the life
of nature, no recreation in the time, for the longer it continues, the more it
is corrupted O Lord, the very infernal hell flasheth and disperseth his
flames, in all the world, the hearts of men are taken prisoners, and their
consciences seared. Let us not O Lord be partakers with the Infideles least we
perish with them. Strengthen us for our trust is in thee, and under the wings
of thy mercy is our refuge, O the comfort of Jacob, and the strength of
Israel, be merciful unto thy poor stock of Iaphets, thou have not lockte up
thy favor in Canaan, but dispersed it in all the world. Let not the multitude
of our sins draw thy vengeance unto our confusion, but let the plentifulnes
of thy mercy, draw our speedy reconciliation unto thee, stop our wilful race
O Lord betimes least we run headlong to confusion, beat down the force of
Satan that he may not have a dominion over us. And establish us in thy truth,
that we may have a comfort in thy word, and Sacrament, and joyfully travel
to the meeting of thy sweet son Jesus Christ, to receive with him the
immortal crown of glory, in the everlasting kingdom of heaven. To the which
we humbly beseech thee to send us all. Amen.

FINIS.

