THE Epitaph of Sir Phillip Sidney Knight, lately Lord Governor of Floshing.



Imprinted at London by George Robinson for Thomas Cadman, and are to be sold
at his Shop at the great North-doore of S. Paul's Church, at the sign of the
Bible.



To the right Worshipful and virtuous Lady the Lady Sidney, that was wife of
Sir Phillip Sidney now deceased.
GOod Madame as my boldness may be rebuked for this wilful presumption, (in
setting forth Verses of so virtuous a Knight whose value my knowledge cannot
utter) So ye forwardnes of my goodwill (if any offense happen) may be
pardonable and make a free passage to the woeful Epitaph of your Ladishippes
worthy Husband. But so excellent a Personage, (beautified with such nobleness
and learning) ought not to be described and handled with the ignorant pen of
so simple a writer. For who should speak of Achilles praise but Homer: yet
good Lady, in the bare and plain phrase, of a mean writer, true things may
be couched, and from weak and base words, some stately and hie matter may be
gathered. For as out of Chafe good Corn is sifted, and fine gold is drawn
from the grosest Dross: so out of little Flint stones men strike out great
sparks of Fire, and from many a small trifle great wealth and treasure does
arise. What needs this Flourish to bring in good liking and credit my silly
knowledge? or to what end serves these dry discourses in so flowing a world?
where the sweet Fountain and moisture of the Muses in this most fruitful
time, finds Tides and seasons so replenished with water springs, that no soil
nor piece of ground in our land, but has taisted and felt the gracious dew of
the Heavens: I mean the bounty of this age (touching the quickness of sharp
sperites) is so beneficial to thousands who have reaped the chiefest Corn,
that there is left no Seed nor Grain to no such an unfortunate Gleaner as my
self: Their works, their Books, and their learned arguments in sondrie
manners, does show they have happily gotten and gathered ye first crop of
knowledge into their Barn: so that they which shall come after must either
lose their labor, or be driven to walk peaking about the feelde to pick up
such forgotten ears of Corn, as the Reapers have unwillingly left, or the
oversight of the world did carelessly look unto. The consait of these causes
has almost astonyed my muse. For the matter I treat on has been before both
learnedly and sententiously spoken of. What course then can I hold, or
compass can I keep? for both our speeches attends but to one purpose: which
is but to show the life and death of one only Parragon and renowned Knight of
England. When the substance of a true tale is at the first thoroughly conceived,
I can find no invention to persuade a belief of a second truth to be
understood. And when an other man has told as much as I can imagine, my
silence were as seemly as my further dispute of the matter. But yet by the way
(under favor be it spoken) though at one present instant, two several Mothers
have brought into the world two sondrie Children yet neither in nature, shape
nor condition the one proves like the other: it may so fall out of these two
Epitaphes (written on Sir Phillip Sidney) whose variety, and inventions, by
strangenes of style may move many Readers to consider the better of the matter
penned. This my work presented to your good Ladyship craves that credit, that
as it may be looked on, So it may pass as a memorial, of such a worthy man,
as it makes mention of. I write not to renew any sorrow (where there is to
much sadness already) but to revive the heart with hope and gladness, when it
shall call to remembrance, the general love and affection of the people
toward this rare Gentleman: whose noble inclination and form of life, is as
well seen and heard by the common report of the world, as though we saw him
alive again amongst us. What greater joy can a good wife have then the
hearing of the honorable report of so worthy an Husband? What Picture or Image
can set forth any such presentatio^ (to please either the mind or eye) as true
penned Uerses both void of flattry or any vain respect? Or what can touch so
nere the worthiness of man, as the Pen that searches the secrets of nature,
gropes the inward motions of the mind, and sets forth the hidden gifts of
grace. If Appelles were alive, he could but with his Pensell paint out the
favor and proportion of your Ladyships most well beloved: but an honest true
Writer with his Pen, explayneth and sets open all the virtues belonging to a
noble Personage. So as far as my poor knowledge and cunning may reach, I
have stretched my judgment and opinion, of one in deed of the worthiest that
ever I knew borne in our time. Trusting that your Ladyship will give good
countenance to my labor, and doubting no whit but the world enbraseth my
travail. For the general consent of many multitudes procured my Pen to set
forth this work, as knows God, who possess your Ladishipp with peace rest
and blessedness.

At humble commaundment, Thomas Churchyard.

The vvorthie Sir Phillip Sidney Knight his Epitaph, that was of late Lord
Governor of Floshnig
A Greater loss then world well ways or may be touched with pen,
No lack so much (in these our days) as want of worthy men:
When wealth is gone, yet wit or hap may quickly get more good:
But when the Tree has lost his Sap farewell both branch and bud.
What sighs or sobbes shall now suffice to counterpaise the pain?
What floods of tears, or weeping eyes may bring our loss again:
No sorrow serves, we wayle to late our Jewel gay is gone,
A special member of our state had Natures course held on.
For kind did lay a lively plot that far surpass our skill,
To long at large to tell God wot her cunning work at will.
But I may show, how from a Child she fostred up this man,
And fraught him full of manners mild when he this world began,
First knowledge ripe, in School he caught to whet his noble spreete,
As he had bin by Tully taught to flow in sentence sweet.
Both pen and tongue did answer mind as water-streames had r^n
From Fountain head by course of kind from whence great floods be gone.
A wit that could conceive as fast as went quick view of eye:
A sense that swift as Swallow past through matters rare and hye.
His ear no sooner heard the sound of voice or deep foresight,
But straight way judgment passage found to bring dark words to light.
His bounty blased like Torch by night and dimde their Candles all,
And ^^aynd both Lamp and Lantern light where sparks from flame did fall.
His life with chaste desires was decked where ever he becam,
As he had bin the Lords eleckt and made a chosen Lam.
His countnaunce gave a gladsome grace with manly pleasant show,
To all that did behold his face or would his favor know.
His learned speech had force to break the thick and hardest ice,
And look what tongue and mouth did speak the mind held most in price.
In prime of youth Embastor sent to Emprour far from hence,
And wan such credit where he went that made him honored sense.
Ran fair at Tilt, like Mars his Son with couched Lance on breast,
And good report of people won that passed all the rest.
A man made out of goodliest mould as shape in wax were wrought,
Or Picture stood in stamp of gold to please each gazers thought.
An Heir in deed of great accoumpt whose hope great hap might have,
Yet muck made never mind to mount for ought that Fortune gave.
His silent looks said wisdom great did lodge in lofty brow:
His patient heart (in chollers heat) suppressed all passions throw.
His inward gifts could closely shroude in humble courties cheer,
As Phoebus hid his head in Cloud to shine at length more clear.
A portly presence passing fine with beauty furnished well,
Where virtues buds and grace divine and dainty gifts did dwell.
Well seen and read in diverse Arts his works they show the same:
Well trauayld to, in sondrie parts to purchase peerelsse Fame,
Brought home both language lawde and lore and might ye Laurel wear,
And crowned with Garland be therefore and style of Honor bear.
In Conscience cause and Countries care to bloody wars he went,
Where lo on murdering Shot unware alas his life he spent.
To far he ventred for renown to short he made his skope:
To soon that stately stalk fell down in whom was such great hope.
To late this world will warned be to quick comes our dispatch:
To blind is dazeled eyes to see where Death for life does watch.
Though manhood runs in Armor gay where great exployts have bin,
Yet courage casts more men away then all the world can win.
For Sidneis sake (O wicked Shot) our native Country cries:
Yea though his death great glory got and Fame thereby does rise,
In wretched earth and Tomb God wot his worthy body lies:
Who left behind by heavy lot a world of weeping eyes.
But chiefly Prince and public weal who ways his worth a right,
A secret sigh or two they steal in thinking on this Knight.
He feared no death, when one did crave if he would dye or no,
Yet wished some longer life to have if God were pleased so.
First to amend his life he sought a respite for a space,
To purge his Soul that Christ had bought and thereby purchase grace.
Next only for Religions sake he craved a year or two,
Before from world he leave did take that he some good might do.
And last of all for Common weal he wished a while to live,
That to the honor of our state he might some council give.
Oh what desire was this of his from whence came that great mind:
Was ever heauenlier thing then this brought forth of human kind:
No no, the Pearl of precious price is lost or stolen away,
The head where dwelt each deep device will here no longer stay,
His trends and kindred wring their hands and heavy hearted go:
His wayling wife like Image stands and cannot speak for woe.
His Servants shake their heads and say (as men overcome with rage)
Where is our Master and our stay in this hard haples age.
His Sisters life consumes away like Snow against the Sun,
His Brethren ban that dismoll day when his short race was run.
His Soldoiurs doleful Dromme does sound and march in mourning sort,
And trayles the Ensign on the ground in sign of sad La mort.
But with exchange all chaunges go for life comes death in place:
For joy comes pain, for wealth comes woe for woe and grief comes grace.
So leave his Soul, where saeftie is embraest in Abraham's breast,
There let him sleep with endless blis that here could take no rest.
FINIS.

