A sad and solemn FUNERAL, of the right Honorable sir FRANCIS KNOWLES knight,
treasorer of the Queens Majesty's household, one of her privy council, and
knight of the most honorable order of the Garter.

Written by Thomas Churchyard Esquier.

Imprinted at London, by Ar. Hatfield, for William Holme. 1596.

To the right honorable my very good Lord, the Lord DELAWARE, Thomas Churchyard
wishes much worldly honor and happiness, with heavenly grace, and great desired
felicity.
MY good Lord, I looked for better motions to write off, but moved with worse
causes than either I thought to treat on or see, follows matter presently
ministered, of heaviness, sorrow, and mourning fit for my aged years to think
on, but unapt for your honorable ears to hear of: notwithstanding the strange
events that time produces (and all ages do offer) with the wonderful works
of the Lord, my muse and pen is compelled to write that I wish not, and follow
the course of hard destinies that often comes without welcome, and are to be
obeyed because they bring no remedy with them. The lives of good men are
gladsome to hear of, but the death of every one in general, is heavy to
behold: first for the loss of friends, (for the affection we bear them,) and
for the want of those we can not call again (whatsoever need requires their
presence) nor bear eeuenly the loss of such as we are bound to favor when
death takes them hence, and life denies them any longer continuance on earth:
my good Lord your noble father who favored me much, and my Lord Chamberlain
that loved me not a little, (whose troth and woorthines I am too mean to write
of) sturs up my spirits (that in a manner drowpeth to honor the names of those
that were woorthies in our age, and show in verse that men of value and
laudation should be always honored in the best sort we can devise. Thus waying
the sudden departures of diverse worthy men (in their calling and vocation)
some famous and learned Bishops, some renowned Captains and courageous
Leaders, and some most honorable Personages, Governors of our state, taken all
away together in one year. I not only lament so great a loss, but in the
number rehearsed have found out one among the chief an honorable Knight, I
knew for many parts well abled in goodness to be written of to the uttermost of
my inventions and skill, thinking my self fortunate to set forth the
unstained life of so happy a Councellor: but my great love to him, presumsion
and forwardnes to enrowle his name among a multitude, makes me pass the bonds
of ordinary duty, and freely utter the opinion conceived of his virtues, which
neither pen can amplely pronounce, nor writer may easily set out: God grant the
curious wits of the world stand as well pleased with my pains, as your L. I
dout not is glad to hear your worthy father in law praised, then I account my
labor well bestowed, and so take leave, wishing your Lordship long life and
blessedness, with double increase of virtue and honor.

COld grue the year, dym waxt both clouds and Sun ^n the com^asse of one ^eere
there ^ied of the ^leargy, of the ^ars, and honorable councellers, so many
Bishops, Captains, and Governors whose names follow hereafter.

Bishop of London D. Fletcher. Bishop of Winchester. Bishop of Chichester D.
Bycklie. Bishop of Chester D. Bylly^. D. Whittakers Master of S. John's in
Cambridge. Captains, Sir Martyn Furbyshar. Sir Roger Williams. Sir T. M^rgan.
Sir Fr. Drake. Sir I. Hawkins. Sir N. Clifford.



The summers pride, shronke up with showers of rain
The birds flue home, the sheep to fold did run
Men took the house, and beasts forsook the plain
Each thing fled fast, from fearful thunder crack
Doems day was come, young baebs and maidens thought
Gods threatening wrath, said all should go to wrack
None should be saved, save those that Christ has boght
When I stepped up, and peeping out apace
Hard rufull news, and many a heavy case.
In one years course, died many men of mark
Some of the Church, both learned wise and grave
Whose books may not, be buryd in the dark
Because their lives, a crown of glory crave:
Some MARS his sons, whose saruice witness bears
Their minds were great, and brought great things to pas
For whose great want, wise world may shed some tears
When need coms on, to try good gold from glass
Some sat to judge, like Senats in their seat
Now lies full low, the loss of whom is great.
If one years wrack, The Earl Huntingto The Lord Delaware. Honorable Councelle
Sir T. Hennage.

Sir I. Woll^ Sir I. Puckring L. Kee^ Sir Francis Knowles.

The L. Ch^^berlaine.


makes all these sorrows ries,
As one sore plaeg, makes thousands wail and weep
Then must we all, stand pleased with angry skies
And kis the earth, wherein our Fathers sleep
Three sorts of men, are quickly crept away
Like twinkling stars, that shoot from clouds in haest
Seemd fresh and fair, like flowrs lo here to day
To morrow dead, worth noght like weeds lies waest
Wisdom and worth, that would aspire and clyme
Are but a puff, and bubble for a time.
But yet good knight, the lamp and torch of troeth
Sir FRANCIS KNOWLES, I can not so forget
Though corse to church, and soul to heaven goes
And body needs, must pay the earth his det
Good will of men, shall wait upon thy toem
And Fame her self, thy funeral shall make
And register, thy name till day of doem
In book of life, for thy great virtues sake
Thy friends shall mourn, not with long clokes of black
But with sad looks, of doell behind thy back.
The Prince and court, shall mys thee many ways
Thy honest life, shall lead us all the dance
Thy faithful men, whose fortune thou did rays
Shall daily bles, thy bones for their good chance
Thy sons shall learn, the fathers steps to tread
Thy kyn shall joy, that they are of thy blood
The learned sort, in Cronikels shall read
Of thy great race, great things shall do them good
Thy neighbors now, in court, in feeld, and town,
With trumpet shrill, shall sound thy true renown.
The Lords and Knights, that at thy table fed
And all good ghests, that thither did repair
Shall honor thee, and thine, though thou be dead
Make of thy praise, an ecco in the air
Yea drom and fyfe, and all the marshall crew
In warlyke gyes, shall wait upon thy hers
Fine writers too, and lawreat poets nue
On thy farewell, shall pen out many a verse
And garlands gaie, shall vestall virgins fling
On thy cold grave, whiles clampring bells do ring.
Chaest life wins lawd, clean thoghts throw clouds does mount
True heart gains friends, and makes proud enemies blush
Plain dealing still, coms quickly to account
In shocking world, good mind abides the push
Who stands upright, fears neither foil nor fall
Who fears God well, and Princes law obaies
Is happy here, and hence most blessed of all
Lives like a saint, and gains immortal prays
These virtues rare, did blaze like star in thee
With greater gifts, in best and highest degree.
The day of death, shoes what the life has been
As apples sweet, tells what the tree is worth
The last adue, does greatest credit wyn
If it be good, and brings good matter forth,
The knitting up, of all things proves best,
The date of man, in balance so is waid
Life, death and all, on good report does rest
Where safely from, all storms, good name is staid
Possess with grace, that place and ancker hold
More worth in price, than precious pearl or gold.
Thus now I hope, in blessed Abrams breast
(Where angels sing, sweet hyms and never cease
Before Gods throne, sir FRANCIS KNOWLS does rest
From labors all, and lives in endless peace,
And all the souls, that here before I name
Both great deuines, and captains in this land
And counselors, of highest place and fame
In presence now, of great IEHOVA stand
My hope is such, and so will follow fast
The steps to death, and path that they have past.
FINIS.

