Come bring in May with me,
My May is fresh and green:
(A subjects heart, an humble mind)
To serve a maiden Queen.
A discourse of Rebellion, drawn forth for to warn the wanton wits how to
keep their heads on their shoulders.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON, in Fletestreat by VVylliam Griffith. Anno Domini. 1570.
The first of May.

A discourse of Rebellion, drawn forth for to warn the wanton wits how to
keep their heads on their shoulders.
A Cyuill war, does God and man abhor,
Hit staynes the air, and blots ye earth with blood
Hit is a plague, a pestlence botch and soore,
that eats up Realms, as worm co^sumes ye wood.
Hit venom castes, as far as Nilus flood,
Hit poysoneth all, it touches any wheare,
Hit is of kind, much worsse then horses hear.
That lies in donge, where on vile Serpents bread
Rebellion first, sprang out of vipers sede,
And nourisht was, in naughty canckred mind,
a loathsome lodge, for diu'lish geasts we find.
You subjects all, beware that snakish beast,
Which swells like toode, and borsts in sonder straight,
Beware ye come, not near that Adders neast,
That heads and hearts and bowels stings by sleight.
Great fame you win, in countries cause to feight
Great shame you get, with Rebels for to hold,
Great plagues thereof in Books you see enrold.
Great wrack and ruen, domestike braules do bring,
They want no skourge, that strives against a king
For right shall reign, and rule as reason ^hoes,
And sway the sword, in spite of secret foes.
Each other grief, is heald with plasters fine,
This finds no salve, so deep the corzye goes,
With stained hands, and blouddye staringe eyne
This Monster great, in furye puffes and bloes:
The source and sea, from whence all mischeife floes.
And yet the Lord, that sittes above the stars,
Brings them to naught, that seeks Civil wars
The best reward, that ever Rebels found.
Was Tiborne thread, and hempen halters round,
Or else a choppe, of churlish botchers are,
That with one bloe, ends all their best knacks.
Ambishious men, that still desires to clyme,
Sediciously, do seek to pole and shave,
And naked birds, when beggry is in prime,
Do snatch for shroud, on fowls that feathers have.
Rebellion thus, with painted vizage brave,
Leads out poor souls (yt knows not gold from glass)
Who bears the pack, and burden like the Ass.
And well away, a rufull tale to tell,
Their fall and ruen, skarce warnes their neibors well
Sedicion is, a sickness and a byell,
Whose breakinge out, bringes people in exyle.
Desire of change, in things we present feel,
Breeds flitting thoughts, of follies new to come,
And rouling minds, that turns like spining whels
Has great desire, to here the Foreign dromme.
And whiles the Be, in brainsick head does homme
On mad devise, the idell man is let,
Then all is fish, that fal^s in fyshers nett.
That knack seems good, that knau'ry much made of
That right made wrong, that earnest made a skoff
That ty^ell true, that sta^e stark staring naught,
And each man's case in cruel question brought.
Unbrideled will, to spoil and hauoke rons,
And headlong hales, the hasty wits awrye:
And subjects so, the true obedience shones,
And falls in flame, as does the feeble Fly,
But when in field, a while these wodcockes lie,
The Princes power, their conscience pricks so fast
That courrage fayles, and home they ron at last.
Then suit with tears, for Pardons do they make,
And so like beasts, men's hearts do fear and quake
God strikes yt stroke, and plukes stout stomaks down
And with stiff arm, stays up a rightful Crown.
Infect the breast, with breatch of promise dew,
The mind makes place, to lodge each branch of vice
Forsake old troeth, and fall to fancies new,
Familier faith throw fondnes wareth nice.
Who takes delight, to cogge and foyst the Dice,
And nosled is, in cutthrote shifts a while,
Leaves all true play, and pastime in exile.
When practice proud, takes place in people mild,
The Civil swain groes sauege rude and wild.
And when mad horse, in teeth does brydell take,
He plongeth often, the riders back to shake.
Break faith and love, and draw a strangers yoke
Man's folly spreades, abroad like sparks of fire:
And does great harm, yet makes but littell smoke,
Till all our pomp, be tombled in the myer.
O Britayne blood, mark this at my desire,
If that you stick, together as you ought,
This little isle, may set the world at naught.
If no then look, for plague at Princes hand,
Who here is plast, in peace to guide the land.
Your wicked wills, shall come to no effect,
For God shall save, his choson and elect.
Though Nuts do fall, that in the cluster grue,
And goodly trees, would clean forsake the bark:
Yet may we not, bid kyrnels all adue,
Fresh buds will blome, whiles stock hit self is stark
Alas, wild heads, you know not well your mark.
You shoot amiss, when Booe is drawn to ear,
And brush the cloth, full sore against the hear.
The yarne in frame, will never cotton well,
Whiles foul abuse, in weauers webb does dwell.
Troth tryes out all, and shall throw time be known,
when Rebels craft, shall clean be overthrown.
In deed it is good, to draw one yoke and line,
The house long stands, that wone good ground does bear,
But for to drink, ye dreggs in sted of wine:
Is madness sure, and goes against the hear.
Sweet Appells pass, the parings of the Pear,
One parfect dish, well seasoned as hit ought,
Is better sure, then deynties derely bought,
Knit fast the knotte, or else vntwyned thread
In garments good, shall fail the seame at need.
Shake settled tyles, from house and you shall see,
That rafters great, and house can not agree.
Example make, but of the faggot now,
Whose sticks fast bound, together long abydes:
Pluck on stick forth, and all the faggot throw,
In sunder shakes, and from the band hit slydes,
Where banks do break, there runs out ye tides
Where Commons knit, in countries cause and right
There Kings find friends, and foes are put to flight.
Where subjects snarre, and several ways do draw
There god poures plagues, throw justice of his law.
Then rage bursts out, and brings in wrack and rune,
And so sweet strings, are wrested out of tune.
Did Rome not rule, the world at will long time,
Till hateful hearts, did strive for painted shoes:
And hautie heads, sought further for to clyme,
Upon the spleen, then subjects compos goes,
^n whose attemptes, a sore desention roes.
For when throw wealth, and pride in ^arre they fell.
Rome was not Rome, that state became an Hell,
And Devils swarmd, in seat where senates sat,
And turned laws, to strife and lewd debate:
Wrong stepped in place, and right was banish quite
And mufled world, in mischeife took delight.
The head thus sick, the members fell away,
And every one, the other still deceaues:
The tree left bare, the sap must needs decay,
The bark once gone, there was no hope of leaves,
The straw infect, the cor^^e forsook the sheaues.
The hyue of Bees, burst out of honey come,
The Common wealth, was banished out of Rome.
So long as laws, the true love knot did knit,
In triumphtes great did worthy Romans sit.
So long as love, in chains did lynke the land,
In passing pomp, the Roman state did stand.
This Realm of ours, had never yet the foil,
Till sausye sleightes, had severed sheep from fold,
And malice hot, in rusty breasts began boil,
And lukers lust, for gain his country sold?
Till revel came, and stately stountnes bold,
And set abro^ch, discord in every sheere,
The world we ruld, and lived like Princes here.
O English hearts, let this suffice I say,
To make you hate, Rebellion every way.
For if you do, in fury fyle your neast,
You are much worsse, then senceles bird or beast.
Finis.
Quoth Churchyard.


