THE HONOR OF THE LAW.

Written by Thomas Churchyard Gent.

Imprinted at London, by Ar. Hatfield, for William Holme. 1596.

To the right honorable sir Thomas Egerton knight, Lord keeper of the great
seal, and one of the Queens Majesty's privy counsel, Thomas Churchyard
wishes long life, continuance of virtue and justice, with everlasting credit
and good fame.
THe gladness good men did show (right honorable) when God and our gracious
Prince placed the great seal in your hands, called up my muse that seldom
sleeps, to awaken the world with some verses, that virtuous men may consider
of. They are but the invention of time, practice of pen, suffrance of old
custom, and the boldness of a writer, that often salutes men of great worth with
books and blessedness, in the first entry of their worldly honor. This spoken
to your L. as one to whom the Lord of Lords (as I know) has given great
graces, not only to judge well of good men's causes, (which prolongs life) but
likewise to answer the hope that great and good personages have in your L. And
so being called to greatness (a fortune not common) great matter is exspected,
and in justice the full effect of your greatness shall be seen (I doubt not)
because the chosen and anointed of the Lord has chosen you (among a
multitude) to sit in the charitable seat of judgment, where pity is a pleader,
patience a hearer, mildnes a looker on, and mercy is a judge. Now the good
report of the world (which I hear) besides the good disposition in your own
mind are presently come to make a proof and daily trial of your virtues: so
leaving your Lordship to the goodness and grace of the almighty, I humbly crave
good acceptance of my simple plain verses, (that I call the Honor of the Law)
written in a frank motion of the good will I have always borne toward your
honorable good fortunes.

The honor of the Law.
THe law where judge is plaest in princely seat,
Came first from God (who would reform man's mis)
And well maintaind, with skill and wisdom great,
And honored much, long lovde and feared is,
Grace spreds the bows, and goodness brings forth fruit,
Time ripens all, and hales the harvest on,
Law thresheth corn, and helps each poor man's suit,
To sow new seed, ere all old grain be gone:
But Justice rules, (by order) all the cawes,
And is of right, the honor of the laws.
Proud, rich or poor, to Justice are alike,
No parshall eye, it has but clearly sees,
Where to defend, to favor, kill or strike,
And looks into the state of all degrees,
With love and law, is Justice joined still,
The one keeps right, as hen does clock her brood,
The other gains the heat of warm goodwill,
Which is the cream, and milk of Christian food:
Justice wins that, and like a Lady stands,
With equal weights, and balance in her hands.
What bears no poize, like feathers flies away,
What keeps weight, and stamp does current pas,
What must be helped with grains and does decay,
Is clipped too near, or neither gold nor glass,
The current coin, that justice does allow,
Is called just law, true dealing and good mind,
A stamp that may, in any world go throw,
And with both friends, and foes may favor find:
Thus Justice does both law and lawyers gide,
Sees who aims right, and who shoots short or wide.
Marks pleaders well (that lengthens suits with words)
Looks far in land, and can true titles sift,
Sounds deepest seas, and wades throw shallow foords,
And hates those heads, that with great finenes shift,
Wealth, praise and peace, are Justice handmaids all,
Honor and fame, holds up mild Justice train,
Truth on each side, supports her from a fall:
And heaunly hope, in heart the does retain:
Disdains delay, gives aid and help in haste,
Cuts off the snuff, before the candle waste.
When suits do hang, ten years on tenter hooks,
They stretch too far, and so gro full of holes:
When few words make great scrouls and mighty books
Ill news is brought to many silly soles.
When cunning casts, a cloak on open wrong,
Right is put back, and knoes not where to go,
When troth is lapt, in great dispute too long,
An upright cause may get an ouerthro:
Light is seen straight, from darkness if we please,
And quarrels may be ended soon with ease.
Though Mine and Thine, makes many brabbles still,
In small short time, each man may have his own,
Though thousands run to law on froward will,
Of each man's cause, the troth is quickly known,
Though doubts arise, in matters of great weight,
Good men may soon, decide a doubtful case,
But if weak things, like wax we stretch an height,
Or on bad stuff, do clap an honest face:
A straw may seem, as strong to many a one,
As is a staff, that lame men stay upon.
Gay collors hides, a patched rotten wall,
Fair fained tales, conuaies foul things from sight,
Sweet sugar takes, the taste from bitter gall,
VVrong richly clad, to blindness seems right,
Troth trodden down, lifts falsehood up aloft,
False dice do run, as smoothe as truest bones,
Fine filed toongs, deceiues plain people often,
Fondlings may take, pure glass for preshous stones:
A trim discourse, set out for goodly shoes,
May quickly mar, the text with glorious gloes.
Plain words are brought, from plow and country plain,
To find plain deeds, a friend to plainnes case,
In open court, then plainnes does complain
Of wrong receiud, before true Justice face,
The pleading there, begins, but has no end,
A year or twain, runs on with reasons great,
Both parties so, much time and wealth does spend,
VVhiles lawyars talk at bar in cold and heat:
The matter often, scarce worth a lock of hey,
Begun of naught, does breed an endless pley.
Why bright broad day at any hole is seen,
Dark night is known, when stars in sky do shoot,
Both black and white are quickly gest from green,
The head or hand is easly found from foot,
The good and bad as great a diffrence have,
As chalk and cheese. Then is there no great doubt,
Tween right and wrong, small pleading do they crave,
For Justice doom, soon finds their natures out:
So is the court dismissed of suitors all,
And mildly sits the Judges in the hall.
Long suits are like a semstars clue of thread,
That first was long a spinning of the wheel,
Long twisting too, to make it serve the need,
Long winding up on thrifty huswiues reele,
And over long a working some men say,
Yet as the length is long of this same clue,
So shall you find an end some kind of way,
To serve the turn in time and season due:
But suits do leave the sutars all so bare,
That half undone world thinks long suitors are.
The honor of the law leaves long delays,
A quick dispatch works many men much good,
When good turns are turned off to years and days,
They bring disease, and breeds no good blood,
What falls out well is welcome at the furst,
What happens ill must needs be known at last,
And when a man in time does know the wurst,
The care is gone, and half the harms are past,
Admit that lands and goods do lie therein,
Look what is lost we have no hope to win.
Plainnes is best, and ever furthest goes,
Slight finds a shift, to shuffell cards too long,
The shortest way, unto the wood who knoes,
And goes about, shall do himself great wrong.
No honor more, than get good will of men,
With judgment sweet, a true-loue knot to knit,
To further that my prayer and my pen,
Shall wait upon the seat wherein you sit:
And poor men's plaints, when salued is their sore,
Eternize shall your name for evermore.
FINIS.

