A DISCOVRSE OF The Queens Majesty's entertainment in Suffolk and Norffolk:
With a description of many things then presently seen.

Devised by THOMAS CHVRCHYARDE, Gent. with diverse shows of his own invention
set out at Norwich: and some rehearsal of her Highness return from
Progress.

Whereunto is adjoined a commendation of Sir Humfrey Gilberts ventrous journey.

CERVA CHARISSIMA ET GRATISSIMVS HINNVLVS^ PRO: 5
printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Henry Bynneman* seruante to the right Honorable Sir
CHRISTOPER HATTON Vizchamberlayne.

To the right worshipful Master Gilbert Gerrard, the Queens Majesty's
Attorney General, Thomas Churchyard Gent. sends this sign of good will,
and wishes increase of worthy fame.
HAVING a desire (right Worshipful) to continue in your favor and amity, I
devised sundry ways to give you some cause of recreation, amid the multitude of
your grave studies, and weighty affairs, and knowing that no one thing is
more welcome to a worthy wit, than the understanding of matter, wherein the
duty of good subjects is expressed, and the greatness of good minds is made
manifest, I have presented you with a little Book, that makes not only report
of the noble receiving of the Queens Majesty into Suffolk and Norffolke, but
also of the good order, great cheer, and charges that her highness subjects
were at, during her abode in those parties. And because I saw most of it, or
heard it so credibly rehearsed, as I know it to be true, I mean to make it a
mirror and shining glass, that all the whole land may look into, or use it for
an example in all places (where the Prince comes) to our posterity
hereafter for ever. For in very deed, if the dutiful usage of Suffolk and
Norffolke had not surmou^ted in greatness and goodness any five Sheeres in
England, for hospitality, bravery, and frank dealing, I had not made mention
of these causes, nor written so large a discourse of their behauioures, and
bountiful manner of duty: but finding these two Sheeres so well furnished of
Gentlemen, and so flourishing, and ready to attend in time of triumph, on her
that is our triumph and earthly felicity, I can do no less, but with
immortal fame, sound their praises, and use my pen to their great glory
and thanks, as a guerdon due for their worthy and honest dezerts, hoping that
every other Sheere, where the Queens highness has not bin, will rather
strive to follow this lantern when occasion is offered, than any way think me
affectionate, or that I have partially proceeded in this exercise of pen. And
now right Worshipful, if you muse why I do enterlard this discourse with
some such words or sentences, as may seem to degresse from my purposed
cause, I pray you conceive, both for variety, and the virtue of the matter,
that my judgment is carried by circumstances, to treat at large those things,
that shortness of speech will not suffer, and that my cunning can not aptly
place every thing in his order: but yet as I may (under your correction) I will
boldly hold on my matter which I have penned, for those people that dwell far
off the Court, that they may see with what majesty a Prince reigns, and with
what obedience and love good Subjects do receive her: not that I think, but
all the Sheeres of England are most willing to do their duties to the uttermost
of their powers: but that in deed the like of this entertayneme^t has not bin
seen: I have presumed to set out these things, and namely, because at
Norwich I was employed to set forth some shows, which here I have
imprinted, as well those that her Highness saw not, by means of evil
weather, as those she saw and heard, and gave gracious thanks for. And as I
mind to wrighte what truly happens in my memory, so mean I to touch a
little, the manner and inclination of the common people, whose civil sort and
courtesy is greatly to be commended. Withal, I have placed at the end of this
discourse, a feawe verses, in the honoring of good minds, and traveling
bodies, meaning thereby Sir Humfrey Gilbert, Master Henry Knolles, and others,
right worthy and honest Gentlemen, presently passed toward a happy voyage as I
hope. These pains and purposes of mine, proceed only on the good will I
bear to al virtuous actions, and so I trust you will take them, and giving my
small Book a little countenance (if it so stand with your pleasure) I shall
find my self greatly bound unto you therefore, and among the rest that
speaks well (which are not a few) of your vprighte gouernemente of life, I
will not be the last shall yield you deserved laud, as knows God, who
increase his grace and good gifts in you, and make your end as honorable, as
your days have bin blessed.

To the Reader.
IF I should not good Reader as well shevve thee some matter of delight, as
publishe to the world these penned discourses, thy wits would wax a vveery
of my frivolous words, and I should gain but little fruit by my labor and
travel: and greater delight can not be presented, than here to show thee the
good disposition of some people, bredde up, and nourished out of the bowels of
thine own nation. And albeit it seems strange, that people nurtured far
from Court, should use much courtesy, yet will I prove by the humbleness
of the common people, where lately the Prince has passed, that if in a manner
all civility were utterly decayed, it might have bin found freshly flourishing
in many of those parties and places specifyed before: for so soon as the
presence of the Prince was entered in their bounds, by a mere motion of
homage and fealty, a general consent of duty and obedience was seen
thorough the whole Country, and well were they that might first find
occasion by any means to vvelcome a Courtier, and not with feyned ceremonies,
but with frie^dlye entertaynemente. And although it be a custom, and most
laudable manner for the poor commons to run in flocks to see their
Sovereign, yet there, as me thought, their desire was so great, that they
had never enough of the sight so long wished and desired: and such reverence
and humility they used toward all the train, wheresoever they encountered
any of them, that the inward affections of the people was plainly
expressed by their outvvard appearance, and manifest courtesies: in so much, that
the meanest persons that follovved the Court, stood maruellously contented
with that they savv, and wondered at the rare and good manner of the people,
especially in Norwich, where the entertainemente was so great, that all
degrees, from the highest to the lowest, were had in such admiration, that it
seemed another world to behold: which nevve kind of reverence, and comely
custom of the Country (as it may be properly applied) makes the old
haughtiness, and stiffenecked behavior of some places, to blushe, and become
odious, yea in soyles, that the Prince generally keeps her residence, and
most abode in, where proud people will pass by many of the Nobility,
without moving either cappe or knee, a stubborn stoutness, and an
unmannerly disordered boldness, bredde up and fostered on the long
familiarity had with the noble men's servants, and daily view of their
masters, with which sight they are so cloyed and vveeryed, that their
duty is forgotten, and utterly rejected, that ought to be ashamed of abuse,
and should use more reuerente manners. If they would (to leave off this
audacious fashion) but look on diverse Sheeres in this land, as Lancasheere,
Chesheere, Shropsheere, and other Sheeres far from the Court, they might
soon be learned to clappe on more comeliness, and use less obstinacy. And
if they think scorn to be taught at home of our own people, it were
good they were Shipped into France or Flaunders, our near neyboures, where
the meaner sort are not only known by their garments and going, but
perceived by their gestures, and humbleness of countenance and speech. Now
gentle Reader, think no other of this my discourse in the commendation of
courtesy, but that I rejoice to see such auntiente humility as yet held up
and mainteyned in England, when pride and vayneglory vvoulde overthrow the
good dispositions of the people, and breed both to GOD and Man a common
contempt. And, as I have rehearsed a piece of those things I savve in
Suffolk and Norffolke, to further thy delight toward the reading of my
simple Book, so look for presentlye at my hands the rest of that Progress
which I am truly instructed of, or may come to my memory. Thus committing
to thy hands and head the boldness of my enterprise, and view of those
Verses and matter I here have set out. I bid thee farevvell.


The entertaynemente of the Queens Majesty into Suffolk, and Norffolke.
TO wright of the receiving of her highness into Suffolk and Norffolke in
every point, as matter may move me, would conteyne a great time, in making a
just rehearsal thereof: wherefore I will but briefly recite it, and commit
the circumstance and manner of the same, to your discretion and judgment. The
troth is, albeit they had but small warning certaynely to build upon, of the
coming of the Queens Majesty into both those Sheeres, the Gentlemen had made
such ready provision, that all the veluets and silks were taken up that might
be laid hand on, and bought for any money, and soon converted to such
garments and suits of roabes, that the show thereof might have beautifyed the
greatest triumph that was in England these many years: for (as I heard)
there were two hundred young Gentlemen, cladde all in white velvet, and three
hundred of the grauer sort apparelled in black velvet coats, and fair
chains, all ready at one instant and place, with fifteen hundred serving men
more on Horseback, well and bravely mounted in good order, ready to receive
the Queens highness into Suffolk, which surely was a comely troop, and a
noble sight to behold: and all these waited on the Sheriff Sir William
Spring, during the Queens Majesty's abode in those parties, and to the very
con^ynes of Suffolk. But before her highness passed to Norffolke, there was
in Suffolk such sumptuous feasting and bankets, as seldom in any part of the
world has bin seen before. The master of the rolls, Sir William Cordall,
was one of the first that began this great feasting, and did light such a
Candle to the rest of the Sheere, that many were glad bountifully and franckly
to follow the same example, with such charges and cost, as the whole train
were in some sort pleased therewith. And near Bury, Sir William Drury for his
part at his house, made the Queens highness a costly and delicat dinner, and
Sir Robert Iermyne of Roeshbroke feasted the French Embassadoures two several
times, with which charges and courtesy they stood maruellously contented. The
Sheriff Sir William Spring, Sir Thomas Kidson, Sir Arthur Higham, and diverse
other of worship, kept great houses, and sundry either at the Queens coming,
or return, solemnly feasted her highness, yea and deffrayed the whole
charges for a day or twain, presented gifts, made such triumphs and
devises, as in deed was most noble to behold, and very thankefully accepted.
The Norffolke Gentlemen hearing how dutifullie their neybours had received the
Prince, prepared in like sort to show themselves dutiful, and so in most
gallantest manner, assembled and set forward with five and twenty hundred
Horsemen, whereof as some affirm, were six hundredth Gentlem^n, so bravely
attired, and mounted, as in deed was worthy the noting, which goodly company
waited on their Sheriff a long season: but in good sooth (as I have heard
credibly spoken) the bankets and feasts began here afresh, and all kind of
triumphs that might be devised, were put in practice and proof. The earl of
Surrey did show most sumptuous ^heere, in whose Park were speeches well set
out, and a special Device much commended: and the rest, as a number of
Gentlemen, whose names I have not, were no whit behind to the uttermost of
their abilities, in all that might be done and devised. But when the Queens
highness came to Norwich, the substance of the whole Triumph and feasting, was
in a manner there new to begin, for order was taken there, that every day,
for six days together, a Show of some strange Device should be seen, and the
Mayor and Alderme^, appointed among themselves and their bre^thren, that no one
person, reteyning to the Queen, should be vnfea^^ed, or unbidden to dinner
and supper, during the space of those six days: which order was well and
wisely observed, and gained their City more same and credit, than they wot
of: for that courtesy of theirs shall remain in perpetual memory, whiles
the walls of their City stands. Besides the money they bestowed on diverse
of the train, and those that took pains for them (albeit my self but
slenderly considered) will be a witness of their well doing and good will,
whiles the report of these things may be called to remembrance. I can not nor
ought not, considering their great charges (and discrete gouernemente in these
causes) but give them due land and reputation, as far as my pen or report
may do them good, and stretche out their credit. For most assuredly, they
have taught and learned all the Towns and Cities in England a lesson, how
to behave themselves in such like services and actions.

Now to return to the Shows and purposed matter penned out by me (to shorten
the season, and move pastime to the Prince) I thought it conueniente to printe
them in order, as they were invented: for I was the first that was called, and
came to Norwiche about that business, and remained there three long weeks
before the Court came thither, devising and studying the best I could for the
City, albeit other Gentlemen, as Master Goldingham, Master Garter, and
others, did seeppe in after, and brought to p^sse that already is set in
Print in a Book, where the Orations and speeches of diverse are set out
plainly and truly: and for that my meaning was orderly to proceed, I have
here plainly drawn out my Device, not that I think it merits any great
memory, nor claymeth credit, but only that mine honest intent may be
thereby expressed, and my friends may see how glad I am to honor God, my
Prince, and my Country, trusting to set sorth other works as time will
permit, and that right shortly, that shall hold you longer tacke, and better
please you. In the mean while I pray you take in worth and good part my little
pains and great good will, and read (as your fancy favors) the Uerses and
Devises that follow.

The Song on Saturday at her Highness entry, soong on the great Stage that
was next the Market place, by the VVaytes and best voices in the City.
THe deavv of heaven drops this day
on dry and barren ground,
Wherefore let fruitful hearts I say
at Drum and Trumpet sound
Yield that is due, show that is meet,
to make our joy the more,
In our good hope, and her great praise,
we never savv before.
The Sun does shine where shade has bin,
long darkness brought us day,
The Star of comfort now coms in,
and here a while will stay.
Ring out the belles, pluck up your sprightes,
and dress your houses gay,
Run in for flowers to straw the streets,
and make what joy you may.
The deaw of Heaven. etc.
Full many a Winter have we seen,
and many storms vvithall,
Since here we savv a King or Queen
in pomp and Princely pall.
Wherefore make feast, and banquet still,
and now to triumph fall,
With duty let us show good will,
to glad both great and small.
The deaw of Heaven. etc.
The Realm throughout will ring of this,
and sundry Regions more
Will say, full great our fortune is,
when our good hap they knoe.
O Norwich, here the well spring runs,
whose virtue still does floe,
And lo this day does shine two Suns
within thy wales also.
The deaw of Heaven. etc.
This Song ended, her highness passed toward her lodging, and by the way in
a Church-yarde, over against Master Peckes door (a worthy Alderman) was a
Skaffold set up and bravely trimmed. On this Skaffolde, was placed an excellent
Boy, well and gallantly decked, in a long white roabe of Taffata, a Crimson
Skarfe wrought with gold, folded on the Turkishe fashion about his brows, and
a gay Garlande of fine ^loures on his head, which Boy was not seen, till the
Queen had a good season marked the Music, which was marvelous sweet and
good, albeit the rudeness of some ringer of belles did somewhat hinder the
noise and harmony: and as soon as the Music ended, the Boy stepped
reverently before the Queen, and spoke these words that follow.

The Boys speech at Master Peckes door.
GReat things were meant to welcome thee (o Queen,)
If want of time had not cut off the same:
Great was our wish, but small is that was seen,
For us to show, before so great a Dame.
Great hope we have it pleased our Princes eye,
Great were the harms that else our pains should reap:
Our grace or foil, does in your judgment lie,
If you mislike, our griefs do grow on heap:
If for small things, we do great favor find,
Great is the joy, that Norwich feels this day:
If well we waid the greatness of your mind,
Few words would serve, we had but small to say.
But knowing that your goodness takes things well
That well are meant, we boldly did proceed:
And so good Queen, both welcome and farewell,
Thine own we are, in heart, in word, and deed.
The Boy thereupon flang up his Garlande, and the Queens Highness said, This
Device is fine.

Then the noise of Music began again, to hear the which, the Queen
stayed a good while, and after departed to the Cathedral Church, which was
not far from thence. And the next day after, which was Sunday, when Princes
commonly come not abroad (and time is occupied with Sermons, and laudable
exercises) I was to watch a convenient season, where and how might be uttered
the things that were prepared for pastime. And so upon Monday before supper, I
made a Device, as though MERCVRIE had bin sent from the Gods, to request the
Queen to come abroad, and behold what: was devised for her welcome, the whole
matter whereof does follow.

Mondayes Device.
The manner of Mercuries Coatche and message to the Queen, requesting her
Highness to come abroad, and see what pastyme the Gods had provided for a
noble Prince.
THe Coatch that MERCVRIE came into (...) Queen, was closely kept in secret a
long season, and when the time came it must pass toward the Court, it had a
Trumpetter with it, and the Coatchman was made to drive so fast, as the Horses
should seem to fly, which was so well observed, as the people wondered at the
swiftness thereof, and fol^owed it in such flocks and multitudes, that
scarce in a great green (where the Preaching place is) might be found room
for any more people. And when the Coatch approached in the hearing of a Trumpet,
the Trumpetter sounded, and so came in to the green sounding, until the
Coatche was full placed before a window at the which the Queen stood, and
might be plainly seen, and openly viewed. When MERCVRIE had espied her
highness, he skipped out of the Coatche, and being on the ground, gave a n^^p
or two, and advanced himself in such a sort, that the Queen smiled at ye
boldness of the Boy. Thus MERCVRIE beholding the Queen with great courage and
audacitie, at the length bowed down his head, and immediately stood bolt
upright, and shaked his rod, and so began his speech with a most assured
countenance, and bravely pronounced it in deed.

Mercuries speech.
Muse not good Queen at me that message brings
From love, or just (...), Lord of might,
No earthly God, yet gouernes mortal things,
And sprites divine, and shining Angels bright.
This Lord o^ late to show his mighty power,
Has wonders wrought, when world looked least therefore:
For at his beck, this day, and present hour,
The Heavens shakt, the thunder boltes did rore.
The earth did move, the dead therein did rise,
And out of grave, the Ghostes of men are gone,
The wandering Sprites that houered in the Skies
Dropped down from air, for world to wonder on.
The Saints thems^lues, that sat in glory great,
Were sent in have, to work Iehouas will,
And I that often my restless wings do beat,
Was called, to use my wings and office still.
A common post is Mercury you know,
When he commands that made the world of naught,
And flies as fast, as arrow out of bow,
When message may express Iehouas thought.
Whose power divine full long ere this has seen,
That in this place should lodge a sacred Queen.
And waying well, the Princ^ whereof I speak,
Might weerie wax of common pastimes here,
(For that he knows her judgment is not weak,)
Deuisd above, below there should appear
(To welcome her) some sights that rare should seem,
And careless stood, what world thereof did deem:
So that good Queen, you take them well in worth.
No sooner had Iehoua meant these things,
But Clouds clapped hands, and souls of men came forth
Of Heaven gates, yea goodly crowned Kings
Were flowen abroad, from blessed Abrams breast:
Some in the air, and tops of trees did rest,
Some fell on (...) houses high,
Some suncke in Seas, (...) were drouned now,
And some did light on land where every eye
May them behold, and note their manners throw.
And therewithal, the black infernal spreetes
Ran out of Hell, the earth so trembling than,
And like young laddes they hopt about the streets.
The Satyrs wild, in form and shape of man
Crept through the wooddes, and thickets full of breeres,
The water Nymphs, and Feyries straight appears
In uncouth forms, and fashion strange to view:
The hagges of Hell that hateful are of kind,
To please the time, had learnd a nature new,
And all those things that man can call to mind,
Were glad to come, and do their duty throw.
I seeing this, called for my Coatch in have,
Abide sir Boy, then said Iehou^ now,
Thou go not yet, until ^ Prince be plast
Where I appoint, thou have nothing to say.
Then still I stood, to know what should be done.
With that, a swarm of people every way
Like little Antes, about the fields began run,
Some to provide for pomp and triumph great,
Some for good fare, yea household cates and meat,
And some they ran to seek where Poets dwell,
To pen forth shows, and paint out tri^^es well,
Some halde and pulled, to bring the carredge in,
Some ran to gaze on triumph near at hand,
And some stood mute, as they amazde had bin
To see a Court, and Princely noble band
Come marching on, and make here their abode:
But when I saw the carredge here unload,
And well had wayd the wonders I have told,
O mighty God (quoth I) now give me leave
To go from thee, some message to unfold,
That by my speech the hearers may conceive
Thy Godhead great, has brought this Princess here.
It shall be so (quoth he) disp^tch and (...),
And tell her, that she is to me so (...).
That I appoint by man's device and art,
That every day she shall see sundry shoe^,
If that she please to walk and take the ayr^:
And that so soon as out of door she goes
(If time do serve, and weather wareth fair)
Some odd device shall meet her highness straight,
To make her smyle, and ease her burdened breast,
And take away the cares and things of weight
That Princes feel, that finds greatest rest.
When I had thus receyvd my charge at full,
My golden rod in lively hand I took,
And badde in have my flying Horses pull.
But ear I past, I began about me look
To see that Coatch, and each thing gall^n^ were:
So down I came, all winged as you see.
And since I have espyde that Princess there,
That greatest Kings do sue to by degree,
And many mo that sues no whit, do fear,
I kiss her steps, and show my masters will,
And leave with her such graces from above,
As always shall command her peoples love,
(Uphold her reign, maynteyne her regal state,
Find out false hearts, and make of subjects true,
Plant perfect peace, and root up all debate)
So with this grace, good Queen now here (...),
For I may now on earth no longer stey,
Than Servants must to Masters will obey.
MERCVRIE having thus spoken to the Queen (whose gracious inclination is such,
as will not have any thing duetifully offered to pass unregarded) was well
heard, her Highness standing at a window, and (as I know,) the Speech very
well taken and understood. MERCVRIE as he came, passed away, at whose Coatch
the people (that had seldom seen such a Device) marvelled, and gazed very
much: for it had horses to draw it finely painted as winged, to as great
show and order of that it presented, as wit might imagine: the Coatchman
suitable to the same: and a Trumpeter in right good garments, as decente for
that purpose as could be devised. But the Coatche was made and framed on such
a fashion, as few men have seen: the whole whereof was covered with Birds, and
naked Sprites hanging by the heels in the air and clouds, cunningly painted
out, as though by some thunder crack they had been shaken and tormented, yet
stayed by power divine in their places, to make the more wonder and miraculous
Show. And on the middle of that Coatch stood a high compassed Tow^r, bedeckt
with golden and gay jewels, in the top whereof was placed a fair plume of
white feathers, all to bespangde and trimmed to the most bravery: MERCVRIE
himself in blew Satin lined with cloth of gold, his garments cut and
slasshed on the finest manner, a peaked hatte of the same color, as though it
should cut and sever the wind asunder, and on the same a pair of wings, and
wings on his heels likewise. And on his golden rod were little wings also,
about the which rod, were two wriggling or scrawling Serpents, which
seemed to have life when the rod was moved or shaken. So in this sort and
form was MERCVRIE and his Coatch set forth, and in deed at such a season, as
a great number looked not for any show, nor things were ready, as some
thought, to perform that was necessary and expected. Yet hap was so good,
and the gracious favor of the Prince, that all was well taken, and construed
to the best meaning of the Deuisor. So ended that days Device, which offered
occasion to further matter.

Tuesdayes Device.
AT this season, although I was not well provided of things necessary for a
Show (by mean of some crossing causes in the City) yet hearing the Queen
road abroad, determined as I might (and yet by help of friends and hap)
very well to venture the hazard of a Show, and to be full in the way where her
highness should pass toward her dinner, in which determination many doubts
were to be cast, and many men persuaded to tarry a better time, but
considering how time rolled on, and days and hours did wast (without doing
any thing promised, and not performed) I hastily prepared my Boys and Men,
with all their furnitures, and so set forward with two Coatches, hansomely
trimmed. The common people beholding the manner thereof, and greedy to gaze on
that should be done, followed, as their fancies did lead them: so that when
we came into the open field, there was as great a train and preace about the
Show, as came with the Court at that instant, which graced much the matter,
and gave i^ some expected hope of good success: and for that you shall (and
please you) imagine you see the thing, I have here set down the whole manner
of the Show, and after that every part as they were played, shall be here
expressed.

First, there is a feigned device, that VENUS and CUPID were thrust out of
Heaven, and walking on the earth, met a Philosopher, who demanded from
whence they came, they told the Philosopher what they were, and he replied, and
began with troth and ta^^tes to tickle the^ so near, that VENUS fell in a
great anger, and CUPID ran away, and left his mother and the Philosopher
disputing together, but CUPID because he would be nourished some where, ran
to the Court, and there sought for succoure, and encountering the Queen,
began to complain his state and his mothers, and told how the Philosopher
had handled them both: but finding neither answer nor aid, returned again,
but not to his mother, for she was fallen mad (upon a conceyt that she was
not made of) and CUPID wandering in the world, met with Dame Chastity and her
maids, called Modesty, Temperance, Good exercise, and Shamefastness, and she
with her four maids encountering CUPID in a goodly Coatche, and without any
honest guard wanting on him, set upon him, threw him out of his golden seat,
trod on his pomp, spoiled him of his counterfeyte Godhead and cloak, and
took away his bow and his qu^uer of arrows, (the one headed with lead, and
the other with gold) and so sent him like a fugitive away, and mounted up into
the Coatche her self and her maids, and so came to the Queen, and rehearsed
what had happened (although this was done in her view) and because (said
Chastity) that the Queen had chosen the best life, she gave ye Queen CVPIDS
^ow, to learn to shoot at whom she pleased, since none could wound her
highness heart, it was meet (said Chastity) that she should do with CVPIDS
how and arrows what she pleased: and so did Chastity depart as she said to
the powers divine. CUPID in ye mean while wandering in the world, had found
out Wanto^nesse and Riot, who soon fell in beggerie and ruin (a spectacle to
be looked into) and felt such daily misery with Wanto^nesse and Riot, that
CUPID was forced to ^^ing away once again, and hazard himself to fall into
the hands of naughty people, or where Fortune assigned, and coming abroad,
happened upon the Philosopher, who talked with him again, and told him his
erroures, and other points of pride and presumption, declaring it was a great
blaspheme and abuse, to report and believe that in Heaven were any other Gods
but one, and he had the only rule of all, that made all of naught. In which
reasoning and discourses, CUPID waxt warm, and yet in his greatest heat knew
not how nor where to cool himself, at which time came Wantonness and Riot,
and persuaded CUPID to play (...) longer the fool (in striving with
Philosophers) and go away with them, so CUPID dep^rted, and went away with
Wantonness and Riotte, and the Philosopher remained, and declared that all
abuses and follyes should come to no better end, than presently was expressed
by the misery of Wantonness, Riotte, and CUPID. Then Modesty and her
fellows, leaving their Mistress Dame Chastity, with the powers Divine, came
^oft and fair in their Mistress Coatch, singing a Song of chaste life, and
when the Song was ended, Modesty sent, as she said she was, from her
Mistress, spoke to the Queen a good season, and so the matter ended, for the
which Show, I had gracious words of the Queen openly and often pronounced by
her Highness. Now^ before you read the parts, you must thoroughly note what
my discourse thereof has bin, and carrying that care and good will with you,
the matter shall seem to have the better life, and I shall think my labor
and ^^udie well bestow^d.

Cupid coming, as he reports, out of Heaven (from whence his Mother and he
is banished) encountres the Queen, and speaks as follows, he riding in a
Coatch: and you must presuppose, that before his coming to the Queen, he and
his Mother had met with the Philosopher.
The Show of Chastity.
A^as poor boy, where shall thou wander no^,
I am thrust out of Heaven in despite,
My Mother too begins to bend the brow,
For both we walk, as we were banished quite.
She mournes and weeps, and blubbers like a child,
By which great grief, in rage now may she fall,
And I have leave to walk the wood so wild,
To houle, to cry, and ^ore complain with^ll.
For lo of late, where she and I did go,
A man we met, a father grave and wise,
Who (...) you the troth will know)
We were the dro^^e, (...) of earth and (...)
Fond (...),
A leavvd delight, a flying f^nsie light,
A shadow fond, that (...) no shape, but name.
The whole abuse of each good wit or wight,
An idle ground, whereon vain Poets walk,
A cause of ^are, a spring where folly ^^oes
A wicked mean, to nourish wanton talk,
And to conclude, sharp ^ettles under Rose
We were: thus said the Father that we me^.
My Mother bl^sh^, these thundering words to hear,
And from them both, away in have ^ get,
To see if I in Court find better cheer^,
But if no friend, no^ fauo^re I may find,
Nor answer have of that which here I speak,
Farewell, I seek my fortune in the wind,
For Cupid has in head (...).
If Heauen^ (...)
In earth below, I (...) to hide my face.
Chastity suddenly in the view of the Queen, settes upon Cupid, and spoils
him of his Coatch, Music the mean time.
Bow and all, and sets him afoo^e, and so rides, in his Coatche to the Queen,
and speaks as follows.
Chastity speaks.
TO strive with boys that stands on bragges and braue^
I thought great scorn, till Cupid I espyde,
But that proud ladde, that makes so many (...),
Must needs find one, to daunt his Peacocks pride.
Dame Chastit^e is she that winnes the field,
Whose breast is armd with thoughts of virtues (...),
Who to the fight does bring no glittering shield,
But c^eane conceytes, which pure and bl^ssed are,
That strikes down lust, and tames the wilful mind,
Maynteynes the just, and holds up learning both;
And wisdom great, through me the Sages find,
Philosophers, the lovers of the troth.
Yea Kings and Queens by me work wonders still,
Do conquer Realms, and Wisdom do attain.
The studious minds, whose knowledge, wit, and skill,
And all the world does fame and glory gain
That chastely lives, it talks with God above,
It climbes the Clouds from pomp and pleasures vain.
It is a thing that shining Angels love,
And in the world to come shall live and reign.
It triumph makes of fickle fond desire,
It breeds great force and courage still in men,
It quenches sparks and flames of fancies fire,
It quickes the wits, and helps the art of pen,
Yea all good gifts from Chastity does rise
That worthy are of honor under Skies.
Then since (o Queen) chaste life is thus thy choice,
And that thy heart is free from bondage yoke,
Thou shall (good Queen) by my consent and voice,
Have half the spoil, take either bow or cloak.
The bow (I think) more fit for such a one
In fleshly form, that bears a heart of stone
That none can wound, nor pearce by any mean.
Wherefore take here the bow, and learn to shoot
At whom thou will, thy heart it is so clean,
Blind Cupids boltes therein can take no root.
Now will I say in this poor Coatch of mine,
To mount the Skies, and see the Gods divine.
CUPID commes running afoote like a vagabond toward the Queen, from
Wantonness and Riot where he was succored, and meets again in open show the
Philosopher, whose habitation was in a Rock, and the Philosopher demaundes of
CUPID where he has bin, and what is the cause he commes abroad in such
disorder.

The Philosopher speaks.
HOw now my friend, where have thou (...) other plight I trow
Thou wast, when lately I thee met, has Cupid lost his bow?
His cloak? his Coatch^ his wit and all? and fled from mothers face?
Or else has Cupid gone to Schole, to learn some pretty Grace?
To play the God, fie foolish boy, leave of these toys in time,
Thy Mother (as the Poets feign,) when beauty was in prim^
A st^umpet was, it may be so, as well appears yet,
Thou art not of the race of Gods, thou art some Beggars chitte.
Cupid. Nay doting fool, that still do pore on Books,
Though Coatch be gone, and golden cloak be lost,
Yet like a God, I tell thee Cupid looks,
When old gray beard shows like a rotten post.
It ill becommes an aged man to rail
On women thus, that are not now in place,
But sure thy words are spent to small avail,
They can not blot my mother, nor my race.

Philosopher. But do thou think thou art ^ God^ then show some proof
thereof.

Cupid. That can I do, but you old men, with boys will jest and scoff,
And either laugh to scorn our words, or taunt us past the nick.

Philosopher. Believe not that, but when in deed we enter near the quick,
Ye wincke like Coltes, and fling away from wit and feeling seen,
Well Cupid, prove thou art a God, and show some good defense,
To this thy talk, I will give ear, and silence keep a while,
Until thy w^^ds have g^ne so far, thy folly makes me smyle.

Cupid. The greatest Clerks that erst have bin, three thousand years ago,
When they on Venus talk or treat, takes Cupids part ye know.
T^eir books, their scrolles, their pa^phlets large, makes me^tio^ of my name,
You need no furt^er search for proof, to try out Cupids fame.

Philosopher. Boast not of booke^, for books they be, that plainly witness
bears
How Cupids art infects good minds, and canckers honest ears.
And though fond men in liables show on you a flourish fine,
Such geegawes grees not with good rules, nor holds on gifts divine.

Cupid. Why Sir, you will believe, that Jove and many more
Of other Gods in Heaven are, where I have bin before?

Philosopher. In Heaven? there you trippe, why boy how came you thence?
You went abroad to take the air, and have bin walking senc^
Like dawes along the coast, O boy, thy proof is bare,
In Heaven is but one that rules, no other Gods there are.

Cupid. And does not Jove and Mars bear sway? (...) that is tru^.

Philosopher. Then put in Tom and Tibbe, and all bears sway as much as yo^.

Cupid. I told you Sir before, your taunting tongue would bite.

Philosopher. I come too near the sore, and please not your deligh^.
But since you (...) for naught, and can not hear the truth,
I will not shame my hoarie hears, to strive with wanton youth.
This Cupid, Venus son, as men suppose to be,
Is neither God nor Man in form, nor monster as you see,
But such a kind of shade, as can no substance shoe,
Begot by braynelesse blind delight, and nursed with natures foe.
Fed up with faithless food, and traynd in trifling toys,
Awakt with vice, and luld asleep again with yrkesome joys.

Wantonness and Riotte commes in, and talks with CUPID, and so takes him
away. Wantonness. ARt thou so fond to talk with doting age,
This Man did bring thy mother in a rage,
And told her plain, a Goddess faynd she was,
Most leavvd of life, and brittle as the glass,
I VVa^tonnesse know well that tale is true,
To this my friend now R^^tte what say you?

Riotte. I could say much, but I will hold my peace,
Foul is that bird that his own neast defiles.
If Riot should not speak, that Ven^^ knows so well,
(With whom since Cupid bare a name, did wanto^ Ven^^ dwell)
Much pity were it sure, that Riot life should bear,
For I am father of delight and pleasure every where.
Without the help of whom, Dame Ven^^ can not live,
For unto Lust and Riot both, does Venus honor give.
And Lust is Riots joy, a spright that pleades for place
In every soil, since world began to boast of Adams race.
And now to tell you plain, from me, or from my stock,
(An endless swarm of idle of folk, a merry careless flock)
As prating Poets feign, at first did Ven^s spring,
But Venus was no strumpet sure; she was some finer thing
That always furthers Love, in French a (...) ^ plain,
A be^ter of good barg^ynes often, and root of fancyes vain.
Though Goddess were she not, yet fair and fine was she,
As I have heard good Clerks report, and you in Books shall (...)
Of her great Stories made, and great account this day
We make of Venus darlings still, wherefore in brief to say,
Both I and thousands more, with (...) needs must hold.
It Was she, to whom King Pri^^s sonn^ did give the apple of gold
That cost so many (...) but r^^de the seege of Tr^y,
And you shall see what pretty pranckes the mother and this boy
Has played in many parts, my knowledge is but small,
I tell by heeresay many things, but am not learnd at all
Good Wanto^nesse thou know, but p^sse ore that awhile
I could tell tales of Ven^^ yet, would make the hearers smile.

Wantonness. O speak no more, come comfort Cupid now*
Let Venus go, that ^ate and saw with eye
The order great, and all the manner how
Dame C^astitie did mount to Starrie Sky
With such a Coatch, and such a noble spoil,
As seldom h^th in Heaven often bin seen.
She said, when she had Cupid put to foil,
She gave his bow and shaftes unto a Queen.
And Cupid straight came running unto me.
I saw him bare, and sent him bare away,
And as we are in deed but bare all three,
So must we part as poorly as we may.
No reasoning here with him that learned is,
Philosophers knows more than wanton fools,
If we had once bin beaten well ear this
And lovd our Books, and truly plyde our Schools,
We had bin learnd, yea livd, and felt no lack,
Where now our wealth is all upon our back.

Ri^tte. By sweet Saint John we are in goodly weede^,
To dance with belles a Morric^ throu^h the Streets.
If any here, three idle people need^s,
Call us in time, for we are finefor sheets:
Yea, for a shift, to steal them from the hedge,
And lay both sheets, and linen all to gage.
We are best be gone, least some do hear allege
We are but Roages, and clappe us in the Cage.
Come Cupid come, if thou will hear a song,
Dame Chast^ti^ has sent her Coatch along,
To comfort those, that daily lives in woe.

Cupid. NAy Cupid will, go hang himself I tro^.
Much better were, to fall on p^ynt of knife,
Than from rich state, to lead a beggars life.

Cupid, Wantonness, and Riot, departs, and the Coatch softly commes on, with
such Music as is devised, and sings not, until the Coatch be before the
Queeue, in the mean while the Philosopher speaks.
Philosopher. NOw world may judge what fables are, and what vain gods there b^,
What names and titles fondlings give, to the^, likewise you see,
And that one God alone does rule, the rest no virtue show,
Vain Venus and blind C^pid both, and all the ragment row
And rabble of Gods, are feigned things, to make the season short,
As wisdom knows that well ca^ wey, the worth and weight of sport.
Through trifles light, sad things are seen, through vice is virtue found,
By hollow ways, and crooked paths, app^^res the playnest ground.
Thus leaving unto wisdoms reach, the things that here are done,
And fearing foil, if here we should, in further folly run,
We stay, save that, some Music commes, to knitte in order due,
The substance of this (...) Show, that we present to you.

Modesty speaks.
DAme Chastity we serve, and wait upon her still,
Save now, that she is called to Clouds, to know (...) will.
She bad us walk abroad, and search, where might be seen
In stately troop, and royal Court, a worthy noble Queen.
Salute her in my name, and l^oke in secret sort
(Quoth she) you do with all your force, maynteyne her princely port.
Good exercise as chief, thy humble duty do,
Let Shamefastness, and Modesty, and sober Temprance too,
Attend as handmaydes still, upon that sacred dame.
We hearing what our mistress said, and marking well the same,
Did have us hither straight, but ere we went at large,
Ieb^us sent us Graces great, and gave us power and charge,
(When pomp is most in place) to creep in princely heart,
And gide the mind, and thoroughly search, the soul and every part.
That still the fear of God, be burning in her breast,
There is the only house O Queen, where we four maids will rest,
There we will service show, there shall our (...) budde,
There is the plot, the seat, the soil, and place to do most good.
Yea under richest roabes, we have a power to go,
In fair^st weeds are cleanest thoughts, and purest minds I know.
The earlish Country cloyne, yea clad in smeared cloak,
With ca^ckred heart, and currish lokes, sits grinning in the smoke.
The comely clean attire, does carry mind aloft,
Makes man think Seo^^e to stoop to vice, and look to Virtue often.
The Sun that s^^neth bright, has virtues manifold,
A gallant flower has pleasant smell, great goodness is in gold.
So gay and glittring Dame, thy graces are not small,
Thy heavenly gifts in greatest prease, in deed surmou^ts the^ all.
Wensday.
THE Wensday her highness (...) at my Lord of Surreys, where were the French
Ambassadors also, and a most rare and delicate Dinner and Banquette. At
which season I did watch with a Show (called MANHOOD and DEZARTE,) at my
Lord of Surreys back door, going to the Queens Barge: but the row^e was so
little, that neither the Shot, the Armed men, nor the Players, could have
place conueniente: Whereupon we took Boats, and conveyed our people down the
water, toward a landing place that we hoped the Queen would come unto. And
there having all things in a readiness, hoouered on the water three long
hours, by which mean the night came on, and so we were feign to withdraw^
our selves and go homewarde, trusting for a better time and occasion, which
in deed was offered the next day after by the Queens Majesty's own good
motion, who told me she would see what pastimes were prepared, as hereafter
you shall perceive by the discourse of these matters that I mean to make, and
by this Show of MANHOOD, and the Show of the NYMPHS, which I mind fully and
truly to treat of.

Thurseday.
THe Thurseday in the morning, my Lord Chamberlain gave me warning ye Queens
highness would ride abroad in the after noone, and he commanded me to be
ready, dutifully to present her with some Show. Then knowing which way the
Queen would ride (by conjecture and instructions given) I caused a place to
be made and dug for the Nymphs of the water, the manner and proportion
whereof, was in this form and fashion. First, there was measure taken for
threescore foot of ground every way, the hole to be made deep and four
square, which ground was covered with a Canuas painted green like the grass,
and at every side on the Canuas, ran a string through Curtayne rings, which
string might easily be drawn any kind of way, by reason of two great poales
that lay along in the ground, and answered the Curtayne or Canuas on each
side so, that drawing a small cord in the middle of the Canuas, the earth
would seem to open, and so shut again, as ye other end of the cord was
drawn backward. And in the same cave was a noble noise of Music of al kind
of instruments, severally to be sounded and played upon, and at one time they
should be sounded all together, that might serve for a consorte of broken
Music. And in the same cave likewise was placed twelve water Nymphs,
desguised or dress^d most strangely, each of them had either upon white Silk,
or fine linen, green segges, stitched cunningly on a long garment, so well
wrought, and set on, as scarce (...) whit might be perceived. And every Nymph
had in her hand a great bundell o^ bulrushes, and had on her head a Garland of
Iuievnder the which Iuie was a Coyfe of Moss, and under the Moss was there
long goodly hear like golden tresses that covered her shoulders, and in a
manner, raughte down unto her middle. And touching the beauty of the Nymphs,
they ^rmed to be the chosen children of a world, and became their attire so
well, that their beauty might have abused a right good judgment, for diverse of
those that knew them before, (albeit they were bare faced) could scarce know
them in their garments, and sundry took them to be young girls and wenches,
prepared for the nonce, to procure a laughter. These Nimphs thus apparelled,
and all things in very good plight and readynesse, there was devised, that at
the Queens coming near the water side (as this cave stood at the brimme of
the River) one Nymph should poppe up out of the cave first, and salute the
Queen with a speech, and then another, and so till four of them had finished
their speeches, there they should remain, and when they retired into their
cave, the Music should begin, which sure had bin a noble hearing, and the
more melodious, for the variety thereof, and because it should come secretly
and strangely out of the earth. And when the Music was done, then should all
the twelve Nymphs have issued together, and daunced a dance with Timbrels
that were tr^mmed with belles, and other ^angling things, which Timbrels were
as broad as a Seeue, having bottoms of fine parchment, and being sounded, made
such a confused noise, and pastime, that it was to be wondered at, besides the
strangeness of the Timbrels (yet known to our forefathers) was a matter of
admiration to such as were ignorante of that new found toy, gathered and
borrowed from our elders. So in order and readiness stood that Show for the
time. And to keep that Show company (but yet far off) stood the Show of
Manhood and Dezart, as first to be presented, and that Show was as well
furnished as the other, Men all, saving one Boy, called Beauty, for the which
Manhood, Favor, and Dezarte, did strive (or should have contended) but good
Fortune (as victor of all conquestes) was to come in, and overthrow Manhood,
Favor, Dezarte, and all their powers, and only by fine force (upon a
watchword spoken) should lay hand on Beauty, and carry or lead her away.
The other suitors troubled with this kind of dealing, should talk together,
and swear to be in one mind, for an open revenge, and upon that Fortune
should cry arm, arm. The other side called for their friends, at which
(...) should appear both their strengthes: but good Fortune should fair in
power exceed his enemies: And yet to show that Destenie, (and who best can
co^quer) shall govern all, Fortune should make an offer, that sir to six with
sword and targette should end the brawle and business: then six Gentlamen
on either side with rebated swords and targets (only in dublet and hose, and
Morion on head) approached, and would claim the combat, and deal together
twelve blows a piece, and in the end Fortune should be victor: and then the
Shot, and Armed men should fall at variaunce so sharply (upon mystaking of
the matter) that Fortunes side should triumph and march over the bellies of
their enemies: in which time was legs and arms of men (well and lively
wrought) to be let fall in numbers on the ground, as bloody as might be.
Fortune regarding nothing but victory, marches so away in great triumph, and
then should have come into the place a doleful song for the death of Manhood,
Favor, and Dezartes, and so the Show should have ended. But now note what
befell after this great business and preparation, for as the Queens highness
was appointed to come to her Coatch, and the Lords and Courtiers were ready to
mount on Horseback, there fell such a shoure of rain (and in the neck
thereof came such a terrible thunder) that every one of us were driven to seek
for couerte and most comfort, in so much, that although some of us in Boat
stood under a Bridge, we were all so dashed and washed, yt it was a greater
pastime to see us look like drowned ^attes, than to have beheld the uttermost
of the Shows rehearsed. Thus you see, a Show in the open field is always
subject to the suddayne change of weather, and a number of more incoueniences
than Ierpresse. But what should I say of that which the City lost by this
cause, Ueluets, Silks, Tinsels, and some cloth of gold, being cut out for
these purposes, and could not serve to any great effect after. Well, there was
no more to say, but an old Adage, yt Man does purpose, and God does dispose,
to whose disposition and pleasure I ^^mmitte the guide of greater matters. So
this (...) took his leave from us, and left us looking one upon another, and
he that thought he had received most injury, kept greatest silence, and
lapping up, among a ^undle of other mysfortunes this evil chance, every person
quietly passed to his lodging. The next day was the Queen to depart the
town, and I fearing that all my labor should be lost, devised to convert
the Nymphs of the water, to the Fairies on the land, as hereafter shall
appear: In the meanewhile I have set down the four speeches that four
Nymphs should have spoken at the Waterside, where the Queen was looked for:
And withal, I have written the order and parts of the Show of MANHOOD and
DEZARTES, that no one thing that was well meante, should sleep in silence. And
first and form^st you must conceive, that the Show of MANHOOD was invented to
be playde in a Garden, or wheresoever had been ^ound a conueniente place, the
Prince then being in presence. And unto her Highness should there have come a
Lady called Beauty, humbly on knees, requiring aid and succoure, or else
judgment, in a matter disputable, and in great controversy, upon whose suit
and humble intercession, the disputation was to begin in order as follows,
in manner of a Dialoge, the parts whereof are here for you to read at your
leisure, and after the same, as the Show of the Nymphs should have bin,
shall their parts follow in like sort.

First, Lady Beauty speaks, and she attyred in very goodly garments as
becomes such a Dame.
MOst royal Prince, speed on thy comely pace,
Make have in time, to do thy subjects good,
Go r^nne with me, to stay this heavy case,
Take p^ynes good Queen, to gain the giltlesse blood.
In one man's life, save lives of many more,
Save him in whom, the state of others stays,
For I poor wretch, God knows am minded so,
With him to live, with him to end my days.
Who now in force, of Tyrants hands does lie,
And vaynely strives, to escape his helpless fate,
Who sees his death, and doleful date so nigh,
Go have to help, and yet perhaps too late.
Manhood. YEt were I best, to kill this peevish Boy,
Whom now she makes, her chief and sole delight,
In whom she finds, such pleasure and such joy,
That causeless I, am clean defaced quite.
Such gaudyes gay, are in his Peacocks face,
And skin smooth^ up, with show of idle hue,
That I do lodge, and languish in disgrace,
Though she of me, has proof of promise true.
Well, make thy choice* and see what likes thee best,
View he ere the death, of this thy darling now,
Or yield thy love, to fancy my request,
Whose manly force, shall win the conquest throw.

Beauty. NAught shall thou win, by that which I shall lose,
Thou ge^st no gaynes, though I be thus bereft,
And though that I, between two mischiefs goes,
Where naught but bale, and wretched woe is les^*
Yet thy reward, which do assault my friend,
(In whose delight, my heart was fed long whyl^)
Shall be disdeyne, and hatered in the end,
A guerdo^ ^itte, for such a Tyrant vile.

Manhood. THis wretch is he, by whom I am annoyde,
He has thy heart, though I deserve the same,
If wisely then, I do my harms avoid,
Why stey I sword, I can not purchase blame,
By cutting off, the cause of my distress,
When he is gone, my let shall be the less.

Beauty. HOw can thou say, thou do dezerue my heart,
Which kilst my heart, and causest all my woe,

Manhood. SInce that thou take, my dealing in such part,
I will delight, to wreake my wrath on ^oe.
In greeuing thee, most glad to hear me groan,
And art most pleased, when Manhood makes his moan^.

Beauty. O Gracious Prince, to thee my moan I make,
And prostrate fall, O Prince before thy foot,
With wonted grace, on me some pity take,
O salve my sore, let sorrow find some boot.
I swelt in sighs, and sure shall dye to see
My friend dispatched, and murthred in this wise,
O bid the wretch, come thrust his sword in me,
For from my love, the cause of grief does rise.
I made the fault, then punish me therefore,
Shall silly Lamb, be led to slaughter thus?
Do either help, with death my endless sore,
Or with remorse, and ruth the case discuss,
If he do dye, by Mighty Iou^ I swear
I will not live, if sword or knife be found,
With scratched face, (...)*
I know at first, my (...),
And then ad^^, my (...), steal away
O Queen, in have, (...)

Manhood. SInce (...) O Prince, forbidst revenge to take,
(...) wilst that men* should lose their time in love,
Then mark my case, and give me leave to make
Myn^ own defense, and (...) allea^ge and prove,
And I will show (...) right and title good,
And that I do, des^rue the (...).
Though this fond wretch, always my suit withstoode,
As one who long, (...),
Whom leavvd delight, has led out of the way,
(Which good Advise, and ord^ed Judgment keep)
Whom Beauties blast has ^ounst against the (...),
Where eraggy tockes, and sands lie ^idde in deep,
A fond device to trust to pay^ted face,
And fasten faith upon so fickle ^l^y,
To whom D^me H^be, lends often gui^efull grace,
Which every year and day does pluck away,
Whom sickness spoils, and (...),
Whom time does eat and age (...),
Whom ^ares of mind do shake and alter so,
As VVinter winds defaceth (...)*
A snare for wit, a b^yte for wanton youth,
A false conceyte, an error of the mind,
A fond delight, wherein there is no truth,
A poisoned dish, th^^ does the reason bli^d*
A color cast on things that are but (...),
A glorious show, to shrowde a homely part,
A rule to run, a leavvd and retchlesse (...),
A deep deceyte, which daunteth often the heart.
In rage of youth, these pricking thi^tles grows,
VVhiles Riot ^aynes, and Folly bear^s the sway
In hoarie age, (...),
Where (...).
The weaker ^exe, in (...)
The infant has, the, (...)*
The hurtful weed, which (...),
To view of eye, does (...).
In outward shower, in deed^ the trust in small,
They are but clokes, and (...),
The virtuous mind, and (...),
Which gaynes (...).
Dame Ven^^ loves, the (...) and warlike Knight,
Though once alas, she loud (...).
And Ladies which, do love (...),
Love such as can, their (...).
What could this (...)*
Whom could this (...)
Judge thou O Queen, which of us two could make
The better shift, and force the worst to yield.

Good favor. YEt let me plead, my cause before my Queen
As thou have done, and sentence after crave,
Then shall the truth, of our two (...) be seen,
I crave no spoil, but wish the thing I have.
Why should my beauty, purchase my (...)*
Why should my praise, become (...)*
Why should Dame Natures gifts be thought so bass,
Which heretofore have bin in greater name?
Who ever could, enforce the Gods with might,
To yield themselves, as conqured with his strength?
Yet Beauty has, subdude them with his sight,
And made them ^end, and bow to him at length.
Whom force subdues, with sad unwilling heart,
Submittes themselves, and grieve at every strok^:
Who beauty winnes, and gaynes unto his part,
They gladly grant, to take the pleasant yoke.
Thy strength thou may, full many a VVinter ^^ide,
Till time does serve, to show the same in place,
Sweet Beauty can, no moment be vnspide,
But does delight, each one with gladsome grace.
Dame Natures show, and Riches Beauty is,
A Heavenly gift, to ravish every eye,
A perfect Pear^e, wherein is naught but bliss,
Delight of men, delight of Gods on high.
Apollo pleased, himself with Golden hear,
H^a^e delights, the Gods with comely ^^ue,
God Venus often, her tender breast did tear,
When she Ado^i^ death was feign to (...).
P^^^bus did mourn, when his delight was slain,
With great mishappe, and error of his hand,
But Gannimed, above with Jove does reign.
And waiting on, his Nectars cup does stand.
What should I speak, of him who at the brook,
The wanton Nymphs, in love supprisd away,
Or him whom Ph^eb, in to her Chariot took,
Or him, whose beauty di^d the morning gray,
The Gods in beauty, pass each mortal wight,
And men surmount, in form the fairest beast,
And yet of them, some are more brave in sight,
Whose natures are, more fined than the rest.
The ugly Tode, swel^ out his poison cold,
A crabbed corpse, commes of a churlish kind,
No ragged mold, the virtue rare can hold,
A seemly face, declares a modest mind.
The fairest Horse will swiftest run his race,
The gallantst Hound, will soonest wind his game,
What need I more, to treat upon this case,
The hearers shall, be iudgers of the same,
If Beauties gifts, and favor you exile,
Then Manhood must, be here preferred the while.

Dezart. STay judgment Prince, and let my case be know
Whose friendly toil, deserves to rea^e his gayn
Mine earnest ^ute, may not be thus orethrowen,
So long employed, in hope and endless pain.
I see these men, prease boldly here in place,
Unfolds great words, and long deb^tes the case:
And braues it out, with goodly gallant Shows,
Which I will not, eclips nor blot at all,
My claim is good, and that just God he knows,
What need I then, my right in question call.
I have no force, nor skill in marshiall field,
I boast not of my fresh and flouring hue,
Nor yet need not, in any point to yield,
That can allege, Dezarts and service true.
My travel then, and truth may not be l^st,
Nor my good will, be recompenst with wrong*
Nor he that has, with tempests sore bin tossed*
And tasted griefs, and bitter torments long,
May not so soon, be shaken off for naught,
I take fine terms* to show my secret thought:
The Gods accepts, our duty in good part,
The Prince rewards, the bills of our request,
The greatest men, consider but the heart,
The friendly means, can ^ame the wildest beast.
And Women who, in softest mouldes be cast,
Whose tender hearts, rues on our careful cries,
Must needs be won, with loving means at last,
To ease our playntes, and wipe our watered eyes.
True love of right, must recompensed be,
Dezart must needs, fly far beyond the rest,
Then grant O Prince, this precious prise to me,
Whose loyal love, claymes place above the b^st.

Good fortune. MVch words are spent, where speech shall not prevail,
Long time is lost, in threats and fond dispute,
Though I good Hap, have borne but simple ^ayle,
And went aloof, it is I must end this suit,
And reason bring, as victor of the field,
Unto whose troth, your weak^ discourse shall yield.
Fair Beauty here, for whom you fondlings strive,
May move, I grant, a God to like her well,
But though she were, the fairest thing alive,
(As sure indeed, her beauty does excel)
Is that a proof, that you in love must fall,
With that which naught pertaynes to you at all?
Admit her mind, by mean of some consayte,
With sweet delight, of fancy may be led,
Your eagre eyes, most greedy of such bayte,
In forward hope, a season has bin fed.
Shall she be spoyld, for favor she bestowe^
In friendly sort, and not in faithful wise?
Nay sure, she shall, ne fame nor freedom lose,
For fraylties faults, or use of gracious eyes.
But to the point, and purpose of your stri^e,
One pleades good will, by shape and favor got,
(A gallant Boy, to please a pleasant wife)
Another tells a penned ^ale by rote,
Bedeckt and fylde with ynck^o^ne terms ynow.
The third commes in, and calls himself Dezart,
And each of them are seen in Stories throw,
And finely seeks to conquer Love by art.
Great slight is vsd, and Clarkly cunning both,
To force a right, and judgment in this case,
Dezart, ^e tells a trim discourse of troth,
The (...) wigge makes boast of shining face.
And Courage he, by Manhood claymeth all.
Great points they are, that pleaded are this day,
And unto whom, the Lady now should fall,
Some doubts may rise, if reason bore the sway.
But to be brief, fair Shape and comely port,
The wise men hold, but outward blossoms vain,
And Manhoods force, may here be knitte up short,
Stout hearts may not, alone the glory gain:
Nor yet Deza^t, that nearest goes the gole,
May win the prise, and thrust his better back,
For he it is, that has the greatest dole,
That does in deed, no piece of Fortune lack.
Good Fortune still, a Lord of worldly chance
Is only judge, himself, of all is done,
Bid Strength stand back, good Fortune leads the Dance,
Fine shape likewise, with Fortune dare not run.
Dezart is dead, where Fortune men advance.
So here I prove, since I good Fortune have,
This Dame is mine, her destnie wills it so,
In Mothers womb, the Gods this gift me gave,
She ordeynd was, with me away to go.
Each worldly grace, and rule with Fortune flies,
A wife must needs, then sto^pe to destnyes lot.
Wherefore I here, possess this noble prize,
As Jewel rich, by hap and Fortune got.
Who strives to take, her now from me by force,
Shall have withal, my breath and vital corse.

Then talk the other three privily together, and Manhood speaks to Good
Fortune as follows. Manhood. ME thinks most fond, and weakly commes be here
Alone to three, if we together stood:
And though in deed, we buy the quarrel dear,
And pay therefore, the sweetest of our blood,
Yet let us show, the noble hearts of men,
For since he says, we all our labor lose,
Not one of us, shall need to sorrow then,
Nor care a fig, how ere the matter goes.

Dezart. A Gree^, though I Dezart have double wrong,
I will revenge the same by dint of sword,
And you shall see, I will not dally long
To do my best, since I have spoke the word.
Despayred men, dare fight with Fortune still,
And scratch for life, as long as breath will last,
When hope is gone, I know no better skill,
But bide the brunt, till all the broyle be past.
Let love and life, together make an end,
The heart shall feel, and hand shall head defend.

Good favor. THough I speak last, that first found special grace,
In foremost ^ight, look you for tender years,
And judge him not, a Milkesoppe by his face,
That stoutely like a Man at need appears.
Great skorne I think, good Fortune should have all,
And reap the right, that labor long has sown,
Yea, Favor has perhaps more friends at call,
Than you would think, or to the world is known.

Here follow the Speeches of the water Nymphs, which should have bin showed
upon the Thurseday, had not evil weather hindered the same.
The first Nymphs Speech.
WE Water Nimphs have time to sport, and skip in every place,
When days are long, and nights be short, and Phoebus hides his face*
And hearing that there came a Queen, along this water side,
So long as we poor silly Nymphs, on land dare well abide,
We dance, we hop, and bounse it up, in honor of her name,
To whom Diana and her train, does give immortal fame.
The second.
WE shun the Sun, yet love the Moon, and hate the open light,
We hide our heads amid the Reeds, in blustering stormy night.
In calmest weather do we play, yet seldom seen we are,
We watch our times, and flee from those, that still do on us stare.
We harm no wight, yet fearful be, to those that have no spreete,
We are some hold of VVome^s sex, and glad with me^ to meet.
The third.
THe Phayri^s are another kind, of el^es that dance in dark,
Yet can light Candles in the night, and vanish like a spark,
And make a noise and rumbling great, among the dishes often,
And wake the sleepie sluggish Maids, that lies in Kitchen loft.
And when in field, they tread the grass, from water we repair,
And hoppe and skippe, with the^ sometime, as weather waxes fair*
The fourth and last that called them into their cave.
What rule is this, what tales tell you, what babble do you make*
Will you tell secrets out of Schole? beware, if bugges awake
You will be shent, come hye you hence, can ye abide the view,
The gaze, and staring such a while, of all this noble crew?
Though that we came to honor her, that Gods on high have blessed,
It is a shame for water Nymphs, on earth so long to rest.
Then suddaynely shou^de they all have departed into the ground, where was an
heavenly noise of all kind of Music prepared, and nothing seen at all, when
the painted Canuas had bin drawn over their heads, as the descripti^n thereof
does declare. Fridayes Device.
ON the Friday, the Court upon remove, the City troubled with many causes, and
some seeking to do service like my self, moved me to do somewhat of my self,
because mine aids (as many tunes they were before) were drawn from me, each
one about his own business, and I left to mine own inventions and policy,
at which erigente, or casual things of Fortune, I drew my Boys unto me,
that were the Nymphs on the water, and so departed the City, with such
garments and stuff necessary as fitted my purpose and the matter I went
about. Then chose I a ground, by the which the Queen must pass, enclosing my
company in the corner of a field, being defenced with high and thick bushes,
and there some parts I made, which the Boys might miss, because the time was
short for the learning of those parts. But I being resolved to do some what
might make the Queen laugh, appointed that seven Boys of twelve, should
pass through a hedge from the place of our abode (which was gallantly
trimmed) and deliver seven speeches, which follow in the next leaf. And
these Boys (you must understand) were dressed like Nymphs of the water, and
were to play by a device and degrees the Phayries, and to dance (as near as
could be ymagined) like the Phayries. Their attire, and coming so strangely
out, I know made the Queens highness smyle and laugh withal. And I hearing
this good hope, being apparelled like a water Sprite, began to sound a
Timbrell, and the rest with me, all the twelve Nymphs together (when the
seven had repaired in) sounded Timbrels likewise. And although I had no great
harting, yet as I durst, I led the young foolish Phayries a dance, which
boldness of mine bredde no disgrace, and as I heard said, was well taken. The
Queen upon our retiring in, hasted to her Highness lodging, which was seven
Miles off, and at that present, when the Show ended, it was past fiu^ of the
cl^cke.

Thus have you truly heard the report of mine own works and inventions,
with the which did no any o^e deal but my self. And as I have made a recital
of matters done in Norwich, so mean I a little to treat of the Queens
return from thence, in as short and brief order as I may, and the briefer,
because I have not all the Gentlemen's names, in whose houses the Queen lay,
and who bestowed some entertaynemente on the train, but those, in whose houses
I was (and where I saw or heard any thing worthy memory) I mind to speak of,
and touch, praying you that shall read the same, to pardon me, where I omit
any matter or men that merits commendation, for it is not want of good will
that shall make me forget any good entertaynementes bestowed on the Court, but
it is want of knowledge that shall cause me so slightly run over the
causes, and make a brief report ther^of, as knows God, who grant and send
our Queen often to such pleasant Progresses, and increase good people and
loving subjects to show the like duty and order, as has been orderly seen
in this season, and time of triumph.

The Queen of Phayries Speech.
THough clean against the Phayries kind, we come in open view^,
(And that the Queen of Phayries here, presents hirselfe to you)
Some secret cause procures the same: the Gods at first, ye know,
In field to honor thee good Queen, did make a gallant show:
Should we that are but sprites of thaire, refuse to do the same?
No sure, for Gods and mortal men, shall serve thee noble Dame.
The second.
When Mercury came first in Coatch, a message to unfold,
(And Mask of Gods amid the night, in chamber secrets told)
We warned were to shape our selves, to do what Jove assignd,
But water Nymphs stepped in the while, and so expressed their mind,
And thrust poor Phayries out of place, yet we: ^or fear of soil,
VVatcht here our time, and for our sports, did chose this certain soil.
The third.
YEa out of hedge we crept in deed, where close in caves we lay,
And knowing by the brute of fame, a Queen must pass this way,
To make her laugh, we clapped on cotes, of Segges and Bulrush both,
That she should know, and world should say, lo there the Phayries goth,
Like Furies mad, and Satyrs wild yet lo, we have in store
Fine Timbrels, that the Auntients use, to make the show the more.
The fourth.
When saints and souls, and sprites of me^, from Heaven down did fling*
(And Ieboua spoke, and Clouds did shake, and many a crowned King.
Crept out of grave, to honor thee, we ready were to wait,
But Hagges of Hell, and damned Feends, that feeds on false desayt
Did blush to see thy presence Queen, but we that harmless were,
Kept love in store, to show at length our duty void of fear.
The fifth.
But when that Cupid was condemnd, and Venus fell in rage,
And Wantonness and Riot rude, for knackes were clapped in cage,
And all the ragment row of Gods, to one great God gave place,
We silly Phayries were afeard, therewith to show our face.
Yet when we saw a Mask well likt, and Gods condemnd appear,
We did consult, at last farewell, the Phayries should be here.
The sixth.
But with Orations good and great, to wall the weak was thrust,
Yet when the strongest did their best, of force yet speak we must.
For Jove that all commands, and does, bade us to watch the hour,
And show no more at this adue, than was in Phayries power.
So keeping course of Jove's command, we speak that is in breast,
And leave the Queen and all the train, with wit to judge the rest.
The seventh.
WIth Gods, yea kings and Queen's, bega^s your entry to this place,
With gentle Gosts and merry sprites, we mind to end the case.
So in good sign of happy chance, to thee O sacred Queen,
To knit up all, we mean to dance with Timbrels on this green.
And then farewell, we can no more, salute thee in our gise,
All that is done, by great good will, is offered to the wise.
Then came the Phayries out with Timbrels, and daunced a while, and so
departed, and there withal the Queen went on her way to her highness
lodging. Her Highness return from Norwich.
Now to come to the return of the Queens Majesty from Norwich, I think it
as necessary to be told, as the rest of matter penned before, not chiefly
for the cheer and entertaynemente ^ounde returning, but for other ca^ses meet
to be rehearsed. But to be tedious in that behalf, and dwell longer on the
discourses of the entertaynement than is requisite, I should but weerie you
with the reading thereof. So to avoid the doubts of mi^^^king, and danger of
this fine world, and sifting senses, I will plainly fall to the troth of
things that I mean to have understood. And so as I have heretofore said, the
Queen passing from Norwich, came to Master Woodhouses that night, where she
was well re^eyned, and nobly entertained. From thence to Wodde rising, the
cheer and entertaymente there I saw not, wherefore I give it no great
commendation. From thence to The^forde at Sir Edward Cleeres. The train have
told me (that was there) how they were worthily feasted. From thence to Sir
Thomas Kidsons, where in very deed, the fare and banquets did so exceed a
number of other places, that it is worthy the mention. A Show representing the
Phayries (as well as might be) was there seen, in the which Show, a rich
Jewel was presented to the Queens Highness. From thence to Master Reeuets,
where all things were well, and in very good order, and meat liberally spent.

But now to speak a little by the way of Gods mighty hand and power, that
framed men's hearts so well in many parts, before the Queens Highness came to
Cambridge Sheere, and to tell how blessedly our great and good God did deal
with our dear Sovereign Lady, in causing every person to show their duty, is
a matter of great discourse, and of no little weight and comfort to all good
minds that shall con^^esse of the same, such a Lord is our great God, that
can frame all things to the best, and such a Sovereign Lady we have, that
can make the crooked paths streighte where she conu^eth, and draw the hearts
of the people after her wheresoever she travels. I had almost passed the
bound^s of my discourse, by a desire of doing well, but remembering where I
left, I begin again, and follow my first intention, to show the return of
the Queen from Norffolke and Suffolk. So from Master Reuets, her Highness
came to my Lord Northes, who was no whit behind any of the best for a frank
house, a noble heart, and well ordered entertaynement, and there was an Oration
made by a Gentleman of Cambridge, and a stately and fair cup presented from
the University, (...) Ambassadors of France beholding the same, and the
Gentlemen of the Shire (as in many other places) did ^eare the Qu^enes meat to
the table, which was a great lik^ng, and gladness to the Gentlemen, and a
solemn sight for Strangers and Subjects to look upon. From my Lord
Northes, to Sir Gyles Allingtons, and there things were well, and well liked.
From thence, to Sir John Cuttes, but what cheer there was found, I know not,
for I was not there. From thence to Master Kapels, where was excellent good
cheer, and entertaynement. From thence to Hide Hall, where I heard of no
great cheer nor banketting. From thence to Rockwood Hall, but how the train
was there entertained, I am ignorant of. From thence to Master Stonars, and
from thence to my L. of Leycesters house, where the Progras ended, and to knit
up all, the good there was reui^ed, not only with making a great feast to ye
Queen, and the French Ambassador, but also in feasting solemnly (at several
times) ye whole Guard, on Sunday and Monday before ye Queen came, at his own
table, using such courtesse unto the^ for the space of two days, as was and is
worthy of perpetual memory. Thus ^old I have bin a little, to speak of ye
Queens Highness retu^ne, who God has so well preserved, that she like a
worthy Prince to our great comfort, prospers in peace, to ye great disgrace of
the enemies of God, and adversaries of our common Weal and Country.

FINIS
quod Tho. Churchyard.

GOod Reader, I had almost forgotten the names of the Gentlemenne that the
Queen made Knights in Suffolk and Norffolke, which oversight had bin a
blotte and blemishe to my Book, because her Highness advanced the^ to the
more Worship, for that they should all their life time after, have the greater
regard to God, and to their Prince.

Their names follow.
Master Colt. Master Parkar. Master Iermine. Master Spring. Master Kydson.
Master Heygham. Master Kneuet. Master Bacon. Master Pastons. Master Grear.
Master Shelton. Master Henry Woodhouse. Master Gaudye. Master Woodde Mayor
of Norwich. Master Roger Woodhouse.
A matter touching the Journey of Sir Humfrey Gilbarte Knight.
THe man that travels much,
with mind and body both,
(Whose restless lims, and labring thoughts,
through heaps of hazards goth,)
A while would gladly rest,
and so some sollace taste,
To sharp the sense, and ease the heart,
that toil does wear and waste.
But though with charged breast,
I seek to steal a nappe,
In hope sound sleeps would soon forget,
the grief of thankelesse hap:
Some cause calls up my Muse,
and bids my vvitts awake,
That down is laid on quiet Coutch,
a little ease to take:
As lately lo you heard,
by Verses penned well,
Which soundes so shrilly through my ears,
and tings so like a Bell,
That though in sad dead sleep,
my vvery body were,
I must rise up and whet my wits,
and lend a loving ear
To that new tale I here,
of friends that hence do go
Unto a soil they never saw,
another world I trow
That few or none have found,
well, what should more be said,
The Journey that my friends do take,
full long in head I wayd,
Yet thought to pause awhile,
(ear pen to paper past)
To see how course of world would go,
and things fell out at last.
And thus in my delay
I caught a slumber sweet,
And sure me thought in fearful dreme,
or sweauon did I meet
The Golden Heart, and other Ships,
that to this voyage goes,
Which Barks were bravely under sail,
where water ebbes and floes.
And where the view of Country soil,
was far from Sailors sight,
And men were forced to try the Seas
in storm or darkest night,
But ear my dream could end,
a voice began call alowde,
(...)
or is he crept in Cloud,
To shun the use of pen
and matter worthy note?
VVhereat I started out of bed,
and straight wey up I got,
And to my Study door
in have therewith I went,
As one that fain would write some thing
that might the World content.
Then brought I unto mind,
the heavy Dream I had,
Yet ear I wrote one English verse,
I called my little ladde,
And bad him run with speed
abroad, and bring some news,
And learn the troth of every thing,
that I might shape my Muse
To please the peoples ears
with fruit of Poets pen.
My Lackey had not vvalkt in Pawles
not twenty pasis then,
But heard that sundry friends
of mine, had taken leave
At Court, and were all Shipte away.
this brute may thee deceive
Thou foolish Boy (quoth I)
nay Sir by sweet Saint John
(Quoth he) (...)
and all his troop is gone.
But whether, no man ^nowes,
save they that are in Bark,
Who with one mind, and one consent,
do hope to hitte one mark.
A ha Sir boy (quoth I)
I knew this long ago,
Shut study door, pack hence a while,
and musing even so,
I marueld how this Knight,
could leave his Lady hee^e,
His friends, and prettie-tender babes,
that he did hold so dear,
And take him to the Seas,
where daily dangers are.
Then wayd I how, immortal Fame,
was more than vvorldly care,
And where great mind remaynes,
the bodies rest is small,
For Countries wealth, for private gain,
or glory seek we all.
And such as marks this world,
and notes the course of things,
The weak and tickle stay of states,
and great affairs of Kings,
Desires to be abroad,
for causes more than one,
Content to live as God appoyntes,
and let the world alone.
Yea such as deeply look,
into these worldly toys,
And freedom of the body still,
and noble mind enioyes,
Are glad to-trudge and toil,
and drive off time awhile,
And at our idle pleasures laughs,
or at our follies smyle:
That will not take some pains,
and try both land and Seas,
For Knowledge seek, and heap of hap,
to do our Country ease.
O Gilbart noble Knight,
God send thee thy desire,
O manly Knolles, and worthy Wight,
whose heart does still aspire,
I wish thee great renown,
and noble Carry too,
And noble North, with Wigmore wise,
I vvish you well to do.
O Ravvley ripe of sprite,
and rare right many ways,
And lively N^^well, God you guide,
to purchase endless praise.
Go comely Cotton too,
and march amidde the rank,
And honest Dennie with the best,
must needs deserve some thank.
George Carry forth I call,
and sure John Roberts here,
A special spark with present wit,
in person shall appear.
Miles Morgan gaynes good Fame,
and VVhe^stone steps in place,
And seeks by travel, and by toil,
to wine him double gr^^ce.
John Vdall is not hid,
nor Rowles I do forgette,
The rest I vow to publish out,
and so dwell in their debt.
But though that Frances Knolles
commes last unto my mind,
Among the first that shall do well,
he will not be behind.
O faithful friends farewell,
I named you all aroe,
For World to view, whiles world does last,
what courage you do shoe.
What charges you are at,
what venture you have made,
And how you seek to traffike there,
where never yet was trade.
And most of you such men,
as livings have at home,
So great and good, that sure abroad
ye need not for to rome:
Fair houses, lands, and wives,
great friends, and of the best,
Good stays and pillars, whereupon
the strongest here may rest:
Well known, and honored both,
in credit every way,
In perfect plighte and state to live,
and laugh, though world say nay.
This strange adieu of youres,
does argue noble hearts,
And in your breasts are noble gifts
and many noble parts.
For having wealth at will,
and world at beck and call,
Propt up with Princes favor still,
so sure ye could not fall:
And yet to leave that hope,
to seek uncertain hap,
And so commit your goods and lives,
to every stormy clappe
That suddayne tempest brings:
me think the venture great,
The value of your valiant minds,
surmountes the fire in heat.
Whereof such hot desires
of doing good, does rise,
The kind (...)
do sparckle thro^^^ (...)
Some people ha (...)
a greedy hope (...)
And heap (...)
does ma^e you (...)
Oh sure that (...)
conceive the case who (...)
For having that (...)
already in (...)
You mean to (...)
as high as eye may look^ (...)
And search (...),
and every secret nooke, (...)
As far as Ship may (...)
I trust for Count (...)
And for the (...)
you offer life and blood (...)
Let world now speak (...)
and babble what they please (...)
What thing (...)
^and so forsake your (...)
It God moud not (...)
to things he liek^^ well
And that your good and deep (...)
wherein you long (...)
Did lead and hall you (...)
as men prepared and (...)
To she^ (...)
and serve the makers thought
That all thing clearly (...).
it is God and your good mind,
That drives you (...)
for any thing I find.
And as he sent you out,
so can he bring you'in,
Yea safely home (...)
at large where you (...)
And now to tell it plain,
not one of all (...)
(Of gentle race) (...)
did hold down head (...)
But bravely bore (...)
which shows no need (...)
That did pro(...)
from hence in have to pass.
Thus sure some other thing
than gain, did cause you go,
Some noble fire that (...),
whose flames of force (...)
Good meaning and good (...)
good fruit and grain (...)
When season serves, and (...)
and hoep for hire does call.
You might have walked the streets,
as other gallants do,
Yea kept the Court and Country both,
in Pavvles have ietted too.
If mind had not bin drawn,
to things of greater weight,
And had not hearts held up your heads
another kind of height,
Perhaps in idle days,
you would set men a work,
And call them to account in have,
that close in corners lurk:
And ask in open place,
how they would spend their time,
And if they say they had no mind
the lofty Clouds to clime,
Yet would you vvish they should
see what on earth is found,
And search the proof, and sail by art,
about the world so round.
At home to tarry still,
but breeds gross blood and wit,
Then better with the Favvcon fly,
than here on dunghill ^itte,
And see how Crows do feed,
on tainted carren bate,
Or live a lea^d and ^retched life,
upon a hungry share.
At home much time is lost,
and never found again,
Much household cares, and common griefs,
do break both sleep and brain.
Abroad men win great wealth,
or knowledge gain at least,
At home we run to wanton sportes,
and smell out every feast.
Abroad small bankets are,
it will not quit the cost,
At home is naught but making love
to every painted post.
Abroad the flesh is tamde,
and brought in fear and frame,
At home often times pride goes before,
and after comes shame.
Abroad we* Wisdom learn,
and do from folly flee,
At home some dance so in a net,
their selves they can not see.
Abroad where service is,
much honor may be won,
At home our gay vayneglory goes,
like shadow in the Sun.
Abroad bare robes are best,
and Manhood makes the show,
At home young Master must be fine,
or all is lost you know.
Abroad fevv quarrels are,
a brawle is bought so sre,
At home they cogge, they (...)
and (...) all (...)
Abroad is (...),
and civil order still,
At home where rudeness keeps no rule,
vvilde wantons take their will.
Abroad may health be got,
for labor lengthens life,
At home the Gout, the (...), the cold,
and each disease is ri^e.
Abroad the sightes are strange,
and wonders may be seen,
At home a stale and balde device,
but duls the spreetes I ween.
Abroad we learn to spare,
to serve our turn in thend,
At home men set the cock on hoope,
and vaynely spoil and spend.
Abroad few thieves you have,
they find so little grace,
At home foul, shifts and robbries both,
abound in every place.
Thus prove I travels best,
for body, soul, and se^s^,
And ease a nurse to pamper vice,
and buckler of defense.
Where virtue can not strike,
nor enter any way,
The (...)
dame Virtues force to stay.
With rest leawd lust does rise,
and soon subdues the (...)
And toil (...),
and strikes vain fancy blind.
Much rest runs Riot still,
and breeds treasons often,
And toil plucks down those (...)
that lokes to mount alofte.
Rest makes mischief ripe,
and settes bad things abroch,
Toil teach^^^ men to conquer Fame,
and flee from foul reproach.
Rest loves to (...) much,
like vvhelp that waves the tail,
Toil is for Ve^^ue quick as Be,
for Vice as slo^ as (...).
Rest sowes no blessed feed,
yet reapes a curssed grain,
Toil weeds the g^ound, and planteth flowers
where nettles did remain*
Rest will no duty know,
but shakes off shackels still,
Toil makes ^he body apt to stoop,
to bend and show good ^ill.
Rest is a retchlesse joy,
that ^ees not his (...),
Toil castes out many a vain consayte,
that rest brings in by svvarmes.
If toil bring these good things
that I have told before,
And rest but want and beggrie breeds,
with sundry mischiefs more:
They ought have endless lavvd,
that in these loytring days
Set idle hands and heads a work,
to win immortal praise.
And they that first found out
the strange and forrayne soil,
Are gone themselves to win the prise,
or take the open foil,
Which shows them more than men,
half Gods if I say troth,
Whole kingdoms scarcely ca^ suffic^
their minds and manhood both.
Now have they taken leave
of worldly pleasures all,
That young and lusty were to live,
and now to toil they fall
That finely were brought up,
yea now they bid adieu,
The glittring Court, the galla^t town,
the gorgious garments new,
The bravery of this world,
the pride and pomp of earth,
And look not backward any way,
to riches, race, or birth.
To worthy wife no^ friend,
to babes nor nearest kin,
But only to the Lord above,
and journey they are in.
And all for Cou^^reys cause,
and to enrich the same,
Now do they hazard all they have:
and so for wealth and fame,
They fare along the Seas,
they sail and tide it out,
They hale and stretch the sheates aloft,
they toil and dread no doubt.
They feed on Biscuit hard,
and drink but simple beer,
Salt beef, and Stockfish dry as kecke,
is now their greatest cheer.
And still a fulsome smell
of pitch and tar they feel,
And when Seasicke (God wot) they are,
about the Ship they reele.
And stomach belcheth up,
a dish that Hadocks seek,
A bitter mess of sundry meats,
a Sirrope green as leeke.
Then head and heart does heave,
and body waxes cold:
Yet face (...),
the same is to behold^
But they must need^^ (...)
a greater brunt than this,
And hope that (...) pains,
there commes a time of (...).
Yet note the torments strange,
that toyling sailors have,
Who lives (...) the Seas:
yea surge and (...),
Would swallow up the (...)
if Pylots were not good,
And some (...)
unto their (...)
Sometime a flaw (...)
blows (...),
And (...),
and at a cord does (...)
To save his silly life,
aloof then (...),
No (...),
and on the (...)
And plying for abo^^^,
about the Vessel (...),
And through (...)
a gale of wind there bloes,
That seems to shake the Bark,
in sunder every rib^^,
Then is no time to (...)
to cry carous and bibb^^
But each man to (...)
they fall and fly (...)*
In neck of this (...)
that seeks to give the (...)*
They spy in half a (...),
up Sold youres (...)
The Captain calls, (...),
a sort of them are plast,
To bea^e the (...),
that should the Shipp^ assail,
At length the Cannon bullet flies,
and shot as thick as (...)
Goes off to murder m^n,
and such a smoke does rise,
As few may well regard the seas,
or scarce behold the Skies.
Some groan and (...) goodnight,
their day watch waxes dim,
Some ca^ not speak their heads are off,
and some have lost a limme.
Some lies on (...) lame,
they have no legs to stand,
And some have lost the use of arm,
or maimed of a hand*
And some are fighting still,
and gets no harm at all,
But he that speedeth best the while,
makes boast thereof but small.
These brawles and bloody broils
to end or quiet brought,
A new begins, as ill a storm,
that troubles more their thought*
The Rocks and wretched streights,
that they must safely pass,
The narrow Creekes and doubts they find
in compass of their glass,
Is danger wonders great,
so that these Sailors toil,
Rests all on hazards, ear they come
to any certain soil.
I could rehearse a heap
of sorrows that they have,
But you that live in peace at home,
and mince the matter brave,
Will scarce believe a troth,
and toil that trauelers take.
Well noble Pilgrims, as in Verse
I write this for your sake,
In Prose at your return,
look for a greater praise,
A Book that to the lofty Skies,
your rare renown shall raise.
This write I for your friends
that you have left behind,
Your worthy wives, whose patient hearts
bear many things in mind,
And sit and shakes their heads
at that they can not mend,
And many a sigh and sad con^aite,
along the Seas they send,
To follow those that fly
from them God wot to fast,
And carried are in rotten Barks
about with every blast,
And tossed up and down
the Seas, our Lord knows where.
O Husbands when you saw your wives,
shed many a bitter tear,
How could you part from them?
the case is aunswerd thus,
You are not ruld by love of babes,
nor women's vvilles yewus.
But guided by such grace,
as God himself has sent,
And that you do, is done indeed
unto a good intent.
God grant you good success,
the whole hearts ease you crave,
As much of wealth and honor both
as ever men may have.
A safe and short return,
not long from home to dwell,
A quiet happy journey still,
and so dear friends farewell.
FINIS.
A welcome home to Master Martin Frobusher, and all those Gentlemen and
Soldiers, that have been with him this last journey, in the Country called
(Met^ incogni^a) which welcome was written since this Book was put to the
Printing, and joined to the same Book, for a true testim^ny of Churchyardes
good w^ll, for the further^nce of Master Frobushers f^me.
Five hundredth times, most welcome home
my friends that far have bin,
When thousands thought, that all was lost
your fleet came safely in:
To glad their hearts, that long bewailde
your toil and hazard great:
O give me leave, in English verse
a while on this to treat,
That does dezerue, such worlds renown
and come to such good end,
As forces friends to favor much
and foes may well commend.
You sloth full snayles, that creep not far,
and love your shelles sowell,
And you cold crousts, that have small crumbs
in cottage poor that dwell,
Now will you blush, or bend the browe,
to see how trauelers thryue,
Nay, now you ought go help your selves
and rather seek to strive
Against ill hap, that holds you here,
when others work for wealth,
And trudge abroad, to lengthed life,
and nourish wished health.
But adle heads, and idle brains,
and babbling tongues, I trow,
Had rather sit in smokie house
(or on the dunghill crow
Like crauen Cocks) than go abroad
where Fortune may be found,
And search where Gold, and Treasure lies
in bowels of the ground.
A pecke of dross, does more content
the base and beggars mind,
Than heaped bushels, of good hap,
that paynefull toil does find,
The thriftlesse will, not let to say,
o give me ease and rest,
A groate in purse, a coat on back,
a homely house and nest,
And fie on Fame, and profit both,
that co^mes by break of sleep,
And but vain pleasures of this world,
both hard to win and keep.
O mizers minds, and wretches hearts,
if all men sought their ease,
And none should search out golden mines,
nor seek their gain by seas,
The world would sone be at an end,
or meat and clothe would fail,
And those that now do laugh and smyle,
at length would weep and wayle.
And all a like, should Lord and ladde
be set by ery where,
The fool and wise man, would ^e one:
and void of love or fear
The world should stand; for wealth and wit
is that which gouern^s all,
And makes us know the mighty sort
and shoes the great from small.
If each man were a like in wealth,
as rogues and beggars are,
And none had skill, nor great foresight
for countries cause to care,
Adeu good rule, and riches too
and farewell virtues praise:
But God be thankt, that we are borne
to live in happier days,
When wits will work for wealths avail
and sundry ride and run,
Yea hoyse up sail, and go themselves
as far as shines the sun
Through thick and thin, and fear no foil,
as though to their good minds
The Gods had made the land and Seas,
the skies, the air and winds,
To follow that they have deuisd
that take these toils in hand.
And of late days, (...) great a flock
of these are in this land,
That I have scarce good leisure left,
to write their names a right,
And yield the praise, and lively lawd
is due to eury wight.
In deed our age for many things
exceedes the season past,
And yet some say, all things be old
and shall whiles world does last.
But if no new devise, did help
the age of that is gone,
Full weak and lame would be old toys
these days to look upon.
I grant the grave, old sages wise,
began to break the ye,
Made smoeth rough ways, set virtue up,
and flatly threw down vice,
Built goodly towers, reard walls aloft,
and to be brief and short,
Saylde throw a world, saw eury creek
and knew each common port,
But all they did, has time reformd
or made more perfect still,
(...)
took place from ancient skill.
So though our elders trauaylde far,
yea, went the world about:
Yet many things, our fathers wits,
as yet could nere find out:
Which they did leave, to younger heads,
and men of later birth,
To search, and see, what hidden wealth,
lay lurking deep in earth:
As lo, in (Meta cognita)
is known, and found of laet,
By those, that through their venture great
both gold and glory gaet.
O Frobusher, thy brute and name
shall be enrold in books,
That whosoever after co^ms,
and on thy labor looks
Shall muse and marvel at thine acts,
and greatness of thy mind.
I say no more, least some affirm
I fan thy face with wind,
I flatter for affections sake:
well, God shall witness be,
In this thy praise (and other Books)
I speak but right of thee.
A Book I made, at thy Farewell,
in prose (where ere it is)
Another for thy Welcome home,
thou shalt have after this,
If this mislike thee any whitte.
So here mine own good friend
I bid thee welcome once again,
and therewith make an end.
THus have I plainly expressed with pen, what portion of good will I bear to
all those that valiantly and worthily are workers to the enriching and honor
of our common wealth: And surely I think, I am as well bound to write in the
praise of those that accompanied Master Frobusher this voyage, as all together
give one alone the commendations of a general labor and manly enterprise: But
I want their names, that gladly I wish great fame unto, and willingly I would
put in a Register of good report, which in time to come may be touched, not in
the respect only of the pains they have taken, which merits much, but to the
encouragyng of others to the like adventure, I would bestow some Verses on
this rare band, where in is a knot of right honest Gentlemen, and a crewe of
good companions, whose for wardnesse may not be forgotten, and whose faithful
service claymes a great consideration and a good regard. For, although that
commonly a Captain carries away the credit of battayles and victories where
the Soldiers have done their duties, and have been an occasion of triumph and
conquest: yet by the judgment of a sound sense and uncorrupted wit, the
branches of the (...) that bring forth leaves, blossoms and fruit, ought as
much to be spoken of, as the ^are bod^e of the same, (...) witho^t branches,
(though it have never so great sap) is but barrayne or little esteemed. I
remember of late ^ayes a victory won against the Turks on the Sea, and one
man went away with the glo^ of the same, which b^edde such disdain among the
rest in whom the force dydlie, that from that tim^ in this present hour, the
great man that went away with this glory was never called or desired to take
the same charge in ^ande again. Nevertheless some one General and Captain,
is more happier and more necessary than a number of the Merrenary people: For
I read, that a great conqueror after he had received his deaths wound, with
causing himself to be carried about the ^^elde in a chair, gave such a
terror and fear to the enemies, that they ran away, and had not the courage
to defend their lives and liberties, the dignity, and name, and presence of
the person before rehearsed, had so daunted them and taken away the use of
their (...). And many matters and noble Histories make mention, that one man's
hap, courage and conduite, is far better (at some instant and season) than
the inconstant opinions of a multitude. But yet for all that, it is good to have
wise and stout Soldiers, whole obedience and manhood deserves as much
commendation, as their Captains can wish to themselves. When in another work
this may come in question, I will more largely deal therewith among the
discourses of war. And so for this presents I trouble you no further.

Thomas Churchyard.


