A Scourge for Rebels:

Wherein are many notable services truly set out, and thoroughly discoursed of,
with every particular point touching the troubles of Ireland, as far as the
painful and dutiful service of the Earl of Ormound in sundry sorts is
manifestfestly known.

Written by Thomas Churchyard Gentleman.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Cadman. 1584.

Churchiards Arms.



To the Right honorable my very good Lord, the Lord Haward of Effingam, Lord
Chamberlain of the Queens Majesty's household, one of her Highness privy
Council, and Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, Thomas Churchyard
wishes increase of honor, and many happy new years.
AS all worldly gifts, good tournes, faithful friendship and true affection
springs of good will, so my good Lord, a certain kind of serviceable liking
toward your Honor, thrusts me forward to this boldness, in presenting
your L. a little bare work of mine, being stirred thereunto. First, for the
general favor that the world bears you (a love not won without desert) and
next, for the favor your noble Parents showed me, I am encouraged not only to
proceed to present some matter meet for you to read, but likewise to show my
self thankful for favor received. So in waying those causes (as becomes me)
and knowing the good consideration your Lordship carries (in sound judgment)
of friends that time did plant, truth makes grow, and trial does gather, I
bethought me of the Earl of Ormounde, who honored your Parents, and loves
your self, in which conceit of mine, I found that you hearing well of that
worthy friend by my means, would believe I were zealous of your Honor, and
a favorer of noble actions.

Wherefore, and in respect a writer ought to be plain, I treat plainly in my
book of the Earl of Ormoundes services (known to many, and hid to a few)
naming him the scourge of Rebels as truly I prove.

Which presumption of mine, in that regard and glory of his in gayning good
report, I trust your Lordeship will peyze in ballaunce of equal weight,
judging me to boldness as I merit, and his deseruings, as they shall compel by
proof to credit. So wishing great grace and good hap to your L. I present
this my first new years gift in the latter time of mine age to your Honor,
and the worlds judgment.

Your L. humbly at comment. Thomas Churchyard.

To the loving Reader.
MY waking goodwil to the world, first for the pleasuring of friends, generally
to please the multitude, keeps my (...) always occupied in such matter as
the time brings forth, which time is mother and nurse as well to bad causes,
as to good actions. And it is sufferable to a true Writer, to treat of both
the ^^des, as the manner and nature in things discoursed of, gives light unto.
So finding plenty and store of matter, both to study on, and travail with, I
cannot but (for easing my burden) impart a piece of my study with thee (of
vertunous disposition) good friendly Reader, not that my words have such
effect to work a common commodity, and lead thee to like my doings, (void
of cunning, style, and eloquence) but to win thy favor, creeping as I may,
under thy sound consideration, I lay my self plain and open to the
judgment and hasty opinions of many, which suddenly condemn and slowly
allow the labor of willing writers. The ground whereof proceeds not of
envy, but of further cause then I name, (Ignorance peradventure a let for the
true understanding of matter well meant) yet my hope is, thy gravity and
goodness, (that bears with my ouerbolde presumption) will accept my good
meaning, and pass over the faults of my book and fantasies I had, when I took
in hand to write this Discourse. The truth is in sleeping softly on the cushion
or carpet of peace (where age is content to take a nappe) the sound of Drum
and Trumpet awakened my muse. For a loud blast and brute of Irishe wars bade
me look about me, and here what might be said by good services for the
scourging of Rebels. Then hearing the fall or tragedy of Desmond, the
faithful services and nobleness of Ormound: with many more things then now I
express: I took pen and registered in memory, what was most meet, and fit
for thee to know in causes not yet published by any true report or Writer,
doubting not, though the matter be but little, the truth thereof shall greatly
delight thee. So commending all that follows to thy upright judgment, I crave
and earnestly desire thee wishingly to read this small discourse, called The
Scourge for Rebels. Promising out of hand to print another work, called A
rebuke to rebellion, and a triumph to true Subjects. So farewell.

A Scourge for Rebels, of matter touching duetifull services, that merits
immortal fame: wherein rebels are scourged and discoursed of, which services
chiefly by the Earl of Ormound (and noble Soldiers under his charge) were
manfully begun, worthily maintained, and happily ended.
WHereas men of good minds, studious to set out truth, Lovers of virtue,
Haters of vice, and Favorers of common weal, have framed themselves members
of the state, and writers of good things worthy memory (that craves
witness of the best wits) have taken pains in publishing many volumes
well penned, and printing of books needful for this time, and necessary for all ages to read and behold in time to come: and in manner written partly on
reports, and partly on experience by view, have set down not only their
own opinions (in matters treated of:) but also have made rehearsal of many
men's actions, and last out the services of a very honorable and valiant Earl
(named the Earl of Ormounde) whose noblenes both in nature and condition
argues a great mind, and commands a multitude to speak well of.

For which cause, and the rather to encourage valiant hearts to continue in
virtuous actions (a thing looked for in each degree and calling) that may
advance the hardy and stout parsonages, I have adventured to put pen to
paper, in the behalf especially of some heretofore long forgotten, and others,
both presently to be praised, and hereafter may be worthy of great renown and
credit.

And to be plain, writers are so small regarded, world so envious, and people
so greedy of their own glory, that few goes about to blow the blast of good
fame, toward any worthy man's advancement.

Such is our weakness of goodwill, and shortness of breath, that we can spare no
speeches (well spent and bestowed) to the benefice of such as deserves well,
whose doings, claims good liking, and a general good report of the world.

Yet commonly the best sort of companies, being inclined to noble disposition
are glad to hear the worthy commended, and with sweet words furthers the
fame of any one that merits commendation.

The truth of things is well bestowed among such people and nothing should be
hid from their knowledge, that so thankfully welcomes the well doing of others.

And in effect no enterprise of value is taken in hand, but in hope that labor
and pains should reap commodity and praise, a good work may not escape
unrewarded, and what better work can there be, then to cut off sick and
rotten members from a sound and hole body?

I mean who can be better occupied then those that would weed out of a common
weal, a number of cankred minds infected with corrupt manners that may
suddenly wound harmless hearts, and break the common society of good men?

Is there any labor more laudable, service more famous, life more toilesome,
or exercises more noble, then still to be busied for the preservation of a
Prince and country?

And who I pray you lives in more hazard, eats with less quietness, sleeps in
more danger, or tastes so many miseries as the Soldier that only seeks his
countries glory and his own credit?

Deserves not that man an everlasting renown, that refuses no journey, shuns
no service, nor auoydes no action to do his country good?

Ye shall read how the Romans rewarded the valiancy of men with a Crown
called the Crown Ciuique, which albeit, it was but of special green leaves,
yet was it as much or more esteemed then some golden crowns that Emperors ded
wear in triumph, as diverse Authors thereof makes mention.

And where such Soldiers (crowned in this manner) repaired either in open
pastimes, priuace plays, and Comedies, or in any noble assembly where honor
is to be received and looked for, the sacred Senate, and generally the whole
Senators altogether would arise from their seats of majesty and show a
certain salutation toward the honorable soldier, at his coming to their
presence, and further to animate courageous minds, there was always an
honorable place prepared (a part from common people) for the soldier.

Whereby the world might see the soldiers worthiness, and learn to regard men
worthily, whose service deserved great reputation.

But look now what great and mighty matters were brought to pass in that age,
what victories were woonne, what tryumphs were obtained, and what riches and
treasure was gotten by the invincible courage of mean, and by mean of the
honor that soldiers and citizens of Rome possessed.

Among the East Indians at this present day, soldiers are so reverenced and
made of, that the mean people must not only give them way and courtesy, but
also must labor for their maintenance, yea their stipends and living are so
great (by a public provision) that they always live and feed on the common
treasure, and every thing is allotted and appointed them, as it came by
inheritance, and were possessed from their parents.

Did not king Alexander the great, in the beginning and middle of his
conquests, cause soldiers to be honored, made orders and laws that no man
should do them injury, and since his days as well as before his time, when a
soldier should be judged (by a free liberty granted from kings) he might
appeal to Caesar from the laws of the land, and so in every sort his
privilege was so great, that al manner of men knew him to be honorable.

Though duty and good disposition halleth men forward, to adventure great
attempts and services, if same should be kept from them, their warm good
wills would wax cold, and wearines would quickly overcome the willingest
mind, that ever followed marshall affairs.

For as the dumb beast being cherished and comforted with his masters sweet
entertainment, draws (as seems) with a better delighte in labor, and
forsakes neither foul way, nor hard adventure for each sensible manne
feelinge some encouragemente in his traueile, goes on Justly to his business,
and thinks the less of great burdens, because some hope leads him
forewarde, and helps to ease his ouercharged Body, and shoulders: fair
words (with some fruit) and gentle behavior, I tell you, towleth some
forward, that otherwise would dragge far behind, and persuades great content
to an aspiring mind, that gapes after glory, and is nourished with good hope.

Now since in our elders days (of great antiquity) souldidiers had
countenance and credit, that qualified their careful turmoylinges, and
recompensed their labors, with a blast of noble report, this our time
present must of compulsion (by mean of their prerogative) yield them
praises condign for their deseruinges, and fit for personages of manly spirit
and towardnes.

So if all nations and times allow necessary fame to valiant minds, and reason
graunts that good men should be honored, (especially in a naughty world)
because desire of fame breeds many worthy actions, we may the better (and
with greater holdnesse) enterprise to register them in the renowned book of
commendation.

All this before by me written, meante only of soldiers, that serve and have
served against foreign enemies. Then what Title, what honor shall I give
them? and what style shall I hold in the honoring of those that continually
against Rebels, have showed their vttermoste force and pollicye, which
services of theirs, springes of marvelous truth and affection, and ought not
to be forgotten of no posterity nor nation: the consequent is so great
thereof, and the constancy so much in them, that pursues Rebels, that no
man's pen is able sufficiently to praise them aright.

For they are such profitable proppes and pillars of the public pillars of
the public weal, that they may march next unto honorable Councillors
whose wisdom trice out follies, and whose gravity graciously gouernes.

And so to be short, if conscience confesseeth that each man dooynge well,
shall possess immortal praise, I may not forgette, and utterly leave out the
noble. Acts and services of mine ancient Friend the woorthye Earl of
Ormounde, whose deeds when you hear, (though you were mortal enemies) you
shall marvel of: and when you consider the the substance thereof throughlye,
you that have power and ability, shall imitate his steps, and be followers
after the light of so noble a lantern, that in the darkest times,
doubtefullest days, and most obscure season, has showed brightness, and like
a blasing star has stood stiffly in a fixed place, and cast a clear light,
so far, that all the beholders may be glad thereof, and well therein.

First, for that the Country of Irelande has been a long while subject to
sundry seditions and sorrowful calamities most miserable for them selves, and
chargeable to the Prince, the reformation whereof has cost many a woorthye
man's life, and the greater has grown the griefs because diverse of that
Nation neglecting their duties, have had small care of the common
tranquillitye and peace of poor people, by which insolence, rebellion has
been bredde: and shameless dissension set abroche. And continuing in
extremity, very sore wounds and maymes the public state has sustained,
til GOD of his goodness raised up some such members as sought nothing but
redress and quietness.

It happened in a number of services that one Noble manne was so fortunate
(because of his fideltye) that many of the rest did fear him, and
therefore sought his overthrow, but he being armed with a just quarrel and
minding to scourge Rebels, omitted no occasion to take the enemies at
advantage, but howsoever he chanced to find them, he fortunately suppressed
their pride, and followed the faithful course and form of a most noble
captain.

And because it shall be seen to the world, orderly what heedid, herein shall
be set down the matter, place, and time, of a part of his honorable
services, to the intent it shall not dwell in forgetfulness, and to encourage
other noble personages in doing their country good to tread the steps of
the noble Earl of Ormound.

I remembering his forwardnes in the young king Edwards days (with whom he was
brought up) and the charge he had of some horsemen in Queen Mary's reign
against Rebels in England, have called in like manner to mind, the service he
did against the Omoores and the Oconnors in their rebellion of Ireland, also
the overthrowing of Dunloghe, Oswilleuane Moors chiefest house, is worthy
note: for it was in time of Rebellion, with other ordinary services, that
always did testify, that this Earl was a sharp scourge to Rebels.

And to prove that his daily desire thirsted after noble enterprises (for the
punishment of malefactors) he served chargeably and in no little danger (on
his own proper cost and expense) with two hundred footmen, and fifty
horsemen in Ulster, the North part of Irelande against John Oneale, who was in
open action of rebellion many and sundry seasons.

In the like manner all on his own charge, he served against the scot, called
James Maconell, in Ulster, whose force he ouerthrewe to the number of two
thousand men, and in the end drove the scot to fly away.

Then having charge of Thomounde (by virtue of the Queens highness commission)
he took all the Castles and ho^^es thereof in spite of the Earl of Thomounde
(who was in rebellion) slew diverse of his men, and brought others of them to
submission, compelling the Earl, himself (for safegarde of his life) to fly
into France, where he remained, until her Majesty on her mere clemency,
pardoned his life, and restored his lands. The Earl of Thomoundes mother
notwithstanding, was Aunt to the Earl of Ormounde, which shows that neither
respect of blood, nor friendship could hinder any piece of dutiful service.

In another great service the Earl of Ormound hearing that Desmound went
about to annoy Sir Maurice fitz Gerralt (late vicount of the Desies) he raised
a power and met Desmounde in the field, gave him battle at Athmanie, slew
five hundred of his men, took himself captive, and sent him into England
where he remained till the Queens highness vouchesafed to remit his offense,
and returned him home to his country.

Now in process of time, my Lord of Ormounde by the Queens appointment,
became governor of Mounster in the beginning of Desmondes last revolt, when he
had of Rebels about him, two thousand able men, but he was followed so fast, and
so hardly beset (by such as were appointed for that purpose) that he was
driven to many extremities, partly by the aid and advice of the L. Justice,
Sir William Pelham, and partly by the policy and power of the Lord Governor
(who chiefly was general in the field) that of two thousand men, the Desmound
was left but one bare hundred, and as it seemed, and may be proved, the Earl
of Ormounde was cause of the weakening of the enemies force, as hereafter you
may read, when it comes to that point.

But the L. Governor being removed from that charge, came into England, from
whence after some time spent there, about necessary causes, he was sent again
to his former government of Mounster with most noble authority and
commission, and being arrived in Irelande, he made head against the Desmound
with whom was a thousand tall soldiers that were gathered together in the
absence of the Earl of Ormound. He coming to scourge these Rebels, and
finding the enemies force strong, took order both by watch, spial, disciplyne
of War, and warlike devises, to supplante Desmoundes determination, and
marchinge in marshall manner toward the enemies, his very countenance
daunted so much Desmoundes company, that they fell to their woonted fear,
where they thought them in most safetye, but being painefullye followed,
and pursued most fiercelye as Rebels should be, they fell from flyinge and
fightinge to yeeldinge and crauinge of mercy, so even as the matter fell out
in the pursuit, ye shall read as follows the names of some few of the
chiefest that were slain being Leaders of companies, and men of accounte
amongst the traitors. Henry fitz Gerralt, base brother to Sir James fitz
Gerralt of the Desies.

Kennedy mac Bryen, mac Brien Ogonaghs, son Gibbon Roe, Lord of the great
wood. The Deane of Brohils sons, the Earl of Desmoundes receiver, Connoghore
O Multean, Daniel Mantagh foster brother to Sir John of Desmond. Rowrie Moel
mac Conoghane. Mac Thomas thief of his name. Mauryce Uale, James Uale, Brownes
of the Earl of Desmoundes foster Brothers. William Graueye son to mac Bryen
Ogonagh with many more too tedious, to be recited, besides two hundred forty
six of their men and confederates that were put to the sword, and executed
in such manner as diverse other Rebels (being greatly terrifled therewith)
were feign to submit themselves to the Queens Highness mercy.

And further, the Lord Governor caused all the Cattle of the Country, to be
brought out of Desmoundes reach, into places of strength, whereby Desmounde
and such of his company as remained with him, were brought to most miserable
state, and driven for want of other relief, to feed upon horsefleshe and
carrion in such sort as with very hard shifte, they saved them selves from
being sterued.

And thus was the Earl of Desmound of al his force consumed and left
accompanied only with seven men and his Priest, who from the tenthe of the
last Iulie, hid them in a glinne within Sleaueloghra, having no other food
the space of seven Weeks there, but six Plowegarrans, whereon they fed
without either bread, drink, or other sustenaunce.

About the twentieth of September last, Desmounde being hardly followed by
certain Kearnes appointed by the L. General to serve against that traitor,
his priest was taken from him, with another of his men, and brought to the
Earl of Ormound.

Since which time, the Earl of Desmounde was relieved by a Captain of
Galloglas (called Gohorra mac Donnagha mac Sweenye) whereof the Earl of
Ormounde having advertisement by such as he employed to do that service,
pursued him into Olearies Country where he took the most part of his
goods, and left no relief for him nor Desmounde, insomuche as the first of
the last November, the said Gohorra was enforced to repair to Iniskiue mac
Carthy Reoghs Countreye, in the Countye of Corcke, and there took thyrteene
Cowes and eight Garrans from one Donogho mac Teig of Iniskiue aforesaid
Gentleman: which Donnogho with ten more in his company made pursuit after
the said Gohorra, rescued his Cowes and garrans, slew the said Rebel, and
sent his head to the Earl of Ormound.

The eleventh of the said November, the Earl of Desmounde for want of the
said Gohorra, to bring him his woonted nourishement was urged with mere
famyne, and pinchinge penurye, to send to one Daniel mac Daniell
Omoriherteighe to seek some relief, which Daniel made answer to him that
brought the message, that he was bound in band, and by oath sworn to the
Lord General, and also that he had delivered his pledge into the Generalles
hands for performaunce of dooynge good service against Desmounde and his
Adherentes: wherefore, he would give him no relief at all.

Whereupon the Earl (being almost famished with extreme hunger) determined a
desperate action. First, for relieuing his necessitye, and after, to escape the
danger of other fortunes that might follow, and in that resolution he
adventured to pray where he thought for that purpose, and because the very
truth of his doings then, and the manner of his death shall be well known to
the world thoroughly, here is set down an examination of one that was at
his overthrow, and saw his head cut off.

The Examination of Owen mac Donill, Omorihertegh, taken the xxvj. of November,
1583. before those whose names are heereunto subscribed, of the manner and
discourse how the Earl of Desmound was pursued and slain.
THe said Owen being duly sworn and examined upon the holy Evangelist, by
virtue of his oath, deposes, that on Saturday (being the ix. of this present
November) the Earl of Desmound departed, the woods lying near the Island of
Rierye, and went Westward beyond Tramore to the wood called Dorremore near
Bongoinder, from whence he sent ii. of his Horsemen (called Conoghore Nescolly
and Shane Deleo) with xviii. kearns to bring him a pray (having himself and
John mac Ullug, and two or three footmen stayed there at Dorremore for them)
which company (by the said Earls direction) went to Cahir nefahye (lying by
west Gregory's Castle by the Sea side) and there took the pray of Maurice mac
Owen brother in law to this Deponent, and the pray of Robert mac Edmound being
Tenauntes to this deponent and to his eldest brother, called Donil mac Donil
Omoriherteighe in that town: that is to say, forcie Cowes, niene capples with
great store of other goods and household stuff, and stripped naked the said
Maurice his wife, and children. At the taking of which pray (to terrefie the
people from making pursuit) the said traitors published and said that the
Earl of Desmound lay near them with the rest of his company, to aid them,
if pursuit had been made after them. Whereupon the said Maurice sent word
to Liuetenant Stanley (then being in the Dungle) and also to this deponent and
to his said brother Douil mac Donil (being then at Castle dromin near Castle
Maing) of the taking of his pray.

Whereupon this Deponent and his said brother Donill mac Donil (having also
word sent them from Lieuetenaunt Stanley, to pursue and tract out that pray,
and to call to their aid, the ward of Castlemaing, and that he and the
country were making ready to follow them to rescue the same) having respect
chiefly to their oaths, assurance, and promise given and made to the Lord
General, to do service, set forward, being xiiii. proper Kearnes in company
whereof two were shot. And this Examinate went to Castlemaing, and told the
Cunstable Cheston of the whole matter, and besought him to rise out (according
to the Lieuetenaunts direction) to follow the pray in the company of him and
his brother Daniel, to which Cheston aunsweared, that he could not himself
depart his charge, and said, he would let him have some of his company, to
go with this Examinate, and so sent away five Soldiers with him. This
Examinate, and those five Soldiers came together to the Mountain of
Sleauemisse, where his Brother Daniell mac Daniell waited for them, and from
thence they came altogether toward Tralye in the Evening a Sunday (being the
tenth of November) in hope that they should overtake the pray, before the
same, should pass the straight of Tramore, where they were sure (as they
thought) to rescue the same pray from the traitors if they had overtaken them
there. At their coming to Traley, they found the tracte of the pray, going
Eastwarde to Sleaueloghra.

Whereupon, the Soldiers which came from Castlemaing began to stay, and
said they would traueyle no farther after the pray, but turn back to their
charge, till at length this Deponente persuaded them to stay, and keep him
company to pursue the pray, promising them two biefes of the pray if it had
been their luck to rescue the same from the Traitors, if not, that he would
give them a Biefe of his own in respect of their travail. Upon which
promise, the Soldiers agreed to go forward: the tracte was followed by day
light to Balleore, and by mooneshyne toward Glamagnitie at Sleaueloghra, where
then the Elder Brother Daniell, and this Examinate took advice to get up
above the Glinne to view whether they might see any in the Wood, or hear
any stir, and having come to the heyghte over the Glinne, they saw the fire
underneath them.

Whereupon Daniell said that he would go to spy, whether the Traitors had
the pray there with them, which he did, and came back to the company, and
told there were some of the Traitors there, which had no Cattle with
them, and said it were best not to assault them before the pray and them
selves could be found together.

Whereunto this Examinate agreed. In the dawninge of the day, on mundaye the
eleventh of November, they put themselves in order to set upon the Traitors
in their Cabbins. This Examinate and his Brother Donill with their Kearne,
took the forewarde, and appointed the soldiers to keep the reward (sauinge
that one Daniell Okelleye a Soldier which had but his Sword and Target,
stood in the forewarde with them) they all making a great cry entered the
Cabin where the Earl lay, and this Examinate ran through the Cabin after
the Earls company, which fled to the Wood, and at his return back to
the Cabin door, the Earl being stricken by one of the company (by whom
certain he knows not, but that all the Footemenne and Soldiers were
together within the Cabin) he discovered him self, saying: I am the Earl
of Desmounde, save my life. To whom this Examinate annsweared, thou have
killed thy self long agone, and now thou shalt be Prisoner to the Queens
Majesty, and to the Earl of Ormounde Lord General of Mounster. Wheruppon
he took him by his arm (being cut,) and willed the Earl (who was slow
in going) to make speed, else they would carrye away his Head, seeing the
Traitors drew very near to have him rescued.

Whereunto Daniel mac Daniel said, I will carry him on my back a while, and
so shall every one of you. Daniel carried a good while, and being weary he put
him off: the Traitors being at hand, all the company refused to carry him any
further, considering the eminent danger they stood in the traitors drawing
near.

Where at this deponent Owen mac Donil willed the soldier Daniel O kelleye, to
cut off the Earls head, for that they could not apply to fight and carry him
away, to whose direction Kelley obeyed, saying: he would so do, drawing out
his sword, and striking off the Earls head, which they brought to Castle
maing, where this Examinate and his brother Daniel mac Daniel delivered the
same to be kept (as in her Majesty's Castle) til they had made themselves ready
to bring the same to the Lord General, and have sent word to Lieuetenaunt
Stanley (who followed them in arms with the force of the country, having the
charge of the service in those parts by the L. Generals appointment) of their
happy success, and willed him to take his way to Castle maing, to meet them
who came thither with his company.

And the forenamed Daniel O kelley (being likewise examined before these,
testified that the Earl of Desmounde was pursued in the order and manner before
written, and that he him self wounded the said Desmound within his Cabin, and
after cut off his head (least he should be rescued) and that he the said
Daniel mac Daniel laid up the same head to be kept at Castlemaing, til it had
been brought by them to the Lord General.

These things being said by oath before the right Honorable the Earl of
Ormound, the Bishop of Oshry, and the Sovereign of Kilkenny.

NOw may you that wish well to the worthy sort of men, behold how manfully
good minds goes forward in scourging of rebels. And so may you note, how by
Gods ordinance, al naughty practices are supplanted, the wicked rooted up and
the worthy preserved, and briefly to rehearse the noble exploites brought to
good pass by the Earl of Ormound, it shall make thousands think, that a
secret divine grace vpholds the true subject, and a prepared plague (from
above) plucketh down the pride of false people, that delights in paltry
rebellion: for the good and sound quarrel, always overthrows the ficke and
charged conscience, as is seen by this service.

First mark, this Earl served against his own nation, against his own
blood, against his familiars, and against all forreyne power and devises,
against whom often he obtained victories, and never took foil, where his
Adversaries were conquered, and brought to utter subversion. Truly a matter
to be marvelled at, and a terrible example to all those that foolishely
commit offense. For truth is so watchful, so stout in right, and strong in
battle, that falsehood can find neither force nor cunning to avoid and
resist. This Irishe action and scourge of Rebels, may warn the busy wits
and wanton heads to beware of punishment, and make retchlesse children fear
the rod. Which rod and scourge, every noble mind bears openly and awfully,
to make the miserable offender quake and tremble, not only at his own
treachery, but also at the view of a true man's face, which forces a Rebel to
blush and turn back unto, and either mainely to run away or feebly to fight.
Yea, and though a while the rebel waxes wild and wanders at pleasure. Yet
suddenly he is made tame, and taken in a net like a wyld goose, that knows of
no danger, till the fowler has him in his fingers.

Now by this notorious service of the Earl of Ormounde (and forwardness of
good soldiers) the whole realm of Ireland may see that truth has ever the
victory, and treason is put to shame and dishonor, which justice of God and
fidelitye of man shall be I trust, a myrrour for all kind of nations to look into,
and shall cause to be made clean al infected consciences, and blottes of the
browe that defiles the faces of many wicked people.

So thus far I have gone in the rehearsal of a portion of the Earl of
Ormoundes services, meaning to write more as time permits me. And thus was
the rather taken in hand and finished in haste, because your good Lordship
shall see how I employ mine aged years. For the exercises of pen, and travel
of body, makes me look so young: And now to knit up my careful pilgrimage, I
frame my self daily to purchase noble friends, whose power may further my good
fortune here, and yield some spark of good report, when I am gone, and my
candle is clean burned out, for which intent only I have presented your
honorable Lordship this little book.

A piece of forgetfulness has hindered my memory, and left out a great matter
which should have bin mentioned in order, among the rest of this severe Earls
services, who as I have said before, took no regard of blood, birth,
friendship, familiarity, nor personage whatsoever, when it came to ye point of
justice. For in execution thereof, all people were alike unto him, were they
never so near of his kin or consanguinity, as appears plainly by the hanging
of his own base son, (and his Brothers son) of late: with a number hanged
likewise of their folowers, which noble and severe deed of his, as it is rare
and most to be marueiled at, so is it an act co^parable to kings, that spared
not their own children in causes of punishment, and showing good example. And
as the other his worthy doings, merits an everlasting same: so this deserves
a perpetual renown and praise, as all just men I know will confess. Further
as I said, I forgate some matter, so the taking and beeheading of Sir James of
Desmound (which was when the Earl of Ormound was Governor of Mounster) must
be remembered, for I mind at the length to bring most of al his good actions to
light.

Your L. humbly and loyally in all at commandment. Thomas Churchyard.


