A warning for the wise, a fear to the fond, a ^idle to the lewd, and a
glass^ to the good.

Written of the late Earthquake chanced in London and other places, the. 6. of
April 1580. for the glory of God, and benefit of men that warely can walk,
and wisely can judge.

Set forth in verse and prose, by Thomas Churchyard Gentleman.

Seen and allowed.

Imprinted at London, by John Allde, and Nicholas Lyng: and are to be sold at
the weast door of Paul's Church. Anno 1580. April. 8.

To the Right worshipful his very good friend, M. Alexan^ Nowel, Deane of
Paul's.
THe fatherlye and faithful manner of your divine Doctrine (M. Deane,) with the
blotlesse life you lead (sou^ded by the universal report of good people) made
me often desirous to dedicate some labor of mine, to the protection of your
sound judgment. And now pricked forward by Gods mighty motion (and marvelous
works of late) to bestow a few verses to a virtuous personage, in a vicious
world and dangerous season, I have chosen you among a multitude, to sound out
the trumpet of Gods glory, and to give passage to the playnesse of my pen, and
willing pains I have taken: Not as though my words or invention (void of
deep profundity) might advance any way the high majesty of God, or further
the good Fame you have gotten. But being in humility of mind, loking to the
baseness of this world, and meannes of my calling, (unfurnished both of
heavenly gifts and worldly good fortunes) I presumed through my pen and study,
to purchase you a friend, and reclaim the enemies of God to come home to their
consciences, and look on the wonders of the Lord, that daily is working among
his loving people. So neither meaning to flatter (where tender ears can abide
no doubleness) nor stretche out a bare Epistle, with a long discourse of
borrowed words, I betake you to the almighty, committing that follows (this
simple short Scedule) to the great and good consideration of your Wisdom. From
my lodging this eight of April. Your well willer always at commandment.

Thomas Churchyard^.

Churchyardes admonition to the Reader.
I Trust (good Reader) that the fresh memory of this late wonder shall make
thee to look backe-warde unto thy former faults, and make thee a new man, i^
cleanness of life. For the stranger the things are that our eyes behold, the
more the impression of the mind is carnestly occupied about the understanding
of a wonder. And ye oftener we see maruelles, the more is Gods might made
manifest, and we the more affrayed to offend. But perhaps, some fine headed
fellows will wrest (by natural arguments) Gods doing and works, to a worldly
or earthly operation* proceeding from a hidden cause in the body and bowels of
ye earth. As in deed of many other earthquakes before, has been written and
thoroughly disputed: A reason that man makes, and a matter to be spoken of, but
not much to be commended. Let such fine wits search out secrets, and sift
what they can from the bottom of their senses. Yet those that fear God, (and
feel in their consciences a divine motion from the consideration of worldly
wonders) will take the Earthquake to be of a another kind of Nature: And
beholding y^ myraculous manner of the same, with open arms, and humble heart,
will embrace Gods visitation, and worthily welcome the messanger he sends.
Which assuredly cannot come, without his providence, nor be seen without his
heavenly will and pleasure. And this is much to be noted: If natural causes
only compelled such Earthquaks (and procured such tremblings,) then as well in
the wild fields, as in the civil Towns, these alterations were often to be
found. In deed many grave Auctors write, how mighty mountains have been
removed, and whole Countries have been drowned, by y^ occasion of Earthquaks.
But in those kingdoms, the Lord of al Kings (for some hidden judgment to
himself) bore a greater sway in those causes and places, than any other
natural properties. And though that in many territories and open fields (as
good books make report) Earthquakes have been seen, and great hurt has been
done: yet the harms that come by Earthquakes in a civil town (where God is
honored and takes care of his people) argues a marvelous mystery, and
persuades a further matter, than weak witted men may meddle withal. For
sundry Cities have soonk, and millions of Houses, Churches, Towers, and walls,
have been by Earthquake utterly overthrown. But commonly such wonders are
seen, where all the world may be a witness of Gods great glory: and man's
vnsuretie of life may be thoroughly understood. Now if for all things that
suddenly happen, a reason may be made, and natural arguments lead man's
belief from the hope, fear, and confidence in God, then though thousands of
wonders happened in a day, not one among ten thousand would think that God
does any thing at al, but as natural causes do fall out, ^h thing to have both
beginning and their end. God keep his chosen from such a conceit of chance,
and belief of blindness. But now to be plain, no threatening serves a
naughty servant, No whippe, nor rod, amendeth a loytering scholar, nor no
example may reform a filthy liver. For when ye plague is past, the people
fall to pleasure. And even as a horse forgets the spur, and falls to a
i^nbeling pace, immediately after his gentle remembrance: so man thinks no
longer on a wonder than a dream, and makes no more account of a marvel, than
if a trifle had been told him. Yet my hope is (good Reader) that the wise will
be warned, and the well disposed person will be the better, while he lives, as
often as this late Earthquake shall come to his mind and memory. For it was
marvelous in the sight of man, and a great thing (no doubt) before the face of
the Almighty: to whom be praise and glory for ever.

The report of the said Earthquake, how it began.
ON Wednesdaye in the Easter week, being the sixth day of April. 1580. between
the hours of five and six in the evening, happened generally through all the
City of London, and the Suburbs of the same (as it were in a moment and upon
the sudden) a wonderful motion and trembling of the earth, in so much, as
Churches, Palaces, Houses, and other buildings did so quiver and shake, that
such as were then present in the same were tossed too and fro as they stood,
and others, as they sat on seats, driven off from their places: some leaning
backewardes, were ready to fall: and many besides so shaken standing, that it
brought such terror to those that were in the same houses, that the most part
feared, their houses would come down upon them, and therevppon ran out of
their doors in great pe^plexitie, to see whether their houses were still
standing in their wonted place or no. And some houses did so crackle, that the
tables and stools, with other furniture, as Bra^e and Pewter, so tottered,
that it was thought they would have fallen to the ground, and the houses rest
insunder. And this chanced not only in London (and ye suburbs of ye same) but
also in diverse other parts through the nerest places of our knowledge in
England. But specially about S. Katherins, the Limehouse, and Rad^liffe, where
y^ people were so maruellously amazed, y^ it was pitiful to behold how
fearfully they ran out of their doors, and how strangely one would
behold an other, thinking verilye, that the latter day had been come. And
the houses on London bridge did shake even in the same sort as in other parts
of y^ City. Whereby it appears, that the said trembling and moving of the
earth, did not only pass under the houses on the firm ground, but also under
the rivers and waters. And to signify better the generality of the same, you
shall understand, that the Abbey Church at Westminster, was there with so
shaken, that one of the Pinacles of the same, lost above one foot of his
top, the stones whereof fell to the ground. Also the steeple in the Palace so
shoke, that the bell of the great Clock sounded therewith, as though it had
been stricken with some ha^^er. Also at White H^l where her Majesty lies, the
great Chamber and other parts of the Court so shook, as seemed strange to such
as were present. The new Hall of the middle Temple did so shake also, as it
caused a number of Gentlemen (being set to Supper) to roon forth with their
knives in their hands, fearing that it would fall. It chanced also, Tho.
Cobhed being in y^ pulpit in Christ's church in Newgate market, preaching to y^
people, suddenly ye church so shook, ye out of the roof of the same fell
certain great stones, by the fall whereof, a boy named Thomas Gray,
apprentice to John Spurling Shoemaker, was brayned, and Mabell Eueret his
fellow servant, was stricken on the head with a stone, being daungerously
hurt, but is not dead: and a number of the people (by hasting to flee and escape
away) were sore bruised and hurt, by falls and such like a^cidentes. A number
being at the Theater and the Curtain at Hollywell, beholding the plays, were
so sh^ken, especially those that stood in the highest roomthes and standings,
that they were not a little dismayed, considering, that they could no way
shifte for themselves, unless they would, by leaping, hazard their lives or
limbs, as some did in deed, leaping from the lowest standings. Also in
Shordiche, and other places, fell Chimneis, and among others, in Filpot Lane,
at Master Alderman Osbornes ^el a piece of a Chimney: like wise from the top
of Paul's Church, and other places, fell small pieces of stone, and mortar from
the tops of houses. And other harm is not yet heard of (for the why^h God be
thanked.)

LEt London weep, whose walls of late did shake with trembling fear,
Put sack^loth on, and wail your sins, with many abytter tear:
For in your pomp, and chiefest pride, when Plagues began to seace,
And peoples hardened stubborn hearts, forgot the God of peace:
An Earthquake came, with whirling noise as House and Tower should fall:
A loving rod of threatening wrath, sent sure to warn us all.
For such a terror did it bring, to every honest mind,
As day of Judgment had been come, with storm and whirling wind.
The streets did shake, the Churches reelde, the ground it quiuered sore,
Men stood amazde, and women shreekt, the babes did cry and rore:
The Steeples tottred too and fro, and locks of doors did clinke:
The tiles from house came tu^bling down, and ground began to shrink.
The Bells did sound without man's help, the water wawmde and boylde.
The trees and flowers did quake for fear, as fruit should clean be spoylde.
The Theater, for (some great regard) that open world should note,
Was shakte so sore, that sundry there, a fearful frighting goett.
Yea some were slain, and crushed with stones from Christ's Church roof that
fell:
And earth was brought, in such a state, as world should sink to Hell.
The wondering sort (of wicked minds) that careless steps do trea^e,
Will smile to see the works of God, as wanton lives they lead.
But those that grace has touched within, by outward signs will show,
That heart forethinks foul former faults, for fear of greater blow,
Than now they feel through Earthquake strange, wherein Gods might in known,
And London (if Gods love had lackt) had surely bin orethrowne.
Look in your hearts what cankers grow, where rust has gotten root,
And search your joints (you sick in spreet) from head to sole of foot.
Talk not of God, and follow world, you know his name is great,
So is his wrath, when that his hate, consumes you in his heat.
You fine dissemblers, shroude your selves within his mercy seat,
And you that for this worldly much, your busy brains do beat,
Amend and fa^l to better life: But you that wantons are,
Repent, or Gods right hand will marr^ the sale of all your ware.
You greedy graceless Fulkers lewd, that lets out gold for gain,
Take h^de, lest from the heau^ns hie, hot* fire and Brunst^ne rain
Upon your heads, for shameful shifts: and you that p^lter still,
With poor n^es wives, come fear y^ Lord, for punish sure he will.
You mighty men and wealthy Chubbes, that hurde up ^hinkes in Chestes,
Proclayme a fast, and bold up hands, and leave your Bacchus feasts.
You wicked folk that use deceyte, in selling needeful things,
Tell tru^th, and leave that lying trade, that Gods disple^sure brings:
You Lordly masters, look on God, and govern well your charge,
And ho^de in youth, that revel makes, and riot ronnes at large.
You game some servant, that do play^ your thrifte away at Dice,
Fling down the bones, forsake the flesh, in time reform your vice.
You Pastors look, your Lamps be light, least you in darkness fall,
Fleece not the flock ye ought to feed, for God beholds all.
You Courtiers live, as you are taught, bid finenesse now adieu,
Let Mammon go, run after God, who sh^peth men a new.
You Lawi^rs cut, off long delays, knitte suits v^ soon and short,
Help poor men's suits, that people pla^e, may give you good report.
And all that in the City dwell, and every other where,
Think on the Erthquake, that you saw, (...) ^ife and breath you bear.
For this was sent from fathers hand, to make the child to know,
The (...) rod is near their backs, that out of order go.
As yet ^e shows a loving sign, but when he lysts to lowre,
The retchlesse laddes, and froward sonne^, shall feel their fathers power.
This Earthquake is but half a check, to those that warning takes:
But when in fury Plagues do chance, when earth and heaven shakes,
Down commes the pride of Babylon, and all full flat on floor:
As dust that now is underfoot, shall lie both rich and poor.
Look^ for your fall, that long have stood, in pomp and glory great,
The second Earthquake when it commes, will stryke, before it threat.
This came to try, how you can take a threatening at his hand,
That rydes upon the Starrie clouds, and has a whysking wande,
Will make the world to yarke and fling, when he sees time therefore.
Well, for this season (gentle friends) I dare now speak no more.
The Judgments of the Lord are great, God grant, that well in gree,
From him you do good warning take, and weigh these words of me.
FINIS.
quod Churchyard.

A true Report upon the great Earthquake.
SInce foreign Reports (right christian Reader) may not suffice to call in
question our frailty, nor the hearing of Children monsterously borne provoke us
to bridle our untamed flesh, nor the wars and cruel bloodsheds of other
Cuntries with their great pes^ilences, sorrows, and unquiet state can make us
to be thankful for the Gospel which we have quietly maintaned by so gracious a
Prince that the universal world has in admiration: yet must this present
cause this fearful w^nder, this gentle token and sweet correction mortify our
cankred conceits and break in pieces our hardened ^arts.

Dull sighted is that man that sees no^ through this perfect spectacle the
heavy burden of his gree^ous offenses, when Heaven and Earth, Fish and Foul,
Beasts and Woormes quake for our sin.

Now does the ancient Enemy seek after starting holes, and with vain
encouragements would persuade men to esteem these rare tokens as common
trifles, therefore it behooues us to put on the helmet of Salvation, the sword
of the Spirit, y^ Armor of life, and keep the Castle of a clear Conscience to
with stand the grievous assaults of those three Rebels the world, the flesh and
the devil.

If we have with Peeter the Apostle broken promise with our Master, and
denied him: let us also with Peeter the Apostle s^ed sorrowful tears, and with
hearty repentance win him to be our good Father again.

If we have with cruel hands committed murder, or bonds of holy marriage: let
us with David be wail the death of Urias, and lament the raye of Bet^sabe, for
he is a gracious God, and has no pleasure to give unto his Enemy the old ser
pent the creature that he has made and fashioned for him self to make up his
number of Saints. If thou have been a persecuter with Saul: thy remedy is to
become a Preacher with Paul, for he has no pleasure in the death of a Sinner,
but rather that he may live and amend.

If thou have with Mary Magdalen broken the bounds of modesty, and followed
the vain whistle of wantonness, forgetting from whence thou camst, whers thou
art, and whither thou must: throw from thee the golden ball of pleasure which
is secretly linde with poison, and humbly with Mary Magdalenanoint the feet of
thy Savior with the tears of thy heart and wipe them with y^ hears of thy head.

Do not with the unwise man fall in argument with thy maker why thou art made
of this fashion or framed of ye mettel, for it is no reason the pot should say
to the Potter why haste thou made me of this fashion? If thou find in thy
self any imperfections by Nature: thy remedy is to make it perfect by Nurture.

Set not thy glory upon sumptuous and stately buildings, which are subject to
the wind that is due unto thy God, which both wind and wethers do obey, for
so doing, thy wilful pleasure will in the end return thy woeful disproffit.

Strive not with Pharo to be a roaring Lion, but labor with the Apostles tob^ a
meek Lamb. Consider what a familie^r name the Lord was content to take upon him
having the choice of all names in his own hands. Had he called him self
Emperor, to that name had belonged great majesty. Had he called him self
King, great is the fear of a Subject toward that name. Had he called him self
Justice to decide controversies, there had belongd a woorshipful reverence to
that degree, but he to show the kindenes of a merciful God: took the name of
our Father upon him, and did not disoain to call us his Children. Then must we
by natural reason think, which by bodily Fathers, when we see our own
Children go astray, fall into themiseries of ye world run after the slesh, and
become careless of their Elders counsel, if it make our ^eds gray, our hearts
heavy, must it not needs offend our heavenly Father to see his sweet promises
refused, his divine ex cellencie so slightly credited, and his Ministers so
slowly followed? That wounded man deserves to have his sore rancle, his flesh
rot, and his bones putrify, y^ knows a ^alue and will not be his own Surgio^.
Even so since it has pleased him to say Come unto me all you that are heavy
laden and I will ease you, if we come not, our sloth is the cause of our
sorrow, and we found guilty of our own blood.

If thou have been prodigal or vainly spent thy life or living upon surfeting
dishes y^ worldly pleasure had provided for thee, or if thou have doted upon y^
painted bea^ tie of Harlots whose secret winks and privy smiles are like
drawing Adama^ts.

If thou have been ^ld in the Cradle of delight and ^ng a ^leep with the
Sirens, labor ernestly in y^ Uiniard of thy mind and with the prodigal Son
return to to thy Father, and say Father I have sinned against heaven and
against thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy son. Then he according to
his fatherly mercy will cause the fatted Calf to be killed, put a ring on thy hand
and a fair garment on thy back. That we may be all so accepted after our time
of prodigality and vain expense of life: let us with hearty repentance humble
hearts and low knees pray unto y^ Lord to who^e be all honor and glory. Ame^.

A true Report of the Earth quake in London.
Two or three honest men that walked for their pleasure into Moorfeeld (sitting
upon a hill) were upon a sudden tu^bled down with such violence that when they
recovered them selves: they were so amazed that for a good space they could not
one speak to the other.

Two honest Men more sitting on a Cannon upon Tower hill were on a sudden
thrown of and the Cannons rolled and hop^ up and down very strange.

The very waters and diches shook and frothed wunderfully.

There were diverse Chimneies in many places about the City the upper part
thrown down. The Beasts in the feeld ^orde meruelously.

In Christ's Church with a stone that fell, there was one killed, and many hurt,
in stri^ing to get forth of the Church.

They were so terrified in the Royal Exchange that many wept with fear, and
with as much speed as they might many shut up their windows being very
fearfully amazed.

Through the whole City this sudden token was suddenly feared and I stand in
do^t will as suddenly be forgotten.

A number of other things which are so commonly known as I need not to write
them. This wunder came so vnlookd for, that they forsook their houses in fear
and with such things as they had in their hands, running into the streets
gasing one upon an other. This being considered to show our thankfulness for so
merciful a token let us desire the Lord our God to accept our humble prayer.

A prayer
O Heavenly father which of thy own free will and heavenly grace made man
like unto thy self, and commaundst all creaturs to obey him after that our
forefather (...) had transgressed, by whose ^al we became Children o^ death,
when thy majesty was so mightily displeased that thou repe^edst that thou
made man, ^et upon thy fatherly good will remembering thy mercy: thou did not
disdain to send thine own Son to be born of the blessed Uirgin Mary.

And touching his manhood to take our ^raile nature upon him to live here in
sorrow, and anguish, to be despised of sinners, to be called be fore Rulers / to
be bu^fetted, to be spet at, to be slau^dred, and cruelly misused, to be
betrayed of his own servant Judas, to be followed as a Murderer, to be
delivered into the hands of sinners, to be crucified upon the cross, to be
laughed at of his enimes, to (...) water and blood for out sakes, to dye among
^heeues, and after to be buried and then to rise again, to be come fellow heir
with the in thy everlasting (...). For reme^braun^e of these, and all thy other
graces when thy sword o^ wrath is lifted up ready to confound us which rebel
in sin against thy glo ry, the^ remember thy (...) sons death, cast a (...)
thy pitiful eyes, behold his gree^us wounds that bleed a fresh to pacify thy
an ger, for get (O Lord) the offenses of our youth, blot out of reme^ brau^ce
y^ sins of our forfathers, and as it has pleased thee to se^d so ge^^e a
remembrance as this earthquake / when it was in thy hands to shake our bodies
to dust, and our souls to he^: so merciful Father give us thy spirit of grace
to takethy warning so tha^kfully, and so mortify all worldly desires in our
hearts, that we may just for thy co^ ming, and humbly pray thee to hasten thy
kingdom, that we may be pertakers of thy heavenly felicity and fellow sharers
with thy Saints and martirs to glorify thy name. Grant this for thy dear
sons sake, to who^e be all honor / praise and glory world without end.

Amen.
YOu that desire to hear of Foreign news,
or tales new ^oynd by rumors rash report:
Lay by such care good friends leave of to muse,
the tale I tell shall sound in better sort.
No toy, no trifle, nor surmised jest:
But worthy well to lodge in every breast.
When Mountains move as late they did in wales
great sign it is y^ nature then is crossed:
When Monsterous Infants tells such doctors tales
the toke^ shows so^e favor has bin lost.
With him that has in charge ye use of all:
To spill or save, to raise or let us fall.
When bla^g stars, and bloody clouds do^ show
then time it is for men too search a new:
And mark y^ stock from whence these graffes do* grow
the fruit more strange the^ any gardner knew
the Ai^e is chockt we vapor of our sin:
When such unwonted tokens call us in.
The very seas of late have chaung'd their tides
it is not so strange as true the Sailers know:
Few things or none in former state a bides,
such swelling floods, such great and monstrous snow
with other woonders to to strange to tell:
A charm for flesh when nature would rebel.
The branch of pride bears such a galla^t gra^
that plainnes now is thrust unto the wall:
And c^uetousnes has conquered such a place,
that charity must let his action fall.
Such writs of error subtlety brings in:
That Conscience verdit is not worth a pi^.
The Child desires his fathers death for wealth
both most and least make Idols of their gold:
Forgetting death that cre^peth in by stelth,
to kill desire if baiard be too bold.
The silver key now opens every gate:
Such is the blindenes of our present state.
(...) does keep so great a coil,
that Saints and Martirs they are slain a new:
And Usury breeds such a bloody broyle,
that Poverty bids all his joys adieu.
Blindness hyes him ^ast to cut the cards:
too smother law with bribes and great rewards
Then Gl^ttony does challenge for his share
his earthly joy, which is his paunch too fill:
And wicked lust tha^ bids a fig for care,
does think this wanton world will tarry still.
With several sco^fes they do not blush to say:
Put of repentance til an other day.
But if these tokens which be past and gone,
have took no root at all within your hearts:
You needs must grant this earthquake to be one,
unless you challenge Heaven for deserts.
Our health of souls must ha^g in great suspense
When earth and Sea do quake for our offense.
But now you Stewards which are put in trust
prepare against your Captain call account:
See that your books, and reconings fall out just
I fear your payment will your wealth s^rmosit.
Turst not in s^uces nor a golden tale:
The law is hard, the Judge will take no bale.
Let faith and truth give suerties of your life,
first honor God, and then obey your Prince
Use upright dealing both to man and wife:
conquer each cause that once may breed offense.
So shall you live deuoide of all complaints:
With Psalms of joy to sing among y^ Saints.
FINIS.
Richard Tarlton.

Imprinted at London by John Allde and are to be sold at the West door of
Paul's Church by Nicolas Ling.


