CHVRCHYARDS Challenge.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1593.

To the right honorable Sir John VVolley Knight, Secretary for the Latin tung
to the Queens Majesty, and one of her privy Council: Thomas Churchyard
wishes increase of honor, blessedness of life, and abundance of worldly
felicity, and heavenly happiness.
THe long travel and tracing out of life in this wearisome pilgrimage (right
honorable) having brought me now almost to the end of my journey, makes me
glad (with a restles desire) to be rid of the burdens of my mind and the
labors of my body, the one never free from study, and the other seldom void
of toil, and yet both of them neither brought great benefit to the life, nor
blessing to the soul: in which small rest and unquietness, many sorrowful
discourses in my days I have written, and numbers of books I have printed:
and because they shall not be buried with me, I challenge them all as my
children to abide behind me in the world, to make them inheritors of such
fame and dispraise as their father (which begat them on sweet invention) here
enioyes or deserves: hoping they shall not be called bastards, nor none alive
will be so hardy as to call them his babes, that I have bred in my bowels,
brought forth and fostred up so carefully at mine own charges, and hazard of
an envious world. And now indeed for that diverse (of disdainful disposition)
do or may hinder the good report of those labors which I think well bestowed
among my friends, I have set forth while I am living a great number of my works
in this book named my Challenge, that after my death shall be witnesses they
were mine own doings: not for any great matter in them, but for the iustnes
of troth and true trial of all my honest exercises, and so to purchase credit
and the more friends and favorers to prop up my poor reputation: I not only
dedicate this book (and all therein) to your honor, but have made also in the
same book diverse dedications to sundry honorable and worshipful personages,
protesting that there is nothing herein but came from mine own device, which
inuencions (spoken as becomes me) shall be in all honest sort defended by pen
or any way I may to the uttermost of my breath or ability, ioying much (with
all gladness of heart) that they are presented to so honorable a personage and
one of such singular learning, whose worth and value by a worthy and virtuous
Princes is seen into, and throwly considered of, which gracious Queen has
always made her princely choice in such an excellent and unspeakable manner, as
God himself should deuinely appoint and direct to our great wealth and his
great glory: and in whose r^re commendation all the pen men of the world may
write. Now good sir under your excellent favor and countenance, I shield my
presumption and boldenes, that has offered a book of so many discourses, to
the judgment of such a multitude that quickly can discover the weakness of my
labors: but having ventured so far as to publishe them in print, I must now
of necessity commit them to the common opinion of the world. So in hope the
best will fall out, I present you with my studies and take leave of your honor,
desiring of God what goodness can be wished, to be always at your commandment.

Dutifully and loyally in all at commandment, Thomas Churchyard.

To the worthiest sort of People, that gently can read, and justly can judge.
GOod Reader, if my presumption were so great that I thought my book might
pass without your favorable judgment, mine error were as much as my
ouer-weening: and yet to use persuasions in purchasing your good liking, I
should pass the bounds of common reason, and fall into the danger of
adulation: for your good wills are rather won with good matter then bare words,
and say what I can to gain your affection toward my work, you will speak
what seems best in your own conceits. For among many thousands are many of
deep consideration, and some undoubtedly of as shallow judgment: so that the
one or the other cannot nor will not be led and carried away with any device of
my pen, though all the hye spirits and excellency of Poetry might drop out of
the quill I writ withal: wherefore now I must as well abide the hazard of your
censure, as I have boldly unfolded my self to the world: there is now no
craving of pardon, nor pleading for your furtherance to increase my good fame:
my works must abide weight, they are thrust into the balance, and I of
necessity must content me with your allowance, and what price pleases you to
set on my merchandise: but if they prove too light in the skales, I pray you
help them with some grain of good skill, that they be not condemned as
trifles, because they have cost me great labor and study, and put me to no
little charges. I freely offer them to you for three or four causes, the one
to keep the reputation of a writer, the second to pleasure my friends with the
reading of new inventions, and thirdly to desire my foes to give me true
report of those works I have made, and last of all to affirm that every
thing in this my book of Challenge is mine own doing, which iustlye no man
can deny. Not boasting thereof as matter worthy memory, but claiming a better
regard then envy would give me, I stand to the praise or dispraise of all I
have done, maruelling much that in my life time any one would take from me the
honest laudation I deserve. I strive no further in that point, but commit to
God and good people the indifferency and iustnes of my cause, and the best is
(which shall bear it self) the wise of the world and worthiest of knowledge
and capacity, are the only Judges shall yield me my right: the rest are but
hearers and lookers on, whose voices may make a great noise, but gives so
uncertain a sound, they can do no great harm, because of nature and
condition they never do no great good. Now my pleading time is past, my book
must appear in that bare fashion as I have formed the matter, I hope it shall
not walk so nakedly abroad, but shall be able to abide the coldenes of ill
will, and the extreme heat of hateful men's disposition. God the giver of
goodness, guide my verses so well that they never happen into their hands that
loves me not, and make my prose and plainenes of speech be as welcome to the
Reader, as it was well meant of the writer. So with double and treble blessing,
Farewell.

FINIS.
My next book shall be the last book of the Worthiness of Wales.

And my last book called my Vltimum Vale, shall be (if it please God) twelve
long tales for Christmas, dedicated to twelve honorable Lords.

Here follows the several matters contained in this book.
THe tragedy of the Earl of Morton. The tragedy of sir Simon Burley. A
discourse that a man is but his mind. A discourse of the true steps of manhood.
A discourse of the honor of a Souldior. A discourse of an old Soldier and a
young. A discourse and comme^dation of those that can make Gold. A discourse
and rebuke to rebellious minds. A discourse of hospitality and consuming of
time and wealth in London. A discourse of misfortune and calamity. A discourse
of law and worthy Lawyers. A discourse of the only Phoenix of the world. A
praise of that Phoenix and verses translated out of French. The tragedy of
Shores wife much augmented. A discourse of the joy good subjects have when they
see our Phoenix abroad. The tragical discourse of the hapless man's life. The
adue the writer made long ago to the world. A discourse of a fantastical
Dream. A tragical discourse of a dolorous Gentlewoman. A tragical discourse
of a Lord and a Lady translated out of French.
I hope you look not that I should place every Knight and Lady in their degree,
for I must of necessity follow my matter.

The books that I can call to memory already Printed: are these that
follows.
FIrst in King Edwards days, a book named Dauie Dicars dream, which one
Camel wrote against, whom I openly confuted. Shores wise I penned at that
season. Another book in those days called the Mirror of Man. In Queen Mary's
reign, a book called a New-yeares gift to all England, which book treated of
rebellion. And many things in the book of songs and Sonets, printed then, were
of my making. Since that time till this day I wrote all these works. The book
of Chips dedicated to sir Christopher Hatton, after Lord Chancellor. The book
called Chance, dedicated to sir Thomas Bromley L. Chancellor then. The book
called my Charge, to my L. of Surrye. The book called my Change, in verse and
proes, dedicated to all good minds. The book called my Choice, dedicated to
the L. Chancellor sir Christopher Hatton. The book of the siege of Leeth and
Edenbrough Castle. The book of sir William Druries service, dedicated to sir
Drue Drury. The book called the golden Nut, dedicated to the Qu. Ma. The book
of receiving her highness into Suffolk, and Norfolk. The book before of her
highness receiving into Bristow. The book of the Earthquake, to the good Deane
of Paul's. The book of the troubles of Flanders, to sir Francis Walsing. The
book called the scourge of rebels in Ireland, to my Lord Admiral. The book
called a rebuke to Rebellion, to the good old Earl of Bedford. The book of a
Spark of freendship, to sir Walter Rawley. The book of Sorrows, to D. Wilson
when he was Secretary. The book of the winning of Macklin, to my Lord Norrice.
The book called the Worthiness of Wales, to the Qu. Ma. The book given her
Majesty at Bristow, where I made all the whole devises. The devises of war
and a play at Awsterley, her highness being at sir Thomas Greshams. The Commedy
before her Majesty at Norwich in the field when she went to dinner to my Lady
Gerning^ms. The whole devises pastimes and plays at Norwich, before her
majesty. The devises and speeches that men and boys showed within many
prograces. The book of King Henry's Epitaph, and other princes and Lords, to
Secretary Wolley. The book of my Deer adue, to M. John Stannop. The book called
a handful of gladsome verses, to the Qu. M. at Wodstocke. The book called a
pleasant co^ceite, a new years gift, to the Queens Majesty.
These works following are gotten from me of some such noble friends as I am
loath to offend.
Aeneas tale to Dydo, largely and truly translated out of Virgill, which I
once showed the Qu. Ma. and had it again. A book of the oath of a Judge and
the honor of Law, delivered to a Stacioner, who sent it the L. chief Baron
that last dyed. A book of a sumptuous show in Shrouetide, by sir Walter Rawley,
sir Robart Carey, M. Chidly, and M. Arthur Gorge, in which book was the whole
service of my L. of Lester mentioned, that he and his train did in Flaunders,
and the gentlemen Pencioners proved to be a great piece of honor to the Court:
all which book was in as good verse as ever I made: an honorable knight
dwelling in the black Friars, can witness the same, because I read it unto him.
A great piece of work translated out of the great learned French Poet Seignior
Dubartas, which work treated of a Lady and an Eagle, most divinely written on
by Dubartas, and given by me to a great Lord of this land, who says it is
lost. An infinite number of other Songs and Sonets, given where they cannot be
recovered, nor purchase any favor when they are craved.
A new kind of a Sonnet.
IN writing long, and reading works of war,
That Homer wrote and Virgils verse did show:
My muse me led in ouerweening far,
When to their Styles my pen presumde to go.
Ovid himself durst not have vaunted so,
Nor Petrarke grave with Homer would compare:
Dawnt durst not think his sense so hye did flow,
As Virgils works that yet much honored are.
Thus each man saw his judgment hye or low,
And would not strive or seek to make a jar:
Or wrestle where they have an overthrow.
So I that find the weakness of my bow,
Will shoot no shaft beyond my length I troe:
For reason learnes and wisdom makes me know.
Whose strength is best and who does make or mar:
A little Lamp may not compare with Star.
A feeble head where no great gifts do grow:
Yields unto skill, whose knowledge makes small show.
Then gentle world I sweetly thee beseech:
Call Spenser now the spirit of learned speech.
Churchyards good will.
THE EARL OF MVRTONS Tragedy, once Regent of Scotland, and always of great
birth, great wisdom, great wealth, and very great power and credit: yet
Fortune envying his estate and noblenes, brought him to lose his head on a
Skaffold in Edenbrough the second of June. 1581.
MAke place for plaints, give rowme for plagued men,
Step back proud minds, that praise your selves too much,
Let me appeal, to some true writers pen:
That does the life, and death of Princes touch.
For my mi^hap, and fatal fall is such,
That gazing world, which hears my woeful end,
Shall marvel much, to see such matter pend.
The restles race, that mortal men do run,
Seems smooth to sight, yet full of scratting breers:
Here is no rest, nor surety under Sun.
Sour is the taste, of flowers that sweet appears,
Our gentle joys, are in our tender years,
For as the Child, to wit and reason grows,
So judgment comes, and seeds of sorrow sowes.
Our wanton time, does steal away with sport,
But when that care, has crept in curious brains:
Long grief begins, and pleasure is but short,
For heart and head, is vert with fancies vain,
Then hord brings hate, and gold breeds greedy gain.
Desire of which, with pomp and glory great,
So boiles in breast, it makes man's brows to sweat.
Ambitious mind, the busy bellows blows,
The quenchles coals, of R^le that burns still,
And ore the banks, the floods of folly flows:
And private wealth, ^o blindes a worldlings will:
That wicked wit, does banish reasons skill,
Climes up aloft, cries fame and rare renown,
Till heavy stone, from top comes tottering down.
The mounting heart, that daily does aspire,
With wilful wings, of pride to clouds would fly:
And though he feels, his feathers singd with fire:
He will not stoop, he holds his head so hie,
To bear a sway, and always casts his eye,
(With eager looks) on honors stately throne:
He likes no mate, but all would weld alone.
The simple sort, that sees soore Fawcon rise,
Disdains to death, the bird that flies too far:
Then as on owl, flocks, crows and chatring pies,
So at great dogs, the little tikes do snarre.
Tweene small and great, when spite ^nes moves the war,
There is no rest, for rage runs all on head,
Hate kindles fire, and love grows cold as lead.
A greater strife, is when two tides do meet,
Both of one force, like mighty struggling streams,
I mean when men, do strive of equal sprite:
The robe is ripped, or rented through the seames:
Great troubles grow, in sundry civil Realms,
For whilst the one, in chiefest rowme is plaste.
The other comes, and hales him down in have.
There is no mean, where matches meet at shocke,
The strong shows strength, the stout stands wrangling still,
About the ball, the finest fellows flock,
They win the goal, that has the greatest skill.
The force of flood, turns round the Water-mill.
So where two men, do wrestle for a fall,
Most might preuailes, the weak is turnde to wall.
But why do I, find fault with greatest band,
My train was such, as I a King had been:
In Court and Town, Earl Murton was so mand.
As every day, I had a world to win,
That was the frette, that did the war begin.
For those that saw, me waited on so well,
Did skorne the same, and so like toades they swell
At my renown, and lo a greater thing,
By chance befell, for I had secret foes:
(That daily sought) my fall about the King.
And as on steps, to stately stage I rose,
So my decay, in Court and country grows.
For privy hate, and malice matchth with might,
Took out the oil, that gave my lamp the light.
Yet through great help, and friends as world may ween,
Whose wisdoms was, well known both grave and sage:
I regent was, when many a broile was green:
And set abroach, in Court by revels rage,
I ruled all, whilst King was under age,
And where I saw, the people make offense,
I scowrgd them sore, which kept them quiet sense.
Some did I hang, and trust them up on hye,
That slaughters made, or murders did commit:
Some were redeemde, that did for favor cry,
And strongest heads, I held in hard with bitts.
With equal ears, I would in judgment sit.
Yea bent my brain, to beat out right and wrong,
And conscience bad, defer not justice long.
The rich by this, were sorry to offend,
The poor did dread, to hang that faulty were,
And yet often times, when faulters did amend,
I hanged but one, to bring the rest in fear.
To suitors all, I gave a gracious ear,
By gentle ways, and wisdoms modest mean,
From filthy facts, I cleansed Country clean.
By order good, I made them fear the law,
I pincht the purse, and pawsde in sheading blood,
I punished sore, where great abuse I saw,
Straight rules I set, to learn rude people good.
By which strong stays, my state in surety stood.
So wealth came in, with goodly gold and gear,
That paid for pains, and did the charges bear.
Yea sure more wealth, and riches I possessed,
Then twenty Lords, of Scotland any way:
I might compare (for treasure) with the best.
We call it Poess, in our plain Scottish lay,
I had the bags, of Angel nobles gay.
I had the chests, filled up unto the brim,
With sundry stamps, of coin and treasure trim.
My houses stood, in gladsom soiles and s^ats,
Stuffed with rich things, and Arras clothes ^now:
My table spread, with dear and dainty meats.
My ward robe storde, with change of garments throw,
My corn in stacks, my hay in many a mow,
My stable great, of gallant goldings good.
And I like Prince, amidst these pleasures stood^.
What I would wish, I had with glory great,
Each knee did bow, and make their bodies bend:
Each: eye stood fixed, to gase on honors seat,
Each friendly face, a loving look would send.
To stately throne, and I again would lend
A Lordly grace, to keep the worlds good will,
Whereby encreast, my fame and honor still.
I buy^t me bowers, sometime to banquet in,
Made plotts for walks, and gardens of delight:
Sought sweet conceits, (not fowsing soul in sin,)
With glutted gorge, at pleasures bait to bite.
But pastime took, to put off worlds despite.
My streamers stood, in topp of bark so brave,
That flaggs of joy, with each good wind would wave.
For worldly pomp, and worship waits at heel,
Where rule and power, sets out gay glittring shows,
Who folowes not, the swinge of fortunes wheel,
What fish forsakes, the floode that daily flows.
Both great and small, with course of water goes.
Where sun does shine, both beast and birds repair,
And what flies not, to pleasant weather fair.
But well away, when we have all we wish,
A house, a home, bedect with gallaunt grace:
A golden net, beguiles a carlesse fish*
We have no hold, of fortunes flittering face.
For when we do, worlds flattring gifts embrace,
We groope and gape, for more vain goods so fast:
That graceless hap, sweepes all away at last.
Our greedy mind, gains gold and tyens good name,
Winnes wealth yet works, a wicked web of woe:
Breeds deep disdain, and bringes a man in blame.
Breaks bands of love, makes friend become a foe.
Shutes spiteful shaftes, from malice sturdie bow,
Strikes dead good name, and reares up slanders brute,
Sowes seeds of vice, and brings forth rotten fruit.
All these de^e^s, does follow greedy mind,
But lo my skill, and sight in public state:
For soaking soores, a sovereign salve could find,
For where I fearde, sharp wars and foul debate*
To cut off strife, great friends at hand I gat,
And by my wit, to keep the King in right,
At my command, I freely brought much might.
Which struck the stroke, and stoutly ruled the roste,
Spent many days, in broils and making peace:
Bestowde great charge, and card not for no cost,
So that they could our common quarrels seace.
And ever as, I saw our brawles encreace,
I helped the harms, by worthy wisdoms art,
So planted peace, and rule in every part.
For every years, some brawle was set abroche,
Some treason wrought, some treachery taken in hand:
Which without stay, would sound to my reproach,
Such falsehood raignde, and raged in the land.
In factions still, did run a bloody band,
About the Realm, as wild as wolves for pray,
But by my friends, I set these things in s^aye.
In greatest storms, I stoutly stood to stern,
And turned about, the ship to win the wind:
And what defects, and fau^tes I did discern,
I ready was, a quick redress to find.
And no man durst, restrain the Regents mind,
For were it good, or bad I would have done,
Unto that side, would most of people run.
Yet murmors rose, among the mighty flock,
Whose hidden hate, huggd close in cankred breast:
To undermine, my strong and stately rock,
That stood on propps, and did on pillars cest.
For longer sure, in Court I could not rest,
Then King might come, to perfect age and years,
As things besell, and by my fall appears.
The secret swarms, of ^lie and subtle snakes,
That lurkes in grass, and under fairest flowers:
The flattering clouds, that often fair weather makes,
Great showers of rain, upon the people powers.
The smiling face, that when it list it lowers.
Betraies the eyes, of them that well believes,
When scorners flier, and laugheth in their sleeves.
My hedge stood stackte, with such weak sticks of wood,
That many a gappe, was made into my grownde:
I trusted much, to freindship, birth, and blood,
But some of those, in fine were faythlesse found.
Most spoke me fair, but least of them were sound.
Some sought my ruin, that waighted hard at heels.
For time so shapt, the world went all on wheels.
What is enuid, but rule and high estate.
The servant seeks, of^ times his masters fall:
The subject bears, to law a privy hate,
The stubborn child, is silde at fathers call.
The froward wives, finds fault with husbands all.
The scholar hates, to hear his folly told,
And each degree, abhors to be controlde.
Rule wants no foes, the horse he hates the bitt.
The dog disdaines, the leashe that holds him in:
The hawk desires, not long on perch to sit,
Rule is despisde, Rule does no favor win.
The man that has, in courtly honor been.
Can tell how often, he was with flattry fed,
And some there are, with blind affection led.
Whose humor weak, the wil^e worldlings feed,
They follow fast, and fawn^ like whelps a while:
Till great men's means, has ^erued their turn in deed,
Then gallants go, away and give a smile.
Thus wa^ters on, do naught but friends beguile.
And slipper lads, as false and fine as those,
For no offense, become most mortal foes.
With curtsie great, and kneeling on the knee,
The harmless hearts, of noble states are trapte:
They look so high, they can no tromperie see,
Until the ^lye, in spiders web be lapt.
And when by sleight, the simple is mishapt.
The wandering world, but maruels at the case,
And from the weak, the strongest turns the face.
Who had more freindes, or yet more wealth than I,
Who sound less help, O fie on friendships trust:
My stock and race, did reach to starrie sky,
Yet world trod down, mine honor in the dust.
And I was left, alone think what I lust.
Weep sigh or sob, when Fortune gave checkmate,
Fer^^ friends were fledd, and I in woeful state.
Yet wisdoms grace, held up my noble mind.
I scornde to think, when sorest tempests blewe:
In face and cheer, my courage men might find,
I counted all, and then the worst I knew,
It was but death, (a payment that is due:)
To yield to day, or else when date drew near
To pay the shot, and make the reckning clear.
What needs more talk, amid my cheifest joys,
A draught was drawn, to drive me out of grace:
The news whereof, did fill my head with toys,
But my stout heart, would give no practice place.
I stiffly stood, in Court with manly face.
And thought to thrust, them out that strove with me.
And so in spigt, of world I would go free.
Great banding then, began in Borough town,
And to the view, I had the strongest side:
For on my part, were men of great renown.
Yea, as the fish, does follow greatest tide:
So people swarmd, and crucifige cried.
On Mortons foes, for daily eurye hour:
In Princes Court, with pomp increast my power.
But when we met, that several ways did draw,
Sweet words did walk, bespyest with fained cheer:
In dulcet shell, a kernel sour, I saw,
That cunning craft, by cloud conuayd full clear.
Our powdered speech, most fresh, would still appear.
Till bitter taste, bewrayd our meanings all:
Then honey comb, in proof became but gall.
So angry bees, burst forth from quiet hiue,
And offered stinge, to those that nearest stood:
Then fearful folk, too feeble were to strive,
They floke so fast, that daily sought my blood.
Yet to the world, I made my quarrel good,
And craude no more, but justice in my cause:
And so to shifte, by course of common laws.
In open Court, I was accused straight,
And straightly chargde, to keep my chamber still:
Where if I had, but used any slight,
I might have scapte, away and had my will.
But destnie did, bewitch both wit and skill.
And robbed me so, of spirit and feeling sense:
That I was meek, and never made defense.
But what I thought, and what I hepte for both,
Is known to God, and some that lives yet:
In deed my fear, was small (I tell you trothe,)
For many things, in compass of my wit,
Did clear me clean, and so though I should sit.
In prison fast, a time till things were tried:
In duraunce long, I hopte I should not bide.
But lo in haste, I was from thence remoude,
And sent unto, the Castle there to stay:
And then perchance, I was but finely proud,
To see for fear, if I would fly away.
For mine own folks, had there the whole conuaie.
(Of body through, the streets) such grace I got,
But woe is me, for then did the old man doat.
Had I but said, I would not be in pound,
(I would be frank, and free from dangers doubt:
I might have turnde, the world in Scotland round,
Like te^nis ball, and thrust mine enemies out.
But who can bring a sternlesse bark about.
My wits were gone, that guided all before,
My shipp on ground, and I was set on shore.
Lo, what God does, to make his glory known,
Lo, how man's life, is cut off like a bough:
Lo, lookers on, how sone is man oerthrowne,
Lo, where became, my worldly wisdom now.
Lo here a glass, that shows your faces through.
You greatest Peers, and Lords of peereles praise,
Your pride is past, if God abridge your days.
No sooner I, beleeude I was so well,
But was conuayde, unto Don Bartyn than:
So all my friends, (that did in Scotland dwell,
Made sure a show, to raise up many a man.
The King straight ways, before these broils began,
Five ensigns chose, to keep the world in awe:
For sure defense, of him and of his law.
Those bands held back, some forward business strange,
Yet in good faith, my friends were twice as strong:
The force of whom, made world to fear a change,
But on and of, alas they dalied long.
And all the while, I thought they did me wrong.
Yet vain it was, in arms to stand and strive:
For they had not, that way found me alive.
Long was the talk, of many a farlye thoe,
Long did I look, for that which did not come:
But all those blasts, in sine did ouerbloe,
I listened long, to here the sound of drum.
Yet though I had, the great good will of some.
God would not th^ell, for one man's sake alone:
That broils should cause, a million make their moan.
When bird is limde, farewell fair feathers all,
The fish in net, may bid the sea adieu:
When world beholds, a man is near his fall,
It leaves him there, and follows fancies new.
When all is said, the old proverb is true.
Who cannot swim, must sincke there is no boot:
Who has no horse, of force must go on foot.
Thus ^yed to clogge, and pende in prison fast,
My hope decaide, my heart did heavy wax:
So soldiers came, and brought me forth at last,
The butcher then, began to wh^t his axe,
All was on flame, the fire was flowne in flax.
There was no choice, I must a size abide:
Prove foul or clean, and by my Peers be tried.
To Edenbrough, the captive man was brought,
Along the fields, where flocks of people were:
The sight of whom, did trouble much my thought,
But when in deed, I was arrived there,
Both streets and stalles* and windows every where,
Were stuffed full, to give on me the gaze:
But that might not my manly mind amaze.
Yet neither one, nor other, small nor great,
Did me salute, So turnde the moodes of men:
That cold device, (nay rather raging heat)
Could not appall; my princely courage then.
For I did look, as I did nothing ken.
Yet knew the whole, that some in secret bore:
So passed through, the thronge, what would ye more.
A russet cloak, (a garment rude and bare,
For such a state: make what of me they would:
With foul felt hat, and robes but base I ware,
That people might* my great disgrace behold.
Alas poor lamb, thy life was bought and soulde.
No force of weeds, to cover clott of claye,
Morton was dead, full long before that day.
Now Lawyers flockte, and swarmde in ilke a place,
Now Lords repaird, and Lardes came daily in:
Now learned heads, did long debate my case,
Now did (in deed) my sorrows all begin,
Now was the time, that I must lose or win,
For I appeard, before the judgment seat,
And there maintainde, my right with reasons great.
Made good defense, to many matters sure,
Spoke boldly still, and did but justice crave:
My pleading there, did four long hours endure,
And Lawyers then, to me good leisure gave,
But to what end, did I long pleading have,
I was condemnd, the world would have it so,
A thing there was, but that the Lord does know.
And I that here, confess my former gylt,
A murder than, was laid unto my charge:
Which I concealde, yet saw a Kings blood spilt*
A foul offense, for which there is no targe:
Nor could not claim, therefore to go at large:
But byed the sense, and censure of the laws,
For foul (God wot) and filthy was my cause.
The judgment was, a heavy thing to here,
But what they did, I could not call again:
The sentence past, too late my self to clear,
Once iudgd to die, condemnd I must remain.
As silly sheep, in shopp must needs be slain.
Then to the pot, or pit our flesh must pass,
All flesh is dust, vain ashes earth and grass.
Then thought I on, some friend that absent was,
And spoke some words, but ask^ not what they were,
So from the bench, to prison did I pas,
And for to die, did make me ready there,
The Preachers came, and shed full many a tear,
To bring my soul, in perfect patience than,
And make me die, a faithful christian man.
In secret sort, the Preachers there I told,
Great things of weight, that in my conscience lay:
And so confessed, what right and reason would,
But thereon pawsde, I would no further say,
Ask what they pleased, I did but troth bewray.
Whereat I knocked, my troubled trembling breast,
And so desirde, the Preachers let me rest.
O brethren mine, your doctrine likes me well,
(Quoth. I) good men, bestow some prayers now.
In your belief, look that you daily dwell,
As you began, so still continue through,
The blood of Christ, has washed my blotted brow,
As white as snow, (I have no doubt nor fear)
Shall be my sins, that red as scarlet were.
The Preachers glad, to bring my soul to rest,
Brought Scripture in, and did the text unfold:
And many a place, and sentence they expressed,
Toward the death, to make my body bold,
O my good Lord, you may not now behold,
The pomp (quoth they) and glory that is past,
But you must think, on that which aye shall last.
Both wealth and friends, and worldly wisdom to,
Are banished quite, and blush to come in place:
When soul goes hence, those things have naught to do.
With man that is, then newly borne in grace,
The light of day, has darkness still in chase,
The heavenly thoughts, do hate all earthly things,
And faith to clouds, does fly with flittring wings.
They praide with me, and wipt their weeping eyes,
My heavy sprite, stood troubled sore that tide:
And as the sighs, from pan^ing heart did rise,
My groaning Ghost, O Abba father cride.
The sobs flew forth, the ^eares I could not hide,
As babe does weep, when he beholds the rod,
So then I feared, the wrath of my good God.
Full soon reformde, I was in godly wise,
Gave ore the world, forgot all earthly thing,
Heaud up my hands, and heart, unto the skies,
To God that did, this plague upon me bring,
And then I sued, and sent unto the King.
To escape the coard, by loss of life and breath,
For heading was, for me more Nobler death.
He granted that, and sad for my mishap,
He let me go, where God and man assignd,
Now every fault, lay open in my lap,
Each small offense came freshly to my mind,
The secret sins, that we in conscience find,
A muster made, and passed for their pay,
Before great God, that does all things bewray.
The wrong I did, to simple people plain,
Bad heart ^orethinke, the fury of mine ire,
The greedy thirst, of glory rule and gain,
Made soul afeard, of hot infernal fire,
My self I blamde, for fleshly fond desire.
But falling thus, full prostrate on my face,
From heavens hie, I felt a spark of grace.
Which warmd my sprites, that waxed faint and cold,
The last conflict, that in this life we have,
Then comfort came, and made weak body bold,
Care not for death, for life mounts up from grave.
(Quoth. knowledge then) when Christ the soul shall save.
With that I flong, behind all fearful dread,
So called for book, and many a Psalm did read.
In less then half, the time that I have spoke,
Me thought I talked, with God whose face did shine,
Who from a cloud, discende as thin as smoke,
And entered in* my breast by power divine,
O mortal man (said he) come thou art mine,
Be strong and stout, to fight the battle throw,
For my right hand, is here to help thee now.
Blush not to see, the raging worlds despite,
The bloody are, nor scaffolde full of bills:
My mercy seat, shall be thy chief delihte.
And though on earth, thine enemies have their wills,
I am the God, that storms and tempests stils,
In quiet calm, pass gently thou away,
And suffer much, yet do but little say.
Death is the end, of all that bears life,
Not one shall escape, this world is but a dream,
The seeds of sin, brings forth but flowers of strife,
In painted robes, lies many a rotten seame,
It is but grief, to guide and rule a Realm:
Great charge and care, a great account must make,
And when I frown, the whole round world I shake.
I cause one wight, to take another place,
To chop off heads, to kill, to hang and draw:
And when I take, from rulers new my grace,
His head again, shall yield to sword and law.
Men blows the cole, but I put fire in straw,
And where does fall, the flame of my great ^e,
All things consumes, to cinders in that fire,
Come Murton come, and play thy pageant well,
Thou go before, perhaps a year or twain:
But after thee, shall pass to heaven or hell,
A number more, that mercy now remain,
World has no stay, I tell ^hee all is vain:
Both reign and rule, and regal power most hie,
When bastards dream, in dirt and dust shall lie.
My God thus said, with that my sprites reuiude,
My wits were armde, my sense redoubled than:
And with my flesh, the holy Ghost he striude.
By Angels force, but not by might of man:
A marulous stir, in stomach then began,
For to subdue, the ^arrein corpse of care,
And burthend breast, that sinful body bare.
Now hope in have, made heavy heart full light,
The fear was fled, that comes by course of law:
Gods promise wrought, (through mercy grace and might,
A noble work in me, clear conscience saw.
A fig for death, his force not worth a straw:
(Quoth. I) a rush for worlds reproach and shame:
For written is, in book of life my name.
The Preachers then, began to weep for joy,
Your firm belief, my Lord shall make you free:
(Quoth they) and sure, your soul is from annoy,
Both in this world, and where sweet Angels be.
And where right soon, you shall Gods glory see:
Not with bare view, but with immortal eyes,
As body shall, at latter day arise.
Then kneeld I down, and to the clouds I look,
The thought and care, the while of world was past,
And I in God, such joy and pleasure took:
That at my heels, all earthly pomp I cast,
By this the hour, of death approached fast.
The Guard gave sign, with halbards bright in hand,
I must prepare, on Skaffold straight to stand.
The streets were full, of soldiers armed well,
With shot and match, and all belongs for war,
I saw in house, I could no lon^er dwell:
For people said, the day was spent full far.
Then open the door, (quoth. I) draw back the bar,
I will go hence, to better home I trust:
Here is no hope, I see, that die I must.
To comfort sense, and strengthen vital sprete,
I tasted foed, and drank a draught of wine:
And pawsde a while, as I thought fit and meet,
But sure no dread, of death within mine eine
Was seen, for God by special grace divine,
Held up my heart, and head as high to shoe,
As when from home, I did a walking go.
Mild words I gave, when bitter speech I hard,
So passed through, them all with manly cheer,
And did no more, this world nor earth regard,
Then though in deed, I never had been here,
But when in sight, the Skaffold did appear,
My mind was bent, to fight the battle out:
And conquer death, and banish fear and dout.
So stepped I up on Skaffold lightly than,
Where sundry came, to ask me many a thing,
I lookte to God, and made small count of man.
Save that alowd, I said God bless the King.
God give him grace, in peace the state to bring,
And shun the harms, and dangers ore his head:
To find on earth, long life when I am dead.
Had I serud God, as well in every sort,
As I did serve, my king and master still:
My scope had not, this season been so short,
Nor world have ^ad, the power to do me ill.
But lo, I liude, against my makers will:
That feels my flesh, that feels my soul alas,
That fault I fear, where now my soul shall pass.
That, that good Lord, forgive, whilst breath I have,
It is the sin, that to this world I brought:
It buried shall, be with my flesh in grave,
It is a sore, and sickness of the thought.
It is most vain, a wretched thing of naught,
A wicked wound, that death does heal alone,
Dwells last in flesh, and first was bred in bone.
Pray you for me, that sets your sins by mine,
And such as do, profess the faith I hold:
Mark who I am, that here by power divine,
Am forced this day, my conscience to unfold.
Look nearly both, to your own Faults untold,
And pray as well, for me with humble mind,
As for your selves, that here I leave behind.
My matter stands, before the judge of all,
Men have condemnd, my body to the tort,
When that great judge, will for a reckning call,
Both you and I, (shut up in sentence short,)
Shall soon be known, who gains the best report,
There accuse, ne small nor great this day:
My part is plaide, and I must pass my way.
The faith this hour that all the Realm does know,
I die in here, and seal it with my blood:
To other faith, beware bend not your bow:
The r^tten string, will break and do no good,
Whilst in this land, such trash and tromprie stood,
God was not pleased, the King not serude aright,
And we did walk, in darkness stead of light.
Good ^earers all, my babes and children dear,
I brought you up, full long in this belief:
Your regent ones, now preaches to you here,
Change not (my barns) religion to your grief,
Serve first your God, next honor King as chief,
This lesson keep, and so good friends, adieu:
The dead from quick, so takes his leave of you.
Thus full resolude, temptation to resist,
Great time I stood, and talkte in stoutest shoe,
Of sundry things, as freely as I list:
But waying then, that hence the soul must go,
And that my neck, must bide the blouddy bloe,
I stretched arms, as hie as I could heave:
So turned my back, and did the audience leave.
The heavenly hope that heart does long uphold,
Did hale me hence, and bad dispatch in haste
As firm as rock I stood, say what they would,
For after this, I spoke no word in waste,
Then down I lay, and balefull block embraste.
And there receiude, the blow as are did fall:
That cut me cleave, from cares and cumbers all.
The gasping head, as in the Lord I slept,
A vision had, ye may the fame suppose:
I dreamde it saw, how friend, and faurers wept,
In head that tide, a stranger fancy rose,
The eyes beheld, before the eyes did close,
A writer there, and Churchyard lo he hight:
Whose pen paints out, men's tragedies aright.
In deadly dream, my tongue callde on that man,
(As headless ^olke, may fumble out a word)
You must believe, the tongue a tale began,
Of earnest things, and not a trifling board,
Churchyard (quoth he) if now thou can afforde
Me one good verse, take here thy pen in hand:
And send my death, to thine own native land.
Which in my life, I loud and honored much.
(A cause there was, let that pass oer with time:)
Thou man (I say,) that did Shores wife so touch,
With loving phrase, and friendly English rhyme.
When pen and muse* (were in chief pride and prime,
Bestow some pains, on him that was thy friend:
Whose life thou knewst, and se^st me make mine end.
These words pronounst, the head began bleed anew,
My body lay, along like lump of lead:
The limbs stretched out, and sti^e as stake they grew,
And under cloth of black was made my bed.
On thick hard boordes, that world might see me dead
There did I lodge, till stars appearde in sky:
And goring blood, had glutted gasers eye.
Thus Churchyard now, in wandering up and down,
(About affairs, perhaps that touched him nere:)
Saw on Tolbothe, in Edenborough town,
My senseless head, before his face appear.
Why Morton then, (quoth he) and art thou here.
That long did reign, and rule this Realm of late:
Then ruin and wrack, oerreacheth each estate.
An Emperors life, puffed up with pomp and pride,
May not compare, with plain ploughman (quoth he)
The climing foot, is apt to slip and slide,
The studious brain, shall selde in surety be,
A bitter blast, sone bites the brauest tree.
At honors seat, blind boltes men daily shoot:
And wretched hap, riues up renown by root.
No wit nor wealth, preuailes against mischaunce,
Whom fortune hates, the people do disdain:
As wisdoms grace, does worthy wits advance,
So privy hate, throws down hie hearts again.
The whitest clothe, will take the greatest stain.
It is not strange, to see great men to fall,
For too much trust, of world deceiues us all.
Why do we wish, to weald a world at will,
What follows pomp, but hazard of good name:
Why would wise men, in pleasure wallow still,
The end of toil, makes soul and body tame.
They take no rest, that runs still after fame,
Great charge breeds grief, and brings on care apace:
Great honor rules, and lasts but a space.
Who trauells far, comes weary home at night,
The mounting Lark, comes down to foulers hand:
Great birds are borne, about with feathers light,
All great renown, on tickle propps does stand,
All wordlie bliss, is builded on the sand.
Which when a puff, of wind begins to bloe:
In pieces small, the painted postee will go.
To greatest trees, the birds do daily flock,
On highest hills, we walk to take the air:
And sudden storms, give greatest oak a shock,
The ground is bare, where many feet repair,
All people draw, unto a goodly fair.
But where most haunte, is found with judging eye:
There is least hope, and does most danger lie:
The fair it self, where all is bought and sold,
Shows mere deceit, to him that buies and sells:
The enemies strength, strives still with strongest hold,
Disdain does draw, where greatest honor dwells.
All flies repair, to flowers of sweetest smells,
Each wicked worm to soundest kernel goes:
Ten thousand weeds, do grow about a rose.
Because the seat, of honor stands hye,
The baser sort, do bend the browe thereat:
And honor is, a moate in enuies eye,
Who vily thinks, and speaks he knows not what.
By enuies brute, that bitter biting gnatt.
A blister grows, in soft and smothest skin:
So skarrs arise, where cleerest show has binne.
O malice great, thou monster sent from hell,
The heavens hate, to hear thy naughty name:
If world thee skorn, thou know not where to dwell,
O fugitive, O son of open shame.
No wisdoms lore, nor men of noble fame,
Can escape thy scourge, it gives so sore a yarke:
And so thy boltes, are shot at each good mark.
Men may not live, though great they are of race,
For malice, rage, and envy now a days:
Proud practice proules, about in eurie place,
To breed debate, and cut of good men's praise.
Where malice sowes, the seeds of wicked ways.
Both honor quails, and creadit crackes with all:
Of no^lest men, and such as fears no fall.
At goodly fruit, that grows on topps of trees,
The people gase, and sometime kudgels flinge:
Disdain repines, at all good things it sees,
And so like snakes, does envy shoot his sting,
The angry waspes, are still about a king.
Who ^eekes by swarms, to hurt true meaning still:
So works great harms, to those that thinks no ill.
True honor may, full long in favor be,
If rigors wrath, and malice did not meet:
And malice might, lies not in mean degree,
It closely lurkes, in craft and cunning sprete,
First fine device, can kiss both hands and feet.
Then draw the knife, that cuts the harmless throat:
Thus honor is, by drifts in danger got.
These deadly driftes, drinks deepest rivers dry,
Sincks greatest grounds, below past help of man:
Flings flat on floor, the statelye buildings hye,
Shakes down great hearts, (let wit do what he can.
Fine drift is he, that mischief first began.
Against whose force, no reason may resist:
That awefull worm, on earth does what it li^t.
Then noble birth, and virtues rare must stowpe,
When day is come, and destines strikes the stroke:
This cunning world, may make great minds to drowpe,
UUhen we are c^lde, men needs must draw the yoke.
UUhen life goes out, our breath is but a smoke.
UUhen at the door, our drerie death does knock:
Take key in hand, we must turn back the lock.
Who would have thought, Earl Morton should have fell,
A grave wise man, and gouernde many a day:
Ruled all at home, and used his wit so well,
In foreine Realms, he bare a wondrous swaie,
Of worlds affairs, he knew the ready way.
Yet knowledge failde, and cunning knew no boot:
When fortune came, and tript him with her foot.
Lo, lookers on, what stay remains in state.
Lo, how man's bliss, is but a blast of wind:
Borne unto bale* and subject to debate,
And makes an end, as destine has assignde,
Lo here as often, as Morton comes to mind,
Despise this world, and think it nothing strange:
For better place, when we our lives do change.
FINIS. quoth. T. C.
SIR SIMON BVRLEIS TRAGEDY, who lived in the xi. year of Richard the
second. Look Frozard the last part Fol. 108.
AM I of blood, or yet of birth so base,
O Baldwin now, that thou forgetst my name:
Or does thy pen, want cunning for that case*
Or is thy skill, or senses fallen lame,
Or do thou fear, to blase abroad my fame:
O show some cause, wherefore I sit in shade,
And why is thus, my Tragedy unmade.
UUho thinks great scorn, in silence still to sleep,
And on whose fall, a world may wail and weep.
Did Boccace live, or Lidgate write again,
Some hope were left, my lantern should have light:
If any one, that had a Poets vain.
Knew half my life, or had my case in sight,
In colors fine, I should be painted right.
But gaping grave, and gnawing worms below,
Snapt Bocace up, and Lidgate long ago,
And Poets sleep, within Parnassus mount,
Where ^oe! of me, they make but small account.
O Bauldwin yet, what blot was in my brow,
That made thee blushe, or fear to write my fall:
With what offense, can world come charge me now,
That I may not, for Baldwins favor call.
Yea durst I claim, the help of Poets all,
I doubt their skill, could scarcely show in deed.
In this behalf, the cunning that does need.
Well Baldwin well, if headless men might chide,
I know what check, and blame should Baldwin bide,
How could thou read, in stories any while,
And so skip ore, my life and dest^^y strange:
Thou know, how hap, on me full long did smile,
And that my state, stood free from doubt of change.
I sprung not forth, of such a simple graunge:
That I should dwell, in dust from mind of men,
While others are, set ou^ by art of Pen*
Thou do me wrong, wherefore the wound to heal
Sir Simon Burley complains to him that knows what sorrow means.
(That sloth has made,) to Churchyard I appeal.
Let him be judge, of all my doings throw,
Let him unfold, my fortune sweet or sour:
Yea unto him* I tell my sorrows now.
Whose resteles hand, is writing every hour,
And so I leave, thee Baldwin in thy hour.
Of Laurel leaves, where thou may sit and see,
At open view, what Churchyard writes of me.
But err he takes in hand this work of mine:
I tell my tale, with weeping blubbring eyne.
Give ear good friend, and hear what I shall say,
And for the while, set all affairs aside:
But sure I fear, too short I find the day.
To show my grief, that hardely can I hide,
Yet through I go, and hope with happy tide,
Though hapless wind, has blown my bark about
And dangers deep, did drive my day^s in doubt.
Since calm is come, and quiet ease I have:
Hear his complaint, that late crept out of grave.
How should I speak, that holds my head in hand,
(Which senseless scalpe, both life and speech has lost:)
Yet out of breast, though headless here I stand.
I may blase forth, the griefs of groaning Ghost:
As from the Seas, that is with torments tossed.
Coms roaring noise, when calmes full quiet are:
So breath I out, from breast my boiling care.
Though head be off, a smoking fume proceeds,
From quaking neck, and gushing veins that bleedes.
Hear him I say, whose bowels speaks alone,
And wants in deed, both use of tongue and wit:
Hear him that must, by art come make his moon,
And lakes therefore, the members meet and fit,
^eare him that groans, and howles from hollow pit.
Hear him whose voice, does give a fearful sound,
Hear him that long, lay rotten in the ground.
Hear him whose plaint, may pearse the lostie skies,
And for thy aid, and English verses cries.
As naked sure, as he was lapt in sheet,
UUith deadly looks, and grisely staring hear:
Not like a man, but like a monstrous spreete,
Sent from the pit, to whisper in thine ear,
And make thee muse, of world an other where.
For here as time, does softly steal away,
So life and laud, and all things does decay.
No birth nor blood, nor flocks of friends preuayles,
When sturdie storms, strikes down our stately sails.
The ship must sway, aside or sincke in seas,
That shaken is, with shocking surges still:
The greenest grass, that grows in goodliest leas.
To partching heat, must yield by reasons skill,
What stone can stay, that rowleth down the hill.
What foot can stand, that fortune daily trips,
What living wight, can escape her scorging whips.
No sooner out, of shell or mothers lap:
But subject straight, to sorrow and mishap.
The life that some, most sweetly do embrace,
To troubled tears, does turn or we be ware.
We are in love, with fond Narcissus face.
And droun'de our selves, in that whereon we stare,
And feed the flesh, so long with dainty fare.
That belly swelles, or stomach belcheth up,
The liquor sweet, that came from spiced cup.
On days disgrace, does breed an endless sore:
And payse us home for all things past before.
Yet climing up, the tree of tickle trust,
We streache the arm, as far as reach may go:
Disguised, with pomp, and pampred up with lust,
We gase alof, and never looks beloe,
Till hatchet comes, and gives the fauling blo,
Then crake it cries, and all in shiuers flies,
That many a day, was mounting to the Skies,
One stroke throws down, a thousand bowse withal,
And such as clime, are crushed by sudden fall.
Was I not one, that in top Gallant stood,
And bare great sway, with him that ruled the roste:
Was not my house, sprung out of Gentle blood.
And was not I, Sir Simon brought up at School with the Prince of Wales and
Aquitayne.
long time in favor most:
Yes sure I was, and therefore make I boste,
At school brought up, with Prince of peereles race,
A playfeere long, with him in every place.
My childhood wan, such love and liking great,
That in mine age, I sat in Senate seat.
Was not my Sire, about a King esteemde,
And highly plast, Into Galatia to conduct Don Petro King of Castle Sir Simon
was sent as one of chiefest for that purpose.
(whereby he purchased praise)
And near the King, in favor as it seemde.
Yea much made of, full long before my days.
Was not I sent, Embaster sundry ways.
And did not I, my duty every hour
With pain and purse, as far as stretched my power,
The World well knows, what service I have done,
And by the same, what honor I have won.
My manhood made, mine enemies fly like sheep,
(Before the Wolf, He appeased an uproar in the City of London.
that watches for his pray)
My wisdom did, in peace the Commons keep.
When John of Gaunt, they would have made away,
My presence often, could quiet many a fray.
My council coold, the rage of retchlesse heads,
My stoutnesse serude, the state in sundry steads,
My noble mind, could never take no rest.
For public wealth, I had such burning breast.
In Poiteou long, against the French I was,
Where frontier war, I held and did full well:
And as I did, through many a peril pass,
In coming home, in Enemies hands I fell.
And when in deed, my Prince thereat heard tell,
He sorry was, and spoke of me much good,
But as these things, in weight and ballaunce stood:
Our Soldiers took, a Duchess of great fame,
Who at that time, of Burbon bare the name.
The Duchess of Burbon prisoner, and did ransom Sir Simon Burley.
The Soldiers swore, that she should nere be free,
(Nor see her Son, nor find a spark of grace:
Nor look for hope,) till she had raunsomde me.
And set me safe, in good and quiet case:
Lo what regard they had, in every place.
Of me those days, lo? how I was on height,
Lo? how I was, emploide in things of w^ight.
At home embraste, abroad well likt with all,
Yea loud and fearde, among both great and small.
One Pascall was sent from the K. of Nauarhether for savior, and King
Richard made Sir Simon answer the Ambasdor the Earl of Salisbury and other in
presence
When foreign friends, did send for succor here,
King Richard bad, me answer make therein:
In presence then, there stood a greater Peer.
But I was he, that did the favor win:
To speak and thus, my credit did begin,
And still increasde, as one whose Lamp in deed,
Could want no Oil, the blase and flame to feed.
My Candle blasde, so clear, as Star by night,
And where I came, the Torche gave little light.
King Richard sent him to conclude a marriage and the Duke of Tasson was sent
hither with Sir Simon from the king of Beam and Almaine about this matter.
And when the King, for causes good and great,
Deuisde to match, with one beyond the seas:
It Was I was thought, most fit to work the feate.
And in this case, the King I did so please,
Of marriage there, that knot was knit with ease,
And so from thence, a Duke was sent with me:
For this behalf, the state of things to see.
Thus still I was, employde in great affairs,
As hap her self, had hald me up her stairs.
An office here, I had of great renown,
A place near Prince, He was Lord Chamberlain.
and still in Court to be:
That might command, the people up and down.
And thrust them out, or call them in to me.
Bad I them run, on flocks then would they flee,
Bad I them stand, in deed they durst not sit:
I swaide them all, as Horse is ruled by Bit.
I bare in hand, the Staff that kept the stur,
And knocked their Pates, that pressed too near the dur.
Lord Warden lo? of the sincke Ports I was,
And Captain both, of Dover Castle tho:
Through Lordly roumes, and places I did pass,
As easily sure, as man can wish to go:
I knew no Ebb* my Tide did daily floe,
I kept the train, I had the lively troop,
I held up head, I never thought to droope.
I went no where, but I was waited on,
And shone in Pomp, like Pearl, or Precious ston.
Among the chief, yea chiefest was I held,
My Prince preferde, me so for virtues sake:
And what he saw, I able was to welde.
I had, for which, I seldom suite did make,
I stood beneath, whilst he did Apples shake
Into my lap, when least I looked therefore.
As somewhat came, so daily followed more,
By heaps as though, great mounts of massy Gould,
In my most need, should answer what I would.
The floods of wealth, that does refresh the mind,
With gladsome thoughts, of threefolde sweet delight,
Came gushing in, against both Tide and Wind,
On which fair baits, each Fish desires to bite.
A careless eye, I cast, of Worlds despite,
That spurns at such, that Fortune liftes alofte,
A wicked Worm, that waits on worship often,
A swarm of Wasps, that uses naught but sting.
On those that rise, and rules about a King.
O hateful flies, ye hatched of wretched brood,
On every dish, in have ye blow and humme:
O canckred men, of vile and noughty mood,
You do infect, all places where you cumme,
You make small show, yet sound as shrill as Drum,
In peoples ears, and still your Poison restes,
On noble minds, and tender harmless Breasts.
Ye malice much, the high and mighty sort,
To kill good name, by brute of false report.
If poor men rise, in favor any way,
The rich repines, to see how they are plaste:
As Hounds do bark, that houlds the Bucke at bay,
The people prate, and spend much speech in waste,
Look says the lewd, on new start vps in haste.
Look who rules now, look what this man has found,
Look how in Lap, does Fortunes Ball rebound:
They lookte not how, to climb for Uertues sake,
But how of World, they may a wonder make.
So lofty minds, with loathsome lowering looks,
Salutes the good, that grows in Princes grace:
And watches close, in corners and in Nookes.
How they by wiles, the worthy may deface,
No marvel sure, it is a common case.
To hear them snarre, whose natures are not like,
What Greiund can rest, by currish country Tike?
What Hawke can sit, in peace for carraine Crow?
What tongue can escape, the skolding of a Shrow.
The dolt disdaines, the deep wise man ye wot,
The blunt abhors, the quick sharp Wit in deed:
The Coward hates, the hand that conquest got.
The Jade will winche, to stand by sturring Steed*
The Glutton grunts, to see the hungry feed.
Thus things from kind, so far can near agree,
No more then can, the Catte and Dog you see
As choice is great, of wealth and worldly goods,
Men differ much, in manners and in moods.
One Jewel stains, an other very far,
And strife there is, in mettalls gross and fine:
And sundry happs, belongs to every star.
And Planets to, they say that can divine.
One race and blood, do seldom draw one line,
A grain of grudge, is sown so deeply here,
That nothing scarce, can escape from malice clear.
Thus malice makes, a murmur where it goes,
And strikes out right, yet gives but secret blows.
The greedy Gnat, and privy eating Mothe,
(A monster small, that skarce is felt or seen:)
Lies lurking still, in plaits of finest cloth,
And little worms, whilst Nuts are fresh and green,
Creepes in and eats, the kirnell as I ween.
So unto them, compare these peevish pates,
That on small cause, do envy great estates,
Yea envy often, is coutcht and clokt as clean,
In mighty folk, as found among the mean.
The flashing flames, that from great Furnace flies,
Casts forth such heat, as few men can abide:
The rage whereof, does dim the dainty eyes:
And breeds great grief, before the harm be spide,
Much mischief comes, by pranks of powting pride,
Which puffes and blows, as it would mountains move,
And grows at first, on naught, but lack of love
Whose spiteful sparks, does spare no speech nor time,
(Nor practice lewd) to pluck them down that clime.
This Envy is, a mighty Monster great,
That swims like Whale, among the little fry:
Whose gaping mouth, would soon consume and eat,
The Gogions small, that in small corners lie.
His thirsty throat, would drink all places dry,
And sucks up all, and so of all leaves naught.
Which should serve all, if all did bear one thought.
O hungry Fly, that would be all in all,
And Maggots brings, when men for feeding call.
As greatest floods, most Gravel do retain,
And strongest Tides, runs ore the weakest walls,
So highest States, do nourish most disdain.
And at rebound, strikes out the tennis Balls.
Yea they who thinks, them furthest off from falls,
Are watching still, in Court, in Field, or Town,
Like stumbling stocks, to trip their fellows down.
And none do strive, and struggle for the goales,
But such as have, their hearts most full of hoales.
Yea heaps of them, are harbred here and theare,
In golden haules, that shines like Phoebus bright:
Where flattrers flock, who tattles in the ear.
A thousand lies, that never comes to light,
They work the wax, with fire both day and night,
They spinne the web, that takes the foolish fly.
They bait the Hook, that bleres the simple eye,
They shoue them out, that should be called in,
They make the match, that does the wager win.
And they breed strife, where all in quiet stood,
They pack the Cards, and play most filthy pranke^*
They sharp the sword, that sheads the guiltles blood
They least deserve, and always gets most thanks,
They feed the stream, that breaks the mighty banks*
They are the sheares, that marrs the garment quite*
They have the tongs, that spares no speech nor spite,
They are the Babes, still dandled on the knee,
And those are they, roots up the soundest tree.
If fawners ded, the house of mighty men,
And (...) folk, would frown on fawning curres,
Deceit should shun, the noble houses then.
And velvet weeds, should shake off cleaning burres,
But stirring steedes, are pricked that needs no spurs.
Th^^ Palfray flings, and flounceth out of frame,
That else of kind, were courteous meek and tame.
A iombling job, does strike the bowl awry,
Which of himself, would close on bias lie.
For noble blood, must needs have noble mind,
And f^ie the gate, of fawcon gentle mild,
And sure it is, against their noble kind,
To play the Kite, and cruel Coistrel^ wild,
Till tatlers come, with tongues full finely filde,
And change their moodes, and mar their manners clean,
They skarce do know, what cankred hate does mean.
But when from best, to worst the good are wrought,
By busy brains, all sorts of sleights are sought.
Then burns the breast, as hot as Ethna hill,
And rage bears rule, where reason dwelt before:
The hasty head, is swift to slay and kill.
The hauty heart, hurds up much hate in store,
The altered mind, does make the mischief more,
The kindled coals, does creep in straw so far,
That quarrels rise, and peace is turned to war.
One haleth back, another draws aside,
And weakest bones, must needs the brunt abide.
As I aspierd, by virtue and desarte,
And was by Prince, called unto credit still:
So some by sleight, did seek to suck my heart.
And of my blood, did thirst, to drink their fill,
They sought to stop, the Water from the mill.
And turn the wheel, and all the ioints awry.
Lo hear how cloase, the swelling Serpents lie,
Lo how they cast, their venom as they may,
And mark what hate, they gain that bears sway.
The Earl of Oxford called duke of Ireland favored much (...) Simon.
For that I grew, full great with Robert Vear,
A Noble man, full wise and mighty both,
And had the guide, of good Prince Edwards ear,
To show therein, my duty, faith and troth,
Great malice rose, as grudging daily groth*
Tweene many men, that cannot rule their rage.
Almighty Duke, there was well stepped in age,
That sought to reap, the corn that I had sown,
And could not rest, till I was quite orethrowne.
My roulmes and rule, and things that I had got,
My gain, my wealth, and glory as it grew:
Was in his eye, so big a mighty mote,
That lo this Duke, my plague did still pursue,
UUith open mouth, he so the bellows blue
That sparks of fire, as thick flew in my face,
As in the sun, the gnatts do fly at chase.
Or as the ball, rebounds at every stroke,
So lo his words, The band that the duke made against the king, the duke of
York, the Earl of Salisbury, the earl of Arundell, the earl of
Northumberland, the earl of Nottingha^, and the archbishop of Canterbury.
did smore me up in smoke.
The dreadful Duke, did drive a wondrous drift
To work his will, with slipperie sleight of hand:
And sought to give, king Richards friends a lift,
For whom he did, prepare a secret band.
Whose bold attempts, did trouble all this land.
But few could find, the darnell in the corn,
Or judge aright, the rose from pricking thorn.
So close in cloud, was clokte their cunning art,
That none could know, who plaide the Foxes part.
This Duke did raise, a brute the king would have,
A fare most strange, of all the realm throughout:
And to the Lords, A noble of every (...) in England was the tax that the
naughty duke said the king did demand.
and Commons council gave,
Against the king, to stand both stiff and stout,
This practice proud, was patcht with many a clout:
Here did the wolf, lead silly lambs amiss,
(And sucked their blood,) as woluish manner is.
Here traytrous tricks, and treble trothlesse traynes,
In subjects breasts, began to spread their veins.
The Duke of York, and diverse noble Peers
Forsook the king, and held with this uproar:
By which great strife, was sown in sundry Shieres,
And corzies rose, that made a running sore.
Big viles brast out, where flesh was sound before,
And though some time, the Surgeon salve did find
To heal the wound, (the skarre remaynde behind.)
A common plague, does creep along the Realm,
As skulls of fish, swimmes up and down the stream.
The greatest towns, and Cities of most name,
As London, York, and many mo beside:
These Dukes did draw, with folly out of frame.
And made some strive, against both stream and tide,
Where banks be broke, the water cannot bide.
Where floods flooe out, the fish do ^ollow fast,
And then too late, to call again is past.
The Swallow flies, no swifter under winge,
Then men's device, that do forsake a King.
For faith once staynde, seeks straight for starting holes,
As Prisners do, that has their promise broke:
The seames once ripped, of shue farewell the soles,
The Ox set free, will seek to shun the yoke,
The chimney bruste, the house is full of smoke.
The fleuce drawn up, down drives the dregs and all,
The strongest tript, the weakest needs must fall.
There is no stay, to hold mean people in,
When might with main, the mischief does begin.
The Lords alledgd, the King was gouernd still,
By such as came, from base and poor estate:
And said he should, no longer have his will,
By which bold speech, there grew so great debate,
The land was bent, on murder, ruin, and hate.
Now several ways, from hiue flue out the Bees,
Now tempests came, and tare up mighty trees.
Now traitors flockt, and fell to factions strange,
Whose fickle minds, still gaped for a change.
O Uipers brood, and bloody bosom snakes,
O Butchers curres, that would your master byte:
O Helhoundes rude, of Plutos loathsome Lakes,
O cursed crew, more cruel then the Kyte,
O cankred hearts, so fraught with froward spite.
O Tigers wild, O monstrous men most vile,
Where was your love, and duty all this while
How durst you speak, so stoutly to his face
To whom of right, the stoutest ought give place.
Among brute beasts, that savage are and wild,
The Lion reigns, and rules with regal power:
And so great birds, stoupes down like little child,
(To fathers beck) if Eagle does but lowre,
Than on a king, dare people look so sour.
That they will force, their sovereign past their reach
No scholar ought, his learned tutor teach.
No member dare, presume to rule the head:
None reigns and rules, but kings when all is sed.
Note how they shrink, that shapes to give a shocke
Against a king, and mark how traitors speed:
Note how their heads do tumble off the block,
That with vain hope, do peoples humors feed,
And note from whence, does princes power proceed.
And note withal, how far does stretch his fame,
And faulters quake, that do but hear his name.
For at the brunt, say here a king does come,
Home run poor knaves, and down they fling the drome.
Hark how this Duke, whereof I spoke before,
By three estates, unto account did call:
Their king and lord, whose mind they troubled sore
And vexed thereby, his friends and favorers all.
They fill in lash, they felt the bloody braule.
They l^st their goods, they got a great disgrace,
They fled from Court, they were pursued in chase.
They were full ^aine, for none offense or cause,
At open bar, to plead their case by laws.
Such are the happes, of those that hold with right,
Such cureles wounds, they have that sores would heal:
Such hate they heap, in hucksters hands that light,
Such harms they find, that stands with common weal.
And such know not, to whom they would appeal,
When wrong will rule, and revel falls to spoil,
The faithful flock, are forced to feel the foil.
Dread drives deserts, that daily well have done:
To sly from foes, or else through fire to run.
Because the Lords, who looked to lead the dance,
The Duke of Gloucester and Duke of York with others maligned those the king
favored.
Saw other step, on stage ere they could rise:
By plain fine force, they would themselves advance.
And for that feate, this drift they did devise,
Desire of fame, does so abuse the wise,
They end like fools, that erst began so well,
And soonest smart, that ringes the larum bell.
For wheels and all, falls down about their ears,
(From rotten frames) who first stood void of fears.
But we who were, besiegd by fortune so,
King Richards best friends were by traitors frowardly handled.
Betrayed I mean, if troth may tell the tale:
Were scourgde and plagude, and feign to fawn on Foe,
And sue to such, as set our lives to sale.
We were shut up, they had the bouncing gale.
That blew their bark, beyond our compass clean:
With sails as^aunt, and had no merry mean.
They clapped on all, and went through stream and flud:
When true men's feet, stood fast in mire and mud.
I was the man, that most of mischief had,
I was accusde, and calde to count in haste:
I found most cause, to sigh and sit full sad.
I was laid up, and thereby clean disgracste,
Mine enemies said, I did the treasure waste
And held in hand the soldiers money too,
I was so nipt, I knew not what to do.
My friends wext fainte, or ferd the like mischaunce,
But I was he, must lead the doleful dance.
A mitred head, a Bishop bold and brave
Said I conuayde, The Bishop of Canterbury accusde him of sacrilege and
conuaying money over the Sea by night to the king of Beam.
away Saint Thomas shryne:
And that I meant, the king of Beam should have,
The same from me, by privy practice fine,
To hoyste me up, he laid both book and line.
And so by friends, he framde so flat a feate,
That I was called to straight account in heat
For this and more, a libell long and large
(Of forged faults,) that he laid to my charge.
No Clarke might come, to make my reckning right,
No tale could serve, to show my matter throw
No deep discourse, could bring the troth to light,
No man of law, could canuas cases now,
Strong hand did all, I must both bend and bow.
The king knew not, of half the wrongs I felt,
Nor none could find, how finely cards were dealt,
A pack was made, and one had got the ace,
And trimely robbed, the trumps before my face.
No boot to bid, the Players deal again,
The game was won, and I had lost the stake:
These Foysters fine, could nick both by and main,
And cog out right, when they the Dice did shake,
And of sweet spoil, a bitter banquet make.
They calde me in, and I the only Gheaste,
Was bidden then, unto that bloody feast,
I was compeld, to taste what dishe they would,
And in great heat, to drink up Poison cold.
I mean my fate, and fortune was so hard
I could not escape, their hands that sought my life,
Who wreakt their wrath, on me without regard,
Yet long in sheath, they kept the murdering Knife:
For on my hap, at first rose all this strife.
And on the freindes, that I by hap had won,
This end I had, and mischief was begone,
For taking part, with such as likt me well,
To ground full flat, from top of tree I fell,
UUhen in the tower my Foes had clapped me fast,
Few friends I found, the world began to wink:
And so at length, in Rerage was I cast,
And Poaste alone, was left to swim or sincke.
And judgment was, as I was forste to think
That I should pay, two hundredth thousand Frankes
For all my toil, lo! here is all my thanks
I did possess, my charges and my loss
And pains abroad, came home by weeping cross.
And wanting wealth, to pay this heavy sum
With Bills, and ^layues, from prison was I led
And so unto, the Tower Hill did I come
To suffer death, where soon I lost my head.
The King knew naught, of this till I was dead.
Lo people here! how things about were brought,
And what disdain, and mighty malice wrought.
Lo! here is end, and sudden sliding down,
That was both true, to God and to the Crown.
As little twigs, ore top of houses grow
Whose branches big, spredes out a mighty tree:
Or as small brooks, with Seas do swell and flow,
Yet has no power, to pass their bounds you see,
Or as fair flowers, that in gaie gardens be
Sprouts out a while, and when they are at height,
They fade and fall, and then declineth straight.
So man does mount, a while on stages hie,
And at the best, shootes down like star from sky.
When things are grown, as far as course is set,
And have attaynde, the fullness of their state:
They backward come, and can no further get,
For clean expierd ye see is then their date,
The life we bear, of force must yield to fate.
The steps we tread, wears out by tract of time,
When ladder breaks, we can no higher clune.
Where fortune sits, so fast, does grind the mill,
The Wheel turns round, and never stands still.
Long is the toil, or man to triumph commes,
Large is the plot, where we our Pagantes play:
Sweet is the sa^; and sour are all the Plummes,
That pain pluckes off, the pleasant planted spray,
Short is the time, of all our glory gay,
Uayne is the hope, of hazards here in earth,
Great are the griefs, of life from day of birth*
No surety grows, of all is here possessed,
All comes to naught, when people fears least.
Lo! what it is, to stand on tickle stays,
Where hatred heaues, the houshoulde out of square:
And when it falls, the joints flee several ways,
And joyful wightes, are clad with woe and care,
The servants howl, the wife and child is bare.
The friends wring hands, the foes do laugh and flyre,
Such chaunges chance,, to those that do aspyre.
The ground but gapes, who first shall fall therein,
And who seeks most, at length the least may win.
Lo! Churchyard now, my mirthlesse tale is told,
A mourning verse, prepare thou straight for me:
And in thy r^^e, some stately order hold,
For that I sprung, not out of base degree,
Let every line, a lively sentence be,
To wake the wits, of such as world would know,
And list to ma^ke, how wordly matters go.
And when thou comst, to touch the gauled back,
Leap ore the horse, or use a riders knacke.
Bear even hand, and hold the bridle right,
Yet whiskt the wande, sometimes for pleasures sake:
Yea spyce thy speech, and terms with trifels light,
That lookers on, may not thy mind mistake,
When store is gone* yet do thy budget shake.
Among the best, and feed their fancies still,
No matter though, a mouse creep out of hill,
Small toys may breed, great sport in great estates,
And in great grounds, men walk through little gates.
Do wisely warn and warely use thy pen,
Speak english plain, and roue about the but:
And shoot at will, and flaunt by wicked men,
Shale cut the shell, and bid them crack the Nut,
Show some delight, and so the sentence shut.
And bid the world, behold me in a glass*
That did to ruin, from Pomp and pleasure pass.
Now I am gone, I wish the rest behind,
(As they desire,) may better Fortune find.
FINIS.
THE MAN IS BUT his Mind.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipful my singular good friend, Sir John Skidmoer, one of
the Liefetenants of Haruordshire.
I Am not forgetful good Sir John of a promise made touching The man is but
his mind: Which work now I present you, though not so well penned as the
matter requires, yet as well meant as any piece of work in this Book, written
as well to keep promise, as to show the circumstance of the mystery that
belongs to every man's mind, and to hope that all I write thereof shall be as
well taken as a dutiful writer can mean. I have plainly set down mine
opinion in that behalf, doubting not but some one man or other shall see a
piece of his own mind, in this my presumption of the same. So wishing your
good and virtuous mind augmented in grace, and your self increased in worship
and contentation of mind, I betake you to God and fall to my purposed
discourse.

AS I was reading in the delightful discourses of Ieronimus Cardanus his
comforts, among many pleasant passages and special sentences* I found that he
said A man was but his mind either in the value of virtue or vanity of vice. So
waying the worth of that conclusion, and knowing that Manhood or Cowardice
consistes in the self same opinion of the mind, I considered that common
quarrels and private reuengement of Injuries received, proceeded in a manner
from this spring and flowing Fountain, that ever is fed and nourished with
some settled conceit or other. For the mind is so noble, watchful, and worthy,
that it is never unoccupied whilst the man is awaken, nor takes any great
rest when the body is a sleep, (as some dreams and visions manifests
plain.) For even as a cunning Carpe^ter or Smith, is hammering and heawing
some piece of wood or iron, to bring the same to such shape and perfection, as
the artificer would have it: So the mind (the harber of all secrets and mouer
of all good and bad motions) can at no season be idle or wax weary of devises.
The Imaginations thereof are so many, and the innumerable conceits therein are
so mighty, the fire is of such vehement heat and operation, that it must needs
burn or consume any thing that long remains in it, so the mind is of such
force and power, that it leads the man any way it lists, and shapes all the
senses and vital spirits in what form or fashion it pleases. For the longer
the fancies of the head (by rouling to and froe are tired) and at length
reposeth themselves in the constantnes of the mind, the more is the man's
reason subject to the minds resolution, and the less strength the judgment
has when it feels the forces of the body captiuated and compeld to obey the
greatness of the mind. Though learning, education, and good instructions, be a
mean and restraint, that a perverse mind shall not draw the whole body to
destruction, yet the mind being bent to some dangerous determination, has
overcome all the good causes rehearsed, and brought both the body, reputation,
and life, into a shameful disorder, and made a cruel confusion not only of
the man, but likewise brought a licentious liberty to the mind, experience of
proud practices has proved this argument no fable, but now to talk truly and
probably of the mind, what can be named or thought on, (if they be things to
be executed) but the mind dare attempt and the man may go about, it dare
adventure the hazard of the soul, the loss of life and goods, and the
cracking of estimation and credit, if any purposed mischief hale the mind
forewarde to some odious enterprises, this shows but a weakness of Judgment,
naughtines of nature, and a most wicked and wilful disposition of a desperate
conceit, diuelishly drawn and inclined and carelessly committing it self to
every kind of practices and dangerous determination.

But now to touch the noblenes of an invincible mind, that neither Fortune can
conquer, power may command, nor worldly pomp nor wealth can win. The true
discourse of this mind, craves a writer of a higher knowledge, for the
unspeakable spirit that keeps life, and breaths continual constancy in
the breast where this mind makes his mansion house, is to be explained and set
forth by the profoundest pen man of the world, that can lay open like an
Anotomy the hidden and secret parts of the body, especially the divine nature
(closed up in flesh and blood) and secrecy belonging to the virtue of this
manly and valiant mind. Some men there are (and though they boast not much
the number may be great) that with a strong heart can suffer afflictions, bear
burdens, abide disgraces, and in their most torments seem careless of all the
crossings and counterchecks is offered them, yet they are armed within to
withstand all outward assaults as it were a fortress manned with soldiers and
munition, thoroughly to defend it self against the power of Princes, and
practices of warlike people, yea as they in peace can use this approved
patience, so in the hottest broiles of the war the hope to overcome the
cruelty of their enemies, does redouble their courages, and so with a resolute
mind, the Cannon they approach, the combat they present, and the present
danger is presently forgotten, a present matter of great moment to be in the
presence and presented before the universal people placed under the cope of
the heavens. But yet I can not leave out the mind they have of honor in
greatest extremities, for minding the preservation of Prince and country, they
clap on such a mind as Mucius Sceuola did, that burned his hand in the ^ire,
for missing the killing of Porcena. They care not in like sort for
imprisonment, penury, hunger, torting, racking, but can suffer all manner of
misery, as want of meat, lack of liberty, and open air, and lie on the hard
earth or bare straw, to keep their enemies out of the Fort or hold committed
to their charge, yea and in respect of the love they loyally bear to their
Country, they suffer many a mortal wound, and in the end offer themselves to
the death, manifestly to show, that a man is but his mind, and the mind is
it that makes the man, both famous and immortal. Now to the contrary come to
the nature and condition of a Coward, whose mind is never to do any noble act,
for he that can bear the infamy and blot of that name, to be called a Coward,
lives careless of all other villainies, and no reproach, slander, shameful
report, foul fact, or what filthiness can be rehearsed* may make him blushe,
his miserable mind is so monstrous, that all soiles, kingdoms, and countries
are alike for him to live in, and as a country cur delights to gnaw a bone on
a midding, so he is fed fat (among wretches of the world) with folly,
beastlines, lewd behavior, and a number of naughty conditions, neither fit to
be followed, nor needful to be written of. The studient that minds nothing
so much as learning, takes such a pleasure and felicity in hearing and reading
new devises and ancient authors, that his Books are only his companions, and
solitary places, the sweet soiles of his repair, and he holds time so
precious an^ dear, that he spends in Idleness no one hour of the day, and has
such glory in gaining of knowledge, shall he makes no account of any other
Treasure, (knowing that he that has virtue is next unto God) nor delights in
any society or company, but such as are learned, wise, grave and honest, and
when long labor and study has gathered the sweet Sap of Judgment (as the
Be has sucked Honey from the flowers) he writes new volumes, and sets out
such works and pamphlets, as may merit commendation, and purchase credit and
benefit, and be accepted and embraced among all posterities, that mind has a
natural disposition in all divine graces, and that mind^ is as a day watch to
the body* and stands as a strong Guard to the Soul and everlasting renown.

The ignorant mind that hates education, and despises knowledge, is an enemy
to himself and all common wealths, most currish and rude of condition,
barbarous and savage, as an vn^amed beast, he swells and powts, like a Tode to
hear the praise of a good man, and minds nor loves nothing but blockishnesse,
ribawdry, and corrupt manners, and has so naughty an inclination, and is
subject to so many defectes and deformities, that this naught and lewd mind
is not necessary to be known among men, nor made mention of where noble minds
are esteemed.

Now in general, let every particular man here somewhat of himself. There are
some kind of men, made of so fine a moulde, whose minds may not suffer them
to here, behold, touch, or come near any loathsome or unclean thing, such
minds disdaines to offend the sight, (which is a clear candle of life) with
unseemly shoes, and will not have the Soul defiled with conceiving of filt^y
matters* that moves a general misliking in the whole Judgment, and every part
of the body and mind to abhor the understanding of any foul and infectious
thing, either ministered by talk, or uttered by view in open assembly.

Another sort of base minded fellows have their only ioy^ in fruitless
babble, foolish fancies and offensive words, that thunders in the air and
corrupts good manners, that fills a house full of clamors and brute, and makes a
few Idiots laugh, and many wise men lowre, but these haerbraine tratlers and
fantastical minded mates striving to have all the talk themselves, (and
glorying to here their own voice) do suddenly become so audacious and bold,
that they are not only a trouble to the whole company, but likewise a
disquietnes to themselves, as apparauntlye falls out, for when such vain
glorious minded marchaunts are known and perceived, they are glad that first
can be rid of their fellowship and society.

A grave and modest minded man looks into a statelier kind of life, and skornes
to open his mouth but in causes of credit, and matter of great moment* and
then the well couched speeches (and sweet spised sentences) comes flowing from
his tongue, as the fair water spouteth from the fountain, a man of that
aduisednes carries an easy hand over the rash multitude, and gathers to his
mind a greater knowledge of the course of this world, and even as the persing
songs and musical harmony of the Nightingale reioyseth the hearts of the
hearers, so the sweet tempred talk of a wise Orator, draws the ears of the
audience after him, and leads them in a string that have any motion and mind
of virtue, or can consider the value and worth of such a well minded man.

The merry and pleasant companion in his kind, bears another disposition, for
his mind is so delightful, that his tongue is like a Taber and a Pipe,
prettily playing and gibing on every man's manors, and he that carries this
mind is continually tuning him self (as a Minstrell were tempring and
wresting of his Instrument) to pleasure with sports the dumpishe people, that
sits listening to hear some strange pastime, but in this merry mind are many
humors that are fed with some sharp and bitter conceits, which often turns
to over bol^ boording, and yet a well ordered mind can smoothly cast a cloud
cunningly on the matter, to avoid all suspicion, and to bring the world in
belief, a merry fellow for the solasing of his own mind, has free scope and
liberty to ride by his neighbors, and yet keep every one clean from dashing,
and he himself to be taken as a man, whose mind means always to make all the
company merry.

A greedy minded groaper of this world, looks solemnly on all things he goes
about, and in a surly sort and fashion, stands bending the brows, and frowning
at a number of accidents he beholdes, his talk is of bargains, purchases,
buildings, and prises of each thing that comes to the market, and minds so
much his private gain and profit, that he forgets both common wealth and
country, never merry but when his money and bags be under his Elbow, and
always sad when he must depart with any great sum^e and payment, though
double benefit proceed from the same, a mind ready to do wrong, and a body
never apt to do service in wars, nor live quietly without brabble in peace.

The unthrift, or more properly called a player at al manner of games sets his
mind so earnestly thereon, that he will los^ meat, sleep and rest, to win
somewat by gaming, many times practicing to pack the Cards, and cogge the
Dice, suddenly moved for a little loss to fall into a great fury, a mind that
couets al, and makes no conscience if it be at play to beguile his companion,
yet many of them have such mind to be called fair players, that they are as
careless what they lose, as they are desirous to gain, but if the loss be
great, full many a raw Pigeon lies wambling in their stomachs after their
first sleep, and yet waking, they mind nothing more then a revenge, either to
take a further foil, or give a greater blow, and of all the minds that men
are subject to (before mentioned) there is no mind more to be marked then this
in any man, for even as his loss or gain is, so are his looks and
countenance, and so are his outward shows of gladness, and his inward
conceits of sorrow.

The Uenerian, whose mind mastereth his body, and subdues all the good parts
of the same, his fancies and imaginations flies swifter then the Swallow, and
seldom or never satisfied with no one conquest or other, goes drawing like a
bloud-hound after a stricken Dear, and taking sent of some suit and finding
perssy follows with open mouth, secret traps and chargeable expenses, till
mind or body, or both be a weary, and credit be brought in question, or
cracked so sore, that good name is past recovery. Then desperately he dare
enter into any quarrel of a combat, and put in hazard and danger life and
goods, and he that puts on this mind, dwells not only in a great over weyning
of himself, but commonly condemns all others that are not of the like nature
and condition.

The Flatterer that frames his mind to all manner of dissimulation, can play
the Cameleon, to dazell the ei^s and understanding of the wise, and abusing the
best sort of people, the base and meanest of degree, are brought quickly to
believe that subtilty is simpleness, and great suerty remains in muffled
manners, the Flatterer finding his falsehood favored, so besturres himself
like a Wolf among sheep, and finely feeds on the fattest flock, and the
wily Fox carries no more craft in his head, then the fine flatterer bears in
his double and deceiptfull mind.

The thief that sets his mind wholly on robb^ry, spoil, and ransacking of the
rich, or whosoever he may wrong, gropes out a wealthy man's budget, as a Ratt
smells out a roasted piece of cheese, and having a wretched mind to live on
such cheats that are gotten by such chance, he chooses no other trade to try
what his villainous mind will bring him to, or what may happen on a resolute
roy^^ing, which comes to no greater regard but the reward of a gallows, the
ill opinion of good men, and the open paltring exercises of a bad mind.

The Shifter that shuffles up a borrowing life makes a purchase of picking his
Creditors purses, his mind is ever to be needy because he minds never to pay
piece of his det, and still cries out of Fortune, when his own folly plagues
him, claiming recompense for service where no desert (nor ablenes to do good
turn) may plead in his behalf, yet by braggs and boastes he makes a show to
have done many wonders, having no great courage in wars nor good quality in
peace, but as a graceless Grome, glad to shifte and sheeld his feeble
abillitie under the title of a Soldier, marvelous is that meaning and
mischeeuous is that mind that lives and dies both in want of wealth, wit and
all manly reputation, a beggerie base mind scarce worthy the bearing about or
harbor in any honest body.

The Envious mind hides his malice, as smothring smoke lies lurking in wet
stubble or straw, and when his fury bursteth abroad in flames some whole
Famely or household is burnt or blemished be sclaunderous brute, and this
stinging and serpenting Snake, being long nourished in the wicked and warm
bosom of a hateful man, bespreads his venom throughout all the vital parts
of the body, so that no member nor lyneami^t thereof serves to express any
goodness, and the tongue is always clapping and caueling at every matter
spoken off or ministered only to keep the cankred mind accustomed in maddnes
and malice.

The Princely and noble mind where bounty (the lock and key of love) is as
busy as a Be in a hiue that brings forth honey for the benefit of others, and
the bountiful mind thinks it self dishonored, if it receive any service,
good turn, free gift or good will, and the same return not again with ten
times treble fold thanks and reward. For this princely mind is ever
imagining how it may get friends and make enemies reform themselves from
malice, yea furthermore this mind is so honorable, liberal, and desirous to
win the favor of good people, that it studies where it may bestow some
acceptable gift, and fastening the same on a grateful person, this mind
remaynes in such ^ollitie and gladness as it had won a whole world, and
sets more store by a Friend gotten in this manner, than of a hundred enemies
overcome by perforce.

The sparing and niggardly mind that spies out advantage of gathering and
whording up riches, spends many words in fair promises (whiles he cunningly
hold^ his own) meaning small performaunce of many great offers, and yet in a
kind of vain glory he intertaines both the time and the people with trifels
that makes a great show of a frank and free heart, when the mind is miserably
bent to save and gather together ill gotten goods to lay up in coffer and
corners for a prodigal son, or a ryotous heir, whose mind is as much set on
spoiling that he found as the father was enclyned to spare that he got, but
the nigards mind has such quenchles thirst to drink up the dross and dong
of this earth, that no kind of good Fortune, wordly wealth, or abundance can
moderate and satisfy his covetous lust that Lucar has set on fire, in the
flaming dungeon and furnace of his nigardly mind.

The prodigal mind that spends without respect, and gives without regard, as
pu^t up in such a pride of it self, that it waxes imperious, lordly, and
lofty in a conceived conceit of laciuious charges, bestowed on the fawners and
flatterers of our days, whose creeping and currying of favor, makes our young
master believe there is no end of his spending, and that the more he flings
and casts away, the more good fellows will follow him and the less his
estimation and riches shall waste and diminish. For in giving either goods and
lands to the daily feeders of his prodigal humor, he thinks he receives an
everlasting renown, fame, and credit, among the lusty crew of good
companions, and his mind carries him so far into the altituds that he hopes
for unknown happs and trusts that mountains of Gold, and the conquest of the
very Indians it self is allotted to be his portion, and whosoever restraines
him from any piece of his purpose, enkindleth his mind rather to make a soon
dispach of all that he has, than to be long in consuming the mucke and
dross of this world, which a prodigal mind will neither be taught how to use,
nor how to consider well off but to his own liking.

The rebellious mind that seeks but blood, sedition, change of state and
government, makes a man run gadding like a Gosling to listen after news, and
alteration of Religion, as nothing could please him but forrayne follies, and
strange tyrranie, murmuring, and finding fault with Countries quietness, and
desirous of troublesome servitude, or at least willing to see some sudden
stir, and strange accidents. This mischievous and male-contented mind, is
swift to sow discord and shed innocent blood, and slow to save his own credit
and Country, ready and apt to forget God, and most unwilling to forgive any
injury, a beginner of all brable and contention, and a mayntayner of all
execrable acts and enterprises. Now passing over the rusticall rabble of Rogues,
Uacabounds, Ruffians, Roysters, and rank Rebels, (whose mischievous minds
surmounts all the rest in villainy, filthynes, reueling, rudenes, treachery,
and treasons, the fruits whereof are but beggary, banishment, and
wretchedness, that brings the maislers of that misrule to Tiborne, and a
shameful end,) I come to the malicious minds of our Foreign enemies (many in
number) that are so drowned in a deadly desire of hatred, wilfulnes,
obstinacy, papistrie, and old worm-eaten Religion, that they cannot see nor
well understand what they go about. There minds carries them headlong into
many hellish and damnable devises, making account of that which never shall be
there own I hope, and making their boast of conquest, victory, and triumph,
before they dare fight for it, or attempt manly to try, who shall find
Fortune most favorable, and what party has God and the right of their side.
And further to be marueled at (a matter most mo^struous in judgment) they
were come into our C^astes in ships of great burden, fraught and filled with
great riches, munition, and men, having in the same ships to countenance
their quarrel numbers of Noble houses, Friars, Priests, English Traitors,
Spanish Women, and such like people, as were come to possess a Country and
kingdom that easily should be gotten, which kingdom is so nobly peopled and
furnished that I doubt not but the sight and bare view of this stout nation
shall make the Spaniards abashed, and yet behold (to prove A man is but his
mind) our Enemies have such minds to do wrong, and have such hope that they
are appointed to be the scourge of God, that they say openly they have
commission to kill man, woman and child, and to save none above the age of
seven year old, lo here is a goodly mind, a goodly commission, and a goodly
sort of Fools, that thinks so populous a Country as this will be so soon
supplanted, a wise company of wild Geese, that with a little gagling and
thrusting out the neck, beleeus to bring to pass so great a matter, you never
heard of more madder minded men than these are, that came to sit down in other
men's houses, before they knew the good will of their Hosts, and bow dearly
they were like to pay for the purchase, ere they should make their entry, or set
their feet on any piece of this Land, and by my troth they go about a pretty
Bargain to offer the sheeding of so much blood, and especially do bring hither
so paltring a Commission, so void of Christianity, and shall cost so many a
broken head, before any iott or parcel of the same commandment be put in
execution.

Now here is to be spoken and treated of good and godly minds that peaceably
shall possess their souls in patience, and these patient minds, are those
that sees other men preferred (as the affection of some will have it so) and
beholdes themselves abiects, that neither want, virtue, nor valiance, yea they
find few good turns and suffer many injuries boastes little of their service,
and are greatly to be praised, being men of good years, and experience, and yet
of bad Fortune and ability, favored of some that can do but little for them,
yet helped or aided of no one body that have power to advance them, the men of
this mind makes much of a little and seldom comes to any great portion, and
so because mine own desteny is not the best, and being loath to put on a worse
mind then now last I have spoken of, I knit up all this discourse in these
few words, and thus I bid you farewell. Hoping that the minds of men,
(though they are several in disposition) will now draw all in one yoke to hold
out the enemies of our Country, and to stand together against all foreign
invasions, and forget all kind of quarrelling among our selves, that often
times has bred in many kingdoms civil wars and sorrowful dissentions.
The plagues and plain examples thereof being well waighed, will (I doubt not)
make our noble Nation be not only mindful of their liberty and honor, but in
like manner make us all of one good mind, resolution, courage, and manhood.

FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipful si^ Edward Dimmocke Knight, and Champion by birth to
the Queens Majesty.
I would have searched the bottom of my studies and chiefest of my labors
(good Sir Edward Dimmocke) if my leisure had served, to have found out some
piece of work worthy of your reading, but doubting that verse delights you
not, and Tragical discourses breeds but a heavy conceit in a pleasant
disposition, I thought it more fitter to treat of a Marshiall cause (wherein
great honor consists) that may move many considerations in a noble mind, and
so not only stir up virtue but also beat down all occasions that hinders the
quiet and sweet society of me^, not meaning that I see any motion, cause, or
action in this age, that may procure my pen to go beyond the compass of my reach
in reforming the same: but to show there is no greater blessedness on earth then
freindly fellowship and amity among men, and all the disturbers thereof are
rather instruments of dissension, than mayntainers of good will. And for that
in your long trauells abroad (where variaunce is moderated with wisdom) many
quarrels you have seen or heard off, I have written a little piece of the
nature of a quarrel compounded on many accidents, not teaching any man a new
course and peaceable order to his life, but to nourish gentleness and kindly
love among all our noble nation. So trusting no matter of mislike shall pass my
Pen, I present you with this little piece of paper that follows, wishing you
the good fame and honor your own heart can desire.

A Discourse of true Manhood.
AMid the wickedness of a naughty world quarells, hatred, and headstrong
people, a bridled mind knows not what pace to hotde, nor steps to tread, and
where madness shows fury, and world mayntaynes follye, wise 'al^mon (were he
here) could not reform the defect of this wilful age, which neither regards
God, good Governors, nor natural love or order.

And where liberty in man's wilfulnes is proclaimed good rule and law is not
known, and rud rashness runs so far beyond reason, that every sencible
creature does wonder at, and stands astonished at the stubberne wickedness of man's
unstayed mind, which grows so blood thirsty and eager after life, that it
seeks nothing but death and destruction, in a manner of his own proper
brother, which was horrible in Cain, and may be odious in all kind of
Christians. Among beasts (that wants reason) remaynes no such cruelty. For now
a days men may not meet without snarring, lostie looks, bitter words,
haughty fashions, and froward behauioure, on which stoutnes of stomach, malice
is kindled, contention is breed, and quarrels are set abroach. The accustomed
courtesy, sweet conversation, freindle gentleness, humane manners, and civil
humblnes in our common society, is almost forgotten, brought in contempt, and
put out of exercise (if Noble Parsonages show it not) and in place of the
commendable virtues are corrupt conditions and newfangled vices closely crept,
to the great disquietnes of many, and commodity of no one person. And now
briefly to come to ye cause of this my bold argument, my short work shall only
touch ye terrible brawels, that lately (on the show of manhood) are sprung up
among us, and nourished to long in the stout courages of men. A matter more
meeter to be lamented than mayntayned, and a new devised wilfulness that our
old Fathers taught us not, nor scarsely was known, till our youth began to
travel strange Countries, and so brought home strange manners. It must be
granted and necessary to be allowed that weapons shall be worn (always of
equal length) and used in causes of defense. And further for slanders,
naughty reports in absence, and present spitfull speeches, men ought for the
mayntenance of good name, sometimes use an lawful manner of correction (this
spoken not of the scripture) for the sharp sword makes a blunt blockhead
beware how he uses his tongue, and if bold bablers were not snibbed for their
sawsines, this world would be full of talkatiue merchants, and no man would
care what he spoke, if words should not be wisely set to sale, and in the end
of an ill market be dearly bought. For it is not fit that every man should go
to Law (about a trifle) nor necessary blood should be shed, whatsoever in
manhoods behalf I have spoken: well: to come to my purposed matter. In the old
time the sight of England was dangerous but not deadly, courageous not cruel,
valiant but not villainous, and most nobly used oftimes without any great
harm, in which season men were as great Conquerors as they be now (let France
and Scotland witness) as loath to offend as men be at this presens, when rapier
fight is more desperate And generally then were as good men, as valiant and
venturous, as now can be found, and yet they stood not upon such terms,
and quarrels as men do now adays, a thousand injuries could then be
forgiven, if they had eased their hearts a little at the sharp weapon, now
life is sought in England for an Italian lie, and nothing but blood and death
can pacify men's furies, men are become such Cocks of the game, they must
fight in a sharppe, scrat out each others eyes, and thirst so much for blood,
that nothing can mitigate their wrath till one be out of the world, and the
other be fled God knows whither. A pretty quarrel that compells men to be
fugitives, for playing of beastly parts and brings such repentance as
breeds both beggerie and extremity of Fortune, and namely when friends shall
forsake you, and weeping can not help. For whilst law persecuteth the
offender, the world is like a Laborinth, and endless is the labor and trouble of
that body that thinks every man follows him.

In the old world when swords of one length and hearts of equal courage did
meet, some in differencie debated the matter, and few were put to foil, and
many were worthily esteemed for their value. And now when the rapier and dagger
dispatcheth a man quickly, neither he lives to hear his own fame, nor no man
living can let fall a good word of the quarrel, begun of such trifles,
maintaind with such terror, and ended with such madness, not so manly as
miserable nor so much praised among the fool hardy, as condemned in the
consideration of the wise. And so to come to the right order of manhood,
courage, valiancy, and stoutnes of heart, it lies more in the Judgment then
in the iarring, in the fortitude then in the forwardnes, and restes more in the
modesty then in the malice. For anger of it self is but a senseless monster,
an unreasonable rage, a furious franzie, a distemperate imperfection, a privy
passion of choler, and an open enemy of life. The discouerer of the frailty
and naughty nature of man, and the discredit of as many as cannot master that
outrageous disease of the mind.

Then how should the fury of malice bring forth any other fruict, but such a
pestiferous fire, as shall consume the beginners of hatred, and the last
reuengers of wretched wroth.

For revenge is like a wind ball the more it is stricken (and remembered with
force of hand) the higher it mountes, and makes the more rebound, so that
endless becomes a quarrel, so long as the exercise of malice is had in ure,
and men with evil disposition go about to store up mischief.

Now is to be decided every degree and manner of a quarrel, and to show how and
in what sort an unjust quarrel may be offered, and a just quarrel may be
taken, both by law of arms and nature, and by a usual custom and manner
among men, proving by antiquities and art military, the matter purposed to
treat upon so that with patience you here out that may be spoken.

As it is unfit for a Gentleman (that stands on reputation) to play the ruffian
and roister, so it is most uncomely for him to stoop so low, as any way to
abase his good calling, with the bad conditions of a rude and rusticall
fellow, by which prerogative the match is unmeet, the quarrel may be
refused, the strife has no equality, nor no honesty is gotten in brawling with
inferiors or fighting with men of so small temperancy and credit, but because
most stoutnes and courage (with hazard of life is between Gentlemen) and
trifles not taken up grow to great business, their quarrels are most requisite
to be spoken of, redressed, corrected, and brought to better order.

First ye shall find among Soldiers, (that are of great minds) a kind of
stately consideration in all quarrels they take in hand. They taking upon them
in the art military (which well becomes their calling) to maintain honor,
defend their country and credit, and to fight in no quarrel but Princes
right and their own honest causes, have set down by certain ceremonies, what
words may touch them, what manner of men they may deal withal, what
occasions may force a combat, what scope and liberty pertaines to a just
quarrel, and what restraines a manly mind from doing injury to others or
harming himself.

On which resolution the Soldier sets up his rest, and commonly hazards the
winning or loosing, of as great thing as life may be worth, not with
presumption procured to this danger, but with estimation of his honor haled
forewarde (by danger of enemy) to leave good example to those that comes after
him.

But behold how this adventure happens, regard the circumstance of this
hazard, way well what difficulty is about the matter, and mark the chief
points (and grounds of advantage) that breeds business, and brings forth a
combat.

Then must be noted, a simple Soldier (or mercenary man) may not challenge a
Captain, a mean Captain or Centurion may not challenge a Corronell, a
Corronell (though leader of a regiment) may not challenge a Lord Marshall of
the Field, a Lord Marshall (having charge of life and death) may not challenge
the Lord Lieutenant of the Army. And all these not only in time of service
(for avoiding of mutiny) but at all seasons, are bound and ought to keep
themselves from brawling, (yea though any one be nearly touched) and seeking
the combat, except a lie has passed, a slander is received, a blow be given, a
man's name and credit be foiled, and a quarrel be sought so narrowly that no
man can avoid. And yet all these degrees (as their office and honor is) one
after another, may without reproach refuse in every place, the daungering of
their lives by private quarrel, and not meeting one another by chance (whereon
may business grow) look what so ever be passed, (villainy excepted) There is no
kind of prejudice to any party, but malice may surcease, and society may
revive friendship* and quietness should of all hands be sought.

Now of matter ministered in despite, spoken to strike dead good name uttered
for offense and bravery, let fall to disgrace any person, and maintained with
threatenings (daring and other open iniu^ies a number) the case of quietness is
altered, and surely no nature can so easily digest those extremities, but
shall find occasion of dislike, and a great motion of quarrel.

Then must be considered, the cause of those speeches, the persons credit that
spoke it, and in what presence and place the injury was offered, for some
places are of such honor, that no dishonestye may be suffered in, and some
person that speaks injuries in base company (out of honorable presence) the
speakers mean calling aunsweres himself, for wise men ought to make no more
account of a badde fellows babble, then of the barking of an old dog, whose
teeth are gone and can not bite. An all the common kind of injuries are but as
men do imagine them, as scoulding of a co^queane, railing of a ruffian,
taunting of a tosseblade, frumping of fine fellows, and the brags and
threatening of a varlette, all these shameless rabble and senseless sort of
shadows, are of so small substance and credit, that their voices makes but a
noise in the air, like a thunder crack, that neither brings rain, nor argues
any constant wind and weather.

There is besides these ordinary causes, (and crooked conditions of people) a
number of naughty natures, that never will be quiet in countenance nor words,
but either with skrowling like conquerors, or skorning like vices on a stage,
they strive with counterfaite courage to overcome Lions, and to be more
terrible then Tigres, snuffing and puffing as all the world were too little to
contain their great looks, and disdainefull monstrous manners.

And their tongues are so talkatiue (and filled with follies) that none may
speak but themselves, on whose proud presumptions are many mad disputes
wilfully begone and most wickedly ended. To contend with those glorious Images,
is as a man should sound a Trumpet at the roaring of every bull.

Thus with extraordinary manners, new fangled fancies, old stubburne nature,
and fresh fine cunning, that wisdom condemns, a good mind may be
ouerreached, and a quiet man may be brought in some quarrelous brabble, for the
sight and sufferaunce of these shadows, (whose substance is all in boasting)
and the society or contention with such counter^aite conquerors, is an open
enemy to all the good dispositions of men, and a privy worker of disquietnes to
those that beholdes and hears any piece or jot of those vices before
rehearsed, for nothing breeds more mislike, or offends so much every
company, as the continual brags and audacious manners of the unbridled
multitude, who are never free from quarrels, void of villainy, nor without
naughty brabbles a number.

Come now to general occasions in Court, Country town and so forth, but
principally of Court we ought to have greatest regard, where not only the
Prince hold residens with a continual majesty, but likewise by absolute power
commands obedience, and restraynes Courtiars many ways from offering of
injuries. For plainly to speak, in Chamber of presence or any place near (or
about a Princes palace) men's tongues are tied either to keep silence, or
ciuilly with reverence to use comely words, meet for such a place, and void
of villanye or vicious intents, chiefly of quarrels that may move mischief,
and stir up disquietnes among the gentle Bees assembled together in a Hiue
for the honoring of their king, and public profit of their estate. The Court
is no Cocke-pit to croe in, no shraep for cocking, no seat to be saucy in, no
place of contention, nor no soil for brawlers and braggers, that have currish
conditions, and knows not their duty, but rather a place of royal dignity,
princely entertainements, courteous behauiors, and fine and friendly fashions,
that with orderly manner may set forth a Princes regality. And though there
some one (wanting temperance) rashly behave himself and with warm words
stir the coals of a wicked quarrel, men's duties in general, (by wisdom)
should either quench the heat thereof, or cast imbers on the fire, that the
fury and flame should not burst out there, nor be disputed of any other where
to the prejudice of that place, and look what is offered in open hearing or
secret whispering (that may sow seeds of dissension) should be trodden under
foot, or passed over with sporting, among the best judgments, for fear least
a little branch of spite do sproute up on some rash speeches, and grow out of
order, both past remedy, and beyond the bounds of good manner.

If men in Court were as careful to keep peace, as they are desirous to
creep in credit, or common society should attend to no other purpose, but to
familiar behauior, friendly affection, brotherly love, and blessedness of life,
you shall behold a mutual agreement among all kind of creatures at their
first meeting, the birds with their like flees and feeds together, and in
their manner use a kind of rejoicing when they encounter one another, yea and
takes part with their fellows against all that shall offend them, flocking
and crying as they may together in multitudes, to show their natural
inclination, and how they al do suffer torment, by the disquietnes of one bird
in their company. The Bees seeing but one of their fraternity troubled or
angry, fly all in a swarm on every thing offends them, and uses such fury for
revenge, that they sting and hum out of measure. The Beasts not only agree in
their fashion, but in like sort takes one another part vehemently: and chiefly
the very Hogs join in a battle against those dogs that biteth them. The Fish
in the flood swim in skulles arming themselves against their enemies, and you
shall read in Pliny that among the Dolphins was such amity* that a Dolphin
being taken prisoner by a King (and closely kept) there assembled such a number
of Dolphins together as is incredible, and they never left mourning and
playning* showing by sorrowful signs the dolor taken for the loss of their
companion, by which means they recovered him again of the King.

Thus if Fish, Foul and Beast, agree in union with a wonderful league of
amity, men may blush to behold their own defects and Serpentine natures, that
never rests hissing, stinging and casting out of venom, bred in vain minds,
and nourished in hateful breasts. The reason that man bears, and the form
and shape of his noble creation, should be an everlasting remembrance to move
him unto quietness, especially the renown that is gotten by patience and
fortitude, should always keep reasonable men from rages, and be a bulwark
and target to bear of quarrels, the destruction of life, the hour glass of
death, and the whole consumer of all good credit.

It is to be presupposed that proud hearts grows so Princely, and every one
(that is quarrelous) would seem a King or a conqueror, yet Princes take great
aduisement before they break peace, and cunningly put of causes of war,
waying the innumerable troubles, dangers, and losses that pertaines to a
quarrel, but the general number of men runs headlong into mischief, casting
neither peril nor hazard, as all our life and fame, stood on slashing,
cutting, roisting, and striving for vainglory. In our Elders days fighters
were called ruffians, and ruffians were so loathsome, that no honest man could
abide their company. If serving men which always should be civil, had quiet
and sober masters, such buckelers with pikes, such swords like spits, and such
long great daggers should not be worn The weapon and countenance (by
maintainers of quarrels) may cause cowards to be bold, and cause courage to
catch copper or creep closely in corns. And now in the chief and highest
degree of quarrelling, where see you iarres, questions, brawls, banding, and
the rest of disorders, but where some party is over great (playing on
advantage) or weapons are not equal, except it be among noble great minds,
whose valiauncy can neither suffer injury, nor abide any blemishe of honor. So
even now to them this work is adressed, the baser sort needs not my
persuasions, nor but of good will and presumption, this needs not I speak
of. The whole world is fraught so full of malice, that the least occasion can
be ministered, breeds such great business, that quarrels are so common (the
custom thereof so old) it seems nothing strange to behold murders,
odious practices, shameful poisnings* and miserable man slaughters.

In Italy, a simple quarrel but once conceived, never ends till death has
dispatched peradventure both the parties, and so greedily they go to take away
life, that all the mischief can be imagined is put in exercises without delay,
taking breath, regard of God, fear of law, or shame of the world, so blouddy
is the mind, the body sleeps not, till the hands have done some abominable
outrage. The mind cannot be in quiet, til open folly and monstrous madness
have disturbed the whole senses, and brought the life and body in hazard of
hell fire, or danger of worldly shame: these are the fruits of fury. The
defects of nature, the miseries of man, and the brutish conditions of the
counterfaite finesse in Italy. In France if a lie may be brought in by
circumstaunces, or a fine quarrel can be sifted out of gross speeches,,
present death follows, or perpetual hatred is set abroach, wherein murders
are committed, and many a mischievous act is taken in hand, odious to behold,
and a great horror to hear, but most unchristianly executed.

And so generally, in all countries and kingdoms, a quarrel once begone, comes
to butchery and bloodshed, and commonly grows after (in many generations and
kindreds) to deadly foed, and shameless slaughters.

A quarrel in property and nature, may be compared to many big barrels of
Gunpowder, which once set on fire, flames so vehemently, that every little
corn thereof, is throughout consumed, and the blast and business it makes,
overthrows houses, beats down great buildings, and shakes a whole town and
the walls thereof in sunder. Yea even as a tennis ball, the harder is stricken
the further it flies, and the oftener it reboundeth, the more he labors that
strikes it: so a spark of spiteful hatred, being blown with the busy
bellows of malice (that kindles coals which can never be quenched)
increases such a smoothering smoke and fire, that burns like the hill of
Ethna, that never goes out, nor wants heat, and fume to trouble a whole
country.

And one especial point is always to be noted (in the naughty nature of a
quarrel) that whosoever has done any injury or given a wound or a blow, never
can avoid danger and utter destruction, without some amends made, craving of
pardon, open repentance, or secret working of friends, that are wearied with
the long debating of the matter.

As one good turn does crave another, so an Injury demands a quarrel, a
quarrel breeds a thousand offenses, offenses hardly can be forgotten, and
the more a wrong remains in mind, ^he less hope is of forgiving the fault,
and the more mischief is put in proof and exercise.

And whosoever duly considers the ill inclination of people, he shall find
thousands so apt and ready to take in hand a quarrel, that in some sort it is
held a cowardice and a kind of no courage to put up a trifle, so many desires
to see bloodshed, so many sets men agog in unhappiness, and so many goes about
with tales and bad devises, to stur up strife and contention.

Well since our imbecility is much, our fury not little, and disposition so
stout, that all things must be disputed of and drawn to the uttermost degree
of dangerous quarrelling: I wish peradventure upon some experience, that
mildnes might moderate the manner of our falling out, and if nothing could
qualify the cruelty of courage, a regard of God, good reputation, just cause,
and honest dealing may be used, exhorting all men to look to life, common
society, mutual love, and the general peace of a christian Kingdom. For how
so ever the World may imagine of fighting and brawling, the very route and
ground of disorder in a common wealth, is unreasonable quarrels, wherein is
maintained a kind of Turkishe tyranny, and brutish boldness.

This not spoken beyond the compass of duty, nor to the prejudice and
hinderaunce of any man's manhood, which may be as well seen, and understood by
the conquering of himself (and maistring his own passions) as in having the
victory of others. Which triumph and victory cannot be gotten without great
bloodshed and business. Thus Friend worshipful I have discoursed a matter
worthy treating off, and I hope for the benefit of many: And so farewell.

FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipful my singular good friend, sir Michaell Blount Knight,
Lieutenant of the Tower.
IN travailing abroad, and searching some secrets at home that closely would
lurk in corners unknown, I found (good M. Lieutenant) many occasions to
write off, but none more grievous to behold than the wandering minds of this
world, and sowers of dissension, hateful to themselves and Enemies to their
Country, and for reformation of their follies, and amendme^t of their lives, I
drew certain verses fit for those causes, and I hope pleasant to read. And
because your good mind and office of worthy credit, is as it were a curb and
musrole to hold in such strong-headed wanderers wilfully bent, and wickedly
disposed: I did on goodwill dedicate this little Volume to your view and good
consideration, knowing that therein is no verse, nor meaning of any matter, but
that attends only to the advancement of virtue, rebuke of vice, and loyalty
to our Country. So wishing you much worship, I enter into the discourse
already here mentioned.

Yours in all at commaundment T. Churchyard.

A WARNING TO THE VVANderers abroad, that seeks to sow dissension at home.
MIne eyes they weep, my heart it bleedes in breast,
My soul does sob, my body quakes for fear:
My fancies roll, my mind can take no rest,
My senses blush, as sprites amazed were,
My knowledge shrugges, at rumors in mine ear.
My head does muse, my reason sore does rewe:
These quarrels old, that rise on brabblings new.
These bold attempts, that Rebels set abroach,
To Gods dislike, and Countries great reproach.
The rotten seames, that in fair garments are,
Be not espide, by sudden view of eye.
The spoiling moath, that eats gay scarlet bare,
In foldes of cloth, full long does closely lie.
Time is the touch, that treacherous trashe does try,
Foul cankred flesh, by Surgeons art is found,
And heald sometimes, by searching of the wound.
Worlds sickness must, with wisdom well be used,
That Doctors may, see how was health abusde.
For taynted fruit, that is not sound at coare,
Smooth skin does show, like apple ripe and good:
A plaster fair, may hide a filthy soar,
The painted face, sets forth no perfect blood.
By proof the best, from worst is understood.
Fair shows but bleares, the judgment for a while,
And colors can, not knowledge long begile.
Though salt be white, the sugars taste is sweet,
And gall does bite, when honey comforts spreete.
Most bitter sour, does foul Rebellion taste.
It breeds on hate, that heart has harborde long,
And wicked will, that wishes woe and waste:
Whose raging mind, delights in open wrong,
Stout stomach first, with snakish stinging tongue
Stirs up the strife, and blows the blast abroad:
Then malice comes, and looks like swelling toad,
And venom casts, where mischief may be wrought,
From mother spite, so monster forth is brought.
Rebellion is, the monster that I mean,
A serpent vile, that lines in stinking den:
A grisly ghost, a graceless sprite unclean,
That lurketh close, in shapes of vainest men.
When it is bredde, behold, what does it then?
It sowes discord, and fostreth up dislike,
Makes sharp the sword, that ready is to strike.
Lies listening still, for news and change of state,
And cares not how* it brings in debate.
A Turk or Jew, a Pagan or a dog,
A fiend of Hell, or else a sprite of the air:
A ventrous ladde, that all can set a gog.
A prattling boy, that fawnes and speaks full fair.
When Rebel falls, in rage of rude despair.
Rebellion brings: so he revenge may take,
The Devil himself, it will a Captain make.
Rebellion looks, but how may blood be shed,
And so vilde minds, in mischief runs on head.
Rebellion springes, of too much head and will,
That riot runs, without rebuke too far,
In suffering harms, great wrongs are offered still.
On little broils, begins a bloody war,
The wilful man, does either make or mar:
The harebraine head, a witless course holds on,
Till fear of God, and wordly care be gone:
All hope is past, run dog or Devil than,
No reason serves, to rule the retchlesse man.
But what foul shame, brings men to this lewd mind?
What bold abuse is this, that breeds such bale?
What vile device, draws nature out of kind?
What marres good wits? what makes men pull and hale,
To seek for death* and sets their lives to sale?
Is It will alone? ^ie on that wayward heart,
That for a toy, makes all the body smart:
Fie on that trick, that turns all out of frame,
Runs far a field, and bringes home open shame.
We see so long, as house together stands,
From rain and storms, both man and wife do sit,
So long as horse, remains in riders hands
He keeps his pace, and plays upon the bitte.
So long as men, be ruled by temprate wit
Draw all one yoke, take part as brethren ought:
So long, you know, they need not take no thought,
But when they jar, and several ways they go,
They draw too far, and break true friendships bow.
Come home wild heads, then gad no more abroad,
To breed debate, that works your Countries wrack,
Lay up your ships, and barques in quiet road:
Cast ankor there, where cable cannot crack,
Run not to Rhemes, to learn a cumbrous knacke,
That smells of smoke, and sauors of discord.
Obey your Prince, and so ye serve the Lord.
To duties bounds, reclaim your selves again:
Against the stream, who strives do lose their pain.
Make Pope your head, the Prince ye do forsake
Obedience bids, a subject leave dispute:
Indeed you do, the scripture clean mistake,
If that your tree, do show no better fruit.
(But bring forth brawles, and raises slanders brute)
Say what you please, your conscience is not clean:
Where duty wants, men do some mischief mean.
And such as speaks, against the Prince, and Law,
Intends no good, but flingeth fire in straw.
And when house burns, and flame begins to gloe,
Your fingers ends, shall surely singed be:
You smell on smoke: as you the bellows blow:
Then put out fire, where rotten wood you see,
Clear sight cannot, with smothering sm^^ke agree.
Good men are harmde, with wicked bad devise,
Of naughty ware, you know full well the price.
Make dark your shoppes, to bleare the buyers eye,
When all is seen, the light each thing shall try.
If you do wrong, to Prince and public state,
Your conscience shall, accuse you in the end:
If legs and feet, begin the head to hate,
Sick are the lims, that should the head defend,
The body weak, by medson may amend.
Wherefore do fall, to physic for your grief.
From candle clear, be sure ye take the thief:
For if in snuff, be crept a little cole,
Through week and all, is worn a curelesse hole.
And sothe light, that glad the lookers on,
God wot is spoyld, before his kindly hour:
When oil, or wax, or tallow clean is gone,
The lamp or light, to burn has little power:
You would plant weeds, where grows a goodly flower.
Let practice go, and play a subjects part:
Plain troath ye know, bids ^ie on cunning art.
One God, one law, one mind and manner now,
In double world, shows subjects duties throw.
All other drifts, do drawthe wire awrie,
And backward bends* the bow that should be straight:
Come near no clouds, the reach is over hie.
Live safely then, no surety comes by sleight:
Content below, does hate to climb on height.
Who knows his own, has wealth and wit enough:
He soundly sleeps, that only looks to plough.
And such as wakes, to ouerlooke this age,
May sing adieu, when foot is fast in cage.
O Country sweet, persuade obedience here,
Reform the fond, and still preserve the wise:
No plot of earth, more pro^ious nor more dear
Than native soil, that for her children cries
And calls for chicks, where kites and puttocks flies,
O Babes well borne, if you will bastards prove
Bid welcome hate, and farewell Countries love:
And this be sure, my friends go where you please,
No goodness grows, by gadding ore the seas.
Note where you took, both breath, warm blood, and life,
Your parents care, and Countries right do way:
Regard what broils, and brawles begin on strife,
Mark how stout hearts, stand all on tickle stay:
And birds of the air, your folly do bewraie,
And mark how God, has opened all your drifts,
And in your pride, has put you to your shifts.
And chiefly note, how God and man does know,
For want of grace, wild heads a gadding go.
Religion Lord, perhaps shall be your shield,
Nay there a straw, you mean an other thing:
You are so great, you would feign march in field,
That world should judge, you feathers of one wing.
So busy birds, together all would sing.
Well waking Cocks, ye crow for day too soon:
Ye neither look, on stars, ne sun, nor moon,
But clapping wings, ye thrust out neck and throat,
And cares not who, does hear your midnight noate.
That sounds not right, of no Religion sure.
Rebellion is, the string you play upon:
O God forbid, that hawk forsook the lure
To feed on frog, that sits one every stone.
I say not much, would God abuse were gone,
Rebellion dead, and all her branches bare,
Faythlesse were fled, and Country void of care,
But since strange toys, breeds humming Bees in brain.
I mean to touch, rebellion once again.
When mother spite, to world this monster brings.
A naughty nourse, vile nature then prepares:
Who cradle rocks and lullabie she singes,
Till retchlesse sense, be brought a sleep unawares,
Then as in corn, do creep wild weeds and tares:
So cockle seed, in common wealth is sown,
Whereby good grain, is quickly ouergrowne.
The cause thereof, is cunning crafty wits,
That still works woe, and never idle sits.
O wretched rage, that riues and rents a Realm
In pieces small, and gains nothing thereby:
O labor lost, that strives with flood and stream,
And daily hopes, to drink great rivers dry,
O cruel plague that, do for vengeance cry.
O prive hate, that open mischief breeds,
O shameless slight, that honest people dreedes:
Accursed I hold, rebellion is of kind,
That never dies, but lives in cankred mind.
The Countries weal, and Princes honor both
It clean forgets, and spoil and havoc cries,
Takes no regard, to duty, faith, or oath,
But claps on wood, where fire and flame may rise,
Tells tatling tales, shows furious angry eyes,
Makes brags and boast that all shall lie in dust,
And has no hope, but treason is his trust:
The wife, the child, the friend and neighbor to^
Rebellion hates, for he will mischief do.
It finds fault, with peace and civil Laws.
Abhors good men, and such as gouernes well:
Takes toy in head, bolts out when is no cause,
Frames deuilish drifts, to make this world a hell:
And at the length, would King and Countery sell
To wreak his wrath, O vile revenge most vain,
When all is lost, what does rebellion gain?
Joys it to see, the wrack of native land?
Such foul offense, is whipped with his own wand.
Their goods, their rent, their honor and their lives,
Shall under foot, be trodden every day:
Their kind deflourde, their children and their wives
Made captive slaves, in bondage many a way.
And when the land, is made a strangers pray,
Like Israelites, poor Jacobs house shall mourn,
Draw in the yoke, and see their houses burn.
Bear burdens still, and bend their backs to toil:
While enemies laugh, and triumphs of the spoil.
What can procure, a man to sell his life,
Forsake his Prince, become a servile slave:
What cause can be, in state to stir a strife?
What joy or bliss, by thraldom can we have?
When men are well, what devil would they crave?
What makes men mad? why dote they in this age?
To foreign foes, to run in such a rage.
Their language sure, I trow is not so fine:
Their love is gross, and tastes like troubled wine.
Want thou but gilt, where they are masters still,
There shall thou starve, for all their goodly shows,
With mockes and skornes, and many another ill:
Poor hewlet stands, among a many of Crows.
The wandering wight, that long a gadding goes,
Comes home at last (by beggars weepi^g cross)
Like rolling stone, that never gathers moss,
A stranger does, but stare in trauailers face,
And smiles in sleeue, at silly souls disgrace.
Rebellion likes, the man he never saw,
If blouddy wars, upon that league may link:
As to the sick, does evil humors draw,
And from foul pits, comes smoke and noisome stink,
So filthy floods, flow from rebellious brinke,
A troubled stream, of puddle mixed with mire.
Does quench the thirst, of rebels hot desire.
The water clear, but skalds a rebels breast:
For cruel rage, and riot takes no rest.
It runs with hare, and hunts with blouddy hound,
It stands with strong, and leaves the weak at worst:
In common wealth, it makes a mortal wound,
It brags to fight, and yet retireth forced:
It is a plague, that God himself has cursed,
For it deuides, in little pieces small,
Both Kingdoms great, and mighty monarkes all:
Dissension works, to sow but Satan's seeds,
And pluckes up slowres, and plants in stinking weeds.
It creepes in hoales, and corners close by ribs,
Prouides for friends, to band it out for need:
It bankets still, and freely quafs and bibs,
And with lewd words, their wicked humor feeds.
Prates much of Prince, makes boast of doughty deeds.
When feeble hearts, lies quaking in their hose,
Much like bold Cocks, that loud on midding crows.
But yet cries creake, when that in sharp they come:
For rebels can, not bide the sound of Drome.
At May Powl mirth, or at some marriage feast,
Or in a fair, where people swarm like Bees:
These stinging wasps, but new come out of neast.
Do fly for life, and so together grees,
Like little mites, or maggots in a cheese.
The humming then, that these wood wasps do make.
Does seem at first, as it would mountains shake:
But out alas, those lawless loytring souls,
Are hid in have, or crept in Conny holes.
The privy thief, that steals away our wealth,
Is sore afraid, a true man's steps to see:
The fearful wight* that does misdoubt his health,
Will blushe to come, where that sound people be.
The faithful stands, the faulty man will flee:
The rebel shrinks, where rule and order swaies.
Troth bides the brunt, the Traitor runs his ways:
Bold practice quakes, when power supplants his pride,
Where biles breaks out, there is rebellion spide.
Among good Ewes, beware of scabbed sheep,
The Wolf with Lamb, may not be matched aright:
The flock is spoilde, where For the Geese does keep.
The sick with sound, is sure no comely sight.
What needs more terms, who dares not bide the light?
In darkness dwells, a blind rebellious mind,
Is more corrupt, then any thing we find.
Then either heal, the member that does smell,
Or cut him of, before he further swell.
But far more fit, that flesh should be reformde,
And san^de from harm, that else corrupt would grow:
The itching hand, of force must needs be wormde,
Least skin wax rough, and pimples rise, ye know.
If knife pare well* a corn upon the toe.
The foot is easde, and man shall march upright.
Take slime from eyes, the blind receives his sight:
So cleansing clean, each part and member well:
The state of man, in safety long shall dwell,
So all things meant, that here does pass the pen,
Wounds to be heald, and searched as they ought:
All to be done, for health and wealth of men,
And naught amiss, in word, in deed nor thought:
Yea when my verse, so great a work has wrought,
To link in love, good subjects all in one.
To stand as firm, as rock or marble stone,
Then shall my mouth, my muse, my pen and all,
Be pressed to serve, at each good subjects call.
FINIS.
THE HONOR OF A Soldier.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPful Sir George Carew, Knight, Lieutenant of the Ordinance
Thomas Churchyard wishes worldly felicity, and heavenly blessedness.
IN calling to mind, good Sir George, our meeting in Ireland a long while ago
for the service of the Queens Majesty, your good brother then living (to whom
I was bound in good will,) I penned at that instant by his means the life and
death of a Pirate, and promised a further work to your self, which now I
perform, because your Souldiour-like disposition is answered with the
aduauncements of Fortune, and your ancient house and blood is beautified with
an honorable place, the Prince has possessed you of a sign and token as I
believe, that a noble Soldiers profession shall never go out of your
remembrance, for the which cause, I have dedicated this work called The honor
of a Soldier unto your protection, in hope that which you have seen and read
for the commendation of Soldiers, shall be a sufficient testimony of their
value and worthiness, and shall not only procure you and others like your self
to further their fame, but like wise willing to read that I have set down in
their behalf, for as briefly as my small Judgment can discharge a true
discourse thereof, with good probable reasons and ancient authors of famous
credit.

I mind to express and set forth at large, how Soldiers were made off, and
honored in times past: and what prerogative they had above other people. And
to declare how Princes held them in admiration, and gave them liberties,
titles, and dignities: far beyond the rest of any, that lived under their
laws and obedience. And this by the way is to be thought, that all my former
discourse and rehearsal of wars, attended to no other purpose and effect,
but for the advancement of Soldiers, and to be as it were a foil to set
forth the matter, I presentlye mind to publishe out. For now I will in a
manner show, how Gentility began, and where and in what sort honor was
first gotten and maintained, which argument as I hope, shall not only content
the wise and well learned, but also please every degree, and make the simple
sort pluck up their courages, and imitate (by some honest exercises) the lives
of noble Soldiers.

I trust I need not in this ready and ripe age (wherein good writers, great
learning, and studious judgments does florishe) rehearse by particulars every
parcel and poinct, that belongs to a Soldiers profession. Nor that you
look I should recite when, and where the Romans, Lacedaemonians, Athenians,
and other nations, did prefer and extol men of Marshall minds, and noble
courages. For their books and Commentaries, and the innumerable Libraries of
great antiquity, are the very records of my discourse, and remain as mirrours
for you to look in. And shall prove a thousand parts more in the commendation
of Soldiers, then either my pen or tongue (by sufficient cunning) has
power to express. For it can not be, that from a little gutte or Channel of
water, you should look for so great a flood, as from a multitude of springes,
from whence mighty Rivers takes original and recourse.

And so I send you to the Welspring of knowledge (I mean the ancient Fathers
works) to fetch true intelligence, of the things I make mention of, touching
the worthy reputation of a good Soldier, and the antiquity of his credit,
triumph and glory.

First, look in the sacred Scriptures, and search from the death of Abell,
coming down orderly to the birth of Christ: And see whether Soldiers were
made of or no. And doubtless you shall find they were not only embraced and
maintained, but likewise they are of a long continuance and credit. As all the
Bible before John the Baptistes time declares. And Christ himself in a sort
did utter, when he said, he had not found such faith in Israel, as he saw in
a Centurion. Yea and in the Apostles Acts, there is a special poinct to be
noted. Devout Soldiers were sent to Simon Tanners house to find out Peter.
Well, now I commit you to the Scripture, and I will follow profane
Histories: and begin at the very Infidels (a scorn for a Christian to be
taught by) which are no small number, nor of no little continuance, people
always brought up in war, and Princes of great fame, power, and auctority. Yea
conquerours of the whole world, and Kings to whom all people did stoop and
do homage.

These Paganes, or as we may term them, lost sheep, to whom the great
Shepherd would not be known, (and yet among them tormented and crucified) did
make such laws and orders for Soldiers, as the Turk to this day observes,
and holds in great reverence. Regard but the liberties and auctority of the
Ianessaries: and that shall manifestly prove, that men of war are had in
great admiration. But because you shall have the more belief to the matter:
read the life of Alexander the Great: The Commentaries of Julius Caesar, and
the noble acts and victories of a number of other notable Princes. And then
assuredly you shall be persuaded, that the renown of Soldiers has reached,
and spread as far as fame can fly, or good report could have passage.

I pray you can any man deny, but it springs of a great courage, and zeal to
the common wealth: when a man forsakes the pleasure of life, to follow the
painfulness of war, and danger of death: and refuses no toil nor
travail, to purchase credit, and attain unto knowledge. Yea some such we
read of, as Marcus Cursius, and Mucius Sceuola, that refused no enterprises to
do their Country pleasure. Yea some have sold their patrimony, and consumed
their Treasure and riches, to enriche their Princes with glory, and everlasting
renown.

Were not this a madness, and more then a mere folly, to be a drudge to the
world, (and a labourer for those that sits at rest) and to watch and ward,
fight, strive, and struggle with strangers for victory: and then to come home
and be rewarded as common persons, and walk like a shadow in the Sun,
without estimation or countenance. Would any that had wisdom, vallue, and
courage, be over run with vicious fools and cowardes, or be made a
footestoole to their inferior, when they have climed up the steps of honor,
and are gotten into the top gallant of worldly glory, and warlicke triumph.

Among children that do but play at the bucklars, there is a pre-eminence, and
one will acknowledge the other to be his better, when good bobbes are
bestowed: and suddenly a stout taule lobber will lay down the waster, and
yield to him that has more practice, and (...) in the weapon then himself.
Then shall not a man that has coped with Champions, buckled with Conquerours,
and abidden the hazard of the Canon, stand on his Pantoffelles, and look to
the steps he has passed. Yes sure, and such a member of the state, (the baser
sort are Ciphers) ought to be made of, deserves place and pre-eminence, and is
no companion for punies, nor meet to be matched with Milkesoppes, whose
manhood and manners differs, as far from the grave Soldiour, as a Donkite in
courage and condition differs from a Ierfaukon.

As the duty to a man's country, and the wages that he takes, binds him
to do the uttermost he may: so were there not an other cause, that forces
further matter. Full coldly some would fight, and full slowly some would march
to the battle, albeit the Princes quarrel and wages received, commands
much, and is a thing stoutly and wisely to be looked to. But I tell you, fame
and reputation is the mark that men shoot at, and the greediness of glory
and ambition, pricketh the mind so fast forward, that neither the man looks
upon the multitude of enemies. Nor regards the danger of death, so he may be
eternized, and live in the good opinion of the Prince and people.

For he that but bluntly looks about him, and goes to the war for wealth
(which hardly is there gotten) is led on with a covetous desire of that he
shall not have, and may fight like an Ox, and die like an Ass. But who so
respects his credit, and paiseth in ballaunce the worthynesse of fame, that
rises by well doing, does combat like a Lion, and either conquers like a man,
or dies like a conqueror, as many great Kings and Captains have done, whose
ensamples (a long while ago) as yet remaynes freshlye in memory.

It may be thought that every mercinarie man, and common hireling (taken up
for a while, or serving a small season) is a soldier fit to be registered, or
honored among the renoumed sort of warlike people. For such numbers of
bezoingnies or necessary instruments for the time, are to fall to their
occupation when the service is ended, and not to live idly, or look for
imbrasing. For neither they tarry long in the f^elde, when they are pressed to go
forth. Nor are not often called again to the like journey, so great is our
store of such persons: and so many shifts they can make, to put of any pain
and hazard. But he is to be accounted the courageous Soldier, that is given
by his own disposition, to delight and follow the Cannon wheel, whose
countenance and cheerful face begins to smile and rejoice when the Drum
sounds, and whose heart is so high, it will not stoop to no slavery. But has
a body and mind able to answer that is looked for, and has often been tried
and experimented in Marshiall affairs: through haunting whereof he is become
ignorant of drudging at home, and made a skillful Scholar in the discipline of
war: which is not learned without some loss of blood, charges of purse, and
consuming of time.

And this may be judged, and plainly presupposed, that many of that sort of
men are not found alive, to trouble or burden a common wealth, because they
are cut off through dangerous services, or forced by seeking of Fame in the
field, to sell that they have at home, and so to travel abroad, subject to
all misery, and far from any friendship or prosperous estate. And sometimes
through the greatness of their minds, that gallopp^ after glory, are carried
away to seek out new Kingdoms, and refuse their old habitation. A matter
falling out well, worthy to be liked, but otherwise, a heavy tale to be told,
and an experience bought with over much repentance. But every way occasions
they are, that dispatcheth* many a good Soldier, and makes the number so
little, that it is reason such as are left alive of that profession: should
either be rewarded, or at the least reap up some such credit, as the common
sort of people should have them in admiration, and offer them such courtesy,
as the worthynesse of their Experience and Service requires.

If in the old time our Forefathers used their men of war nobly, preferred
them to promotions, and dealt honorably with them that served then Country,
where wars were not so cruel. Why should not this world, wherein policies,
murders, and bloodshed is followed (and hazards are meruelously escaped) to
the uttermost of man's power, have more regard to a Soldier that shunneth no
hazard, nor refuses no peril. There is no more to say, for the aunswering of
this great oversight, but the hackney horse is unhappy, having borne a burden
all the day on his back, and is cast off at night to a bare common, there to
seek for food, and abide a hard fortune.

There is a worse matter th^n this to be treated off, yet nothing but that so
far past remedy to be touched: let any one serving man get a good Master,
and for following his heels at an inch, he shall be more spoken and get more
benefit, then twenty of the best Soldiers that you can name, that have
followed the wars all their life days, and knew not how to flatter and
fawn, or crouch and cours^e for commodity. Yea, such as serves at home, and
cannot go out of the view of a fair house, and smoke of a foul Chimney,
snatcheth up good turns, and steals away preferments privily: when those
that merits more consideration, often goes openly a begging, and finds few
among thousands that wishes them well, or does them any good.

Some say the cause of this hard hap to the one, and good Fortune to the
other, is a certain deadly dissension, fallen between the sword and the
pen. By which mortal malice is bred and nourished in bosom, such a
headstrong hatred and parcialitie, that the pen is ever giving a dash out of
order, against the commendation of the sword, and the sword being disgraced,
by a balde blot of a scuruie Goose quill, lies in a broken rustie scabberd, and
so takes a Canker, which eats away the edge, and is in a manner lost for
lack of good looking to, and consideration of a painful Cutler.

And the pen (as many people are persuaded) is like the Pensell of a Painter,
always ready to set out sundry colors, and sometime more apt to make a
blurre, then give a good shape and proportion to any invention or devise, that
proceeds of a plain meaning. And as all pensels are as well occupied of a
bongling Paynter, as a cunning woorkeman. So the scribbling Pen is ever
woorking of some subteltie, more for the benefit of the Writer, then commonly
for the profitte or pleasure of the Reader: yea, and the pen is waxt so fine,
and can show such a florishe, that a Master of Fence, though he playde with a
two hand Sword, might be put to a foul foil: where the Pen is in place,
and is guided by a slight hand^, and a shrewde head.

But under correcton, if a man may be plain, the Pen and the Sword can
never agree, because the Pen stands in such fear of the sword, it would not
come under the blow of the blade: and the sword is in such doubt to be moi^ed
with ink, by the dash of a pen, that it loves not to come where the pen may
annoye it. And so the dissension and quarrel between the Pen and the
Sword, is never like to be taken up: the harms are so great that grows on
their amity and meeting, and the advantage of them both is so much when they
be kept a sunder.

For the Sword is the best and in his most bravery when it is shyning in the
field, where blood may be shed, and honor may be won. And the Pen is in
the chi^fest pomp, when it lies lurking in the Town, where pence may be
purchased, and peace and quietness may do what it please^h. And the Pen is so
glad to rest in the pennar, till profit calls him out, that he cannot abide
the hindrers of his commodity, nor the disquieter of his ease. Which comes
by wars, and proceeds from the Sword, when the Drum and the Trumpet puts
the pen out of credit.

Now to speak roundly to the reason, may be alleged in the Pens behalf (and
praises of those that have the use of the same) it cannot be denied, but the
pen may both persuade war, and purchase peace. And those that here at home
maintain good Laws: see justice ministered, uphold the public state: plead
controversies at the bar, study to unfold doubts. Labor at their Book to
be profitable members, and strive daily to excel in learning, and quiet the
quarrellous people of their Country. Such I say that with Pen or tongue,
aduaunceth virtue, and ouerthrows vice, are meet to be honored, deserves
great laud, and ought to go in the rank and place of commendation and
dignitiye. For there is but four sorts of true Nobility, or Gentlemen. The
first Governors, by whom all States and Kingdoms are guided, brought to know
order, and made to possess in quietness the goods that either good Fortune,
or sweat of brows has gotten.

The second are Soldiers, whose venture and valliance has been great, service
and labor not little, and daily defended with the hazard of their lives, the
liberty of the Country.

The third are upright and learned Lawiers, that looke^h more to the matter
they have in hand, then the money they receive. And are never idle in doing
their duty, and studying for the quietness of matters in controversy.

The fourth are Merchants, that sails foreign Countries, and brings
commodities home: and after great hazards abroad do utter their ware with
regard of conscience and profit to the public estate.

And as from the beginning Governors and Rulers were ordained by God, and the
rest of Gentilitie came in, and did follow as reason required, and desert did
command. So ancient birth and blood (joined with good conditions) is a thing
much to be honored and esteemed, and beautifies not only the noble race, but
bringes likewise a treable beatitude, to the person so virtuously bent and
nobly borne.

And as for the Soldiers and their original, of honors, titles, and calling,
the Romans (which were the Fathers of all Marshiall affairs, and Conquerors
of the world) have so much spoken of and praised, that no man can deny, but
they are the men of greatest antiquity, and people that Princes first
preferred, and gave stippendes unto. Yea, and the chiefest Conquerours that
ever were before our days: had a great glory themselves to be called
Soldiers, and Noble Captains. For they thought none so worthy as the
Soldier, nor none so meet to compare themselves unto, as the man that stood
on his honor, and would neither stoop to no kind of slauerye, nor yield to
no villainous action.

But in very deed, to speak of every one in their order, there is none ^o
much to be feared, loved, and honored as the Rulers and Leaders of the common
people.

For the peaceable Governor, and such as are experimented in Wordly policies,
knows how to make war, and how to avoid troubles: and as they are loath to
fall from rest and wealth, to ruffeling War and wickedness, that breeds
bloodshed and want: So they can break the bands of peace, and set men out to
the field, when causes commaundes them, and opportunity does serve. But since
that my purpose is but to treat of Soldiers alone, (and that I lack skill to
set forth the rest) I will return to my first Discourse and intent, and leave
the wise to consider, what good matter may be said in the thing I leave off.

The Soldier because his life is in ballaunce, and his death is at the door,
has so many mischieues to pass, and so few means to escape danger: that he
is compelled to be honest, and be ready to make an account every hour of the
day. For as the Cannon may call him before he be aware, or the policy of the
enemy may cut off his years: so is he assured that the pot, which goes often
to the water, comes home with a knock, or at length is passhed all in pieces.
Through which accidents or cross chances, he is held so hard, and curbed so
short (if any fear of God be in his breast) that he has no scope to run at
riot in: nor play the parts of a wanton, or prodigal son.

Albeit some hold opinion, that Soldiers be given to spoil and offered to
insolent life, by a number of inconveniences: yet may they so well be occupied
in war, that they may be occasion of great good, and a great hinderer of
many harms. For when houses are ready to be burnt, impote^t persons, poor
women and children ready to be slain: they may save what they list, and
preserve an infinite number of things, that a man at home can do no good in,
nor none but the Soldier in the field, has power to comfort and succor.
And for certame I know Soldiers of that disposition, that has been occupied
in these honest actions: when some Helhoudes have been spoiling and
murdering, and found by their follye and over great cruelitye, a dispatch of
their own days, and peradventure the terrible wrath of God, and damnation to
their souls.

My Prince may be well served, and the Enemy not always to the uttermost
persecuted: the Lesson that Saint John Baptist gave the soldiers, may
suffice for this matter, and carry men's minds from violence, and doing wrong,
to quallifie fury, and maintain right, with a regard to the innocent, that
ought not to be touched, for the offense of an ambicious Leader, or one whose
faults the ignorant may not answers This point though simply it is passed
over, may contain a large volume: and is to be looked into with a divine
(...), and (...) Christian consideration.

Then if the soldiers (as few there are in number) be honest and is to be
proved, they are not to be reproved: it follows that honor and reputation
accompanies those soldiers, and that a singular privilege and liberty, may
be had for those that have such regard of their fame, that they will do no any
one thing prejudicial to their credit, in the compass of which regard is
knit, valiancy, modesty, pity, and hope of another life to come: when the
affairs of this world shall dutifully and honestly be finished.

And for that the reader hereof shall not think, but that great Princes thought
their Soldiers to be honest, and men that were worthy the making of (whose
doings and regard did argue and show a special hope of another place to go
to, or a certain fame and credit here to be maintained) I will show you as I
have gathered by translation, how triumphant kings and princely potentates, did
ordain, set down, and deliver a law and rule for soldiers. By the which
they had honor, liberty, and prerogative above, and beyond the Commoners, or
common course of people. The translation I speak of is not long and tedious,
but bringing willing minds to hear and know the truth you may read if leisure
permit, and you peruse that follows.

First you must mark (and make a good note of) that Heraldes were at the
beginning soldiers, and were called ancient knights, as well it seems to
be true: for they (I meant Heraldes) being brought up in war, beheld who
deserved renown, and had by their authority and experience, a power to give
Arms and sign of honor to those, which for well doing in field or public
state, did merit remembrance, which power and place of the Heralde does
plainly express: that from the field, or honorable offices at home, sprung
up our gentilitie, and generation of Gentlemen. For as every man's blood in a
b^son looks of one color: and when Adam was created, and a long while after,
me^ were al alike. So virtuous acts that shines to the heavens, has made them
to be honored and advanced* where vicious livers, and bloodthirsty wretches
were accursed of God, and hated of man. And had a mark set upon them to be
known by, and be a testimony to the world, that they were not worthy of honor,
and were appointed to reproach. Let Cain that killed his brother Abell (by an
unjust war) be a witness in this behalf.

Aeneas Siluius does derine Heraldes of ab Heroibus, of Noble men:

For Heroes were ancient Knights, otherwise called Soldiers, and an Herald
signifies Centonicum vocabulum (videlicet) and old man of Arms, or an old
Knight, but at this day (said Eneas a long while since) certain servile men,
feeble and weak messengers, which never have playde the Soldiers, do
profess that office. The privileges and offices of the Herauldes in ancient
time, to this day continuing nevertheless. And the first author of them was
Bacchus, which India being conquered, did call them by this name: I absolve you
of Wars and travel, and will that you be ancient Soldiers, and to be
called Heroes. Your office shall be to provide for the Common weal, to try
out the original of causes, and to praise the wise: you shall call for greater
rewards, in what place or Country you shall come. And the Kings shall give
you meat and apparel. You shall be most honorable to all men. Princes shall
offer unto you many things, and shall license you their apparel. Credit
shall be given to your sayings, you shall abhor lies. You shall judge traitors
and Adu^^terers. These infamous persons ye shall punish: and in every Nation
you shall have liberty, and sure egresse and regresse shall be unto you, if
any man shall gain say any of you in word or deed, let him die with the
sword.

Alexander the Great has annexed to these privileges of noble men after a long
season, that they might use purple, golden and beautiful garments. And that
they should bring in princely and notable Arms at every place, in any Country
or Region soever it shall be If any man shall repulse these without respect, or
secretly defame in word, he shall be accounted gilty of death, and
deposition of gooddes. And so the same Eneas does say, Tucidides, Herodotus,
Didimses, Magashones, and Zenophon together.

Thirdly, then Octauian Auguste, the Roman Monarch being established, has
beautified them on this condition: Who so ever (said he) has played the
Soldier with us, the space of ten years, and be of the age of forty years,
whether he be horseman, or else footeman, he shall have his wages* and
afterward be absent from wars, be a noble man and old Soldiers. No man shall
forbid thee the Ctity, the Market, the Church, Hospitality and house: no man
shall impute any fault to thee, thou shall be discharged of that blemish or
burden: no man shall ask any thing of thee, if thou make fault in any thing,
only look thou for Caesar's vengeance: for what filthiness men shall impute,
let them fear thee being a judge and corrector* whether they be private, or
Princes: what so ever thou say, thou shall affirm, and no man contrary. All
iourneis and places shall be free and plain to thee: let thy meat and drink
be in the houses of Princes, and take daily of the common treasure,
wherewithal to keep thee and thine house. Marry thou a wife of comely beauty,
and esteem her above all other. Whom thou will check and reproach with infamy,
thou shall say this man is an infamous reprobat. Arms, Ensignee, names and
ornaments of noble men bear thou. Do what things become Kings, and what
thou would do or say in every place and Nation, make mention of it: if
there be any injurious person, let him die.

And last of all Cha^les the Great, the name of the Empire being translated to
the Germans, after the conquest of the Saxons and Lombardes. Caesar called
Augustus, has rewarded them with this honor, saying: My Knights, you noble
men, fellows of Kings and Judges of faults, live after your labor, without
travail, provide for Kings in a common name. Take away vice. Favor women.
Help children. Keep council of the Prince, and of him ask your apparel,
and stipend: and if any deny, let him be accounted presumptuou^ and
slanderous. If any shall do you injury, let him acknowledge himself guilty
of empairing the Empire. But take you heed least you defile such worship,
and such privilege, gotten by just travail of war, either by drunkenness,
baudry, or any other vice: neither that we give unto you, should redound unto
praise, or peace, which is to be taken of you. If perhaps you shall exceed us,
and our successors Kings of the Romans for ever hereafter.

These before rehearsed word for word, as I might I translated out of
Latin, finding therein a maruailous commendation of Soldiers, and so is
thereby to be p^rceiued, that in all ages, times, and public gouernements,
Kings and mighty Monarkes, took care as much for their men of war, as for
their Commonweal: and to bring them in heart if any despair or mislike,
should grow through sl^cknes of looking unto. The Princes of their princely
benignity, and mere good will borne to Marshall people, invested them with
titles, names and honors, such as always pluckes up a man's courage, and
procures thousands to valiauncy and service. For who will not venture boldly a
season, when they know for ten years toil and hazard, he shall be honored,
sit at ease, live without danger, and remain in a perpetual privilege:
neither subject to the malice of lewd people, nor worldly want, whose plague
persecuteth many millions of men, and throws down in the dust the praises of
such, as otherwise should shine like the Sun, before the ^ies of all nations.

And as those Kings and Conquerours many hundred years ago, ordained by
decree and virtue of a Law, that Soldiers should be made honorable, and
possess great contentation of mind: So fell it out from time to time, their
services were considered. And that Souldier-like King and triumphant
Conqueror, King Henry the eight, having trial of Soldiers and a warlike
heart: to show the honor belonging to that profession, and to follow his noble
predecessors: Made a Law as ye may read in the Statutes, that Soldiers might
wear what they listed: And further to the comfort of all men of war, he left
no one worthy Soldier unrewarded, in what place so ever of his dominion, or
affairs the Soldiour had been emploide.

In France, our near neighbors makes so great account of Soldiers (namely
those that they call Soldado Vetche) that the greatest Dukes or Princes in the
field, Court, or Town, encountering a Soldier, salutes him with courtesy,
takes him to his Table, and uses him with such entertainment and reverence,
that it is a world to behold. And when service is to be seen, either in
battle, or at an assault: The greatest Duke or noble man, thinks himself
happy to be joined with a known Soldier: and commonly both old and young of
their nobility, are foremost in the ^ight, and last that will retire. It is a
thing incredible among some ignorant persons, to be told how Souldier-like,
and manlike in all poinctes they behave themselves, and how little account they
make of life, when death must be sought by service, and thereby their honor
and liberty of Country, is to be preferred.

The Spaniards, a Nation not inferior to any yet named, join so in amity at
their meeting, make such courtesy, and show such fastness of friendship
(especially among Soldiers) that every one in presence embraces his
companion, and in absence, lets fall good report of the absent. Yea, their love
and constancy by custom and ceremonies, knits them in such an union, that no
stranger can separate: and they give so great place one to another, that it is
hard to know by their gestures and vsages, which is the better of them. And
they have their own Soldiers in such a liking, that no people in the world,
shall be suffered to reap any piece of their glory.

The Italians Soldiers of great antiquity, and of no less value with most
humility and civil manner, enterchaungeth their talk: yielding for one gentle
word, twenty good terms, smooth speeches, and philed phrases. And happening to
come together, either in service, or otherwise: they agree like brethren, and
depart without quarrel. And their great men and mightiest in power, if they
repair where Soldiers are, shows them selves of little authority, as a man
might guess by their courtesy: Refuses to take any thing upon them, wh^re
the Marshall man approaches, and seems to be at the disposition of such as
have served, so great is the reputation of a Soldier among them.

The Scots men, a stout and manly people, beginning to take a savor in the
war, seeks sundry soiles to serve in: and have great delight to be in the
company of soldiers, and prove them selves worthy of commendation in any place
they repair. And for that they would become famous, and attain to some
experience and credit, they shun no kind of service that is offered: and
all the sorts of Gentility among them, esteems much a Soldier. Which is a
sign that at the length, Soldiers will come to their ancient dignity and
admiration, where the sound of Dromme or Trompet may be heard.

Now to speak of our own Nation were superfluous, (although many have served
well, and sundry are yet in the exercises of war) because I have named before
diverse things wherein our country men have won desired fame and renown,
yet for arguments sake, and to enlarge this volume. Further matter may be
treated of, neither hurtful to the hearers, that favors well doing: nor
hateful to any when nothing shall be touched, but that which is necessary for
the advancement of virtue.

Our sovereign Lady by Gods providence (to make up the matter) I bring for a
testimony of great regard to Soldiers, considering whom they are she has
helped, in some sort and respect, and what good things have passed among
Soldiers, as her highness heard well of, or had intelligence given her to
understand, the worthiness of those that have well deserved. Do but examine
how many since her noble reign, of Soldiers have had Leases, gotten livings,
been preferred to government, and gone from Court with full hands, that
began with empty purses. And then tell the world openly, what secret suits
were passed and what open wrong they do them, that bountifully bestowed good
gifts, where any good cause appeared. Admit some by the report of their
friends, stole away the benefits from the fountain head: yet look to the
rest of things that worthily fell out, and you shall see the best sort of
Soldiers worthily rewarded, and nobly used. What care we though some silly
souls, or serviceable Soldiers watch at receipt, or are not spoken for by
mean of some hinderers of good hap. Yet since other some, and many in number
have found good Fortune, (say what they can) at her Highness hands that now
remains Queen over our Country, we cannot but confess that the candle is
in, and not burnt so far, but may give a gracious blase and a new light, to
lighten the minds of Soldiers, and such as sit in the comfortless shadow of
dark despair.

So to make short and prove for the purpose, Soldiers in times past have
been set by, and dearly esteemed, and presently in all places of the world
embraced and made of. From whom sprung Herraldes, the erectours and publishers
of Gentlemen, and all true fame and honor did rise: as for example, a Knight
made in the field, especially for service sake, has much more to rejoice of,
then he that at home is called to worship, except in causes of government and
honorable offices, which are to be preferred before all other dignities and
calling. Chiefly for that our whole public state and princely order, depends
on their wisdoms without the which order, and Majesty of rule, the civil
would become savage, and the world wax wild: so that the beasts in the field,
and the people in the Town, should soon for naughty manners be alike in
condition.

Now here is to be noted, that Soldiers in old time of ten years
continuance, being forty years of age, was suffered to live quiet, and bore
the title of honor. Then reason will grant, that who has served thirty
years, without reproach or shame (and in a dangerous world and mischief) may
claim by right a pention of the Prince, and stipend of the common Treasure.
But what and if some of good birth and hauiour, have been much more then
thirty years a follower of the wars, and never out of warlike exercises, all
this long season. And yet are as new to begin the world again, as they were
the first day they came from their Craddle. For any preferment, favor of the
Prince, or countenance and commodity of their country. Such Soldiers may
say, they were borne in an unhappy season, or found but could friends in time
of regard, and trial of good Fortune.

The affection of this world is led with such liking, (and the cunning of the
wily can so finely curry favor) that he that never came near the danger of
the Cannon, with looking big, and turning up his mouchachose, makes men
believe he is a devil, who fearing the monster will do some mischief. And
carried away by affection (for the goodly show this kill Cow has made) speak
for him where goodness is to be gotten, and so a swad or a swirnpipe is called
a good Soldier, (and goes away with credit and living) when he that wants
this cunning, and yet lackes no courage nor vallue lives unrewarded, and
consumes his days in sorrow.

Yet some holds opinion, it is but hap that helps, and neither cunning nor
deserts that compasses good liuinges, and attaines unto benefit. Full bare
and poor is that argument and reason, and men of such opinions, are as blind
as a beetell: to believe he is happy that has no worthiness in him, and he
unfortunate that lacks no virtues. But the world is most ignorant and much
to be blamed, that helps a shadow to great substance, and lets the worthy
shift for their living that deserves reward. and they are not to be excused,
that by a color of hap, aduaunceth the vicious person, and favors not the
foreward Soldier, and men of virtuous disposition. For gold and silver are
known by their weight and goodness: The flower by the smell: The horse by his
pace, and every other thing is tried and made of for his value. And must the
merits of men be subject to hap, where men do help men, and are the iudgers
of man's doings: that case is too cruel, and that hap is accursed gotten by such
blindness, and purchased by such parciality.

In Rome where noble minds were maruailously extolled, yet when diverse men
came to be preferred: every Senator a part had (...) many followers, that one
would hinder another: and look who the best people favored, the worst sort
would hate. And look who followed Pompey was misliked of Julius Caesar, and so
by this factious dealing many great Soldiers, eloquent Orators, and noble
members of the Common wealth, were put off from post to pillar. And few that
were worthy of cherishing, found good chance, or possessed any part of the
hap, that they justly might claim, by which frowardnes and misery of the time,
is plainly to be proved, that there is no hap certain. For man him self is
the maker of hap, and the marrer thereof: even as his lust is to like, or his
heart is bent to loathe. For hap could do nothing at all among them, their
affections were so far a sunder, and they haled such several ways, that
their followers were left in the lash, or failed of their footing. Then speak
not of hap, for God and good men are the distributers of desired Fortune, and
the only causers of that which betideth, and must fall of necessity on some
men's shoulders, as in the Book of Boethius de consolatione, is manifestly to be
tried.

Now leave of hearing of hap, and note how nobly the Romans used their
Soldiers, namely those that at any time had succored a Citizen of Rome: and
taken him out of the hands of his ennemies. For such soldiers as had done that
service, was crowned with a garland or hat, made of the leaves of Trees, as I
find written in Pliny the xvi. Book the fourth Chapter, the chiefest whereof
that serves for my purpose, I have translated out of French. Pliny bringing
many great authors to affirm his saying, the matter follows.

The greatest honor that could be done to a Soldier, was to Cro^ne him with
a Crown called Ciuiques, and likewise of long time this Crown Ciuiques was
due unto Emperors, in sign of clemency. For since the civil wars had harmed
the Romans, it was thought a singular good deed, to let a Citizen live in
rest and peace. Likewise there was no Crown compared to that Crown: For those
that were given to that Soldier, that was first at the breach, or first on the
walls, or rampars of the ennemies, was not so honorable, no, although they
were of gold, and thereby were more rich. We have seen says Pliny in our
time, two great triumphs for the Sea service, the one was of Marcus Varro (the
which Pompey did Crown, for having defeated the Pirates, and making the Sea
clear of Thieves) the second was of Marcus Agrippa, which Caesar did likewise
Crown, for having defeated the Cicilians, and purged the sea in like sort of
Brigandes and Robbers.

At the first foundation of Rome, Romulus did Crown Hostus Hostilius with a
garlande of leaves: because he was the first on the Walls, at the taking of
Fidena. Now before a Burgoies should at any time enjoy this Crown Ciuique, he
must rescue a Roman Citizen, and kill the Ennemie that led the Citizen away
Prisoner. It must be likewise that the Enemy did hold and possess the
place, that same day that the Roman Citizen was rescued in. It is necessary
that the man which has been succored, should confess the same before the
people: For a Soldiers own witness in that behalf, serves to no purpose. And
furthermore it is required, that he that was rescued, be known to be a Burgois
of Rome. For if one do rescue a King, that comes to serve the Romans, he
does not merit for the same the Crown Ciuique. In like sort, if one do rescue
a general of an Army, he gets no more honor therefore, then though he had
rescued a simple Citizen. For they which established this ordinance had no
regard, but to the conservation of the Citizens of Rome, whosoever they were.
The Privilege of this Crown shall be to give power, to wear a Hatte of broad
leaves, as often as he pleased that had been once Crowned for his well doing.
Further all the Senate had a custom, to rise out of their places, and to do
honor to them that have had this Crown, when they go to see the common plays
and pastimes. And it is sufferable and permitted, that they shall sit in a
seat near the Senators. And they shall be exempt from all civil charges,
not only themselves, but their natural Fathers and Graundfathers: And now
behold touching their Privileges, there was one Cicinius Dentatus, according
as we have said, Crowned fourteen times. And one Capitolinus had six times
been Crowned, for he rescued Seruilius, then General of the Army:
notwithstanding Scipio Affrican would not suffer them to give him the Crown
Ciuique, succouring his Father in the journey of Trebia. O ordinance worthy
of immortality (says Pliny) that assigns no other praise for such great
works, then this great honor, which surpasses all other warlike Crowns.

Thus far goes the very words of Pliny, and many (other ancient Aucthors
that I could rehearse) in the commendation of men of War, which neither in
Tholomeus time: Artaxerses days: nor any of the mighty Monarkes long reigning
before, could be forgotten, but were so honored, that laws ^ orders was
only devised for the enlarging of their Land, and stirring up their noble
minds.

Yea, Soldiers and Herraldes had power to denounce wars, insomuch as the
ancient Romans: who were the Fathers of all Marshiall affairs, and
conquerours of the world, held this for a most certain rule.

Nullum bellum iustum esse nisi pro rebus unjust ablatis and quod fecialis
Romani antea denunciabant. Which rule and order of the Romans, for the power
and honor of soldiers and Herauldes: declares they are of great dignity and
calling, and may compare by this there authority, to be no whit inferior to
the best sort of Gentlemen.

You may read in like manner, that there was a man among the Romans, that
merely, or peradventure in contempt, put a crown Ciuique upon his own head:
and looking out at a great window into the street, was espied. And thereuppon
apprehended, and brought before the Senate: where he was judged presently to
be put to death, for touching and abusing that crown Ciuique, which was
ordained for the wearing only of an honorable Soldier, and for such a one
as had been by desarte crowned with Triumph and Solempnitie in open audience.
So this foolish man (albeit he might mean but little harm) was had to the
place of execution, and there lost his life, to the great terror of those that
rashly meddle with things that become them not, and to the great honor of
those that are advanced by virtue, and wins with courage the wearing of
this Crown called the crown Ciuique.

Now coming down to this present age in the time of our peace, where
Soldiers have nothing to do, there is enough spoken (and peradventure too
much) for the Soldiers commendation, yet let me lead you a little further
in that case, For now is to be proved what degrees of Soldiers (having
served long, or borne any office of credit) are gentlemen, and may unrebukable
be bold to take that name and title upon them. First you have heard, that
serving ten years honestly and truly, he is not only past his prentiship, but
also above a journey man, and ought from all ioyrneis to be spared. As a man
might say, (though improperly compared) a good free horse after his long
labor, and many great iourneis is to be ridden but seldom, and kept in the
stable till extreme necessity requires: and then is to be used gentelie,
least his stiff limbs and old body deceaues the Riders expectation. So a
Soldier coming to this age and perfection, or being past the iollitie of
youth and youthful actions: ought to be provided for, and may without
presumption plead for arms, albeit he never gave any before, and can bring
no great proof of his house, gentry, or dissent, and though he be the first
of that house, stock, and name that gave arms: his beginning is allowed of al
our ancient writers and Princes, and shall put his adversaries to silence, when
in that point they seek to deface him.

I remember once I saw and heard an Italian (being in the E^perour Charles the
fifth his Camp) so stand on his reputa^ion, that when a mean Gentleman
quarrelled with him, and desired the Combat, he answered he had been (
Soldado Vetche) an old Soldier, and had borne office, and passed through
sundry Offices by order: and that the Gentleman was but a young man, and but
of two years experience in War, and far unmeet to make challenge with
him, that had passed so many steps of honor, and places of credit. But said
the Italian to his adversary, go and do that I have done, or pass through
the like, and when thou have mounted up, and trodden on every step that I
have passed: come to me and I will fight with thee the Combat. But to say I
will stoop so low and abase my self (as a Lord may in fighting with a
Ruffian) beyond the compass of my calling, I will not, nor no Law of Arms
can command me. The matter came in question before the Prince of Orrange
that now is dead, and the Duke of Sauoy yet living, and the challenger had a
foul disgrace in the audience of a multitude: and the defendaunt had a reward
of five hundredth Crowns allowed him by the Emperor, for preserving his honor
and estimation so much. This was done and openly seen, a little before the
siege of Renttie, and stands for a good record. Then an old soldier is a
Gentleman, both worthy to give arms and colors, and meet to be borne withal
in causes of quarrel.

An other proof for the maintenance of my matter, I saw at the siege of
Leeth, a Gentleman of great courage and birth (called Master Ihon Soutch)
quarrel with Captain Randall, then Mayor of the field. And Master Soutch
did urge through ill words and stout language, Captain Randall very far:
which might have moved any manne living. But Captain Randall in a manner used
those words that the Italian had done, before expressed: and going further on
in communication, commanded the Soldiers to lay hands on Master Soutch,
and swore he would execute him, and learn all other by his boldness, to
know their duties. And when Master Soutch was stayed, well qouth Captain
Randall since thou have challenged me, I will not use my power and authority
over thee: But by the faith of a soldier, when I am out of the Sergeaunt
Majors room I will meet thee, and make thy heart ache for those words thou
haste given: except thou repent before of thy lewd demeanor. Master Soutch
having disgested, and wisely waighed this matter: being talked withal of the
Captains in the camp, came like a Gentleman on himself, and acknowledged his
fault most dutifully, and with great repentance: for which submission of his,
he was the better thought on after.

This shows and declares, that an ancient soldier and Officer has a great
Privilege, and not be compared with, nor offered any injury: because he
carries the admiration of the people, and the honor of the field.

Ye shall find written in the Spanish, and the Language of the Portugal
(which Portugalles found out the East Indians) that there was a mighty King
of Calicute, and many other Kings in the Indians, whose Soldiers were all
Gentlemen, and did live ever on the s^ipend that the King allowed them. And
those Soldiers had many Privileges and titles of honor, and stood so much on
their reputation: that they would not touch a Husband man's hands, nor suffer a
Rusticall fellow to come into their houses. And the Husband men were bound
when the Soldiers go in the streets, to cry with a loud voice, to make
place for the Soldiers. For if those Gentlemen did come, and bid the Common
people go out of the way, and they do not obey their commandment therein:
It was sufferable for the Gentlemen Soldiers, to kill those obstinate and
proud people. And furthermore the King could not make Gentlemen: i^ they were
not borne of some Noble stock, of the race of Soldiers. They could not take
their weapons, nor enter into Combat, before they were armed Knights. They
must at the age of seven years be put to learn to play with all Weapons,
and to the end they should be perfect, their Masters do hale their arms
very far out (thereby to stretch their limbs) and afterward they teach
them such Fence, as is apt for that purpose. They did by an ordinance and
custom of theirs, honor and salute their Masters that had taught them at
the Weapons, (which were Graduates and cunninge men) wheresoever they met
them in the street. They were bound two Months in the year to plie their
school, and take a Lesson at their Masters hands. By which reason they were
very skillful of their Weapons, and for that cause they greatly esteemed
themselves. They could not be knighted, but by the Kings own hands, who
asked them before he laid his hand on their heads: if they could observe and
keep the custom and ordinance of gentlemenne Soldiers, and they said and
answered the king. They minded to take that profession of Arms upon them:
and so the king caused a Sword to be girded about them, and after embraces
those Gentlemen so knighted, then they did swear to live and die with him, and
for him, which oath they would keep and observe. For if their Lord were slain
in the War: they would fight to their last breath, and kill him that had
slain their King. Or if at that instaunt they could not bring their purpose to
effect, they would watch and spy out a convenient season, for the
perfourmaunce of their promise and oath. And undoubtedly some of them would
revenge their Masters death. They had a great regard to their duty and
endeavor. They thought nothing so precious as fidelity, and their Princes
favor. They cared not for life: so glory might be gotten by their death.
They served most faythfullye under them, that gave them intertaynemente. They
spared nothing, but spent liberally. They applied their only studies for the
mainteinaunce of their king and Country. They would not suffer any dishonor,
nor offer any injury. They thought it a double death to loose their good
name. They made no account of their meat, money, sleep, or ease and little
esteemed their own lives or persons when they should make proof and show of
their manhood. Their wages and stipende was so much and so well paid, that
every one of them might live gallantlye: and the meanest might keep to wait
on him a man or a boy. The Law was that they might not marry, and yet had
Lemmans and Women appointed by order, which they kept and used well, and all
quarrels was avoided by that means. For they might not company with their
women, but at certain seasons appointed. Thus they past over their life time,
without the care and trouble of Wife and Children. They might forsake upon a
good cause any of their Lemmans. And their Women might at their own wills
forsake the men. All those that accompanied these Soldiers were
Gentlewoman, and of good birth, but might not be married to any person after
she had been at the Soldiers commandment. And because many men by their
often changing, happen to have the company of one Woman, they fathered not
any Child, though it were never so much like them: and therefore their Brothers
children did always inherit their Lands and goods. And this Law that those
Gentlemen Soldiers should not marry, was made by a King, that would not
have a man of War to fix his love on a wife and children, nor thereby to
wax feeble spirited and effeminate. But the king ordained, because these
Gentlemen should have no womannish manners nor minds: that they should have all
things at their wills, and live in such liberty, as no one thing might draw
them from noble service, nor command them to servile drudgerie. And because
they should be the more animated to live in noble order, and encouraged to
serve well: they were priuileged, that no man might imprison them for any
cause, nor they might not be put to death by any mean of ordinary justice.
Howbeit when one killed another, or did sleep with a Country Woman, or did
speak evil of the king then reigning. Then would the king having just and
true information of the matter, make a Writing and send the same to a head
Officer, commanding him to cut in pieces the offendour, wheresoever he was
found. And after he was dead, there should be hanged about him the kings
Writing, to show the people wherefore he suffered: but no Law nor Justice
could touch him, before the king had iustlye condemned him.

So by this Liberty and honor that Soldiers had, is well to be seen, that
none by: Caesar might meddle with men of War. And it seems this liberty
was fetched from Alexanders days, who called his old soldiers Noble men,
and gave them noble privileges and rewards: to cause the World that did
follow, to augmente their renown, and spread their fame to the highest
Heavens, that have been valliant on earth and Noble of mind. Which great
foresight of Alexander and other great Princes to advance Soldiers: has
made men more like Gods, than earthly creatures, and done such good to the
World thereby, that there is no World, but will make of men of War, and
give place to the goodness of those, that strive by stoutnesse of heart, and
labor of body to enlarge the limmets and bounds of his Country.

The effect of this above expressed, was drawn out of Spanish, and remains
among Christians, as a matter worthy noting, though Infidells did observe them.

Now though a man have had charge, and borne a number of Offices: yet the name
of an old soldiour beautifies his title. But yet perticularly I will go
through the offices, as breefly as I may, and therein show who may justly be
called Gentlemen among them. A Collonell, a Captain, and Ensign bearer. A
Lieutenaunt, a Corporal, a Sergeant of the band, and old soldier though he
never bare any office, are all gentlemen, granting and allowing that none of
the officers were made for affection at home. But had their beginning by
service in the Feelde, and a^e known of good courage and conduct, and well
experimented in Marsh^all affairs. The rest of other officers, that have noble
roumes and places in the Camp, needs no setting out: for all men know such
officers as are chosen, (and made by the most noble in any government) are not
to be treated off, for that every soldier gives them due honor and place.

You may not look for at my hands, the original and discourse of all
gentlemen, albeit I go as far as I dare in that behalf. For I love not to
meddle with thankelesse labor, and would be loathe to roue beyond my reach and
knowledge: in a matter that my betters, as yet have not dealt withal. For a
doubtful attempt, brings a dangerous construction. And with drawing a strong
Bow, a weak arm waxes weary. Wherefore I go no further in this matter,
des^ring the Reader to bear with my boldness herein, and regard soldiers as
they deserve.

FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir John Savage Knight, one of the Lieutenants of
Cheshire.
MY good and affectionate Worshipful friend for many courtesies I promised to
dedicat some verses unto you, and finding no subject better to write upon then
the maintenance of Hospitality, I thought a little to touch the loss of
time, and charges that a number of Gentlemen spends at London, not any whit
thereby blemishing the good brute of that honorable City (so I pray you
understand me) but showing the inconvenience that comes by over great charges
bestowed and spent where nothing is gathered again, nor reaped at the last but
repentance, or such cold acquaintance, as when money is gone will scarce know
a man in time of necessity, this being spoken generally of all the places and
Cities in the world, where men shall find but strangenes, when their own
wealth and estate begins to decline.

A Discourse of Gentlemen lying in London, that were better keep house at home
in their Country.
I Muse why youth, or age of gentle blood,
Borne unto wealth, and worldly worship here:
In London long, consumes both land and good,
That better were, at home to make good cheer.
In London still, they find all vittells dear,
Hoist up a height, to bring our purses low,
And send men home with empty bags ye know.
The streets with fields, may never matched be,
For all sweet air, at will abroad we find:
What is it then, in London that they see.
But Country yeeldes, and better glads the mind.
Perhaps some say, the people are so kind:
And courteous to, in stately civil Town.
As men thereby, wins credit and renown.
First for they seem, in City fresh and fine,
Most gay to eye, and gallant as a rose:
But shall a man, for pleasure of his eien.
And pomp or pride, of painted goodly cloes,
He sees abroad, at home his credit lose.
Our Elders did, not so delight in trashe,
And tempting toys, that brings a man in lash.
For when they came, to London there to stay,
They sent fat beenes, before them for their store:
And went sometimes, a shooting all the way.
With all their train, and household that is more:
Yet were they not, at no less charge therefore:
Kept house in Ins, and fed the poor thereby.
That in hard world, may now for hunger die.
They tarried not, in Town to card and dice,
Nor follow long, lewd lusts that loathsome are:
Which breeds rebuke, and fosters secret vice.
And makes tame birds, to fall in Satan's snare,
They loud plain robes, but hated purses bare,
Made much of men, gave neighbors beef and bred,
Yet left their aires, great wealth now they are dead.
Their care was still, to keep good house and name,
Spend they might spare, yet spare where cause they found,
And librall be, when bounty purchased fame.
And let flood run, where water did abound.
Ruled all with wit, and wary Judgment sound,
Not bent in braues, great havoc for to make.
But drawn and mo^de, to spend for virtues sake.
Gave much to poor, that craude an alms at gate,
Kept buttry door, for strangers open still:
Made neighbors eat, that early came or late.
By which they won, the Countries great good will,
Could serve the Prince, with coundit men and skill:
With their own charge, and pors a rare thing now,
That seelde is seen, with love and power throw.
They raisd no rents, to make the tenant whine,
Nor clapped no yoke, on friendly neighbors neck:
Nor made poor folk, find fault with cu^^hroat fine.
But had the hearts, of people at a beck,
As we have now, our servants under check.
O how plain men, would follow Landlord than.
Like swarms of Bees, when any wars began.
Yea glad was he, that might with master go,
Though charge and wife, be lest at home behind,
In this fine world, the manner is not so.
Hard handling makes, men show another mind,
Then loyal love, made men's affection blind.
Now can they see, and will do what they list.
Cast of like Hawks, comes when they please to fist.
What change find you, young masters in these days,
What has drawn back, the forward minds of men:
What makes sometime, pr^st soldier run his ways.
What makes this world, much worse then world was then.
I dare not now, express the cause with pen.
But lay your hands, upon your breast and wink.
And you shall guess, what of these things I think.
Gay golden robes, and garments pownced out,
Silk laid on s^^ke, and stitched ore the same:
Great loss and play, and keeping revel route,
With grosser knackes, I list not now to name.
Has by abuse, brought world clean out of frame.
And made them rich, and proud, that borne were bare.
Yet lives by lust, and sale of paltry ware.
Our fathers wore, good frees to keep them warm,
And kendall green, in summer for a show:
Might better to, take trifles for a farm.
Then these that now, in silks and veluets go,
The former age, made tenants duty know:
To Landlords all, and so their cates they sold,
As much for love, as now they sell for gold.
Now is the case and custom altered clean,
The tenant he, in deed will part from naught:
For landlords weal, nor lose by him a bean,
Nor sell him thing, that is not dearly bought,
At tenants hand, what ever may be sought.
Bears double price, as though the farmer might,
Live on himself, and set his Landlord light.
This breeds contempt, in vassal past all cry,
And makes the Lord, rack up his rents a height:
And take great fines, you see wherefore and why.
And lode the backs of Farmers with great weight.
This makes wise men, use many a craft and slight.
To punish churles, and pinch them near the bone,
That does small good, yet all would have alone.
Why plead they want, where plenty is great store,
And God has blessed, the earth with fruit and grain:
They say because, they charged are so sore.
To pay such rent, and take such toil and pain.
Well well there does, a fault in both remain.
The one will not* let naught in market fall,
The other still, in London spends all.
Like one that flings, more water in the seas,
Or casts away, his gold where it is lost:
The Gentleman, is seldom well at ease.
Till that he ride, to London all in post.
And up and down, the dice and cards be lost.
When he a while, about the streets does rome,
He borrowes pence, at length to bring him home*
O says the boy, or girl that keeps the bar,
This man is free, and francke where ere he goes,
And spends as much, as does a man of war,
That comes from spoil, and conquest of his foes,
Cries fill the pot, the ebbing water flows.
The chencks are here, we have enough to spend,
Set all agog, until bad world amend.
O Lord how soon, a man is ore his shoes,
That wades and steps, in stream or water deep:
How soon from town, in country we have news,
That some spends all, for they can nothing keep,
If such lads were, at home in bed a sleep.
Twere better sure, then lie in London thus,
Upon the score, or like banckrouts iwus.
Fine shops and sights, fine dames and houses gay,
Fine wares fine words, fine sorts of meat is there,
Yea all is fine, and nothing gross they say.
Fine knaks costs much, costs spoils us every where
Spoil is a worm, that wealth away will wear,
A cancker crept, in Court for some men's cross,
That eats up lands, and breeds great lack and loss.
Expense and spoil, waits hard on braueries heels,
With daily debt, and danger of disgrace:
A crew of Dickas, as world went all on wheels,
With swashing Tom, and goodman Maple face,
In sundry cloakes, and thread bare liueries bace,
That never ware, ne badge, nor sign of thrift.
But certain signs and shows they live by shift.
And in the neck, of all this retchles band,
Comes thought and care, in sad and mourning weed,
And sore forethinkes, that he has sold his land.
Or laid to gage, good leases and old deeds.
No better fruit, we ce^pe of ill sown seeds,
But heavy sighs, or (...) thistels bare,
That does destroy, good ground where ere they are.
Spoil brings home plagues, to wife and children both,
When husband has, at play set up his rest:
Then wife and babes, at home a hungry goes,
(Thrice every week) where seld good meat is dressed.
With rusty broach, the household all are blessed.
For potched eggs, in good hour be it spoke:
Must for a shift, make kitchen chimney smoke.
A fine devise, to keep poor kaett in health,
A pretty toy, to mock an Ape withal:
No ma^tter much, though wife has little wealth.
She has for n^^de, a mess of cream at call,
A trim young boy, to toss and tirle the ball,
A (...), and pretty pus or catte.
And at a pinch, a great deal more then that,
Gay gowns and gear, God wot good store enough,
And fair milk maids, as dainty as a Do,
That fares as well, as ^ob that holds the plough,
Yea cheer in bowls, they have sometime ye know:
Sw^te whay and cruds, a bancket for a Croe,
Such rule she keeps, when husband is far of,
Whiles children weeps, that seeds on hard brown lofe.
Think you these things, nips not the pie crossed near,
And rubs the gaul, that never will be whole:
The master may, keep revel all the year,
And leave the wife, at home like silly soul
What recke of that, who lists may blow the cole,
Though some do starve, and pine away with want.
Young lusty lads, abroad lives all aflant.
Some come to Court, to break up house at home,
Such keeps a cloak, until a rainy day:
Some weaues their yarne, and cloth in other loeme.
At tabling house, where they may freely play:
Some walk to Paul's, where some maks many a fray
The greatest sum, are sworn to spend and spoil,
And royot run, at large in every soil.
Great cheer is turned, at home to empty dishe,
Great bounty looks, like bare foot beggars bag,
Great hardness brings, to board ne flesh nor fish,
Great have to give, comes limping lame and lag.
Great show men make, of house but that's a brag.
For if ten days, at home they keep great fare,
Three months abroad, for that they absent are.
England was called, a librall country rich,
That took great joy, in spending beef and bred:
In deed this day, the country spends mich,
But that expense, stands poor in little sted:
For they find naught, where hounds and hawks are fed,
But hard cold posts, to lean at in great lack:
Who wants both food, and clouts to cloth their back.
Alms deeds are dead, and conscience waxes cold,
World scrats and scrapes, pluckes flesh and fell from bone,
What cunning heads, and hands can catch in hold,
That covetous minds, does seek to weld alone,
The poor complaynes, and makes a grievous moan.
The rich hears all, and keeps all safe in fist,
As all were his, to spend it as he list.
Well spend on still, a reckning must be made,
When he does call, that sendes you all the store:
You will be taught, to use another trade,
Or in the end, full dearly pay therefore
I wish you well, you can desire no more.
Way all my words, as you have reason still,
I find no fault, but speaks this of good will.
And you dear friend, that in Rocksauage dwell,
For whom I have, these verses here set down:
To you no piece, of this Discourse I tell,
For you lie not, at charge so long in town,
As others do, that are of like renown.
Your house at home, you hold in better sort,
Then thousands do, the world does so report.
FINIS.
A Discourse of an old Soldier and a young.
To the right Worshipful Sir Henry Kneuet Knight, one of the Lieutenants of
Willshire.
THE world cannot wonder, nor the wise thereof think strange, that experience
commands me to keep friends, and my pen does what it may to purchase me
favor, for that is all the fruits of my studies. Which once taken from me I
have neither prop to uphold me, nor foundation to stand on: so fea^ing the
weakness of my feeble buildings that lies open to enuies blast) which soddenly
may be blown down, I seek many stays and crave many supportations for the
maintenance of my honest mind, and works framed for the world to behold. So
good sir Henry among the worthy company of my selected friends I honor you with
a small discourse of age and youth, where a little is spoken of the old
Soldier and the young, not in dispraise of any of them both, but in the
commendation of knowledge, courage, and conduct, under which three virtues
consists many noble actions, and so under your favorable sufferaunce I pass
to my purposed matter.

THere is a strife, a sweet dispute I troe,
Between two sorres, of men in these our days:
On which debate, does many reasons grow,
That soundes in deed, to each good Soldiers praise*
Whose fame my pen is ready for to raise.
But my intent is first with flat plain truth,
To treat a verse, or two of age and youth.
Age is the fire, and father of great things,
That has begot, both science, rule, and wit:
Brought great renown, and honor unto kings,
And for man's wealth, may well in council sit.
Youth is for field, and town a member fit,
To use the sword, in Countries cause and right,
In whose defense, youth has great force to fight.
Age may command, because it knows most,
And best can judge, of every thing it knows:
Has mighty mind, yet makes but little bost,
On whose advice, men may their lives repose,
The worth of youth, stands often in outward shows,
That fresh and gay, to world it seems still,
Like bladder fair, that is blown up with quill.
Age looks like tree, whose bark is rough without,
When winters waste has made green leaves to fall:
But when spring comes, that branch should bud and sprout,
With threefold fruit, the sprayes are loaded all.
Bare youth looks like, a picture on a wall,
That stands both mute, and dumme like shadow weak,
To seek for sense, whom age begins to ^peake.
The brute in world, is how old things decreace,
For that sweet sap, at length forsakes the tree:
Yet men will ask, old wits in wars or peace,
Of this or that, what the success shall be.
In outward shows, young judgments well can see,
When old men's sightes, that wisely looks within,
The end beholdes, as s^one as they begin.
A great old Oak, long time will akornes bear,
And small young graffes, are long in sprouting out:
Some say old wine, is liked every where,
And all men know, new ale is full of growt.
Old horse goes well, young titts are much to doubt,
But sure old gold, is more esteemed than new,
No hawk compares, with haggard in the mue.
Old men knows much, though young men calls them fools,
Old books are best, for there great learning is:
Old authors too, are daily read in schools,
New Sects are naught* old knowledge cannot miss*
Old guise was good, and nothing like to this.
Where fraud, and craft, and finesse all would have,
And plainest men, can neither powle nor shave.
Old Fathers builte, fair Colleges good store,
And gave great goods, and lands to bring up youth:
Young men loves not, to make of little more,
But spendes away, their thrift to tell the truth.
Old men were full, of mercy, grace, and rueth,
And pity took, on those that seemde to lack,
Young gallants gay, from poor do turn their back.
Old beaten ways, are ready still to hit,
These new be-pathes, leads men on many styles:
An old prouerbye, has no more wor^es than wit,
New fangled heads, at each old order smiles.
Old wisdom far, surmountes young fondlings wills.
Experience is, the Doctor every day,
That carries close, all knowledge clean away.
Young hounds are fleet, the old huntes sloe and true,
Old dogs bite sore, if all their teeth be sound:
Old ancient freindes, are better than the new,
In younglings love, there is small surety found,
For like a top, light fancy turns round.
Old clothe or silk, made in our elders days,
Wears long and firm, when new things soon decays,
Old soldiers are, the beauty of a state,
Young branches bear, but blossoms many a day.
Old Doctors can, deep matters well debate:
Young punies knows, not what old doctors say,
King Harries crew, brought conquest home away.
From Flowdayne field, from France and many a soil,
And put the proud, by strength and force to foil:
Old soldiers were, great Allexanders aid,
And chiefest joy, in all the wars he had
The white gray head, made beardlesse boys affraide,
Where grave men ruld, the country all was glad:
And where they lackt, the fortune was but bad.
As all things does, to skill and knowledge yield,
So old men bear, the honor of the field:
What needs more proof, of ancient soldiers now,
Both old and young, are needful members here.
I want both time, and power to praise them throw,
For service great, in countries quarrel dear:
When cause requires, ye know the case is clear,
These champions must, in field and open plain*
With shining sword, the right of kings maintain.
FINIS.
A DISCOVRSE OF CALAMITY.
To the right Worshipful my singular good friend Sir William Hatton knight.
IN the remembrance of a sorrowful loss I had by the death of the last Lord
Chancellor, (good Sir William Hatton) and considering your great countenance
partly declined by that soddaine accident, besides the great soms of money you
were left to pay. For the parting from such an honorable friend, I thought
(every piece of cause well waied) you know as well what calamity is as a
meaner man, and feeling the smart and weight of that burden, before you were
ready to support it, your care and calamity could not be little. First for the
loss of so great a comfort, and next for the sorrow and trobles that belongs
to such a loss, though lands or livings helps to bear of a piece of the
vexasion of mind, yet the body shall always bear to the death a sorrowful
imagination of that hasty mishap, the impression thereof shall never go out of
your memory, so long as life lasts. So good sir, in sign of some
consolation, I present you a discourse of Calamity, the right path to come to
quietness, and the very hie way that leads a good mind to think of the
immortality of the soul, thus presuming your favorable acception of the same,
I pass to the discourse of Calamity, wishing you much worship, hearts ease and
health.

T. Churchyard.

A Description or Discourse, that declares how that by tasting of miseries,
men are become happy: written for that soldiers always bears the burden of
sorrow and suffers more calamity then any other people.
RIght worshipful, for that calamity and combersome chances, do seem
intolerable too bear (and for our first fathers offense, they are the
burdens of life, and companions of man till the hour of his death) I being
often charged with the heavy fa^dle of misfortunes: have taken in hand to
treat of a troubled mind, and show what blessedness and benefit to the body
and soul this worldly in felicity brings.

As the common afflictions of mankind are many in number, and seem at the
first feeling so irksome and weighty, that few can suffer them, or support
them. So a multitude of miseries accustometh the mind so long, in the
sharpness of sorrows, that a sound judgment is made the more able thereby, to
abide the brunte of troubles: and attend for a short season a remedy of
misch^e^e^, by proof ^he troth of this is tried. For let the laboryng man, or
ordinary porter (that daily carries great burdens) be often used to lift up
packes: he shall better bear a great burden, then an other that is fine
fingered, shall b^e able to heave a small piece of Timber. And there is none
that labors so sore, but is sure at one time or other, to attain to rest
and commodity. So that all sorrows are to be compted, but a sharp sause to
season the appetite, and bring the sweet and delicate dishes into such order,
that it glut not the stomach.

And now to consider how all pleasures are possessed, and pro^ittes take their
begininges. The very issue and original of those yearthly commodities,
springes only from continual care and pain: and labourious vexation of body
and mind. The greatest glories, and chiefest seats of honor any where, are
gotten and compassed by this kind of calamity, and the least or most sparks
of man's delight is maintained (and at the length enjoyed) by the mean of
studious labor, and painful exersices.

But herein to be brief, pain and labor is the portion appointed for man in
his pilgrimage, and they that are most persecuted (so they be not tempted above
their strength) are most to be thought in favor with God, and happiest among
men: if heavenly graces and correction, be measured by the yearthly vessels
of vanity, that we carry about, which without correction and refourming, would
grow so full of filthe and corrupt manners, that they neither could hold good
liquor, nor serve to any good purpose.

Do you not behold that the purest metal, with ill looking unto, becomes
full of cankers and rust: if it be not scoured, rubbed and roughly handled, his
beauty decays, and the worth and vallue of it is little, because it has
lost his virtue and estimation. So man's corrupt Nature, were it not serched
with sundry instruments (that takes away the dead flesh, and toutcheth the
quick) would putrify, and wax loathsome to the whole world and to the
creature himself, that bears it in his bowels. And for the avoiding of such
an inconvenience, calamity must be tasted, and troubles are necessary,, for
the keeping clean of a spotted conscience, and frail body puffed up with
Pride, and vanity of curious conceits.

And so I prove adversity, is the bringer home of good spirits, and gentill
wits, that wanders after worldly follies, and runs a gadding beyond the
bounds of measure, to the utter confines of danger and destruction. Yea, a
little trouble and torment* produces great goodness, and brings soorth
noble books, and goodly works, which the liberty of life, and wantonness of
pleasure, denies and hinders. As a thing that draws man from the coveting of
Fame, and true searching of immortality.

Man's prosperous estate breeds but idleness, nourishes vice, contemnes
virtue, and banisheth good studies and learning: albeit some one among the
richest, at one season or other, may look on a book, favor writers and give
good speeches of well dooyng. Yet seldom comes any great work from their
hands that are in prosperity. And none in a manner but the afflicted, did at
any time hitherto, yield benefit to their country: and knowledge to the
universal world. Let Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Cleantes, and a number of
poor Philosophers (yea princes of education) be witness of that I speak,
from which Philosophers, the fountain of noble Arts and Sciences did spring,
and abundantly flow.

The body pampered, bedecked with beauty, full of ornaments, and set out to
sale like flesh in the Shambelles: Either would be bought quickly, or will be
tainted in hanging too long in the wind. So that as horses do wax reistie,
for want of good usage: and cleanest things takes corruption, by lack of
looking unto (in season). Pleasure and liberty in process of time, makes a man
wild, if callamitie tame not the body, and bring the mind in willing
subjection.

Sorrow, sadness, and other passions of this world, that comes by common
causes, puttes the wits and judgment to such a plonge, (secret shifte and
policy) that all the senses openly makes a muster, to defend the estimation,
and upright body from falling, to which assembly comes Patience, Reverence and
Modesty, that the matter is so well taken, injuries are put up, and wrongs
that have been offered, works in a wise head, a world of devises, wherein
virtue gettes victory.

To bear the comfortable cross of persecution, is the true badge of
blessedness, whereby the servant is seen to follow his master, and all the
vices of man he maistered, or reformed by the crossyng chances of this world,
and virtuous operation of calamity, which miraculously works the distempered
mind as the hot Furnace tries out the Gold, and the warm fire bringes in
temper, and makes soft the hard and coldest Wax. A divine secret to them that
are chosen, and familiar example to those, that glories in wordly felicity who
knows the natural causes of earthly things.

If a man might ask wherefore was man made, sent from the highest dignity of
pleasures, to this low dongion of sorrows, and base soil of servitude. It
may be answered: Adam was thrust out of Paradise, for offense he had
committed, and for that he was formed out of the earth, on the race of the
earth he should get his food and living, as a vessel ordained to bear all
manner of liquour, that is put into it: and as a Creature condemned to taste and
feel torments, sorrows, and troubles, wherein man sees Gods mercy, and his
own infirmities. And refusing to bear and suffer, what is laid upon him, he
seems to hold an other course then God has appointed, and so seeks that
he cannot attain. For since the earth was cursed, it never could bring forth
but cares, and grief of mind: The only fruit and painful portion, that was
from the beginning, prepared for all Adams children and posterity.

Now some will reply and say, that the rich and wealthy of the world, that
may wallow and tumble on their treasure: Have builded such bulwarks against
the assaults of fortune, that no troubles can touch them, nor make them yield
to the common calamity of our life, but who soever so thinks, is utterly
deceived. For riches is not gotten nor kept, but with much care and labor,
and where it is possessed, it brings danger, dread, disdain and a thousand
evils with it: Tempting man to riot, and lascivious living, and leads the
soul to perdition, by a number of infinite follies, except a special grace
do uphold it, it runs headlong into hell, and looks seldom unto heaven.
And commonly when men do grow rich, they surfeit so often with bankettes or
bibbing, that they are full of deseases, and so shortens their days.

Which liberty of life, and boldness in abuses (that springs on abundance,
the root of disorder) puffes them up in Pride, pampers them in pleasures, and
blinds so their judgments, that they neither can see who deceives them, nor
find out the right way of heavenly felicity. And yet the ^latterie of one,
and falsehood of an other about them, breeds such business, and raises such
storms (where quietness is looked for) that the rich man's house is never
without blonder, brabble, and braulinges. So that under the calmest shows and
ciuilest manners, lurketh terrible tempests, and fearful suspicions, which
in that kind is a domestical calamity, and misery incurable.

And so all the iollitie and pomp of the earth (enjoyed by enheritaunce, or
purchased by fortune) are accompanied with pain, enterlarded with dolloure,
and mixed with unquietness, and may be compared to a rotten painted wall,
that under fair colors, has many a foul fret, which deceives the eyes of
them that looks on it* or gives those a great overthrow that leans against
it. But this is no proof ye riches is cause of sorrow, but this rather shows
that sorrow care, and many misfortunes does follow riches, and poverty (so it
be not bare indigence) is void of hazard, free from fortunes mutability, and
coumpted most happy, in comparison of the goodness that belonged to a blessed
life.

God, in beholding the vices of many, and sees some bent to esteem villainy,
or offense: does cut of their days by soddaine mischances (or on a set
purpose, through the Divine power) because their evil shall not hurt the good.
And regarding the other sort that will, or may amend: leaves them to the touch
of their consciences, with good respite and leisure to repent, sending them
misery, trouble, and disquietnesse only as a restraint and bridle, to pluck
them from vices. And so calamity may be accounted a precious purgation: and
prosperity may be judged a Pestilent desease, which increased, or begun by
disordered life, is rather to be called a calamity, and sickness of the
soul, then a health of the mind, or good renown to the body.

Many great personages, being overcome with the casualties of this world, and
mutabilitie of fortune, have after their fall into persecution, taken all
things in good part, and made but small ado, nor account of their state when
adversity approached, and been often time as glad to use the liberty of
mind, in a serui^e sort, as they were well pleased, when their bodies took
most pleasure, and had the world at commandment. For of necessity storms
follow calmes: and callamitie either last or first, does visitte an earthly
vessel. For some come to Kingdoms from induraunce, and some fall to misery
from wealth and honor. Dyonisius was glad to keep a Schole, after he had lost
his Empire, and Andronico of Athens when his Country was subdued by the
Romans, was feign to serve sundry miserable Masters: and after led a Lion
about Rome, to the end of his days. But though I brought a Tyrante and and
Infidel, to show that calamity must be tasted: so could I rehearse many
Christen princes, that calamity has touched, and made them as happy by those
crosses they have borne, as some others are blessed that makes boast, that have
never suffered torment.

Calamity is like a supplyng salve that heals a sore Canher. A precious
preservative, to keep the head from surie of folly. A gentill medicine to
reform an infected conscience. A bitter draught of drink: that purges a
stout corrupt stomach: A sour sirope or sauce that seasoneth a lewd appetite.
And the sweet Salt of man's felicity, without the which no life can be well
seasoned.

Who feels himself afflicted, has cause to conceive he is not forgotten
(where favor is most to be desired) and be that is let alone, to follow his
own pleasure, walks as a caste-away, and has nothing to rejoice of. For his
bad spirit leads him to destruction, and his good Angel has forsaken his
company, which is a sign he is given over, to his naughty inclinations, and
is suffered to slide or fall down right, when the afflicted by a special
grace, is kept from stumblidg.

The horse that finds the Bridle cast in his neck, runne^ out of order about
the wild field: And such as loves lewd liberty, and will not be bri^e^ed,
good order runs from them, and foul reproach wa^es at their heels. And if
they chance to happen in any hazard, the sodainnesse of the mischief breaks
their heart, or the woundering of the world, makes the wicked a weary of his
life. But such as ^^lamitie by cust^me has reclaimed, takes adversity as a
qualifier of cursed conditions, and being content to kiss the Rod of
perturbation, are made children of promise, and inheritours of the land they
have long looked for.

So blessed be those babes then, who in the trouble of their souls possesses
quietness, and makes account of calamity, to be the perfect way and good mean
to felicity and good hap. The feeling of such a scourge and visitation, lately
sent me (who gatte great benefitte by his trouble) made me write this trifling
treatise of calamity.

FINIS.
A Commendation to them that can make gold, showing that many heretofore has
found out the Philosophers stone.
To the right Worshipful my vvorthie great friend, Sir John Russell knight,
one of the Lieuetenants of Worcester Shire.
I am bound in goodwil, detted in ordinary duty, and commanded for favor
received (good Sir John) to publish openly in some little pamphlet, the great
desire I have to be registered in your memory, so that I might merit by
desearts, the least part of your affectionate friendship, not common to all but
by a free election of mind offered to a few you think, worthy of it, in the
purchase of which good liking I would bestow a great portion of my studies,
accompting my self happy in dedicating a piece of my last labors to so
worthy a knight. The truth is (good sir) in the first prime and presumption of
the gift of pen, I followed the fortunate fauourets of this world, as well to
be favored at their hands as to be enriched by their happes, being learned
that wit by those that lackte no wealth in observing that custom, but the
higher those fauorets were mounted the lower they left me, when some of them
flue away I say not with my feathers, and sat on the top of their aduancements,
gazing on the baseness of my fortune, which strange accidente ministered by the
mutability of time, makes me choose faster friends, whose noble disposition,
breeds greater regard, whose constancies will longer continue, and whose
frendships bringes forth better fruit. So good sir John knowing your good
inclination toward the best sort of men, and faitfullnesse toward your
country and friends, I (being tied by good turns to remember you) have devised
a discourse I hope delightful for your reading, because in your sundry
trauells beyond the seas (besides your good exercises at home) you have heard
of many excellent men and arts of diverse natures and quality. The work I
present you is a commendation of them that can or has made gold, if any such
be or has bin, the art whereof I have not only commended, but in some part
touched, as far as my simple capacity can reach unto, touching and setting
down in verse, with comely terms some sufficient cause how by transmutation of
metals, many men have adventured the making of gold. Thus craving the worlds
goodwill and your favor for the setting forth this bold discourse, I pass to
the matter, and wish you much worship, wordly felicity, and heavenly
blessedness.

Thomas Churchyard.

A Commendation to them that can make gold, showing that many heretofore has
found out the Philosophers stone.
WHat words of worth, or ^^led phrase of men.
May serve my turn, to show rare gifts of grace
What percing speech, what tongue or flowing pen
Is fi^ to blase, the valor of this case,
My wits are weak, my sense and skill to base:
To talk or treat, on things of such great weight.
That seems so d^epe, and reaches such a height,
With Uirgills verse, and Homers haughty style,
In golden lines, should knowledge glory shine.
Would God one man, were borne in this our I Will:
Could catch from clouds, great arts and grace divine.
As he were taught, of all the mu^es nine,
To know the course of stars and stately skies:
And how deep seas, and floudes do fall and rise,
If mortal man, may rob the gods of skill.
And rule the son, the moon and planets all.
And easly climb, the heavens when he will:
Or make the spirits, below obey his call,
Or clap the earth, into a compass small.
Knowledge is he, nay rather better seed,
A sacred power, has knowledge in his head:
That from the Lord, of life and glory came,
No earthly gift, nor worldly wicked knacke.
For world is vain, most certain sure I am:
And all foul arts, makes worlolings live in lack,
The cleanest minds, are free from ruin and wrack.
For virtue reigns, and rules this wretched mould:
And draws from dross, huge heaps of massy gold,
They never thrive, that works with hagges of hell,
Bare lives they lewd, bare robes and weeds they wear*
They seldom want, that in joys doying well.
Great store of fruit, a happy tree does bear,
A blasted branch, but withers every where:
A virtuous man, whose heart to grace aspires,
Finds good success, of all his whole desires,
Great studies gains, great grace and wisdom too.
Great wisdom looks, into Gods sacred throne:
And few do know, what special grace can do,
Such secrets great, does rest in God alone.
And God gives man, the Philosophers stone,
Then who has that, has all that can be got:
And needs not care; for all the world a grote.
Some say that knows, how god is pleased best,
Good life helps much, to make men blessed here:
If that be true, God does bad life detest,
where are we then, where shall soul life appear.
Who has fair face, who shows a conscience clear:
Such as can purge, themselves with prayers still,
Gets greatest grace, and gains greatest skill.
Good arts are arms, to all our bodies throw,
By force to work, by strength to strike all parts:
To make stife stones, or steel to bend or bow,
As nothing could, escape the reach of arts.
Scholars in schools, and merchantes in their mar^^.
Can ply their thrift, so they that makes gold,
By gifts of grace, have cunning treble fold.
To catch the heat, of son or fire by light:
And melt and myxe, the metals as they are,
And put by art, compounds together straight.
As all should yield, to fine invention rare:
When science leaves, all hidden secrets bare,
No mastry then, to work on wax new wrought.
A picture plain, to answer workmans thought:
Most nearest God, the cleanest hearts do go.
They cast of flesh, and Angels nature take,
And than throw faith, they may move mountains so,
Gold by that means, a mortal man may make,
God does great things, for his great glories sake.
That world shall see, some vessels God has chose:
To whom he does his hidden gifts disclose,
vii. of Wisdom.
The wise king said, he saw how world was made:
How things began, and how they end again,
How fruits and flowers, do flourish and do fade.
How virtues rare, in herbs and roots remain:
How out of stones, comes dew like drops of rain,
And how dry dust, and earth that seems naught worth,
Hides gold in hord, yet brings great treasure forth:
He saw what grace, and knowledge could discern,
What wisdoms eyes, could see in darkest night.
What God himself, to his elect did learn,
What man might do, by Gods clear lamp of light,
What might be known, by simple sacred sight.
And what poor men, by plainness might attain:
And what fruit comes, by travel toil and pain,
To gather flowers, and weeds where ere they grow.
And take up fruit, from tops of trees that fall,
And mix these things, with floods that ebb and floe:
And at a beck, to change their natures all.
Is art at will, and knowledge we it call.
But to dig out, from dross the gold most fine.
Is secret skill, and special power divine:
To make fine glass, and give it form and shape,
Was sure an art, that few at first did know.
A painter made, quick birds to pick the grape:
That pensell had, most finely painted so,
In dome dead things, life has bin breathd you know.
Who reads shall see, great knowledge under son:
That was with men, by grace and virtue won,
Mercurius Tres migistus king of the Egiptianes.
A king there was, of y^er that Hermies hight,
Who first found out, the cause how gold was made.
Some at his torch, did there dime candells light:
That erst did walk, for want of Son in shade,
Since that in seas, full many wits did wade.
To sound and see, how far weak feet might go:
And some did find, the depth thereof I troe,
G^bar a king, likewise of great estate,
A volume large, of this great art did write.
Throw study long, Gebar such knowledge gat:
That in his books, great princes did delight,
Great things of him, great actors do resyte.
Greater then he, some say was never none,
For he did teach, how men should make the stone.
In a vision, much matter may you read,
Of this rich art, that thousands hold full dear:
Remundus too, that long liud here indeed,
Wrate sundry works, as well does yet appear.
Of stone for gold, and showed plain and clear,
A stone for health, Arnolde wrate of the same:
And many more, that were too long to name.
But Ryppley may, not escape my pen as yet,
Nor Nor^ons books, that are in written hand:
Two famous clerks, of ripe and ready wit.
Mere Englishmen, borne both with in this land,
In the records, of tower their works do stand:
Let this suffice, how ere the matter seemd,
Among the wise, this art was much esteemd.
Here follows the Tragedy of Shores Wife, much augmented with diverse new
aditions.
To the right honorable the Lady Mount Eagle and Compton, wife to the right
honorable the Lord of Buckhursts son and heir.
GOod madame for that the virtuous and good Lady Carry your sister,
honorably accepted a discourse of my penning, I believed your Ladyship would
not refuse the like offer, humbly presented and dutifully meant, I bethoght me
of a Tragedy that long lay printed and many speak well of, but some doubting
the shallowness of my head (or of mere malice disdaineth my doeings) denies
me the fathering of such a work, that has won so much credit, but as sure as
god lives, they that so defames me or does disable me in this cause, does me
such an open wrong as I would be glad to right with the best blood in my body,
so he be mine equal that moved such a quarrel, but mine old years does
utterly forbid me such a combat, and to contend with the malicious I think it
a madness, yet I protest before God and the world the penning of Shores wife
was mine, desiring in my heart that all the plagues in the world may possess
me, if any help me either with scrowle or council, to the publishing of the
inuencion of the same Shores wife; and to show that yet my spirits fail me not
in as great matters as that, I have augmented her Tragedy, I hope in as fine a
form as the first impression thereof, and has set forth some more Tragedies
and Tragical discourses, no whit inferior as I trust to my first work, and
good Madame because Rosimond is so excellently set forth (the actor whereof I
honor) I have somewhat beautified my Shores wife, not in any kind of
emulation, but to make the world know, my device in age is as ripe and reddie,
as my disposition and knowledge was in youth, so having chosen a noble
personage, to be a patrones to support poor Shores wifes Tragedy again, I
commend all the verses of her (old and new) to your good Ladyships judgment,
hoping you shall lose no honor ^n the supportation of the same, because the
true writer thereof with all humbleness of mind and service, presents the
Tragedy unto your honorable censure, wishing long life, and increase of
virtues fame, to make your Ladyships days happy.

T. Churchyard.

Here follows the Tragedy of Shores wife, much augmented with diverse new
aditions.
AMong the rest, by fortune overthrown,
I am not least, that most may wail her fate:
My fame and brute, abroad the world is blown,
Who can forget, a thing thus done so late?
My great mischance, my fall, and heavy state,
Is such a mark, whereat each tongue does shoot,
That my good name, is plucked up by the root.
This wandering world, bewitched me with wiles,
And won my wits, with wanton sugared joys:
In Fortunes freakes, who trusts her when she smiles,
Shall find her false, and full of fickle toys,
Her triumphs all, but fills our ears with noise,
Her flattering gifts, are pleasures mixed with pain,
Yea, and all her words, are thunders threatening rain.
The fond desire, that we in glory set,
Does thirle our hearts, to hope in slipper hap,
A blast of pomp, is all the fruit^ we get,
And under that, lies hid a sudden clap.
In feeking rest, unawares we fall in trap,
In groping flowers, with nettels stung we are,
In labring ^ong, we reap the crop of care.
Oh dark deceit, with painted face for sho,
Oh poysned bait, that makes us eager still,
Oh fained friend, deceiving people so,
Oh world, of thee, we cannot speak too ill:
Yet fools we are, that bend so to thy skill,
The plague and scourge, that thousands daily feel,
Should warn the wise, to shun thy whirling wheel.
But who can stop, the stream that runs full swift?
Or quench the fire, that crept is in the straw?
The thirsty drinks, there is no other shift,
Perforce is such, that need obayes no law.
Thus bound we are, in worldly yokes to draw,
And cannot stay, nor turn again in time,
Nor learn of those, that sought too high to clime.
My self for proof, lo here I now appear,
In woman's weed, with weeping watered eyes,
That bought her youth, and her delights full dear:
Whose lewd reproach, does sound unto the skies.
And bids my corse, out of the ground to rise,
As one that may no longer hide her face:
But needs must come and show her piteous case,
The sheet of shame, wherein I shrouded was,
Did move me often, to plain before this day,
And in mine ears, did ring the trompe of brass,
Which is defame, that does each thing bewray,,
Yea though full dead, and low in earth I lay,
I heard the voice, of me what people said,
But then to speak, alas I was affraide.
And now a time, for me I see preparde,
I hear the li^es, and falls of many wights:
My tale therefore, the better may be heard;
For at the torch, the little candle lights.
Where Pageants be, small things fill out the sights.
Wherefore give ear, good Churchyard do thy best,
My Tragedy, to place among the rest.
Because the truth, shall witness well with thee,
I will rehearse, in order as it fell,
My life, my death, my doleful destene,
My wealth, my woe, my doing every deal,
My bitter bliss, wherein I long did dwell:
A whole discourse, by me Shores wife by name,
Now shall thou hear, as thou had seen the same
Of noble blood, I cannot boast my birth,
For I was made, out of the meanest moulde,
Mine heritage, but seven foot of the earth,
Fortune ne gave, to me the gifts of gold,
But I could brag, of nature if I would:
Who filled my face, with favor fresh and fair,
Whose beauty shon, like Phoebus in the air.
" My beauty blasd, like torch or twinkling star,
" A lively lamp, that lends dark world some light,
" Fair Phoebus beams, scarce reaches half so far:
" As did the rays, of my rare beauty bright,
" As summers day, exceedes black winters night,
" So Shores wives face, made foul Browneta blush:
" As pearl staynes pitch, or gold surmounts a rush.
" The Damask rose, or Rosamond the fair,
" That Henry held, as dear as Jewels be,
" Who was kept close, in cage from open air:
" For beauties boast, could scarce compare with me,
" The kindly buds, and blosomes of brave tree,
" With white and red, had decked my cheeks so fine,
" There stood two balls, like drops of claret wine.
" The beaten snow, nor Lily in the field,
" No whiter sure, then naked neck and hand.
" My looks had force, to make a Lion yield,
" And at my form, in gase a world would stand,
" My body small, framd finely to be spand,
" As though dame kind, had sworn in solemn sort,
" To shroud herself, in my fair form and port.
" No part amiss, when nature took such care,
" To set me out, as naught should be awry,
" To fornish forth, (in due proportion rare)
" A piece of work, should please a princes eye,
" O would to God, that boast might prove a lie,
" For pride youth took, in beauties borrowde trash,
" Gave age a whippe, and left me in the lash.
My shape some said, was seemly to each sight,
My countenance, did show a sober grace,
Mine eyes in looks, were never proved light,
My tongue in words, was chaste in every case,
Mine ears were deaf, and would no lovers place,
Save that, alas, a Prince did blot my browe,
Lo, there the strong, did make the weak to bow.
The majesty, that kings to people bear,
The stately port, the awefull cheer they show,
Does make the mean, to shrink and couch for fear,
Like as the hounde, that does his master know:
What then? since I, was made unto the bow,
There is no cloak, can serve to ^ide my fault:
For I agreede, the fort he should assault.
The eagles force, subdues each bird that flies,
What metal may, resist the flaming fire?
Does not the Sun, dasill the cleerest eyes,
And melt the yse, and make the frost retire,
Who can withstand, a puissant kings desire?
The stiffest stones, are perced through with tools,
The wisest are, with Princes made but fools,
If kind had wrought my form, in common frames,
And set me forth, in colors black and brown.
Or beauty had, been parcht in Phoebus flames,
Or shamefast ways, had plucked my feathers down,
Then had I kept, my fame and good renown:
For natures gifts, were cause of all my grief,
A pleasant pray, entiseth many a thief.
Thus woe to thee, that wrought my peacocks pride,
By clothing me, with natures tapestry:
Woe worth the hew, wherein my face was did,
Which made me think, I pleased every eye,
Like as the stars, make men behold the sky.
So beauties show, does make the wise full fond,
And brings free hearts, full often in endless bond.
But clear from blame, my friends can not be found,
Before my time, my youth they did abuse,
In marriage yoke, a prentise was I bound,
When that mere love, I knew not how to use,
But well away, that cannot me excuse,
The harm is mine, though they deuisde my care,
And I must smart, and sit in slanderous snare.
Yet give me leave, to plead my cause at large,
If that the horse, do run beyond his race,
Or any thing, that keepers have in charge,
Do break their course, where rulers may take place:
Or meat be set, before the hungries face,
Who is in fault? the offender yea or no,
Or they that are, the cause of all this woe.
Note well what strife, this forced marriage makes,
What lothed lives, do come where love does lack,
What scratching bri^rs, do grow upon such brakes,
What commonweals, by it are brought to wrack,
What heavy load, is put on patients back,
What strange delights, this branch of vice does breed
And mark what grain, springs out of such a seed.
Compel the hawk, to sit that is vnmande,
Or make the hounde, vnraind to draw the dear,
Or bring the free, against his will in band,
Or move the sad, a pleasant tale to here,
Your time is lost, and you no whit the nere:
So love ne learnes, of force the knot to knit,
She serves but those, that feels sweet fancies fit.
The less defame, redounds to my dispraise,
I was must, by trains, and trapt by trust:
Though in (...) force, remained yeas and nayes,
Unto my friends, yet needs consent I must,
In every thing, yea law^ull or unjust.
They break the bows, and shake the tree by sleight,
And bend the wand, that might have grown full straight.
What help is this, the pale thus broken down,
The dear must needs, in danger run astray:
At me therefore, why should the world so frown,
My weakness made, my youth a Princes pray.
Though wisdom should, the course of nature stay,
Yet try my case, who list, and they shall prove,
The ripest wits, are soonest thralls to love.
What need I more, to clear my self so much,
A king me wan, and had me at his call,
His royal state, his princely grace was such,
The hope of will, that women seek for all,
The ease and wealth, the gifts which were not small,
Be^^eged me, so strongly round about,
My power was weak, I could not hold him out.
Duke Hanniball, in all his conquest great,
Or Caesar yet, whose triumphs did exceed,
Of all their spoils, which made them toil and sweat,
Were not so glad, to have so rich a meede,
As was this prince, when I to him agreede,
And yielded me, a prisner willingly,
As one that knew, no way away to fly.
The Nightingale, for all his merry voice,
Nor yet the Lark, that still delights to sing,
Did never make the hearers so rejoice,
As I with words have made this worthy King:
I never iarde, in tune was every string,
I tempred so, my tongue to please his ear,
That what I said, was current every where.
Sweet are the songs, that merry-night crow singes,
" For many parts, are in those charming notes,
" Sweet are the tunes, and Pipes that pleases kings,
" Sweet is the love wherein great Lordings dotes,
" But sweetst of all, is fancy where it flotes,
" For throw rough seas, it smoothly swimmes away,
" And in deep floods, where skulles of fish do play.
" And where love slides, it leaves no sign nor show,
" Where it has gone, the way so shuts again,
" It is a sport, to hear the fine night-crow,
" Chaunt in the queere upon a prick song plain:
" No music more may please a princes vain,
" Then descant strange, and voice of faurets brees^,
" In quiet bower, when birds be all at rest.
" No such consort, as plain two parts in one,
" Whose rare reports, does carry cunning clean,
" Where two long loves, and lives in joy alone.
" They sing at will, the treble or the mean,
" UUhere music wants, the mirth not worth a bean^,
" The king and I, agreed in such concord,
I ruld by love, though he did reign a Lord.
I joined my talk, my iestures and my grace,
In witty frames, that long might last and stand,
So that I brought, the King in such a case,
That to his death, I was his chiefest hand,
I gouernd him, that ruled all this land:
I bare the sword, though he did wear the Crown,
I struck the stroke, that threw the mighty down.
If justice said, that judgment was but death,
With my sweet words, I could the King persuade,
And make him pause, and take therein a breath,
Till I with suite, the fautors peace had made:
I knew what way to use him in his trade,
I had the art, to make the Lion meek,
There was no point, wherein I was to seek.
" I took delight, in doying each man good,
" Not scratting all, my self as all were mine,
" But looked whose life, in need and danger stood.
" And those I kept, from harm with cunning fine.
" On Princes train, I always cast mine ^ine,
" For lifting up, the servants of a King,
" I did throw court, my self in favor bring,
" I offered aid, before they sued to me,
" And promisd naught, but would perform it straight,
" I shaked down, sweet fruit from top of tree.
" Made aples fall, in laps of men by sleight.
" I did good turns, whiles that I was a height:
" For fear a flawe, of wind would make me reele,
" And blow me down, when Fortune turned her wheel.
" I filled no chests, with chynks to cherish age,
" But in the hearts, of people laid my gold,
" Sought love of Lord, of master and of page:
" And for no bribbe, I never favor sold.
" I had enough, I might do what I would,
" Save spend or give, or fling it on the ground,
" The more I gave, the more in purse I found.
If I did frown, who then durst look awry,
If I did smile, who would not laugh outright,
If I but spoke, who durst my words deny?
If I persude, who would forsake the flight?
I mean, my power, was known to every wight,
On such a height, good hap had built my bower,
As though my sweet, should nere have turned to sour.
My husband then, as one that knew his good,
Refusde to keep, a Princes Concubine,
For seeing the end, and mischief as it stood,
Against the king, did never much repine:
He saw the grape, whereof he drank the wine,
Though inward thought, his heart did still torment,
Yet outwardly, he seemde he was content.
To purchase praise, and win the peoples zeal,
Yea rather bent, of kind to do some good,
I ever did, uphold the common weal,
I had delight, to save the guiltles blood:
Each suitors cause, when that I understood,
I did prefer, as it had been mine own,
And help them up, that might have been orethrowns.
My power was pressed, to right the poor man's wrong,
My hands were free, to give where need required:
To watch for grace, I never thought it long,
To do men good, I need not be desired.
Nor yet with gifts, my heart was never hired.
But when the ball, was at my foot to guide,
I playde to those, that Fortune did abide.
My want was wealth, my woe was ease at will,
My robes were rich, and brauer then the sunn:
My Fortune then, was far above my skill,
My state was great, my glass did ever run.
My fatal throed, so happily was spunne,
That then I sat, in earthly pleasures clad,
And for the time, a Goddess place I had.
But I had not, so soon this life possessed,
But my good hap, began to slide aside:
And Fortune then, did me so sore molest,
That unto plaints, was turned all my pride.
It booted not, to row against the tide,
Mine oars were weak, my heart and strength did fail,
The wind was rough, I durst not bear a sail.
What steps of strife, belong to high estate,
The climing up, is doubtful to endure,
The seat it self, does purchase privy hate,
And honors fame, is fickle and unsure,
And all she brings, is flowers that be vnpure:
Which fall as fast, as they do sprout and spring,
And cannot last, they are so vain a thing.
We count no care, to catch that we do wish,
But what we win, is long to us unknown,
Till present pain be served in our dish,
We scarce perceive, whereon our grief has grown:
What grain proves well, that is so rashly sown:
If that a mean, did measure all our deeds,
In steed of corn, we should not gather weeds.
The settled mind, is free from Fortunes power,
They need not fear, who look not up aloft:
But they that clime, are careful every hour,
For when they fall; they light not very soft,
Examples has, the wisest warned often,
That where the trees, the smalest branches bear,
The storms do blow, and have most rigor there.
Where is it strong, but near the ground and root:
Where is it weak, but on the highest sprayes:
Where may a man, so surely set his foot,
But on those bows, that grows low always?
The little twigs, are but unsteadfast stays,
If they break not, they bend with every blast,
Who trusts to them, shall never stand full fast.
The wind is great, upon the highest hills,
The quiet life, is in the dale below:
Who treades on yse, shall slide against their wills,
They want no cares, that curious arts do know.
Who lives at ease, and can content him so,
Is perfect wise, and sets us all to school,
Who hates this lore, may well be calde a fool.
What greater grief, may come to any life,
Then after sweet, to taste the bitter sour,
Or after peace, to fall at war and strife,
Or after mirth, to have a cause to lowre:
Under such props, false fortune buildes her bower
On sudden change, her flittering frames be set,
Where is no way, for to escape the net.
The hasty smart, that Fortune sends in spite,
Is hard to brook, where gladness we embrace:
She threatens not, but suddenly does smite,
Where joy is mou^, there does she sorrow place.
But sure I think, this is too strange a case,
For us to feel, such grief amid our game,
And know not why, until we taste the same.
As erst I said, my bliss was turned to bale,
I had good cause, to weep and wring my hands,
And show sad cheer, with countenance full pale:
For I was brought, in sorrows woeful bands.
A pi^ry came, and set my ship on sands,
What should I hyde, and color care and noy?
King Edward did, in whom was all my joy,
And when the earth, received had his corse,
And that in tomb this worthy Prince was laid,
The world on me, began to show his force,
Of troubles then, my part I long assayde:
For they of whom, I never was affrayde,
Undid we most, and wrought me such dispite,
That they bereft, me of my pleasure quite.
" Brought bare and poor, and thrown in worlds disgrace,
" Holds down the head, that never casts up eye,
" Cast out of court, condemnd in every place,
" Condemnd perforce, at mercies foot must lie:
" Hope is but small, when we for mercy cry.
" The bird half dead, that hawk has fast in foot,
" Lay head on block, where is no other boot.
" The rolling stone, that tumbleth down the hill,
" Fynds none to stay, the fury of his fall,
" Once under foot, for ever daunted still:
" One cruel blow, strikes clean a way the ball.
" Left once in lack, feels always want of will,
" A conquered mind, must yield to every ill,
" A weak poor soul, that fortune does forsake,
" In hard extremes, from world her leave may take
" From those that fall, such as do rise and run,
" The sound with sick, do seldom long abide,
" Poor people pass (as shadows in the Sun).
" Like feeble fish, that needs must follow tide,
" Among the rich, a beggar soon is spied,
" When weak Shores wife, had lost her staff of stay:
" The halt and blind, went limping lame away,
" The poor is pincht, and pointed at in deed,
" As baited bull, were leading to a stake,
" Wealth finds great help, want gets no friend at need,
" A plaged wight, a booteles moan may make:
" A naked soul, in street for cold may quake.
" But cold or hot, when mischiefs comes a roe,
" As falls the lot, the back bears of the bloe.
" Prefarment past, the world will soon forget,
" The present time, is daily gazd upon,
" If merchant rich, from wealth do fall in debt:
" Small count is made, of his good fortune gone.
" We feed on flesh, and fling away the bone,
" Embrace the best, and set the worst aside,
" Because fair flowers, are made of in their pride.
" You yonglings now, that vain delights leads on.
" To sell chaste life, for lewd and light desires,
" Poor gain is got, when rich good name is gone,
" Foul blot and shame, lives under trim attires:
" World soon casts off, the hackney horse it hiers.
" And when bare nagge, is ridden out of breath,
" Tibbe is turned lose, to feed on barren heath.
" Of flowers a while, men do gay poses make.
" The sent once past, a due dry withered leaves,
" Love lasts not long, pricked up for pleasures sake:
" Straw little worth, when corn forsaks the sheaues,
" A painted post, the gazars eye deceiues,
" But when foul fauts, are found that bleard the sight.
" The account is gone, of girlls or gugawes light.
" Young pooppies play, small season lasts you see,
" Old appish sportes, are quickly out of grace,
" Fond wanton games, will soon forgotten be.
" As sour as crabbe, becomes the sweetest face,
" There needs no more, be spoken of this case,
" All earthly joys, by tract of time decays,
" Soon is the glase run out of our good days.
" My fall and fact, makes proof of that is spoke,
" Tells world to much, of shadows in the sun,
" Dust blown with wind, or simple proof of smoke,
" That flies from fire, and fast throw air does run:
" It ends with woe, that was with joy begun.
" It turns to tears, that first began with sport,
" At length long pain, finds pleasure was but short.
As long as life, remaind in Edwards breast,
Who was but I? who had such friends at call?
His body was, no sooner put in chest,
But well was he, that could procure my fall:
His brother was, mine enemy most of all,
Protector then, whose vice did still abound,
From ill to worse, till death did him confound.
He falsely fainde, that I of counsel was,
To poison him, which thing I never meant:
But he could set thereon a face of brass,
To bring to pass, his lewd and false intent,
To such mischief, this tyrants heart was bent,
To God, ne man, he never stood in awe,
For in his wrath, he made his will a law.
Lord Hastings blood for vengeance on him cries,
And many more, that were to long to name:
But most of all and in most woeful wise,
I had good cause, this wrtched man to blam^.
Before the world, I suffered open shame,
Where people were, as thick as is the sand,
I penance took, with taper in my hand.
Each eye did stare, and look me in the face,
As I past hy, the rumors on me ran,
But patience then, had lent me such a grace,
My quiet looks, were praisd of every man:
The shamefast blood, brought me such color than,
That thousands said, that saw my sober cheer,
It is great ruth, to see this woman here.
But what preuayld, the peoples pity there?
This raging wolf, would spare no guiltles blood.
Oh wicked womb, that such ill fruit did bear,
Oh cursed earth, that yields forth such mud:
The hell consume, all things that did thee good,
The heavens shut, their gates against thy spreete,
The world tread down, thy glory under feet.
I ask of God, a vengeance on thy bones,
Thy stinking corpse, corrupts the air I know:
Thy shameful death no earthly wight bemones:
For in the life, thy works were hated so,
That every man, did wis^ thy ouerthroe:
Wherefore I may, though parciall now I am,
Curse every cause, whereof thy body came.
Woe worth the man, that fathered such a child.
Woe worth the hour, wherein thou wast begat:
Woe worth the breasts, that have the world begylde,
To norish thee, that all the world did hate,
Woe worth the Gods, that gave thee such a fate,
To live so long, that death deserude so often,
Woe worth the chance, that set thee up aloft.
" Woe worth the day, the time the hour and all,
" When subjects clapped the crown on Richards head,
" Woe worth the Lords, that sat in sumptuous hall,
" To honor him, that Princes blood so shead:
" Would God he had bin, boyld in scalding lead.
" When he presumde, in brothers seat to sit,
" Whose wretched rage, ruld all with wicked wit.
Ye Princes all, and rulers euerechone,
In punishment, beware of hatreds ire.
Before ye scourge, take heed, look well thereon:
In wraths ill will, if malice kindle fire,
Your hearts will burn, in such a hot desire,
That in those flames, the smoke shall dim your sight,
Ye shall forget, to join your justice right.
You should not judge, till things be well descernd,
Your charge is still, to maintain upright laws:
In conscience rules, ye should be throwly lernd,
Where clemency, bids wrath and rashness pause,
And further says, strike not without a cause:
And when ye smite, do it for justice sake,
Then in good part, each man your scourge will take.
If that such zeal, had moud this tyrants mind,
To make my plague, a warning for the rest,
I had small cause, such fault in him to find,
Such punishment, is used for the best:
But by ill will, and power I was oprest,
He spoylde my goods, and left me bare and poor,
And caused me, to beg from door to door.
What fall was this, to come from Princes fare,
To watch for crumes, among the blind and lame?
When alms were dealt, I had an hungry share,
Because I knew, not how to ask for shame,
Till force and need, had brought me in such frame,
Than starve I must, or learn to beg an alms,
With book in hand, to say S. David's Psalms.
Where I was wont, the golden chains to wear,
A pair of beads, about my neck was wound,
A linen cloth, was lapt about my hear,
A ragged gown, that trailed on the ground,
A dish that clapped, and gave a heavy sound,
A staying staff, and wallet there withal,
I bare about, as witness of my fall,
" The fall of leaf, is nothing like the spring,
" Each eye beholdes the rising of the sun,
" All men admire the favor of a King,
" And from great states, grown in disgrace they run,
" Such sudden claps, ne wit nor will can shun:
For when the stool, is taken from our feet,
Full flat on floor, the body falls in street.
I had no house, wherein to hide my head,
The open street, my lodging was perforce,
Full often I went, all hungry to my bed,
My flesh consumde, I looked like a corse.
Yet in that plight, who had on me remorse?
O God thou knowste, my friends forsook me than,
Not one help me, that succred many a man.
They frownd on me, that fawnd on me before,
And fled from me, that followed me full fast:
They hated me, by whom I set much store,
They ken we full well, my Fortune did not last.
In every place, I was condemnde and cast,
To plead my cause, at bar it was no boot,
For every man, did tread me under foot.
Thus long I liud, all weary of my life,
Till death approcht, and rid me from that woe:
Example take, by me* both maid and wife,
Beware, take heed, fall not to folly so.
A Mirror make, by my great ouerthroe,
Defye the world, and all his wanton ways,
Beware by me, that spent so ill her days.
T. Churchyard.

A Story of an Eagle and a Lady, excellently set out in Du Bartas.
MOunt Eagle up, with fame and honor great,
By Pellycan, that feeds her young with blood,
(Of her own breast), make thou thy noble seat:
Thy virtues do, surmount all worldly good.
No bird but one, which is a Phoenix rare,
Does thee surpass, or may with thee compare.
The Story.
A Lady once, in Thraciaas we read,
Two Eagles found, new hatched in their neast,
The one she took, and did that bird so feed,
(And kept it warm, amid her tender breast),
Tha as this dame, fell sick upon a day,
This Eagle flue, abroad to get his pray.
And what so ere, this Eagle killed in field,
He brought it home, as choycely as he might:
At mistress foot, the pray then would he yield,
Who mused much, to see so strange a sight.
But mistress health, by this might not be had,
Which daily made, the Eagle wondrous sad.
But still he flue, to field for dainty fare,
To feed this dame, that long a dying lay:
And when the bird, saw house so full of care,
For mistress death, whose life was past away.
Upon the bed, he sat and bowd his beak,
Down to the flore, to hear his mistress speak.
Often would he kiss, her mouth as cold as stone,
And spread his wings, abroad to warm her face:
And in his kind, he made such heavy moan,
As man for wife, may do in such a case.
But when no life, in mistress might be found,
With his own beak, himself he began to wound.
Brusd all his breast, and body every where,
Plucked feathers off, and flung them flat on flore,
Bled out of frame, and did his flesh so tear:
That he could not, no way fly out of door.
Would take no food, nor rest, but growling lay;
By bare bedstocke, half dead full many a day.
At length her corse, a funeral must have,
Where mistress must, be burnd as was the gyse,
The Eagle then, did follow her to grave:
And under winge, did mount aloft in skies.
And when in fire, was cast this noble dame,
The Eagle flung, himself amid the flame.
With pikes and staves, the people held him back,
That helped no whit, the Eagle there would burn,
So bent to seek, in fire his ruin and wrack,
Into the flame, again he did return:
Mount Eagle then, from dust and ashes here,
Unto the clouds, where virtue shines clear.
TO THE HONORABLE MY LADY Carry. Sir George Caries wife, one of the Ladies of
the privy chamber.
Having great desire (good madame) in some serviceable sort to dedicate to you
a piece of such my honest labors as may merit your Ladyships good liking, I
find my self so unable for the same, as in a manner half discouraged, I
doubted what inuencion I should take in hand, but waieng your virtuous
disposition, joined with a sweet and courteous kind of behavior (that wins the
worlds goodwill) I presumed that your Ladyship would not think amiss of any
that would honor you in good meaning with such works of the pen, as becomes
an humble writer to present to such a worthy Lady, so searching my simple
storehouse of studies, I found fit for my purpose (though far unmeet for your
reading) a doleful discourse of a hapless man, penned long a go to be
looked on, but cast carelessly aside, therefore now revived again to manifest
his misfortunes, that willingly would not depart the world till his whole
pilgrimage were well known to the best sort of people, as the verses that
follows shall amply declare, which verses I commit to your ladyships judgment
and view, wishing you much honor and good Fortune, with increase of virtue.

A TRAGICAL DISCOVRSE OF THE Hapless man's life.
COme Courties al, draw near my morning hers,
Come hear my knell, ere corse to church shall go,
Or at the least, come read this woeful verse:
And last farewell, the haples penneth so,
And such as does his life, and manners kno,
Come shed some tears, and see him painted out,
That restles here, did wander world about.
O pilgrims poor, press near my pagent now,
And note full well the part that I have played,
And wisely way, my thriftles Fortune throw,
And print in breast, each word that here is said:
Shrink not my friends, step forth stand not, afraid
Though monstrous hap, I daily here possessed,
Some sweeter chance, may bring your hearts to rest.
For though the wretch, in cold and hunger lies,
The happy wight, in pomp and pleasure sits,
The weak falls down, where mighty folk aries:
The sound feels not, the feeble ague fits.
So world you wot, does serve the finest wits,
The wise at will, can walk where shins the Sun
And to the stream and flood each fish will run.
And hap falls not, to every man a like,
Some sleeps full sound, yet has the world at call,
Some leapes the hedge, some lights amid the dike:
Some sucks the sweat, and some the bitter gall,
The use of things, blind destnie gives us all.
So though you see, ten thousand souls in hell,
Yet may you hope, in heavens bliss to dwell.
Let my mishap, a worldly wonder be,
For few can find, the fruit that I did taste,
Ne leaves nor bows, I found upon the tree:
And where I ploud, the Ground lay ever wast.
A man would think, the child was borne in have:
Or out of time, that had such luck as I,
For lo I look, for Larkes when falls the sky.
No soil nor seat, nor season serves my turn.
Each plot is sown, with sorrow where I go,
On mountain top, they say where torch should burn
I find but smoke, and loathsome smothring woe,
Near Fountain head, where springs do daily floe:
Cold yse I get, that melts with warmth of hand,
So that I starve, where Cock and Cundits stand.
I quench small thirst, where thousands drink and bib,
An empty cup I carry clean away,
And though as lean, as rake is every rib
And hollow cheeks, does hidden grief bewray,
The rich cats all, the poor may fast and pray:
No butter cleaus, upon my bread at need,
When hungry maw, thinks throat is cut indeed.
The shallow brokes, where little fish are found,
I shun, and seek, the Seas to swyin thereon,
Yet vesssayle sinkes, or bark is laid a ground,
Where leaking ships, in safety still have gone:
The harbor find, when haven have I none,
Hap calls them in, when I am logde at large,
Thus plainnes creepes, in cold cock Lorels barge.
Full fifety years, both Court and wars I tried,
And still I sought acquaintance with the best,
And serud the state, and did such hap abide,
As might befall, and Fortune sent the rest,
When drum did sound, a soldier was I pressed,
To Sea or Land, as Princes quarrel stood.
And for the same, full often I lost my blood.
In Scotland long, I lingered out my years,
When Wilford liud, a worthy wight indeed:
And there at length, I fell so far in briers,
I taken was, as destny had decreede
Well yet with words, I did my foes so feed.
That there I liud, in pleasure many aday,
And scapte so free, I did no ransom pay.
Some said I found, in Scotland favor then,
I grant my pomp, was more than reason would
Yet on my band, I sent home sundry men
That else had pynd, in prison pincht with cold,
To French, and scots, so fair a tale I told,
That they beleeud, white chalk and cheese was one,
And it was pearl, that proud but pible stone.
In Lawther fort, I clapped my self by sleight,
So sled from soes, and home to friends I past:
The French in have, beseegd that fortress straight,
Then was I like to light in fetters fast,
But lo a peace, broke up the seege at last.
When weary wars, and wicked bloodshed great,
Made both the sides, to seek a quiet seat.
From thence I came, to England as I might,
And after that, to Irland I did sail,
Where Sellenger, a wise and Noble Knight.
Gave me such place, as was to mine avail,
Then teasters walked as thich as does the hayle,
About the world, for lo from thence I bore,
(For service done), of money right good store.
Home came I tho^, and so to France did fare,
When that their King, wan Meatts through fatchis fine,
So on the stock, I spent al void of care,
And what I gate. by spoil I held it mine,
Than down I past, the pleasant flood of Ryen,
And so I serud, in Flanders note the same,
Where lo at first, my hap fell out of frame.
For I was clapped, in prison without cause,
And straightly held, for coming out of France,
But God did work, through justice of the cause,
And help of friends, to me a better chance,
And still I hopte, the wars would me advance
So trayld the pike, and world began a new,
And looked like hawk, that lately came from mue.
Three year at least, I saw the Emprours wars,
Then homeward drew, as was my wonted trade:
Where Sun and Moon, and all the seven stars,
Stood on my side, and me great welcome made,
But whether fair, and flowers full soon will fade:
So peoples love, is like new besomes often,
That sweepes all clean, whiles brom is green and soft.
Well once again, to wars I drew me fast,
And with Lord Gray at Giens I did remain,
Where he or his, in any service past,
I followed on, amyd the warlike train,
And sometime felt, my part of woe and pain*
As others did, that Canon well could like
And pleasure took, in trayling of the pike.
At length the French, did Giens beseege ye wot,
And little help or succor found we thoe,
By which foul want, it was my heavy lot:
To Paris straight with good Lord Gray to go,
As prisoners both, the world to well does knoe,
By tract of time, and wonders charge indeed,
He homeward went, and took his leave with speed.
But post alone, I stood alack the while,
And country clean, forgot me this is true,
And I might live, in sorrow and exile.
And pine away, for any thing I knew,
As I had bakt, indeed so might I brue:
Not one at home, did seek my grief to heal,
Thus was I clean cut of from common weal^.
Yet lo a shift, to skape away I found,
When to my faith, my taker gave no trust,
I did devise, in writing to be bound:
To come again, the time was set full just,
But to return forsooth I had no lust,
Since faith could get no credit at his hand,
I sent him word, to come and s^e my band.
He came himself, to court as I did hear,
And told his tale, as finely as he might,
At Ragland then, was I in Monmouth shiere.
Yet when in court, this matter came to light:
My friends did say, that I had done him right,
A Soldier ought upon his faith to go,
Which I had kept, if he had sent me so.
Well yet my mind, could never rest at home,
My shoes were made, of running leather sure,
And borne I was, about the world to rome,
To see the wars, and keep my hand in ure:
The French ye know, did Englishmen procure,
To come to Leeth, at seege whereof I was,
Till French did seek, in ships away to pass.
A little breath, I took then after this,
And shapte my self, about the Court to be,
And every day, as right and reason is,
To serve the Prince, in Court I settled me:
Some friends I found, as friends do go you see,
That gave me words, as sweet as honey still,
Yet let me live, by head and cunning skill.
I crucht, I kneeld, and many a cap could veil,
And watched late, and early rose at morn,
And with the throng, I followed hard at tail:
As brave as bull, or sheep but newly shorn,
The gladest man, that ever yet was borne,
To wayt and stare, among the states full hye:
Who feeds the poor, with many a friendly eye.
But who can live, with goodly looks alone,
Or merry words, that sounds like tabers pype,
Say what they will, they love to keep their own:
And part with naught, that comes in their gripe,
You shall have Nuts, they say when ploms are ripe.
Thus all with shalls, or shalles ye shall be fed.
And gape for gold, and want both Gold and lead.
The proof thereof, made me to seek far hence,
To Anwerp then, I trudged on the spleen
And all in have to get some spending pence,
To serve my turn, in service of the Queen:
But God he knows, my gain was small I ween.
For though I did my credit still increase,
I got no wealth, by wars, ne yet by peace.
Yet hark and note, I pray you if you please,
In Anwerp town, what Fortune me befell:
My chance was such, when I had past the seas,
(And taken land and thereon rested well)
The people iard, and range a larum bell,
So that in arms, the town was every where,
And few or none, of life stood certain there.
A Noble Prince I saw, amid that broyle,
To whom I went, The Prince of Or^nge.
and swear his part to take,
The commons came, al set on rage and spoil,
And gave me charge, to keep my wits awake:
The Prince for love, of King and countries sake.
Bad me do well, and shed no guyltles blood,
And save from spoil, poor people and their good.
I gave my faith, and hand to do the same,
And wrought the best, that I could work therefore:
And brought at length, ^he commons in such frame,
That some were bent to blow the cole no more,
Yet some to rage, and robbery ran full sore:
Whom I refor^de, so that no harm did fall,
To any wight, among the commons all.
The keys I had, of town and treasure both,
And Captain was, of thousands three days than,
And ruled all, our foes to tell you tro^h,
And saud indeed, the life of many a man.
And many a piece, of goodly ordinance wan:
Took prisoners two, M. Candeler master of the assuraunces in the Royal
Exchange is alive, witness to this.
and of the brauest sort,
I clapped in hold, and held the enemies short.
Five thousand shot, I sent behind their backs,
To dant their pride, and pluck their courage down,
And quick with speed, deuisd such cunning knackes.
As in three hours, we conquered all the town.
The enemies durst, no drum nor trumphet sown,
For fear of blows, M. Iosephe Loupo and his Brother Peter two excellent
musition^, are alive witness to this in like sort.
for such a camp they saw,
In arms at hand, that held them all in awe,
The enemies drew, the Martinests from me,
By such false brute, as subtle people raise:
The Caluenists, that did this treachery see,
Loud quick dispatch, but hated long delays.
They saw the world, was wandering sundry ways,
So bad me store, to stay the reeling state,
That soon would fall, and breed a strange debate.
Ten thousand men, by this devise we lost*
But ere they could make head against us there,
We hold them all, and to the Prin^e in post,
I past to put* the people in such fear,
That w^ in have, unarmed them every where,
Then did we march, with fifteen thousand more,
Along the st^eetes, and thankt the Lord therefore.
Each man in peace, and safe in lodging so,
The gospel free and preachers well at ease,
To England straight, indeed I thought to go
When this uproar, with peace I did appease.
In surety so, I could not pass the seas,
A drift was drawn, to take me in a trap,
But God prepared, for me a better hap.
In street we stood, and brake ne huose nor door,
And for three days, made no man's finger bleed:
I dare avouch, that neither rich or poor.
Could say they lost the valor of a threede,
Well what of that, you know an honest deed,
Is soon forgot* of such as thankles be,
For in the end, it fared so by me.
The town I kept, from cruel sword and fire,
Did seek my life, when peace and all was made,
And such they were, that did my blood desire:
As I had saude, from blows and bloody blade,
I crept away, and hide me in the shade,
But as the day* and Sun began to shine,
They followed fast, with force and practice fine.
In priests atyre, but not with shaven crown,
I scapte their hands, that sought to have my head,
In forckid cap, and pleycted curtal gown:
Far from the Church, stood me in right good stead.
In all this while, ne mass for quick nor dead,
I durst not sing, a posting priest I was,
That did in have, from post to pillar pass.
In Briges then, the persons breatch did quake,
For there a clarke, came tinging of a Bell,
(That in the town, did such a rumbling make)
I could not walk, in vickars garments well:
So there I wished my self in cockle shel,
Or sea man sloppes, that smeld of pitch and tar,
Which robes I found, ere I had traueld far.
A Marshall came, and searched our whole fleet than,
In boat I leapt, and so through Sealand went,
And many a day a silly weary man:
I traueld there, and stood with toil content,
Til God by grace, a better Fortune sent.
And brought me home in safety as you knoe,
Great thanks to him, I give that serude me so.
In Court where I, at rest and peace remainde,
I thought upon, the part that Flemings plaide,
And for goodwil, since I was so retainde:
I thought to make, those roysters once afraid,
So hoist up sail when I had anchor waid,
And into France, I slipped with much ado,
Where lo a Net, was making for me to.
Yet past I through, to Paris without stop,
When civil broils were likely to begin,
And standing there, within a merchants shop,
I heard one say the Prince was coming in,
To Flaunders fast, with whom I late had bill,
Before you wot, thus having merry news,
I stole away, and so did France refuse.
But by your leave, I fell in danger deep,
Before I could in freedom go or ride,
Devouring Wolves, had like to slain the sheep:
And wipte their mouths, upon the muttons hide.
Naught goes amiss, where God will be the guide,
So through the place, where perril most did seem,
I past at will, when danger was extreme.
The Prince I found, from Collen at his house,
And there I saw, of Roitters right good store,
Who welcomde me, with many a mad carouse:
Such is their gise, and has bin evermore,
To Haunders thus, we marched and God before,
And near the Rhine, our Camp a season lay,
Till money came, and had a general pay.
In Flaunders long, our Camp remained still,
And sweet with sour, we tasted sundry ways
Who goes to wars, must feel both good and ill
Some likes it not, and some that life can prays
Where nights are cold, and many hungry days
Some will not be, yet such as loves the drom
Takes in good part, the chances as they com.
Perhaps my share, was not the sweetest there,
I make no bost, nor find no fault therein:
I sought my self, the burden for to bear,
Among the rest, that had ore charged bin.
If smart I felt, it was a plague for sin,
If joy I found, I knew it would not last,
If wealth I had, so wast came on as fast,
When Prince did pass, to France and Flaunders last,
I license sought, to see my native soil,
He told me than, the French by some fine craft:
On me at lenght would make a pray and spoil,
I took my leave, not fearing any soil.
But ere the day, the sky had clean forsook,
I fell in snare, as fish on baited hoke.
A woeful tale, it is to tell indeed,
Yet hear it out, and how God wrought for me,
The case was such, that I a gide did need,
So in the field, full near a willow tree.
I found a carle, that needs my guide must be
His hand I had, his heart did halt the while,
And treason did, through trust the true beguyle.
We held the way, unto S. Quintance right,
As I did think, but long two leagues I lost,
To ease my horse, he bad me often a light:
But I thereat, seemd dumme and deaffe as post,
Of stomach stout, the way of^imes he crossed:
And sought to take, my bridle by the rain,
That slight I sound, and so he lost his pain.
Had I turned back, the pesants were at hand
Who mounted were, on better horse than I,
A village near, there was within that land:
Where lo my guide, would have me for to ly^.
Not so my friend, I answerde very hie,
Whereat he knew, the pad in straw was found,
So took the ball, and stroke it at rebound:
Thou can not escape, (quoth he) then light a down,
Thou art but dead, thy life here shall thou lose,
And there withal, the carle began to frown:
And laid his hand, upon my leather hose.
Through signs he made, the town by this arose,
And some by wars, that lately lost their good,
Sought to revenge the same upon my blood.
My guide leapt up, upon the horse I rode,
And flang away, as fast as he could drive:
Down was I halde, and on my face they trod,
And for my robes, the tormenters did strive.
My guide did cry, O leave him not alive:
An English churl, he is his tongue does show,
And gold he has good store, full well I know.
They stripped me straight, from dublet to my shurt,
Yet hose they left, untouched as God it would
No power they had, to do me further hurt:
For as the knife, to throat they began to hold.
To save my life, an upright tale I told,
They hearing that, laid all their weapons down,
And asked me if, I knew saint Quintains town.
I past thereby, when to the Spawe I went,
(Quoth I) and there, my pasport well was viewd,
If that be true, said one thou shall be sent:
From thence in have, and so they did conclude.
To town I should, from savage country rude,
So in they hey, they laid me all that night,
Yet sought my life, before the day was light.
But as with weeds, some suffrant flower groes,
So in that soil a blessed man was bred,
Which undertook, to keep me from my foes:
And save my life, by fine device of head.
He called me up, when they were in their bed,
And bad me go, with him where he thought best,
Least in that place, full small should be my rest.
I followed on, as he did lead the trace,
He brought the safe, where I in surety stood,
Thus God through him, did show his might and grace,
Which ioyde me more, than all this worldly good:
The other sort, were butchers al for blood,
And daily slew, such stragglars as they took,
For whom they lay, and watched in many a noke,
That hazard past, I found more mischieues still,
But none so great, nor none so much to fear:
With toil and pain, with slight of head and skill
From France I came, (and left all mischief there)
Now here what fruit, my native soil does bear,
See what I reap, and mark what I have sown:
And let my luck, through all this Land be known.
First let me tell, how Fortune did me call,
To Garnesey thoe, to stay my troubled mind:
Where well I was, although my wealth was small,
And long had dwelt, if destny had assignde,
But as the ship, is subject to the wind,
So we must change, as checking chances falls,
Who tosseth men, about like tennis balls.
This chance is she, some say that leads men out,
And bringes them home, when least they look therefore,
A dallying dame, that breeds both hope and doubt,
And makes great wounds, yet seldom salues the sore,
Not sure on sea, nor certain on the shore,
A worldly witch, that deals with wanton charms,
For one good turn, she does ten thousand harms.
A fig for chance, this Fortune bears no shape,
The people fond, a name to Fortune give:
Which senseless souls, do after shadows gape,
Great GOD does rule, and sure as God does l^u^,
He grindes the Corn, and sifts the meal through s^ue,
And leaves the bran, as refues of the flower,
To work his will, and show his mighty power.
Promotion comes, ne from the East nor West,
Ne South nor North, it falls from Heaven hie:
For God himself, sets up whom he thinks best,
And casts them down, whose hearts would climb the ski^.
Thus earthly haps, in wordlings do not lie.
We trudge, we run, we ride and break our brain,
And backward come, the self same steps again.
Till time approach, that God will man prefarre,
With labors long, in vain we beat the air:
Our destnies dwell, in neither moon nor star,
Nor comfortes come, from people foul nor fair,
Small hope in those, that sits in golden chair.
Their moodes, their minds, and all we go about,
Takes light from him, that puts our candle out.
This argues now, all goodness freely groes,
From him that first, made man of earthly mold:
And floodes of wealth into their bosom floes,
That clearly can, his blessed will behold*
As sheape heardes do, keep safe their sheep in fold.
And Gardner knows, how flowers should watered be,
So God gives aid, ere man the want can see.
Helps comes not sure, by hap, or heads device,
Though wits of men, are means to work the wax:
And cunning hands, do often cast the dice.
All these are toys, trust up in tinkars packes,
No ^lame will rise, till fire be thrust to flax.
No branch may bud, till he that made the plant,
With dew of grace, indeed supplies the want.
Can earth yield fruit, till Spring time sap do shoe?
Can air be clear, till ^ogges and mists be fled?
Can seas and floods, at every season floe?
Can (...) give life, to sha^es and bodies dead?
Such secrets pass, the reach of man's vain head,
So look to reap, no corn for all our toil,
Till harvest come, and God has blessed the soil.
The potter knows, what vessaile serves his turn,
And therein still, he powers liquor sweet:
The Cook well notes, what wood is best to burn,
And what conceits, is for the banquet meet:
The Captain marks, what Soldier has most spreete.
And calls that man, to charge and office great,
When he thinks good, and service is in heat.
Dare any wight, presume to take the place,
Of worthy charge, till he thereto be called?
Dare subject brag, before the Princes face?
Or strive with states, that are in honor stauld?
Dare village boast, with City strongly wauld?
Dare children clime, till they good footing find,
No al things yields, to him that leads the mind.
He lifts aloft, he flingeth down as fast,
He gives men fame, and plucks renown away,
Hap does not so, for chance is but a blast,
An idle word, wherewith weak people play:
Hap hangs and holds, on hazard every way,
And hazard leanes, on doubt and danger deep,
That glads but few, and makes Millions weep.
I use this term, of hap in all I write,
As well to make, the matter large and long,
As any cause, or dram of great delight
I take th^rem: But here I do you wrong.
To lead your cares, with such a senseless song,
From hearing that, I promisd have to end,
The ^are discourse, the hapless man has pend.
So coming home, and crept from toil abroad,
(With charged breast, and heavy heauing heart)
I thought in Court, my burden to unload:
And cast away, the cares of former smart,
But there alas, my chance is so oreth wart,
I sit and sighe, and fold mine arms withal,
And in old griefs, afresh begin to fall.
Yea there where most, my hope and haunt has bin,
Where years and days, I spent upon the stock:
And diverse do, good hap and friendship win.
(And duty makes a World of people flock)
And thousands Lo, draws water from the Cock,
I scearse may moist, my mouth when thirst is great
And heart is clean, consumde with scalding heat.
A spring of kind, does floe above the brim,
Yet cannot stop a Fountain if you would:
For through hard rocks, it runs clear and trim.
And in some Ground, it casts up grain of Gold,
It bursts the Earth, and deeply digges the Ground,
It gusheth out, and goes in sundry veins,
From mountains top, and spreads all the playnes.
The Spring creepes up, the highest hill that is,
And many Wells, thereon are easly found,
And this I wot, where do you water mis,
Small fruit does grow, it is but barraine Ground
The soil is sweet, where pleasant springes abound,
The Cowslop sproutes, where spring and fountains be,
And floodes begin, from fountain heads you see.
The laboring man, thereat does cole his heat,
The birds do bathe, their breasts full bravely there:
The brutest beasts, therein find pleasures great,
And likes not half, so well another where,
What cause in me, what doubt, what fault, or fear.
That I may not, in this so weak a plight:
Go drink my fill, where each thing has delight.
The more we draw, the water from the well,
The better far, we bring the spring in frame,
The seas themselves, of nature rise and swell,
The more the wind, and weather works the same.
The fire burns best, when bellows blows the flame.
Let things stand still, and stir them not in time:
They shall decay, by mean of dross and sl^^ne.
I see some streams, with sticks are choked up,
And Rivers large, are marde with beds of sand:
I see some bring, from Doels an empty cup,
Yet crave an alms, and shows a needy hand.
I see bare boys, before the banquet stand,
And no man says, lo poor man if thou wut:
Take here a dish, to fill thy hungry gut.
Of cormorant kind some crammed Capons are,
The more they eat, the more they may consume,
Some men likewise, the better that they fare,
The worse they be and sicker of the rume,
And some so chafe, so frown, so fret, and fume,
When others feed, they cannot God he knows:
Spare any time, the dropping of their nose.
The bordes are spread, and feasts are made thereon,
And such sits down, that has their bellies full:
Whose greedy mouths, from dog would snatch the bone.
Which snudges swell, and look like greiste wull:
They puff, they blow, yea like a bayted bull.
And shoue them back, that on small crumes would feed,
Whose patient hearts, makes virtue of a need.
The Glutton thinks, his belly is too small,
When in his eye, a dayntie morsel is:
He grines and gapes, as though no crum should fall
From him: and looks as all the world were his.
Thus such as want, are sure the post to kis.
For poulting pride does press so fast in place,
That poor plain Tom, dare scarce come show his face.
Each one does seek, for to aspire and rise,
Yet hate we those, that does by virtue clime:
The fool he scorns, the worship of the wise,
Yet dolts presume, beyond the wise sometime,
And all this strife, is but for dross and slime.
That out of earth, we dig with dangers deep:
Full hard to win, and much more words to keep.
This makes me muse, when some have heaps in hord,
They will not help, the nearest friend they have:
And yet with smiles, and many a friendly word,
They grant to give, before a man do crave,
Such Barbors fine, can finely poule and shave,
And wash full clean* till all away they wash:
Then good sir Grime, like lob they leave in lash.
What should men loose, when they enough have had,
If that they part, with things that might be sparde?
A little piece, out of a golden gad,
For service long; might be a great reward,
No no as steel, and flint is stiff and hard.
So World is waxt, and no good turn is found,
But where indeed, do double gifts rebound.
We make a leg, and kiss the hand withal,
(A French device, nay sure a Spanish trick)
And speak in Print, and say lo at your call,
I will remain, your own both dead and quick*
A Courtier so, can give a lobbe a lick,
And dress a dolt, in Motley for a while,
And so in sleeue, at silly Woodcocke smile,
If meaning went, with painted words and shoes,
It might suffice such courteous cheer to taste;
But with the same, disdain and envy goes.
And trumpry great, with wind and words in wast,
Then arm in arm, comes flattery full in have,
And leads away, the senses out of frame,
That upright wits, are thereby stricken lame.
This lowting low, and bowing down the knee,
But gropes men's minds, to creep in credits lap,
Like malte horse then, he holds up head you see
That late before, could veil both knee and cap,
The Nurse a while, can feed the child with pap,
And after beat him on the breech full bare.
A swarm God wot, of these fine Natures are.
There be that bites, yet gronts and whines withal,
There be that winnes, yet swear and says cylose,
There be that stops, and steals away the ball,
There be that plants, a weed and plucks a rose,
There be pleads want, to whom the fountain floes
Such hides their haps, to make the world to think,
At fair well head, they need not for to drink,
The whales you see, eats up the little fish,
The pretty Penk, with Sammon may not swime,
The greatest heads, are fed with finesh dish,
The foulest piss, saire water runs trime.
He gets the gain that stands near the brime,
He blows the cole, that has cold fingers still,
He starues for bread, that has no corn at mill.
A world to see* the course and state of things,
Some would get up, that knows not where to light:
Some soer the skies, that never had no wings,
Some wrestle well, by cunning not by might.
Some seems to judge, fair colors without sight.
And every one, with some odd^ shift or grace,
In world at will, runs out a goodly race.
But to be plain, I lag and come behind,
As I were lame, and had a broken leg:
Or else I cannot, lie within the wind,
And hearken still, what I might easily beg,
I need no: say, in mouth I have geg.
For I have spoke, and sped in matters small,
By help of him, that has my verses all.
But far God wot, I am from that to seek,
And miss the mark, that many men do hit:
Wherefore salt tears, do trickle down the cheek,
And heart does feel, full many a woeful fit.
And so aside, in solemn sorrow sit.
As one indeed, that is forsaken clean,
Where most he does deserve, and best does mean.
No matter now, though each man march and tread
On him that hates, the life he bears about:
Yet such as shall, these heavy Verses read,
Shall find I blame, my fortune out of doubt,
But since on hope, no better hap will sprout.
I yield to death, and upward lift the mind,
Where loathsome life, shall present comfort find.
Since hope can have, no honey from the Hiue,
And pains can pluck, no pleasure for his toil:
It is but vain, for weary life to strive,
And stretch out time, with torment and tormoyle,
Get what we can, death triumphs ore the spoil.
Then note this well, though we win near so mitch,
When death takes all, we leave a mizer rich.
To live and lack, is double death indeed,
A present death, exceedes a lingering woe:
Since no good hap, in youth did help my need,
In age why should, I strive with Fortune so,
Old years are come, and hastes me hence to go.
The time draws on, I hate the life I have,
When heart shall break, my grief shall end in grave,
Should I seek life, that finds no place of rest,
Ne soil, nor seat, to shroude me from the air:
When cramping cold, beclyps my careful breast,
And dolor drives, my heart in deep^ despair,
For such foul days, dark death is wondrous fair.
As good to make, the scrawling worms a feast,
As please the world, where mischief makes her neast.
Hie time it is, to haste my ca^kasse hence,
Youth stole away, and felt no kind of joy:
And age he left, in travel ever since,
The wanton days* that made me nice and coy,
Were but a dream, a shadow and a toy.
Since slavery here, I find and nothing else,
My home is there, where soul in freedom dwells.
In wars and woe, my years are wasted clean,
What should I see, if Lordly life I led:
I look in glass, and find my cheeks so lean,
That every hour, I do but wish me dead,
Now back bendes down, and forward falls the head,
And hollow eyes, in wrinkled brow does shroude,
As though two stars, were creeping under cloud.
The lips wax cold, and looks both pale and thin,
The teeth falls out, as nuts forsook the shale:
The hare bald-head, but shows where hai^e has bin,
The lively joints, wax very stiff and stale,
The ready tongue, now folters in his tale.
The wearish face, and tawney color shows,
The courage quayles as strength decaies and goes.
The sweet delights, are drownde in dulled mind,
The gladsome sportes, to groaning sighs are bent,
The frisking limbs, so far from frame I find,
That I forethinke, the time that youth has spent,
But when I weigh, that all these things were lent,
And I must pay, the earth her duty throw,
I shrink no whit, to yield these pleasures now.
Had I possessed, the gifts of Fortune here,
A house, a wife, and Children there withal:
And had in store, (to make my friends good cheer)
Such common things, as neighbors have at call,
In such despair, perchance I would not fall.
But want of this, and other lackes a score,
Bids me seek death, and wish to live no more.
The thatcher has, a cottage poor you see,
The sheapheard knows, where he shall sleep at night,
The daily drudge, at night can quiet bee^,
Thus Fortune sendes, some rest to every wight.
So borne I was, to house and land by right.
But in a bagg, to Court I brought the same,
From Shrewsburie town, a seat of ancient fame.
What thinks my friends, that there behind I laft,
What fault finds she, that gave me life and suck:
O courting fine, thou art too cold a craft,
The Carter has, at home much better luck,
Well* well I say, adue all worldly mucke.
Ne house nor Land, we bear away I knoe,
I naked came, and naked hence must go.
The greatest King, must pass the self same way,
Our day of birth, and burial are alike:
Their joy, their pomp, their wealth and rich array,
Shall soon consume, like snow that lies in dike,
No Buckler serves, when soddaine death does strike.
As soon may come, a poor man's soul to blis,
As may the rich, or greatest Lord that is.
Well ere my breath, my body do forsake,
My spri^e I do, bequeath to God above:
My books, my scronies, and songs that I did make,
I leave with friends, that freely me did love,
To slyring foes, whose malice me did move.
I wish in have, amendment of their ways,
And to the Court, and courtiers happy days.
My fortune strange, to strangers do I leave,
That straungly can, retain such strange mishap:
To such as still, in world did me deceive,
I wish they may, beware of such like trap,
To slanderous tongues, that killde me with a clap.
I wish more rest, than they have given to me,
And bless those shreawes, that cursed and crabbed be.
To such as yet, did never pleasure man,
I give those rimes, that nips the gawled back:
To such as would, do good and if they can,
I wish good luck, long life, and void of lack,
To currish Karles, a whyp and Colliers sack.
And to the proud, that stands upon their braues,
A wainscot face, and twenty crabtree staves.
To surly sirs, that scorns the meaner sort,
A nightcap furd, with Foynes I them bequeath:
To such as scowle, at others good report,
(And sets much store, by their own painted sheat)
In sign of luck, I give a willow wreath,
To such as are, vnnamde, and merits much,
The stone I leave, that tries the Gold by tutch,
To gentill race, with good conditions joined,
I wish more joy, than man imagine may:
And since for poor, I have noe money coynd,
God grant them all a merry marriage day,
To such as does delight in honest play.
I wish the Gold, that I have lost thereby,
And all the wealth, I want before I die.
Now friends shake hands, I must be gone my boys,
Our mirth takes end, our triumph all is done:
Our tykling talk, our sportes and merry toys,
Do slide away, like shadow of the Sun,
Another comes, when I my race have run.
Shall pass the time, with you in better plite,
And find good cause, of greater things to write.
FINIS.
A DREAM.
To the right worshipful my good Lady the Lady Paulet, who was wife to the
honorable sir Hugh Paule^ Knight.
AMong the manifold works in print, pamphelets, books, volumes, and devises, I
never addressed my pen to your Ladyship till now, though bound for many
courtesies better to consider of so good a Lady, and now worst able to redeem
duty forgotten, I bring my self backward to behold my great oversight, but
presing forward to win ground, I leese the keeping of a writers credit, for no
one thing is left worthy your view and looking on, such have have I had in the
spoiling of my self and inventions: a prodicall point of bounty rather than
the part of a wise bountiful writer, especially to bestow the best matters on
others, and present but a dream to your Ladyship, showing thereby the
shallownes of my judgment: but yet some such substance of matter as I trust
is more delightful than dainty. For my Dream having many significations, may
grow on many causes, and hit on a number of Accidents fit for my humor, but
skarse meet for your grave consideration, yet such fancies as a dream brings
^orth, I of necessity must offer (because my store is not great) and such
fancies as I have, I hope your Lad. amongst the rest of my friends will stand
pleased with, til better matter fall out. So in heart, service, and goodwill, I
betake you to the sweet blessing of the Almighty.

A Dream I had the straungest thing,
that ever man might meet:
Me thought I bore amid a King,
a fair familiar spreet.
A Lady like the Fairie Queen,
that men behold but s^ld:
Who daunceth round about the green,
by Moonshine often in field.
This Ring on little finger worn,
did mysteries unfold:
And made me walk from Eauen to Morn,
in s^cret where I would.
Among the Dames and Nymphs most chaste,
when greatest glee they make:
And where sweet darlings are embrac'st,
and greatest pleasure take.
I came sometime where loves delight,
was drowned in deep disdain:
And fancy reapt but froward spite,
to counter-pace his pain.
Not sound a sleep in slumber so,
this busy dream I had:
That tossed senses to and fro,
with heavy motions sad.
That waits upon a troubled mind,
that seldom takes rest:
But wanders with each blast of wind,
and breath of panting breast,
And in this Dream a world of toys,
and trifles led me on:
Some of new cares, some present joys,
and some of pleasures gone.
And some of gladsome haps to come,
those were dumme sights and shows*
Not worth a philip of my thombe,
if I should all disclose.
But as those fancies past like shade,
that follow man full fast:
Or brightness of a shining blade,
whose glaunce small while does last.
I came me thought into a cave,
where all the Sibbils dwell:
Asumptuous palace builded brave,
not like a little Cell.
Or Cottage poor of small account,
for at the outer gate:
There stood a stately mighty mount,
whereon a Lady sat.
All clothed in white, and wore a hoode
of red, round shapte indeed:
At sight of whom amazed I stood,
to see so strange a weed.
Why man quoth she, fear not a whit*
A woman sure I am:
That do among my neighbors sit,
as mild and meek as Lamb.
And spend the goods that God has sent,
in worthy liberal sort:
With merry mean and sad content,
that winnes a good report.
The poor I f^^d, the rich I feast,
and welcome hie and low:
And spent thus thirty years at least,
more wealth than world does know.
The weeds that body does disguise,
upon vain earth a spare:
At latter day when soul shall rise,
shall give me greater grace.
I woondred at the words she spoke,
she did descend withal:
So by the hand she did me take,
and led me through the hall.
Unto a pretty parlour fine,
where I beheld and saw:
A trifling counterfeit of mine,
that Arnold Oens did draw.
There sat of guests a table full,
that ancient friends had been:
For the held house for them that wull,
make of her house their Inn.
Not for to pay as trauelers do,
for every thing they take:
But feed and find great welcome to,
full free for friendships sake.
Sometime the chief and greatest sort,
of Dames and noble peer:
Unto her table does resort,
to taste of her good cheer.
Yea most of all the worthy men,
that bears good name and sway:
Comes freely thither now and then,
to pass the time away.
It were a world to show and tell,
what worthy dads she does:
For world will s^a^ce believe it well,
that I do know forsooth.
Let pass in silence that a while,
my Dreams breeds greater doubt,
For some there at may chance to smile,
it fa^es is strangely out.
The r^ping thoughts of idle brain,
and (...) in the head:
That feed the mind with humors vain,
when body seems dead.
Are trustles ^oyes clean void of truth,
which rise on meat and drink:
Or weak con^a^^s of age and youth,
whereon the heart does think.
Well be thy vizions good or bad,
or sweauons of the night:
Such idle s^^akes as fancy had,
now shall you hear aright.
Me thought a troop of Dames I saw,
a thousand in a roe:
They would not tread upon a straw,
they minst the matter so.
All hand in hand they traced on,
a tricksie ancient round:
And soon as shadows were they gone,
and might no more be found.
And in their place came fearful bugges,
as black as any pitche:
With bellies big and swagging dugges,
more loathsome then a witch.
All these began to chide and charm,
as hellish hags they were:
And went about some secret harm,
as seemed plainly there.
For in a circle stood they still,
and starde like Bull at stake:
They did no good but wished much ill,
to them that sleep or wake.
From these foul feends I thought to fly,
but I was quickly staide:
And in the twinkling of an eye,
was made full sore afraid.
For they with frowns and froward looks,
did threaten my decay:
And said they had such counting books,
that should my sins bewray.
Thy filthy faults of youth quoth they,
shall now corrected be:
For plagues and scourges every way,
there is prepared for thee.
First for thy soul offense to God,
in secret corners done:
Thou shall be whipped with many a rod,
of every mothers Son.
Some shall thee wound with edged sword,
and let out thy wild blood:
And some shall shoot such bitter words,
shall never do thee good.
The Prince shall daily speak thee fair,
but never thee prefer:
The people drive thee in despair,
and make thee open war.
Thy friends with flattery thee deceive,
thy foes about thee flock:
And in great mischief shall thee lead,
beset with many a mock.
And each disease that life abhorres,
shall daily on thee steal:
With botch and blaines and stinking sores,
that no sweet salve shall heal.
So marked man pass where thou will,
Gods wrath shall follow thee:
As guerdon for thy wretched guilt,
which God alone does see.
These words pronounc'st, these hags of hell,
inhast and horror both:
From thence did take a quick farewell,
and down those hell hounds goes.
Where Pluto dwells and darkness is,
a place of endless pain:
And where foul Feends full far from bliss,
in torments still remain.
Now sat I sadly all amazed,
to think on follies past:
And upward to the heavens gazed,
from whence comes help at last.
Where at the Clouds a passage made,
to Angels as I ween:
That than descended down in shade,
to come to world unseen.
My ring disclosed that secret straight,
and told me what they were:
Fie man (quoth they) use no such slight,
thou needst not now to fear.
We come to comfort feeble sense,
that all things takes awrie:
And not to punish man's offense,
that does for vengeance cry.
God does in mercy more delight,
than in his justice still:
His anger is forgotten quite,
when men fore-thinke their ill.
The devil drives men in despair,
by threatenings now and th^n:
And lays his snares in earth or air,
to trap some silly man.
He is the Father of untroth,
that has great wits beguilde:
And still about great mischief goes,
like roaring Lion wild.
Those bugges that late before thee stood,
are fancies of thy head:
Or on thy heart some heavy blood,
that haunts thee in thy bed.
This said, the Angels vanished all,
for I saw them no more:
Then for the Lady began I call,
of whom I spoke before.
She came with crootch now lymping on,
in garments white as snow:
For pleasure, pride, and pomp was gone,
from her full long ago.
What meanest thou man to call me thus?
quoth she thou homely guest:
For I was half asleep I wis,
my years requires some rest.
O courteous dame, of favor yet,
hear what I have to say:
I seek but council at thy wit,
of things I shall bewray.
My life is tossed and troubled long,
with sorrows from my birth:
With many greefes and ma^y a wrong,
and wretched cares on earth.
I droup and drop away like lincke,
whose light is soon burnt out:
And still the more of world I think,
the more I live in doubt.
The more I wish, the less I have,
and where I merit most:
There just deserts does daily crave,
and there is labor lost.
Youth has consumde his years in wa^^e,
and gathers naught but grief:
Age is but scornde or clean disgraste,
and starues without relief.
O tell no more of this quoth she,
these fortunes many find:
As heavy haps do follow me,
if thou did know my mind.
I mean as well as any wight,
that I by love bear life:
And dare show face for doing right,
with widow, maid or wife.
Yet world deceiues me every day,
my good turns have no proof:
No faith nor promise any way,
falls out for my behoof.
In world there is such falsehood used,
the just can never thrive:
A Saint himself might be abused,
if here he were alive.
But earth and ashes, dung and stink,
is all that here we have:
Men have not one good thought to think,
from birth unto their grave.
Uaine are the words and deeds of all,
all is but scorns and lies:
And all to dust and dross shall fall,
thou see before thine eyes.
She said no more, but pausde and staid^
to hear how I replied:
When I her words full well had waied,
and time to speak I spied.
These things are true quoth I, gooddreame,
I know the wrongs you feel*
And how mishap turns, out of frame
falls Fortunes fickle wheel.
And how vile world shall make an end,
and what short season here:
We have before from world we wend,
all that see I full clear.
A greater grief sticks in my mind,
that none but God he knows:
Which in my heart my friends shall find,
when hence my body goes.
This shall I shrine in secret thought,
as it some tretcherie were:
Or might against great God we wrought,
to bring my soul in fear.
If my right hand knew that indeed,
I would cut of the same:
And bite my tung and make it bleed,
if tung those greefes would name.
No ear nor any living soul,
is fit to hear it through:
My head does crave to stand on pole,
if I disclose it now.
The air alone shall hear me sound.
the smart I bear in breast:
In hollow caves it shall rebound,
to breed me more unrest.
Yea like a man bestraught of wit*
amid wild woods and groves:
Where Howlets in dark nights do sit,
and Hawks for pray he houes.
There shall my heart his greefes unfold,
there will I cry and yell:
To stars and clouds it shall be told,
that now I dare not tell.
Fie man, be not so brute like beast,
to rage and run abroad:
From foes do keep, to friends at least,
thy conscience do unload.
Some of those gripes that greeues thee so,
good council may thou take:
Sweet plasters God prouides I know,
for men that mo^e will make.
A friend dear dame, what words are those,
where dwells so true a wight?
No sooner secrets we disclose,
but then adue goodnight.
A stranger has that he has sought,
and news is hard to keep:
When friends are masters of thy thoughts,
they laugh when thou do weep.
And quickly lo behind thy back,
thy secrets must be known:
Shall friends a burden bear in pack,
when thou holdst not thine own,
That close in breast was locked fast,
a blabbing tung beware:
Strange tales flies every where like blasts,
that sure uncertain are.
Perchance I seek some secret drift,
that none should know but I*
Or practice some dishonest shift,
whereon my life may lie.
Or love some Lady of estate,
a toy past hope in age:
A fancy that may purchase hate,
if reason rule not rage.
Should these things be put out to nurse,
where Wolves and Tigers feed:
And where things grow from ill to worse,
and men catch harm indeed.
Nay, better swallow sorrows up,
and dye in great distres:
Poison drink in spiced Cup,
then secrets so expres.
If matter of such weight you have
goodman, do what you please:
I do no such great knowledge crave,
to find out your disease.
And as for love, both you and I
me think we should it leave:
The moistnes of old veins wax dry,
if wit not me deceive.
You may as well make madmen wise,
or clime beyond the Sun:
Or build fair Castles in the Skies,
as such a course to run.
As follow love that knows you not,
when silver hairs do shine:
And has the pranckes of youth forgot,
and will no more be fine.
O toutch not me with no fond love,
nor nothing thereby meant:
For I did but your judgment prove,
of secret sweet content.
Which I in s^lence carry still,
as my old years allow?
As much of heart, as of goodwill,
I troe I told you now.
Perchance I may do this or that,
as fancies men beguile:
But sure I never told you what,
I meaned all the while.
For I had rather dye then tell,
what makes my sorrow great:
My greefes the wise does know full well,
that knows cold from heat.
Cold fortune may torment me sore,
and so may shifts some time:
Hot hatred troubles men much more,
then Uenus in her prime.
Love lasts no longer as you say,
then whiles gaie flowers grow green:
In age then all delights decay,
which few or none have seen.
For age knows what true love is worth,
and has in love great stay:
Youth brings light love like blossoms forth,
that fades as flower in May.
Love is not lost if love be set,
past reach of common men:
Though for great love, small love we get,
love is not hated then.
Which shows good love wins favor still,
if love be placed right:
Love gets great thanks, or gains goodwill,
where ever love does light.
Some say that love is often disdain,
that is where love does lack:
those folks are weak and feeble brainde,
that thinks love but a knacke.
For through the world love leads the Dance,
where love wants, grows no good:
But springs up spite and foul mischaunce,
and mischief flows like Flood.
Though love I praise, this shows no spark,
of my close care and woes:
I hide my secrets in the dark,
that none but God it knows.
Enough for me to suffer smart,
such lot does destine give:
And so with sorrows break the heart,
that has no will to live.
Good friend (quoth she) haste not thine end,
with passions of the mind:
Hope after hap, the world may mend,
thou may good fortune find.
No sure my glass of life is run,
Death draws on me so fast:
I see my days are almost done,
life may no longer last.
My haples years and aged bones,
desires no being here:
To grave I go with sighs and groans,
I buy bad life too dear.
With loss of blood, of time and youth,
and all that precious is:
With loyal service toil and truth,
and hope of earthly bliss.
All in one balance now goes down,
since guerdon get I none:
Nor no account in Court nor town,
now I may hap upon.
Adue day light, shut close mine eyes,
too long you stare for naught:
So farewell friends, and you be wise,
for me take you no thought.
By this our ships were wend about,
and Cannons began to rore:
As they to Brytaine passed out,
with bounsing shot great store.
At noise whereof I wakned straight,
and calling for my close:
And saw the Sun on such a height,
that suddenly I rose.
And so put all my dream in verse,
would God a dream it were:
For many things I now rehearse,
will prove too true I fear.
FINIS.
To the right honorable my Lady Puckering, wife to the most honorable the L.
keeper of the great seal of England.
GOod Madam, strange it may seem, that a mere stranger to your Ladyship* ^are
adventure to dedicate any piece of work, where bold attempt and labor may
be but strangely understood, if a greater hope in your goodness exceeded not the
greatness of my matter, but my (...) your most honorable husbands bountiful
dealings with me of late, makes me the bolder, (because I must be thankful) in
this presumptio^^ (...) present some acceptable pe^ce of that small talent God
has given me to your good L. as well to be known of you, as to keep^ me in
my L. favor, and though that which I o^fer be skarce worthy the taking, Yet
I trust first my serviceable present hall not be misliked* because the
receiving well thereof, may procure a further piece of work better penned,
such as shall best become me to present, as knovveth God, (...) now, and at
all times augment his good gifts of grace in your good Ladyship.

LOng time in suit, and service gets some grade,
Long craving gains, both crust and crome ye know:
Long walking rids, great ground away apace,
Long use of legs makes traueiler easly go.
Long watching t^^d, brings ebb at length to flo^,
So loyal love, and duty long in ure:
Full many ways does great good will procure.
Whereon good turns springs out as from a flood,
Runs gushing waves, that waters every soil:
Whose moisture does, both fruit and flower much good,
And profit bring^ to Plowmans painful toil.
This fair land flood, kept barren field from foil,
For if no deaw, of heaven I had found:
Hot summers drouth, had soon dried up my ground.
The fountain had, her course no sooner run,
With golden streams, that cordial is of kind:
But straight began, to shine the gladsome S^n,
That sucker sends, to tree, to root, and rind.
The frost did thaw, with mild warm western wind,
And all the springs and conduits of the town;
Ran Claret wine, in honor of the crown.
When bill assignd, by suit from Prince had past,
Lord how the world, blood therewith well content:
The Clearkes they wrote, and freely labored fast,
The seals were won, when purse no penny spent.
The wax was wrought throw grace that God had sent,
So seal and wax, and all that name I can:
Came franckly of, to me from every man.
Lo how hard world, by means is easy made,
And men's good wills, with tract of time we gain:
In spring it sprouts, at fall of leaf did fade,
The grass grows green, with little showers of rain.
I reapt the crop, and fruit of others pain,
What needs more words, each place where I did go:
For Princes grace, did me great favor sho.
They knew that Court had clean consumde my youth,
And plead mine age, with pretty pension now:
If so they thought, in deed they gest the truth,
For youth and age, perforce is pleased throw.
Save that they bid me make my pen my plow,
And prove awhile, what printed books will do:
To help old Tom, to get a supper too.
But blessed be her that did the dinner give,
With too much meat we may a surfeit take:
Long with good rule, and diet men may live,
Full belly often, an empty purse may make.
He feeds best, that eats for hungers sake.
Than portion poor, makes men ne proud nor rich:
Yet one good meal a day does please me mich.
Where am I now, I speak of liberal men,
That freely gave the seals and all the rest:
Which deed deserves both thanks and praise of pen,
For that is all from me they have possessed.
This course would make the learned Lawyers blessed,
If of poor men (they took no fee at all:)
Whose wrongs are great, and riches is but small.
To trot and trudge two hundredth miles or more,
And spend their goods in toyling too and fro:
And be long pincht with pain and labor sore,
And then compeld to costly term to go.
Craves great regard of them that conscience know.
Than wise grave heads that looks through every cause:
Defend the poor with favor of your laws.
Their plaints may pearce through highest heavens all,
Their prayers brings great blessings to your door:
Your fame does rise, where they good words let fall,
For happy are the hands that helps the poor.
This sentence should be written on the floor,
Who can do good to those that stands in need:
Shall reap much corn, where sown was little seed.
When justice flows from liberal noble mind,
Good turns in world will make men live like Saints*
When good cheap law, poor silly souls do find,
The Court is not long troubled with complaints.
Frank heart goes throw where feeble courage faints,
Bounty winnes love, and lasts for ever more:
Who does great good and little takes therefore.
The poor are more in number every where,
Then are the rich that have the world at will:
Wherefore the more we ought with them to bear,
Because they live in lack and sorrow still.
The Lord that sits on his hie holy hill,
Looked lowly down on Lazarus the poor:
That humbly asked an alms at Dives door.
Most precious are the poor to God above,
Though here below they walk like lambs were lost:
And one good turn to them does get more love,
Then forty things we do for worldly boast.
Who saues a ship that is with tempest tossed,
And brings the bark where help and harbor is:
For thankful pains shall purchase heaven bliss.
When that great Judge shall come to judge us all,
Such as did help the poor shall happy be:
For then that Judge will for those people call,
Who to the poor were always frank and free.
Though world wax blind, the Lord does daily see,
Who helps who harms, and who in hope and trust:
Lays up their gold where riches cannot rust.
The wise no doubt does so by gift of grace,
That gouernes man in every honest cause:
Those noble minds that virtue do embrace,
Are plac'^t by Prince the Judges of our Laws.
At that well head the poor clear water draws,
Yea poor and rich do taste that running stream:
That spreads her veins throw all this stately Reame.
Who could enjoy a yard or foot of Land,
If Law did not decide true titles right?
Or who could hold his purse in his own hand?
If Law brought not dark dealings unto light.
Good Law does see clear day from clowdy night,
Discernes the troth from falsehood finely cled:
Whose glorious grace deceaues each simple head.
Law looks on all and sifts the flower from bran,
Law sets that straight that craft would crooked make:
Law is a stay to state and life of man,
Law with a word makes guilty conscience quake.
Law with the sword from shoulders head does take.
Law forces love, where hatred seeks blood:
And Law mong men in world does greatest good.
Where Law is none, there civil order dies,
Both brute, and rude, and sauadge people groe:
Like Canibals they live in beastly guise,
And naked too like mad wild goats they go.
The Feend they serve for God they do not know,
Where Law does lack and Justice has no place*
There never comes ne goodness, rule, nor grace.
O God how glad the hungry is of food,
The heavy heart that woe has wasted long:
To feel and find the Lawyers in such mood,
That they by Law redress a poor man's wrong.
O sweet consort O pleasant well set song,
Where all the parts the singers have by rote:
And out of tune is placed nere a note.
O noble Law where Justice voice does sound,
Concordance right the prop of public state:
And where no jar of music may be found,
Nor discord comes amiss to breed debate.
Who loves no law does all good order hate*
Law holds the joints to gather firm and fast:
That makes the house and timber long to last.
With equal waights in balance all is tried,
By measure just the world does buy and sell:
A little grain in gold is quickly spied,
When in true skales good coin is waied well.
Rest so I have a further tale to tell,
God grant my muse be in so good a vain:
That I deserve but thanks for all my pain.
FINIS.
To the right worshipful the Lady Anderson, wife to the right honorable Lord
chief Justice of the common Pleas.
MY boldness being much, may pass the bounds of duty, but the goodness of your
honorable husband (good Madame) passes so far the commendacion of my pen,
that under his judgment and shield (that is so just a Judge) I make a sauegard
to this my presumption, that hazardeth where I am unknown to present any piece
of Poetry or matter of greater effect, yet aduenturing by fortune, to give my
Lady your sister somewhat in the honor of the Queens Majesty, in the
excellency of her worthy praise that never can decay. I have translated some
verses out of French, that a Poet seemed to write of his own mistress, which
verses are so apt for the honoring of the Phoenix of our world, that I cannot
hide them from the sight of the worthy, nor dare commit so gross a fault as to
let them die with my self: wherefore and in way of your favor in publishing
these verses, I dedicate them to your good Ladishippe, though not so well
penned as the first Author did polish them, yet in the best manner my muse can
affoorde, they are plainly expressed, hoping they shall be as well taken as they
are meant, so the blessed and great Judge of all daily bless you.

A few plain verses of truth against the flaterie of time, made when the
Queens Majesty was last at Oxenford.
Since silent Poets all,
that praise your Ladies ^o:
My Phoenix makes their plumes to fall,
that would like Peacockes go.
Some do their Princes praise,
and Synthia some do like:
And some their Mistress honor raise,
as high as Soldiers pike.
Come down ye do presmount,
the warning bell it sounds:
That calls you Poets to account,
for breaking of your bounds.
In giving fame to those,
fair flowers that soon does fade:
And clean forget the white red rose,
that God a Phoenix made.
Your Ladies also do decline,
like Stars in darkesome night:
When Phoenix does like Phoebus shine,
and leands the world great light.
You paint to please desire,
your Dame in colors g^y:
As though brave words, or trim attire,
could grace a clod of clay.
My Phoenix needs not any art,
of Poets painting quil:
She is her self in every part,
so shapte by kindly skill.
That nature cannot well amend,
and to that shape most rare:
The Gods such special grace does send,
that is without compare.
The heavens did agree,
by constellations plain:
That for her virtue she should be the only queen to reign,
(In her most happy days) and carries clean away:
The tip and top of peerlesse praise, if all the world say nay,
Look not that I should name, her virtue in their place,
But look on her true well-won fame, that answers form and face
And therein shall you read, a world of matter now,
That round about the world does spread her heavenly graces throw
The seas (where cannons rore) has yielded her her right,
And sent such news unto the shore, of enemies foil and flight.
That all the world does sound, the glory Phoenix got
Whereof an echo does rebound, in such a tune and note,
(That none alive shall reatch) of Phoenix honor great,
Which shall the poets muses teach, how they of her should treat
O then with verses sweet, if Poets have good store,
Fling down your pen, at Phoenix feet, and praise your nymphs no more.
Pack hence she comes in place, a stately Royal Queen:
That takes away your Ladies grace, as soon as she is seen.
FINIS.
To the right Worshipful my Lady Fortescue, wife to the right honorable Sir
John Fortescue Knight.
THe good turn and great labor good Madam, your Honorable husband bestowed in
my behalf binds me so far, as I must not be ingrat, to him nor non of his, and
chiefelie to remember your Ladishippe, with some matter acceptable, I than
thinking of the great grief that many Soldiers found by the absence of the
Queens Majesty in time of the plague, when she lay last at Hampton court,
drew out some sad verses of the sorrow among Soldiers conceived, and
presuming you will accept them, I became so bold as to present them to your
hands, had I any worthier work to offer I would bring better, but hoping
these few lines shall duetifullie show my good will, I am to crave your
favor, in presenting these verses unto you, desiring God to multiply his
benefits and blessings in your good Ladishippe.

Verses of value, if Virtue be seen,
Made of a Phoenix, a King, and a Queen.
MY Phoenix once, was wont to mount the skies,
To see how birds, of baser feathers flew:
Then did her Port, and presence please our eyes:
Whose absence now, breeds naught but fancies new.
The Phoenix want, our court, and Realm may rue.
Thus sight of her, such welcome gladness brings,
That world ioies much, when Phoenix claps her wings
And flies abroad, to take the open air,
In royal sort, as bird of stately kind:
Who hates soul storms; and loves mild weather fair,
And by great force, can bore the blostring wind,
To show the grace, and greatness of the mind,
My Phoenix has, that virtue growing green,
When that abroad, her gracious face is seen.
Let neither fear, of plagues nor wits of men,
Keep Phoenix close, that ought to live in sight:
Of open world, for absence wrongs us then,
To take from world, the Lamp that gives us light,
O God forbid, our day were turnde to night,
And shining Sun, in clouds should shrouded be,
Whose golden rays, the world desires to see.
The Dolphin daunts, each fish that swims in Seas,
The Lion fears, the greatest beast that goes:
The Bees in Hiue, are glad their King to please,
And to their Lord, each thing their duty knows.
But first the King, his Princely presence shows,
Then subjects stoopes, and prostrate falls on face,
Or bows down head, to give their master place.
The Sun has power, to comfort flowrs and gras,
And purge the air, of soul infections all:
Makes each thing pure where his clear beams do pass
Draws up the dew, that mists and fogs lets fall,
My Phoenix has, a greater gift at call,
For vassals all, a view of her do crave,
Because thereby, great hope and hap we have.
Good turns it brings, and suitors plaints are heard,
The poor are pleased, the rich some purchase gains,
The wicked blush: the worthy wins reward,
The servant finds: a mean to quit his pains:
The wronged man, by her some right attaines,
Thus every one, that help and succor needs,
In hard distress, on Phoenix favor feeds.
But from our view, if world do Phoenix keep,
Both Sun and Moon, and stars we bid farewell,
The heavens mourn, the earth will wail and weep.
The heavy heart, it feels the pains of Hell,
Woe be to those, that in despair do dwell.
Was never plague, nor pestlence like to this,
When souls of men, have lost such heavenly bliss.
Now suitors all, you may shoot up your plaints
Your Gods now, is locked in shrine full fast:
You may perhaps, yet pray unto her Saints.
Whose ears are stopped, and hearing sure is past.
Now in the fire, you may such Idols cast.
They cannot help, like stocks and stones they be,
That have no life, nor cannot hear nor see.
Till that at large, our royal Phoenix comes,
Pack hence poor men, or pick your fingers ends.
Or blow your nails, or gnaw and bite your thombs,
Till God above, some better fortune sends.
Who here abides, till this bad world amends,
May do full well, as tides do ebb and flow,
So fortune turns, and haps do come and go.
The bodies joy, and all the ioints it bears,
Lies in the head, that may command the rest:
Let head but ache, the heart is full of fears,
And arms acrosse, we clap on troubled breast:
With heavy thoughts, the mind is so oppressed.
That neither legs, nor feet have will to go,
As man himself, were clean overcome with woe.
The head is it, that still preserues the sense*
And seeks to save, each member from disease:
Devise of head, is bodies whole defense:
The skill whereof, no part dare well displease,
For as the Moon, moves up the mighty seas,
So head does guide, the body when it will.
And rules the man, by wit and reasons skill.
But how should head, in deed do all this good,
When at our need, no use of head we have:
The head is felt, is seen and understood.
Then from disgrace, it will the body save.
And otherwise, sick man drops down in grave.
For when no help, nor use of head we find,
The feet falls lame, and gazing eyes grow blind.
The lims war stiff, for want of use and aid,
The bones do dry, their marrow wastes away:
The heart is dead, the body lives afraid,
The sinnowes shrink, the blood does still decay,
So long as world, does want the Star of day,
So long dark night, we shall be sure of h^^re,
For clowdy skies, I fear will never clear.
God send some help, to salve sick poor men's sores,
A bore of baulme, would heal our wounds up quite:
That precious oil, would eat out rotten cores,
And give great health, and man his whole delighte.
God send some sun, in frostie morning white.
That cakes of ice may melt by gentle thaw:
And at well head, we may some water draw.
A Riddle.
We wish, we want, yet have that we desire:
We freese, we burn, and yet kept from the fire.
FINIS.
This is taken out of Belleau made of his own Mistress.
Sad sighs does show, the heat of hearts desire,
And sorrow speaks, by signs of heavy eyes:
So if hot flames, proceed from holly fire,
And love may not, from vicious fancies eyes,
In tarrying time, and favor of the skies,
My only good, and greatest hap does lie:
In her that does, all fond delight dispies:
Than turn to me, sad sighs I shall not dye*
If that be she, who has so much me bound,
And makes me hers, as I were not mine own:
She most to praise, that may alive be found,
Most great and good, and gracious througly known*
She all my hope, in brief yea more than mine,
(That quickly may, bring life by look of eye)
Than come chaest sighs, a close record divine,
Return to me, and I shall never dye.
If from young years she gainde the garland ga^e,
And wan the price, of all good gifts of grace:
If princely port, do virtuous mind bewraie,
And royal power, be found by noble face,
If she be borne, most happy grave and wise,
A Sibill sage, sent down from heavens hie,
O smothring sightes, that feign would close mine eyes,
Return to me, so shall I never die.
If most upright, and fair of form she be,
That may bear life, and sweetest manner shows,
Loves God, good men, and Countries wealth does see,
A queen of kings, all Christian princes knows,
So justly lives, that each man has his own,
Sets straight each state, that else would go awrie:
Whereby her ^ame, abroad the world is blown,
Then seace sad sighs, so shall I never die.
If she the heart of Alexander have,
The sharp esprite, and hap of Haniball:
The constant mind, that Gods to Scipio gave,
And Caesar's grace, whose triumphed passed all,
If in her thought, do dwell the judgment great,
Of all that reigns, and rules from earth to sky:
(And sits this hour, in throne and regal seat),
Come sighs again, your master can not die.
If she be found, to taste the pearcing air,
In heat in cold, in frost, in snow and rain:
As diamond, that shines so passing fair,
That sun nor moon, nor weather cannot stain:
If blastes of wind, and storms to beauty yield,
And this well spring, makes other fountains dry,
(Turns tides and floodes, to water baraine feeld,)
Come sighs then home, I live and cannot die.
If her great gifts, does daunt dame fortunes might,
And she have caught, the hayres and head ot hap:
To others hard, to her a matter light,
To mount the clouds, and fall in honors lap.
If she her self, and others conquers too,
Lives long in peace, and yet does war defy:
As valiant kings, and virtuous victors do,
Then sighe no more, o heart I cannot die.
If such a prince, abase her highness than,
For some good thing, the world may guess in me:
And stoupes so low, too like a silly man,
That little knows, what Princes grace may be.
If she well way, my faith and service true,
And is the judge, and toutch that gold shall try:
The color clear, that never changes hue,
Heart sigh no more, I live and may not dye.
If I do use, her favor for wy weal,
By reason off, her gracious countenance still:
And from the sun, a little light I steal,
To keep the life, in lamp to burn at will.
If robbery thus, a true man may commit,
Both I and mine, unto her merits fly:
If I presume, it springes for want of wit,
Excuse me than, sad sighs or else I die.
If she do know, her shape in heart I bear,
Engraude in breast, her grace and figure is*
Yea day and night, I think and dream each where,
On nothing else, but on that heavenly bliss,
If so transformde, my mind and body lives,
But not consumde, nor find no cause to cry.
And wait on her, that help and comfort gives.
Than come poor sighs, your master shall not die.
If she behold that here I wish no breath,
But live all hers, in thought in word and deed:
Whose favor lost, I crave but present death,
Whose grace attaind, lean soul full fat shall feed.
If any cause, do keep her from my sight,
I know no world, my self I shall deny,
But if her torch, do lend my candle light,
Heart sigh no more, the body does not die.
But if by death, or some disgrace of mine,
Through enuies sting, or false report of foes,
My view be bard, from that sweet face divine.
Believe for troth, to death her servant goes,
And rather sure, than I should ill conceive:
Sighs mount to skies, you know the cause and why.
How here below, my lusty life I leave,
Attend me there, for wounded heart must die.
If she believe, without her presence here,
That any thing, may now content my mind:
Or think in world, is spark of gladsome cheer,
Where she is not, nor I her presence find:
But all the joys, that man imagine may,
As handmaides wayt, on her here under sky,
Then sighs mount up, to heavens hold your way,
And stay me there, for I of force must die.
If I may fear, that fragill beauty light,
Or semblance fair, is to be doubted sore:
Or my vain youth, may turn with fancies might,
Or sighs full falls, ^ains grief or torment more:
Than heart does feel, then angry stars above,
Do band your selves, against me in heavens hie.
And rigor work, to conquer constant love,
Mount up poor sighs, here is no help I die.
And so sad sighs, the witness of my thought,
If love find not, true guerdon for good will:
Ere that to grave, my body shall be brought,
Mount up to clouds, and there abide me still,
But if good hope, and hap some succor send,
And honor does, my virtuous mind supply,
With treble bliss, for which I long attend,
Return good sighs, I mean not now to die.
Translated out of French, for one that is bound much to Fortune.

FINIS.
This is to be red five ways.
IN hat a favor worn, a bird of gold in Britain land,
In loyal heart is borne, yet does on head like Phoenix stand.
To set my Phoenix forth, whose vetues may the^ al surmount,
An orient pearl more worth, in value price and good accounnt,
The^ gold or precious stone* what tongue or verse dare her distain.
A peerless paragon, in whom such gladsome gifts remain.
Whose seemly shape is wroght, as out of war were made ye mold
By fine devise of thought, like shrined Saint in beaten gold,
Dame nature did disdain, and thought great scorn in any sort,
To make the like again, that should deserve such rare report.
There needs no Poe^^s pen, nor painters peniel come in place,
Nor flatring frase of me^, whose filed spech gives each thing grace
To praise this worthy dame, a Nymph which Dian holds full deer
That in such perfect frame, as mirror bright and crystal clear
Is set out to our view, threefold as fair as shining Sun,
For beauty grace and hue, a work that has great glory won,
A Gods dropped from sky, for causes more then men may know
To please both mind and eye for those that dwells on earth below
And show what heavenly grace, and noble secret power divine.
Is seen in Pr^ncely face, that kind has formd and ^^amd so fine.
Lo this is all I write, of sacred Phoenix ten times blessed,
To show mine own delight, as fancies humor thinks best.
FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, my Lady Brocket, wife to Sir John Brocket knight,
one of the Lieutenants of Hartford Shire.
A Promise made to the good Lady you Sister, who died in the Tower (good
Mada^) commands me to shape somewhat of good will and labor of pen, to present
your La, withal, and for that I can not long live in this world and must needs
take leave thereof sooner than I look for. I have found out an old farewell
that may breed some new consideration, and such a running and rouing rhyme it
is (I hope without offense) as rather shall procure laughter than lowering, it
is enterlarded with conceits, and mixed with familiar terms, shortly knit up,
and without all curious circumstances* as brief to the Reader, as vntedious to
the writer, having passed the censure of the world thirty years ago, and is
now put in print again for a passing of the time, and a farewell to the world.
So hoping your La* receives it in good part, the matter begins I trust to
your content and good likeing.

FINIS.
A FAREVVELL WHEN I WENT to study, written to the World.
FArewell thou world, that me betrayde so long,
Too dearly bought, I find thy follies all:
Who shall thee serve, is sure to suffer wrong:
Who scorns thy haps, may shun thy sudden fall
Who fauwnes on thee, shall drink thy bitter gall:
Who flies thy toys, thy painted face shall find,
Who sooner slides, than those which at thy call,
Lives like thy slaves, in body, soul, and mind.
First from a child, with fancies was I fedd,
All at thy hands* till I to manhood grue:
Than in the dark, lo blindfeld was I led
So that my God, my self, nor man I knew,
Wild wit, young blood, old vice, new bred in bones,
Made me forget, my duty all at once.
Fair things, foul thoughts, fond works and flattring ease,
Had muffled me, and hoodwinckt so my wits
That in the storms, I drade no Sillas seas,
Nor in the calmes I fearde no froward fits
UUhich were to come: things present pleased me best
Those gone I made no mirror to the rest.
Bed soft, full mouth, gay back and foolish fame,
Was all I sought, like Lord to live at lust
At my nown shape, and shadow had I game,
A looking glass, a plaiffeer trim at trust
To pry upon, my life thus did I frame
Clean out of tune, I see it now full well
So that my life, was careless eury dell,
Yet found I have, a heap of other harms
Therereby: what then, I cannot them amend,
When dead they seem, than spring they up by swarms*
Such mischief ripped, will have a rotten end
Though at the full, the tide of them is now,
The Ebb may come, when God a time shall send,
Leave that to him, and I shall tell you how,
I learnde to know, the kind and course of man,
His nature new, his fashion half disguisde,
And how for shame, at length lo I began
To follow that, which I before despisde.
Full welcome ought, that learning be to me
Which taught me wit, when wildnes weaude the loeme
Of wanton ways, and blindness ganne to see
The path he mist, the way that led me home
Unto the Port, where I would harbored be.
And rather dwell, with quiet settled mind,
Then roue abroad, to seek uncertain luck,
Or subject be, to filthy worldly mucke.
I would not sure, be bound to suhc a clogge,
That would me rob, of reason and good skill
And in the end, but fish and catch a frogge,
As some have done, and some do use it still,
Which snatch the bone, before the hungry dogg^
UUho will not part, from that he has in hold^
Althoug in deed, his master would it have:
Unto this end, this tale now I have told,
To show him wise, that knows what to crave.
And asks of those, that freely gives for naught,
But he most wise, that has no greedy thought.
And can content, him with those little scraps,
That falls by lot, unto him for his share,
And finds no fault, at others wordly haps,
But has a head, as free from inward care.
As babe newborn, yea such a one may smile,
And laugh his fill, where some cries woe the pie:
He shall see much, that has a simple eye:
That man shall see, the strong the weak beguile,
The poor by rich, and mighty swallowed up,
The harmless drink, out of the poisoned cup.
The needy lack, that greedy raueners gripe,
The thieves let go, that robbes in velvet weeds:
And sits on bench, when truth feels many a stripe.
How fear is dubd, a knight for simple deeds,
How manhood begges, and none are helped that need^
How creep in holes, that did no hurt at all,
Are valiant called, such are the peoples brute:
The quiet man, these things behold he shall,
And see them pass, and learn thereby some fruit.
As I have done, though far from quiet mind,
In any case, my self God wot I find.
Save that to toil, and burdens for to bear,
I framed am, and lettes the world alone:
Amid my foes, that fawnes and speaks full fear.
I live aloufe, and will not be aknowne.
There hate I have, I must dissemble there,
As does those mates, which play at fortunes ball:
Do not some halt, that well may go upright:
Who can deny, but we dissemble all
In some one point, and wisdom we it call
Things are not found, as they do seem to sight.
Some laugh in heart, yet show a weeping eye,
You have hard say, the blind eats many a fly.
How should the sad, with wantons mirth agree,
The whole with sick, the wise with foolish dwell:
The proud with meek, the mean with mighty be
If all these sorts, could not dissemble well.
And even so, it fares now by me
I wincke at things, that I would not be hold.
And see those fall, that profits me no whit,
I hear likewise, that I can wish untold:
I shoot with them, that never mark may hit:
But me believe, yet win the game I would.
Among that sort, that giuet aim to sit.
I like not sure: I rather wish to bet
Then look upon, and lay on nere a sled.
Set doubts a part, it is good sport to get.
But he that winnes, must hazard needs abide,
(I leave you there) I would so make my game,
It were half won, before the match were tried,
And make him think, that hits the mark is wide.
And say himself, he roueth out of frame,
I pray you now, who would not do the same,
To gain thereby, or else at least to save,
Then grant me this, dissemble sure ye must,
As I may do, or in time past I have.
And made some blind, that better saw then I.
And saw full often, that I would not perceive,
When that thereon, did life or danger lie:
And yet I looked, and l^er^d by your leave,
What might befall, and sought to shun the shock^.
And as I fled, ill fortune followed fast,
When she should strike, I escaped many a knock,
By donking down, I knew so well her cast,
With cap and knee, her favor soon I wan.
So in a while, she took me as her man.
But when I thought, most hold of her to take,
Away she went, the whirle wind in her tail.
Yet with her friends, fair weather did I make.
Whose help was good, when world began to fail.
And if you ask, how I acquainted was,
With such sure props, that holds up house and all,
And how that I, could bring such things to pass.
To keep me up, when diverse sought my fall.
(His fall not great, it cannot be I trow,
Whose climing up, was never much you know)
This by the way, I speak yet answer lo,
To you I make, that this demands of me,
To court I came, where I could hear and see,
As others did, and with the strong I stood,
As world did wag, I wound my bark about.
And leand me there, where I could find most good,
In deed this was, the way to bear it out,
And there I found, of every sort inow:
Would I be brave, I knew where mates were had,
Would I be stout, I saw who will not bow,
Hie looks was he, that still I saw go throw,
That ship made way, that all the sails could bear.
Small sprite sat low, with finger in his ear,
Great curchy crept, full hie among the best.
He made them laugh, that looked as he would swear,
He carried coals, that could abide no gest.
Plain life the lout, was little set by there,
Fine t^unting tongues, brought many a fool in fear
Make love the meek, was ready at a call.
Feign would be seen, was fisking every were,
Set forth to sale, was marked beyond them all.
Uaine glory smilde, and looked for much ado,
New-fanglenesse, shakt off old friendship past,
Fine fall at foot, could whine and bite you toe,
Proud blind conceit, would not be placed last.
Small wit would laugh, at wiser than him self,
Disdain that dwarft, looked like a peevish elfe.
Strange nature fround, when homely folks sat down,
Full purse found friends, that came to late to town.
Set by himself, would not salute but sewe:
Small worth made boast, still mouth was all the shrewe.
Tell all that blab, was calde a royster than,
False semblaunce thriude, that could two faces bear.
Happy was he, that was a turnecoates man,
They sped not worst, that counterfayted wear,
Do as world did, drove off the longest time:
He had the lands, that was Dicke shifters ear,
He caught the birds, that best could set the lime,
Yet broken shinnes, some gate that used to clyme.
Spite spurnde at those, that better sped than he,
All busy heads, could not on shoulders bide:
They met full often, that seldom could agree,
Who fell so soon, as wit orematch with pride?
Who rose but such, as ruffled forth their years,
Yet change of suits, brought many in the briars.
White plummes cost pence, apparel picked the purse
All worn in Court, was not in City paid,
Sharp set, said often, back cloutes made belly worse.
Bare cloak he ware, whose credit was decayed,
Catch naught poor knave, could Court and Courtiers curse,
Spend all s^te still, and looked like a maid,
Hope well made spoil, and waighted for a day,
Unthrift would swear, and dice it all away.
Toss blade would snuff, and shake a swinish head,
Dare do looked big, as butcher in his shop:
Saue-grote smeld out; where hunger may be sped,
Proud would not speak, that sat not at the top.
When lurch was out, some knew not where to dine,
Who keeps the bar, was asked every hour,
Some speak full fair, to get a cup of wine,
God save ye sir, will please you take a flower.
A sweet red Rose, he had that kept good cheer:
And many a cap, and courchy to the ground,
An officer still, was made of all the year,
Old stagers knew, where such a friend was found.
Young fry might fast, for any thing they gate,
New comers walked, abroad for taking cold:
Full paunch did martch, as he had been a state,
Who looks like me, thought he that chippings sold
UUhen Christmas roobes, were brusht and that day worn,
Well was that man, might bid that saint good morn.
Bear rule stood stiff, and kept his betters out,
Boldface thrust in, throw thickest prease and throng,
Hoffe have at all, full hie could hold the snout,
Speak as he thought, was not in favor long,
Find fault the soole, would flyer in each man's face,
Rich ruled the roast, lack friends felt all the wrong,
Bare life knew not, to whom to show his case,
Wast all the wield, might sing a heavy song.
Hoyst up in ha^^, forget from whence he came
Hie office scornde, to look back how he clymde,
Hog Norton br^d, disdain to know their dame,
Pride scarde no fall, till foot full fast was lymde,
Snatch scratched all, and give his fellows none,
Need lickt the plates, and gnawed bare the bone,
Mounch present crept, in corners all alone*
Hau^cke was made, where meat was little seen:
Unworthy of bread, fardewell God save the Queen.
Spoil would not spare, his charges was but small,
Make feast filled in, the King did pay for all.
Seek help, spoke fair, yet sloly sped his suit,
Give bribes was heard, his money told his tale,
Lack naught had more, but want could find no fruit
Need blew his nails, and looked very stale.
Skill for a shifte, was glad to teach for pence,
Old hangers on, would not be beaten thence.
Wit did invent, but wealth bare all the brute:
Boldness did speak, when bashnes was full mute.
Cunning wrought much, but craft beyond him crept,
Poets made rimes, but roysters praises rept,
Wisdom would wait, on many a woodcock often,
Old broomes were good, but new all clean they swept,
Love ease sat long, and looked to lie full soft.
Eat much would boast, he serud our suffrant long,
Fat brows Knights, I tell you took great pain,
Some went full gaie, that was not worth a thong.
Some threw at all, and nicked every main.
He talked of wars, that had small wit in peace,
Scarce knew himself, would common wealths debate:
He spoke great things, that swelted in his grease.
Witless well di^de, would be a Lords check mate,
Lo croucht unto, a sore Discourse would make,
Make room my friends (quoth he) that kept the gate
Craft had a care, to all he did or spoke,
Unwelcome guestes, stepped in and a^t no leave,
Some pleased the prince, yet had the peoples hate.
Some serude them both, and did them both deceive.
He near sat still, that courried favor well:
Some playde the fox, that like a goose could look,
Some askd what news, and yet could wonders tell,
Small mind of God, would often bear a book,
He went to mass, that would the Challice sell,
Some loud the Church, for the sweet relickes there
Some made of saints, brought up another where:
Some neither saint, nor Devil fearde at all,
Some like this world, more than the world to come:
Some in their ruff, would iet about the hall,
Some spent such nights, they dread no day of dome,
Some watch their time, and yet their time they lost,
Some banquets made, and wear banckrout at last:
Some learnde to be, fine Courtiers to their cost.
Some had small help, and yet spent all full fast.
Some sought to spend, upon another charge,
Some careless liude, and walked abroad at large,
Some craude apace, and caught some crummes by craft,
Some could not ask, they thought deserts should crave,
Some made fair sale, of blades louse in the haft.
Some never wanne, nor could devise to save.
Some waited hard, but gate small fruit therefore,
Some had ill hap, and yet no virtue lackt:
Some saude odd ends, and made of little more,
Some had their bags, as full as could be thwakt.
Some made cold mirth, yet favored for such vice,
Who Fortune liket, was ever most in price.
All this in Court, I saw of them good store
F^ll twenty years, as trial good I have,
Not of Court now, as Court has been of yore,
I write, I speak, and treat so God me save.
To show wherefore, from thence I me withdrew,
What harm it did, unto my betters far.
What good likewise, he gate that Court well knew,
How some did make, and some therein did mar.
But to be plain, where I such chaunges found,
I list not dwell, let them that will be bound
To that short rain, I choose the quiet soil
The Country large, to have free scope to walk,
To be in Court, I count it but a toil.
Where heart much thinks, and tongue dare little talk.
Where some must site, and look upon the walls:
And beat their heels, against formsides all day,
And subjects are, to others becks and calls,
That life is weak, wherein their is no stay,
A piece of bread, is better had with eas.
Then bankets sweet, upon such bitter bordes
Some say there is, no fishing to the Seas,
Yet many Troutes, are caught on little fordes,
That shallow seem, with other pretty fish.
That at the length, will make an honest dishe,
On little brooks, men angle safe and dry.
In leather boots, and dread no drowning there,
On these rough Seas, the least wind in the sky.
Tipes up the Bark, or brings a man in fear,
Some have no hearts, with roaring waves to strive.
Full green to sight, and vggly to the eye.
Which on the rocks, the silly vessels drive.
And knocks their Keeles, and makes poor Pilots cry
Hale in the sail, let go the bowling mate.
Now in good faith, such soddaine shocks I hate,
Yet some will think, I am not settled so,
But I will seek, to try the Sea again,
Why is the Earth, so narrow would I know,
I cannot find, where I may well remain.
The world is wide, and men must burdens bear,
That ordaind are, unto no better chance.
That grows not here, takes root an other where,
Some shoots ill, yet happens by a glaunce,
To hit their game, men ought to do their best.
And seek their luck, and let God work the rest.
So for my part, I shall likewise proceed,
And though I bid, the Court and world farewell,
I mean to use, them both as I have need.
But for to say, in Court I wish to dwell,
I mind it not, as God me help and speed,
And for the world, his yoke still draw I must.
But sure I serve, him all against my lust,
For in the same, is neither hope nor trust,
Wherefore my leave, I take as power I have,
From him and his, though course of life says no.
A worldling here, I must be to my grave.
For this is but, a May game mixed with woe,
A borrowde roulme, where we our Pageants play.
A skaffold plain, whereon we revels make.
A crooked path, a parlous false high way,
A toilesome soil, where we much travel take,
Good Reader now, do neither sting nor hiss,
At any thing, that in this verse is pl^est,
Where fault is found, for favor mend the miss.
This rouing rhyme, was slubberd up in have,
And naught thereby, the simple writer meant,
But neither Court, nor world could him content.
FINIS.
A Tragical Discourse of a dolorous Gentlewoman, dedicated to all those Ladies
that holds good name precious.
YOu wives that wish, to live with worlds renown,
And wisely way, the worth of precious fame:
Come hear the voice, that gives a woeful sown.
Come hear her tale, that dare not show her name*
Come Country youth, come noble Courtly Dame.
And mark my words, whose works in wondering days,
With double blotte, redounds to my dispraise.
From tender years, till twenty two were past,
I nourisht was, at pomp at pleasures pap^,
But who can tell, how long our joy shall last:
For greatest calmes, comes often to thunder claps,
And sweetest hopes, do change to sowrest haps,
O tickle time, that wanders swift as wind,
With hair before, and bare and bald behind.
No gripe nor hand, can take sure hold of thee,
Thou flitst so fast, and leaves the world at worst,
Look what time brings, time takes away you see.
Good time is blessed, bad time we hold accorst.
Time hurts them often, that time did help at forced,
Look what we have, when youth is most in prime,
That shall we want, in age by course of time.
My fresh delights, do fall and fade like flower,
The blossoms gay, from beauties buds are gone,
Our state of life, does alter every hour,
As pleasures pass, come sorrows pacing on,
The world it self, is like a rolling stone,
And on such wheels, our tombling haps do run,
They slide as swift, as shadow in the Sun.
Whiles careless wit, does carry youth about,
(To sports and plays, that does from pastime rise)
The merry mind, is void of fear and doubt,
And all the powers, are glad to please the eyes,
But when wild head, or wanton waxes wise,
The weighty thoughts, that deep foresight retains,
Brings troubled sleeps, and breaks the quiet brains.
In childishe days, I made no count of chance,
When friends took care, to match me to their will,
So hoping long, good hap would me advance,
I kept me free, from wedlockes bondage still.
But parents wise, that had good worldly skill,
With open checks, rebukt the causes chief^,
The more they stirde, the greater grew my grief.
As when a sore, is rubde and handled hard,
The less it heales, because ye touch it near:
O Fathers grave, if that you took regard,
How that with checks, you use your children dear,
(Or in your moodes, you would some reason here.
They should be ioynde, where they great joy should have.
And you of them, enjoy the thing you crave.
But wilful men, (that wealth may wrest awry)
Will force poor babes, to marry or to morn:
What father will, the child may not deny.
He hurts his shins, against the prick shall spurn,
When match is made, it is past time to turn.
When silly Lamb, is to the slaughter led,
The Butchar brags, the simple Sheep is dead.
And yet in deed, twere better children smart,
(And match in time, as cause and matter moves).
Then childrens choice, should break the fathers heart
Or breed debate, as wilful marriage proves,
Short is the joy, of them that longest loves,
When want comes on, and woe begins to wring:
For lack is thrall, and slave to every thing.
Love is not now, as love has been of old,
(A gamesome babe, to dandle on the knee)
Love cares for naught, but land and bags of gold,
That keeps both man, and horse in stable free,
They have no wit, that other lovers be,
Wealth master is, and porter of the gate:
That lets in love, when want shall come to late.
Well as it was, my friends could do no good,
My fortune bore, the sway and ruled all,
And I full long, on will and freedom stood:
Till flesh and blood, must needs to fancy fall.
And then though hap, and worldly wealth was small
I lighted where, I likte and loved well;
And where I vowde, for term of life to dwell.
My choice was likte, for many gifts of grace,
He had, though wealth, sometime was not at will:
And for his sake, in many a noble place,
I welcome was, and purchased favor still.
My candle blasoe, like torch on top of hill:
And for content, of mind where love does rest.
Mine own poor choice, might pass among the best.
Long liude we thus, at home and eke abroad,
When kindred clean, in deed forsook us both.
What burden fell, I helped to bear the load:
And glad in world, to taste how Fortune goth,
The mind I had, to God and sacred oath,
Made me refuse, no travail for his sake*
Whom of free will, I choose to be my make.
The Seas we sailde, the land we rode about,
The Court we saw, the town we dwelt long in:
The fields we walked, the gardens gay throughout,
We went unto, where many a feast has bin,
We could not sincke, for hap held up the chin.
He prosperd well, and look what God had sent,
With loving wife, at home the same he spent.
He took great pains, to come by that he had,
And trauailde sore, through many a foreign soil:
To bring that home, that makes the household glad.
And keep the wife, and household folk from ^oile,
And I took care, that nothing went to spoil,
And look in deed, what things that I did lack,
Was seen in face, or found upon my back.
The world might see, I went in garments good,
Though small I brought, to him as I confess:
I spent him much, and at great charge I stood.
Which brings strong hearts, sometime to great distres*
But never that, might make his love the less.
For look how he* his liking first began,
In fine for troth, he proud the self same manne.
I could not sleep, but where in bed he lay,
I could not eat, but where he sat at boorde:
I could not laugh, when liking was away,
I silent sat, gave he but half a word.
Ill news of him, struck me with mortal sword,
His mind and mine, did draw so in one yoke,
The self same sittes, he felt where of I spoke.
Full seven years, this constant course we kept,
Though often times, there happened household iarrs,
And tratling tales, that in between us crept.
Made many wounds, where yet remains the scarrs.
Yet always peace, took up our brawling wars,
And we did seek, to salve each others sore:
And pass old griefs, and think thereon no more.
Sweet is that peace, that patcheth up great harms,
Sharp is the war, that tears a house in ^waine.
Woe worth those words, that brings in braule^ by swarms.
Dark be those clouds, that always threatens rain.
Cursed be the cause, that breeds woe and pain,
And damnde in Hell, those subtle spirits shall be:
That council gave, to part my choice from me.
Well as our chance, together was to join,
And dwell long while, as here in brief you hard:
So hap came on, (through hope of wealth or coin)
And drew my choice, where he might be prefarde*
To wars, and I, that had a great regard:
To him that time, when I his mind did know:
Gave my consent, that he to wars should go.
With sighs and sobs, and bitter tears among,
We parted tho, with promise surely past:
That one should hear, from other ere twere long,
And sadly so, we seured at the last,
His goods, his gold, his friends both firm and fast.
He left me then, to comfort me withal,
But nere a child, as Fortune so did fall.
He past the seas, and sent me tokens still,
And money such, as might supply my need:
And for to show, his faith and great good will,
Long Letters large, he made that I might reed.
Of promise past, and to come home in deed,
But to what end, should serve this business great,
My mind was turnde, warm love had lost his heat.
A new fine man, both young and apt for change,
I those, and clean, forgot my former joy:
And in a while, I was become so strange.
As Hagard Hawk, that takes in head a toy,
And flees from Lure, and wa^eth nice and coy.
My wedlock now, not hearing of these news,
Made no have home, till I was ore the shows.
Yet knacks I wrought, to bleare my husbands eyes,
I made a brute, be blown that I was dead:
When that he heard, he did his life despise:
And so forsook, sleep, rest, and taste of bread,
He rent his hair, he sadly shook his head,
He walked the woods, and shunned all repair,
As one would be, deuourd with fowls of thaire.
He daily bledde, when little food he took,
He would not come, where women were in place,
And he so lean, and like a Ghost did look.
That Death it self, was seen amid his face,
A noble Earl, as he beheld this case:
Brake with the man, that thus tormented was,
And so in sports, the troubled time did pass.
But ague ^its* and sickness followed on,
That in poor plite, came home my husband thoe,
Not lean in purse, but bare and near the bone,
The body then, was worn with war and woe,
And yet full sound, as all the world might know,
His limbs I saw, but I so nice did wax:
There was no flame, of fire might come to flax.
For I could weep, and quench by cunning art,
The hottest love, that ever husband bore:
And so two years, I played a Foxes part,
Which ere I die, I may repent full sore,
My husbands bed, I shund, and furthermore,
I fainde I had* a sickness let it go,
I never mind, that folly forth to shoe.
A finer ^ricke, to compass that I ^ought,
I plaide through fleight* and casting figures trim:
To my good man, a bastard g^rle I brought,
And from my friend* presented her to him:
He saw thereby, the find run ore the brime,
Yet kept it close, and said nothing at all:
Till out by chance, might further matter fall.
And always would, my husband tell me plain,
I did him wrong, to keep me from his bed:
But I could use, him in a pleasant vain,
And make him soon, forgett that he had sedde.
My door was locked, how ere I laid my head,
My maids and I, kept solemn cheer alone:
How ever plain, poor husband made his mon^.
Two years this wise* I shoeffled Cards full clean,
Till husband spied, a Letter of my hand:
Whereby he found, what folly I did mean,
But I was bent, against my deed to stand.
So faest him down, and swore when all was scande
It was not mine, but as he soundly slept:
To his beds side, my maid and I we stepped.
And heaude him up, and so from bolster than,
We took his purse, wherein the Letter lay:
When that we had, we left the silly man,
As saffe as he, that sleeps in Cock of hay,
Well, when he looked, in purse the other day,
And found my fraud, and falsehood as it was:
Out of the door, in fury did he pass.
Yet came again, that night and so fell sick,
(The cause whereof, soon after you shall here:)
Full long he lay, and touched so near the quick,
That he was like, to buy that sickness dear.
But when on foot, he stepped and all was clear,
He had farewell, fal^^ wife, God send thee grace*
Thy wicked ways, mak^s husband give thee place.
I saw how world, would wonder at this act,
And straight new tales, on husband ganne I raise:
With forged lies, and railing reasons rackt,
That still should sound, unto his most disprayse.
I faynde one while, he used wanton ways,
With every maid, that he might touch or see:
And then he was, to sick a soul for me.
Then poor he was, I said to cloak my pride,
When this serude not, I ^wore the man was madd,
And in his rage, would beat me back and side,
So every day, a new device I had.
To make the world, believe he was too bad,
And at the length, when all I had was sold:
My maid and I: go try the world we would.
So shutting door, and trusting up my pack^,
I flang from home, not bidding friends farewell:
But I had not, no sooner turnde my back,
But husband heard, how all this matter fell.
And yet alone, awhile he let me dwell,
Till that he saw, I was so far past shame:
I card not what, became of honest name.
Indeed the house, where I my residence made,
With ^ustie Lads, was haunted every hour,
And I had those, that well could toss the blade,
To take my part, if husband ganne to lowre.
His friends were weak, and I with strongest power,
Began to brag, and threaten him full sore:
And had preparde, a bloody band therefore.
I sought to bring, my brethren to this braule,
But they were wise, and would no quarrel take:
And putting off, the harms that might befall,
They wisely wrought, a fraindly peace to make.
But ever I, good counsel did forsake,
And thought to make, my husband hide his head:
By practice still, till he poor man were dead.
Yet in a mood, when least I looked therefore,
He came and told, me all was much amiss:
Whereat I cried, alas and loud I rore,
For neighbors help, who quickly hearing this,
Came thrusting in, as often the manner is,
How now good folk, quoth he with bended brow:
Tweene man and wife, dare you be sticklars now.
No in good faith, quoth they and so retierd,
But still I looked, for other succor there:
And for that thing, that husband then desired,
I took no care, For poisning her master*
I meant a further fear.
To bring him in, yet maid in giving ear,
To honest words, fell down on knees at last:
And pardon craude, for privy knauerie past.
My husband then, forgave her and took leave,
In hope my mind, would gentle wax thereby:
But I that meant, my husband to deceive,
In better place, began a greater cry.
Where women were, that marked my weeping eye,
And thought indeed, I had been handled ill:
So stayde me there, perforce among them still.
My husband swore, I should receive no harm,
And home again, I should be safely brought:
But I had taught, the women such a charm,
They would not then, depart from me for naught.
That could be said, thus he like wa^e was wrought,
And tempred so, that home without his wife:
He went away, the more my shamlesse life.
When shamef^^^ looks, forsook my modest face,
I waxt so bold, I blushed no more than block:
Then clapped on Robes, of gaie vaine-glories grace,
With colors fair, to paint a foul black stock.
Yet calde I was, a Hen for each good Cock,
A morsel sweet, a whetstone fine forsooth:
To set on edge, on every dainty tothe.
I card not how, my husband murthred were,
By Magicks force, or any Diuilish art:
I shoude his sight, and presence every where,
As one that lodgde, disdain in hateful heart.
And still I playde, full many a filthy part,
To rid him hence, and take away his life:
Who God preserude, to plague a paltring wife.
And for to hide, those brainesicke prankes of mine,
I had a knacke to break the marriage band:
And so a dragme, or draught of poison fine,
I did devise, to hap in husbands hand.
And as that cup, on tables end did stand,
With fervent thirst, he came and so it raught,
And in that heat, drank of the mortal draught.
When guilty heart, should make my face to blushe,
I braude it out, in silks and Ueluets gaye:
And card not what, world said of me a rushe,
For I took time, e^e time would wear away.
(At graceless games, and many a shameless play^)
And sowing seeds, that Nettle flowers brought forth:
I reapt but weeds, or thistles nothing worth.
I rufled long, when husband barely went,
And fast him out, in streets or civil town,
My friends did force the man to stand content,
It was no boot, to strive or swear me down.
For I had made the world on him to frown,
And raisde a brute, that he was bedlem mad:
Thus lo, of him the conquest still I had.
My haunt was such among the noblest sort,
That I was calde a sober Sibill sage:
And worthy wits would build on my report,
For I knew how to flatter every age.
And always wrought to make my husband rage
Whereby his life in hazard hard might fall:
And I the while run clean away with ball.
I loved not one but lusted after all,
The puddell ^oule, was fittest for a gigge:
The fountain fair did drink like bitter gall,
In filthy mud I wallowd like a pigge.
About the streets was gadding gentle rigge.
With clothes tuckt up to set bad ware to sale:
For youth good stuff, and for old age a stale.
A loving look could make a Gudgeon bite,
A fine du guard could fetch in scoles of fish:
A cunning knacke could stir up cold delight,
A glittring girl could feed a wantons wish.
And who does not desire a dainty dish,
Whose sugared taste breeds secret eger mood:
That feign would feed, and finds most fearful food.
I could in street bestur and stretch my limbs,
As though some sprite were under outward show
Who angleth not for fish that smoothly swims?
At pleasant mark who does not bend the bow?
Small shafts are shot at many a cerraine Crow,
Then if fair birds do hap to come in way:
Blame not the Hawk that makes of foul a pray.
Not beauty here, I claim by this my talk,
For brown and black I was God bless the ma^ke:
Who calls me fair does scarce know Cheese from chalk,
For I was formd when winter nights was dark.
And Natures works took light at little spark,
For kind in scorn had made a moulde of Iette:
That shone like cole, wherein my face was set.
Three years I straied like waffe that waxes wild,
Two more at least I lay from husbands bed:
And all this while I used him like a child,
For at no time I neither wrote ne sed.
Ne sent to him, such toys I had in head.
That stomach ^^iffe thought not to stoop a whit:
For stubborn Colte in teeth had got the bit.
He let me run oer hedge, oer hill and dale.
And would not pluck the raines of bridle back:
I could tell why, but thereby hangs a tale,
Would make me blush and show of grace great lack.
I had my will, whiles all thing went to wrack,
What needs more words, I ran so rude a race:
I never thought again to turn my face.
What slight scapes free, from subtle searching head,
What wit works not to serve lewd women's wyles:
What practice flies the foil of stained bed,
What is not won with words or worldly guiles.
What will not yield and faune where Fortune smiles,
What time is lost to gain that women crave:
And all proceeds from waiward will we have.
If that we love, the fury lasts not long,
If once we hate, our malice has no end:
If that we mind to offer husband wrong,
We want no wit the quarrel to defend.
Our stuborne heart had rather break then bend,
And custom has among us made such laws:
That all our sex will take our part and cause.
And where the flood and stream of strife does run,
In comes the tide of daily troubles great:
Yea where a storm or braule is once begun,
All bitter blasts repairs and breathes out heat.
the eyes will stare, the face will frown and sweat,
The tung must clap, the head will shake and nod:
And heart within has clean forgotten God.
Friends must be wrought with blades to band it out,
Foes must be whipped and scourged in their kind:
World shall be tossed and turned round about,
Still to maintain the mischief of the mind.
Tale bearers then shall lie within the wind,
To bring bad news and set the house a fire:
That flamde before with sparks of spites desire.
My practice strange can all these plagues unfold,
That better were lapt up in silence heer^:
Too late to call again that tung has told,
The wise should sell their words and worship dear.
But since in world my self I cannot clear,
I will go through this heavy tale of mine:
That world may well at wicked ways repine.
Long after this he heard that I lay sick,
And then from Court he comes with right great speed:
Do comfort me that was both sound and quick,
To play the Fox or knave again for need.
But though that time I would not be agreede,
I took his wine and sent him so away:
With scorn enough in sign of parting day.
For since that time he never saw my face,
Nor had no mind to come where was my haunt:
And since that storm I had so little grace,
In every soil I make my boste and vaunte.
I conquered him and so I do you grant,
For three years more I have done what I please:
And live at large in lust and lordly ease.
And these five years I have done what I can,
By tung and art and figures that I cast:
And every way to shame my plain good man,
which shame I fear will sure be mine at last.
I am so learnd I can play loose and fast,
My skill is such in Planets hye and low:
I rule the Skies and heavens where I go.
Good Fortunes sure some say that I can tell,
And many things by figures I unfold:
I say no more but wish that all were well,
For he that does this wicked world behold.
whose Godhead seeeth into this massy moulde.
Knows well how often I tread my shoe awry:
And in what plight my sinful soul does lie.
And if this God regard with angry cheer,
The vice on earth that vainly we commit:
And straightly look unto my doings here,
And like a Judge in trembling conscience sit.
I am condemd, there serves ne force nor wit,
Out is my Lamp, the oil has lost his light:
And my fair day is turned to foul black night.
The searching heads that sifts my manners throw,
Will shrink aside when I draw near their view:
The wiuely dames that sees my blotted brow,
In my behalf will blush and change their hue.
The gentle hearts that others harms does rue,
Will much lament my life so lewdly run:
And clean untwist the thread good name has spun.
The basest dame (whose faults are borne in breast)
Will scorn to hear my folly blazed abroad:
The frumping flock at me will make a jest,
The spiteful swarm will poulte and swell like tode.
My guilty mind that bears most heavy lode,
Will sink down right when world shall talk of grace:
And shame her self will slubber all my face.
The two brave boys I had from husbands bed,
That Stoner got, stains now my honest name:
And witness bears to world when I am dead,
Of secret sins that purchased open shame.
I kept that close long like a cunning dame,
Till husband had found out my paultring life:
Then he at Bathe forsook his cogging wife.
The foul reports that daily I give him,
Rebounds like ball to mine own bosom straight:
Yet I with craft fac'te out the matter trim,
But still I bear the blot for all my slight.
My back so crackes under this heavy weight,
That all the joints and bones I bear about:
Uofoldes my faults and filthy manners out.
The sober sort that sets by noble brute,
Will shake their heads as they my boldness spy:
The clapping tungs will never sure be mute,
Shreawd people all, will show alowryng eye.
But still I fear, the Lord that sits on hye,
Will look more strange, on me so late disgraste:
Then all the world that here beneath are plaste.
The Church wherein both faith and hand I gave,
Shall witness bear of breach of promise due?
The spousall bed and marriage day so brave,
Shall make me calde* forsworn and most untrue.
the holy book, the old law and the new,
Against my soul shall such sharp sentence give:
In other world where sprite desires to live.
Let matrons chaste, and modest wives each one,
That falsehood hates, and loves their troth to keep:
In fury come, and fling at me a stone,
And let no wight my death bewail nor weep.
Let days unrest and dreadful dreams in sleep,
Pursue me still and bring me to my grave:
Since God and man I so offended have.
The steps I tread shall tell me my offense,
the feelds I walk shall bring my fault to mind,
The harms I did in world shall haste me hence,
The wealth I wish shall waste and wear with wind.
The fame I seek shall fling me far behind,
And all good things that virtuous wives enjoy:
At my most need shall turn to mine annoy.
The wise that weighes my wiles in balance right,
Shall see my wit want weight and be but ba^e:
The fool himself shall find my judgment light,
In making choice to chop and change my race.
The poor shall point at me in every place,
The rich, and those that sway and rule does hear:
With curb of Law shall bring lewd life in fear.
The friends I had shall froune and shun my sight,
The foes I have shall follow me with shame:
The neighbor love that pleased me day and night,
Shall now draw back and look on loss of name.
The merry mate and homely country dame,
And all the town and soil where I was borne:
In Parish Church shall laugh my life to scorn.
The band once broke that God himself has blessed,
Brings worldly woe, and curses in by swarms:
The marriage marde that God made for man's rest,
Turns vpside down, from happy help to harms.
The Bridal bed defiled with loathsome charms,
Breeds wicked smoke, and smoothing slanders base:
On whose foul sum a world of people gaze.
The knot of love unknit by hateful cause,
Calls greefes to count, and cries to clouds for aid:
The lewd contempt and breach of sacred laws,
Makes every hour offendour sore afraid.
The fickle faith that is with scourges paid,
Bids falsehood fly the plague that is preparde:
For those who looks to life with small regard.
No rouffling troop that s^ash and swill up wine,
Can ward the blows that wrath of God sends down:
No cunning knacks nor knacking fetches fine,
Can conquer troth and thrust him out of town.
No treasons train can take way true renown,
No cloud can cloak the craft that all men finds:
No salve but grace can heal infected minds.
My hollow heart has lost the hope I had,
What drops in now, does doubt and danger bring:
In husband^ cares, I spoke that made me glad,
With newfound friends, I talk that makes me wring.
The first good will, from virtuous love did spring,
The last delight, and all that since fell out:
Began on lust, and needs must end in doubt
Now open streets, by Dule flight must I walk,
And secret nookes, and shifts must shadow fleight:
Except I care not what the world does talk,
And mind to frame a crooked matter straight.
And then though pride, holds head a wonders height,
Shame pluckes down heart, and makes me blush at last:
But well away, that sign of grace is past.
Though in the teeth, I have the bridle got,
And that I run beyond my riders reach:
I dare not sing, in queere too hie a note,
For fear of check, and tuter do me teach.
I play boe peep, least people me appeach,
I seem a Saint, when devilish things I mean:
Yet much adoo, I have to carry clean.
O wretched change, that brings repentance often,
O bitter sweet, whose taste deceiues us all:
O poisoned lust, that puffes up pride aloft,
O graceless game, full farc'st with sugared gall.
O tripping trust, that swiftly gives a fall,
O spiteful sport, that spends thy youth in shame:
And brings thine age, in horror and defame.
O greedy will, that gains but grief of mind,
O gnawing worm that frets the conscience still:
O wicked Art, that strikes the senses blind,
O leude desire, more hot than Ethna hill,
O beastly bliss, begun on bold consait:
And does bewitch, them all that bites the bayte.
O paultring play, and peevish pastime vain,
O sliding joy, that sinckes where surety swims:
O perlous toye, and pleasure mixed with pain,
O Peacocke proud, that still fond feathers trims.
O lusty blood, nay wanton loathsome limes,
That stoupes to filth, and costly carrein gaye:
That gives bad gold, and steals good name away.
My merry mates, and minsing minions fine,
Speaks fair a while, to win their leude desire:
But wilely world, can let me starve and pine,
And for reward, can give a flout or flire.
So lead me on, and leave me in the mire,
And blab all out, that has been closely wrought:
O prankes of youth, O painted thing of naught.
O puddell soul, that seems at first full fair,
O cause of care, and source of sorrow sour:
O deadly hope, and ground of deep despair,
O pleasant weed, and stinking rotten flower,
O ravening wolves, that does poor wives devour,
O smiling thieves, that robbs the chastest heart:
O traiterous tongues, that can play Judas part.
You laid your traynes, as Foulers lays his net,
You bosom Snakes, your sting has me undone:
By loving you, at length what shall I get,
When you me loathe, where shall the cast off run.
Woe worth that wight, that woing first begun,
Cursed be the crast, that causes clamours ryes:
And vengeance fall, upon your staring eyes.
A plague consume, your songs and subtell suits,
A wildfire catch, your combrous knauish brains:
A murrein take, your foul untimely fruits,
A canker eat, your hands and azure veins.
The Haggs of Hell, reward you for your pains,
Both pen and ynke, and all that helped desire:
(And you your selves) I wish in flaming fire.
Fie on your scroules, and Pistells full of lies,
An Oten straw, for all your stately stiells:
Your frisled hair, and noughtie new-fond guise,
Your Lordly looks, your simpring shameless smilles
Your wanton talk, and privy wincking wills,
I here bequeath, to Satan and his crew:
Good fellows fit, for such false ladds as you.
You are the frothe, and scumme of worlds delight,
The dalling whelps, that can with feathers play:
Of mischiefs all, the mark, the butte, and white*
The jolly Fry, that follows flood each way.
The gallant flock, the stately stars of day,
The busy Bees, that can no honey make:
But spoylers of, each fruit and flower ye take.
The waiting dogs, that bite before they bark,
The couching currs, that snatch at every fly:
The figboies fine, that iuggles in the dark,
The cunning crew, that at receipt can lie.
The sooking sponge, that draws fair fountains dry,
The greedy hounds, that follows eurie game:
The blott and stain, of each good woman's name.
A robe or ring, or trifling token bare,
You give for that, you never can restore,
Then are you ^one, you have your wished fare,
In stranger streams, you love to stire your Ore*
If honest wives, but knew your prankes before,
They would as soon, see of your subtle heds:
As by your drifts, go stain their husbands bedds.
In marriage house, is friendly fastness found,
Though fare be mean, content fills up the dish:
In bordell bower, sweet banquets are unsound,
Though dainties there, we have at will and wish,
At home we take, in worth cold flesh or fish,
For warm good will, does season so the chee^e,
That with small cost, we banquet all the year.
Abroad we sit, as though we were affearde,
And scarce dare feed, or talk for taunts and nipps:
At home we rule, in spite of husbands bearde,
And play the Cook, and so may lick our lips.
Abroad for naught, our tongue is taken in tripps,
And then great heart, can neither drink nor eat:
Thus dear is bought, abroad our borrowde meat.
Look what is said, at home in cloth is lappt,
There speech is free, and honey sports we use:
O well away, that this misfortune hapt,
And that I did, my husband so abuse.
That I have brought, my self into a muse,
Lost home thereby, lost God and good men's praise:
And now must run, a gadding all my days.
A plague most fit, for them that use to change,
A scourge wherein, the wrath of God is seen:
A staff of strife, for pilgrim nothing strange,
A bleeding wound, that makes my sorrow green.
A sore rebuke, for wits that over ween,
A heavy cross, and sent me for the nones:
To break my will, and yet to bruise no bones.
But since my will, did weaue this woeful web,
That nee^s must make, a weed for wantons wear
And that my flood, is like to fall to ebb,
By want of will, that ought low sail to bear.
To punish Soul, that else some other where,
Might suffer smart, I vow in hand to take,
A better life, and so false world forsake.
Away proud pomp, and costly garments nice,
Come mourning gown, ^ clothe the careful wight:
Away vain shows, and open signs of vice,
Come virtue now, and give my Lamp more light*
Come Summers day, adue dark winters night,
I love to live, and look about me far:
When wound is heald, time may amend the scarre.
Away young Fry, that gives leawd Counsel now,
Away old trotts, that sets young flesh to sale:
Away foul sluttes, whose filth does blott my browe,
Away trim tongues, that near told honest tale,
Away bold beasts, whose brabble bred my bal^,
Away rude Waspes, you stong me through the breast.
Go ^ite your heads, and let me live in rest.
Away wild giggs, that bounceth like a topp,
Away ta^e louts, that fawn like whelps for naught:
Away light heads, that loves to change and chopp,
Away fine wits, that many mischiefs wrought,
Away slay Snakes, that my destruction sought,
Away ^alse shrewes, that never none may trust:
But such leawd girls, as are beguilde by lust.
Away fair speech, that me bewitch to long,
Away foul works, that filled my face with blurs,
Come home poor sense, that led my fancy wrong:
And pack from me, you privy biting curs,
That sticks still, together like wild burs,
And where ye touch, ye bring away the wull.
So from fine cloth, pure honest name ye pull.
It Is time to look, how good report was lost,
And prop up house, that now is near to fall:
A wretched brute, flies through the air in post.
A whirling wind, may come and trip down all,
And though I list, not come at husbands call:
I may not fly, from God and follow man,
That still deuours, like Wolf what sheep he can.
The sweetest wine, at length will ware full sour,
It proves sharp sauce, that once had sugared taste:
Fond fancies freaks, will fade as fast as flower,
And wantons love, with sports will wear and wast.
When hard in arms, new comers are embrast.
Farewell old friend, go play you where you wull:
The Hawk has praide, the Haggards gorgs is full.
Love stays not long, it is but one years bird,
A foolish fit, that makes wild wits go mad:
A gallant Coult, that runs for a girde,
A lime rod fine, to catch a lusty ladde:
A youthful prancke, that makes age look full sad,
A merry mate, so long as money lasts,
Good for a flight, then of her bells she casts.
Love tarries not, it is a pesting game,
That has such have, it goes we know not where,
Now fair and fat, then crooked lean and lame,
Now plays boe peep, now asking here and there is.
Now balde as Coote, now trim with fresled hear,
Now gay and glad, now shrewd and scarce well pleas^
Now sound as Chicke, now sick and soon diseasd.
With dalling much love will be easly tierd,
When love is cloyed, the roile at gresse must run:
When hoof is whole; the hackney may be hierd,
When corn is sold, the market clean is done.
It ends with hate, that was with love begone,
It may be loathd, that long on liking lay:
Lust lacks no wings, when love will fly away.
Love must have change, to season sweet delight,
Loves mind will range, like Spaniel in the field:
Love looks like Dove, when she will prove a Kite,
Love seeks to rule, she has no mind to yield,
Love will have scope, love is restrained seelde.
If love lack a ought, she shows a lowering eye,
And then for naught, the babe will pule and cry.
Love must be kolld, and kissed round about,
Love must go gay, and painted like a post,
Love must be peecst, and patcht with many a clout,
Love is a sprite, a shadow or a Ghost:
A needelesse charge, that seldom quits the cost,
A practice bought, with many a thread bare purse,
A wretched bliss, that I and mine may curse.
It is the skum, and only dross of youth,
That brings booth soul, and body in decay:
A kind of talk, wherein there is no truth.
A Courting trade, that does much craft bewray,
A wily Fox, a wanton full of play:
A Saint to show, a Devil God he knose,
That me betrayde, and made me freedom lose.
The Horse runs far, that never turns again,
The beaten child, is learnd to fear the rod:
The double mind, may fall to meaning plain:
They may amend, that feels the fear of God.
The clouds may clear, that long has threatened rain
The time ill spent, if reason will redeem:
Calls home wild wits, from toies that are extreme.
Youth takes his course, and follows fancies freakes
Age all reforms, and sore repents tune past:
The bow long bent, ye know in process weakes,
Hard things at first, may gentle wax at last.
Who often fawls, is taught to stand full fast.
And few there are, but flides or fawls down right,
In youth or age, our judgments are so light.
When wit is bought, (and folly thoroughly wa^ed,)
An ounce of skill, is worth a pound of dross:
Till body smart, the mind is never stayed,
Gain is not likt, till we have tasted loss.
Some say each one, is borne to bear his cross,
My heavy faults, now burdens breast so sore:
That here or hence, I must be scourgd therefore.
Sweet are those stripes, that breaks ne bone nor lim
(And yet sets sound, the soul and body both:)
Sour are those joys, and worldly braurie trim,
That down to hell, with damned people goth.
Sweet are sharp words that tells lewd life the froth
Sour is sweet sauce, that cloyes the stomach still
Sweet are those nips, that does restrain the will.
The pempred horse, that still in stable stands,
Will wax a jade, if spur ne wand he taste,
The wild-hed Colt, is tamde by riders hands.
Ane so through bitte, is made well traind and past,
Al hedstrong things, are not reformde in have:
But when regard, looks back where blindness went
The peril past, bids pomp and pride repent.
Great is the scope, that greedy will desires,
Small gain or grace, does grow by gadding out,
With heavy lode, the weary legs retiers:
And heartfull fraught, of worldly dread and dout.
And sure the ground, from whence al vice does sprout
Is gadding geres, that loves abroad to gase:
Who shame sends home, in great sad muse and mase.
And when in doors, dame dalliance close is drawn,
And notes what blot, she did escape without:
She thinks in street, she put her name to pawn,
Or went abroad, to play the bare banckrout,
Where wanton eyes, did naught but stare about,
Where all a flant, at full like ship with sail.
Fine minions march, as brave as Peacocks tail.
The crooked back, must bolstred be by art,
The tawny skin, must shine by some trim knack,
The twinkling looks, for sport must play their part
The per wickes fine, must curle where hair does lack
The swelling grace, that fills the empty sack:
And ietting pace, with lims stretched out full straight,
To patch out pride, are matters of great weight.
Then fle on al, such trashe and trompry vile,
That sets forth shades, in Sunny day to shine:
My youth is past, I cannot world beguile,
Men will not look, for babes in hollowd eyes.
A witherd grape, hangs now on rotten vien.
From blasted branche, the berry round is gone,
A dosky glass, is little lookte upon.
Wherefore I vow, to wear a sorry veil,
To shroud the face, that few or none will like:
And get some shell, to hold in head like Snaile,
For former faults, in conscience so does strike.
That I do fear, I shall my self mislike:
If shadows do, not cloak defects I have,
Or death dispatch, and send me to my grave.
Now note my tale, you dames of gentle blood,
Now wail with me, al such as plays my part:
Now let my harms, do harmless people good
Now bid al wives, defy this deuilish art,
For my conceit, is such a deadly darte,
That where I go, or walk in any place,
Me thinks my faults, are written in my face.
This discarded Gentlewoman went awalking twentye years, and yet cannot find
the way home to her husband.

FINIS.
To the right Worshipful my Lady Wawllar, wife to the Souldioer-like Knight
Sir Water Wawllar.
I Had almost (good Madam) forgotte what I promised, of my self, touching a
Book to be Printed, yet at the kniting up of a tedius tale I remembered how to
keep promise and a friend, and bethought me of some matter pertaining to that
cause, waying that light and slender discourses became not me to offer, nor
your Ladishippe to hear. So happening on a doleful and tragical Treatise I
preferred it to your reading, knowing that some humor of sorrow or sorrowful
penned matter would be answerable to your grave consistderation, in which
discourse following, are numbers of heavy causes t^eated on, and touched so
narrowly (with a clear conceit of the writer) that no one point or other
pertaining to a ruefull rehearsal of troubles, is forgotten. And though the
tale seems long, the variety and life of words it brings, shall I doubt
not shorten the time that is spent in reading, for that every passion of mind,
trouble of body, and disquietnesse of the Soul, is amply and plainly
explained and unfolded by that which follows, translated out of another
language and taught to speak English to those that understands the heavy
haps of such, as have fallen into misfortune, so knitting up my Book with this
discourse, I express the matter I have spoken of.

A DOLLFVLL DISCOVRSE OF A great Lord and a Lady. Translated out of French
into English.
DRaw near good minds that sadly marks,
the sway of worldly broils.
And hear what I at large can say,
of troubles tumbling toils.
Which did befall, in foreign Land,
tweene two of Noble race:
To whose mishap, and hateful fate,
a world it self gives place.
Not long ago, the case so stood,
a Lord of great estate,
(In native Soil, by destnies lo^.)
a Ladies favor gate.
With whom he ioynde, a hazard great,
his liking led him so:
That neither fear of frowning Gods,
nor dread of earthly ^oe
Could make him stain his plighted troth,
such constant mind* he bare:
For which this noble Fawkon may,
with turtle true compare.
But well away alas for woe,
his grief thereby began:
In Prince displeasure throw this prank,
fell ^o this Noble man.
And Caesar frowing on the fact,
there was no other boot:
But fly the Realm, or prostrate fall,
Full flat at Cesars foot.
O states by this come learn to stoop,
no stoutnesse can prevail:
When from the Heavens storms do blow,
and strikes down your sail.
From thunder cracks both man and beast,
yea Sun and Moon does fly:
The Earth and all that lives below,
does fear the rattling sky.
When Gods are moved, in lowering clouds,
like dusky Mantles black:
The troubled air to mortal men,
does threaten, ruin, and wrack.
I turnde my talk from such Discourse,
and treat of that turmoyle:
Which long this Knight and Lady felt,
at home in Country soil.
And somewhat of the cares abroad,
that he perforce did taste:
I mean to write so that as troth,
my verses be embraste:
For troth and time that tries out Gold,
^ath tempre^ so my talk:
That pen nor muse no pleasures takes,
on doubtful ground to walk,
Now when these states with linkes of love
were tyds together fast,
And many a sad and heavy thought,
between them both had past,
Of Princes grace and favor great,
(to which regard they* took:
As chiefest thing and only cause)
Whereon they ought to look.
They wayde in balance of their breasts,
what ^ittest serude their turns:
And like as wood takes flame of fire,
and so to Sinders burns.
So through the heap of this mishapp,
they felt such sorrow thoe,
As though hard destnie swore they should,
consume themselves with woe.
The Lady lost her freedom straight.
the Gods had so decreed,
Her knight by sudden flight abroad,
made virtue of a need.
And living there with lingering hope,
in foreign Country strange,
Where absence might through present toys,
in some men work a change,
He stood as firm as marble stone,
and kept both troeth and toutch.
To her who found few friends at home,
and hearts disease was much,
Yea though this knight with offers great,
and treasure tempted was:
(As they full well can witness bear
which saw this matter pas)
Yet small account of Fortune new,
he made for still in breast.
Was shrinde the Saint that stony walls,
and prison had possessed.
No feere nor friend, nor fellow-mate,
this Troylus mind might move:
This Fawcon scornd to pray abroad,
at home he left his love.
Full many a sigh and heavy look,
he sent along the Seas:
And wished himself, in fetters fast,
to do his Lady ease.
What grief of mind, and torment strange
she suffered all that while:
Is known to those, that bondage feels,
whose friends are in exile.
Could mischief fall on both the sides,
more harder then it did?
The one from joy and worldly pomp,
in prison closely hid.
The other forced, by fatal chance,
to seek his fortune out:
And shonning danger found ^ispayre,
in wandering World about.
But waying well a Subjects State,
and what was duties bounds:
He yielded straight to open harms
for fear of secret wounds,
And ventring life, yea Lands and goods,
to heepe his name from blot:
(And to requite with hazardes hard,
the love that he had got.)
From Spain with speed he did return,
and setting foot on Land:
He put his cause in Justice dome,
and Noble Princes hand.
Though in the yoke with free consent,
the humble heart did fall,
The heavens stood so out of tune,
he gate no grace at all:
And clapped up full fast in hold,
a Prisoners part he plays:
Where griping griefs and grievous groans,
consumde his gladsome days.
Whiles he aloof full long remaynde,
and out of danger crepte:
The dolfull Dame, in great despair,
his absence sore bewept.
Yet great regard to promise past,
she had as world well wist:
And therefore often wrong her hands,
when that her Knight she mist.
But now began the boistrous blastes,
to blow in bloody breast:
And now the gulf of sighs and sobs,
burst out with great unrest.
For lo, one house held both these wights
yet both a sunder were:
And b^th in like displeasure stood,
yea each of both did fear.
Of Princes wrath and worlds disgrace,
a heavy tale to tell:
A plague past hope of heavens bliss,
a torment and a hell.
That is without redemption sure,
but what should more be said:
Thus under lock and barred doors,
these Jewels safely laid.
They must abide the happy hours,
that God appoints in skies:
And drink up water sweet or sour,
or what shall hap to rise.
The prison then did plead their case,
the walls both deaf and dum:
Did show by signs of freedom gone,
what sorrows were to come.
The skreeking Owl in silent night,
at window clapped his wings:
To threaten death or badde success*
of sundry doubtful things.
No joyful sound was heard with ear,
no news of happy years:
No pleasure to the pinched heart,
in prison strong appears.
Admit the Lute with touch of hand,
a heavy dumpe does shoe,
A cooling comfort Music brings,
to wretches wrapped in woe.
No mirth with mourning move may match,
for mischief measure lacks:
And care consumes the mind of man,
as fire melts Uirgin Wax.
In silly Sell, and several place,
these two estates did sit:
Whose coming out, did far surmount,
the compass of our wit.
As long they spent their tickle time,
in teene and terror great:
So often God wot of matters hard,
in head did hammers beat.
Now hoping that the clouds would calm
and storms would stand at stay:
Then looking when the Planets turned*
their course another way.
But shaken ships in Seas do sincke,
when surges rise aloft:
And under waves (for want of aid)
weak vessels welter often.
So that no hope of succor seems,
to come when tempests rage.
Except the gods draw back the plagues,
and wind and weather swage.
The present panges and parlous thoughts,
that pearceth troubled minds:
Is known to none but such I say,
that lack of freedom finds.
A prisner bears a simple port,
most glad to please and ply:
As subject to the keepers beck,
and iellouse Gailors eye.
Now tracing out a weary walk,
now whisht and quiet stands:
Now down on knees, now to the clouds
looks up with stretched hands.
Now listening after happy newe^,
now nipt with sorrows old:
Now sore abasht and brought in muse,
now merry stout and bold,
Now ripe and ready for to speak,
now dombe and dare not store:
Now fearful of each sudden sound,
and clap of every door.
Now bent to bear and suffer wrong,
now full reposde on right:
Now feign to fawn on feeble folk,
now setting all things light.
These passions still awakes their spryets,
that careful captives are:
Such smart they taste, such bread they bite,
that feeds on loaves of car^.
Yea some are serude with change of meats,
yet touch they near a dishe:
But sits like Tantalus in Hell,
and wants that most they wish.
These twain I troe were not so used,
but yet when best they sped:
On heavy morf^els mixte with moan,
their hungry stomachs fed.
No day stood free from Fortunes foil,
no hour but nourisht fear:
No season serude to salve the sores,
of soking sorrows there.
No drink could cool the fury hot,
of thraldomes thirsty throat:
No pleasant very nor dittie framde,
to dolors dolfull note.
No book nor story might revive,
their drowping dead delight:
For through the thoughts of thirled hearts,
are pleasures banished quite.
To slowth, to sleep, and mirthlesse moodes,
their dompish days enclinde:
As from the clue of worldly cares,
should threde of life vntwinde,
Dispiesd the night, abhord the day.
and hated hour of birth:
Thought scorn of food, and clean forsook
the pleasures of the earth.
Would feign have lost both speech and breath
and look when hearts would burst:
Beleude they were in mothers womb,
or else in cradell cursed,
Though drousie dreed, did death desire,
and grief sought quick dispatch:
There was no parting from the place.
till day discharge the watch.
We cannot pay our borrowed breath,
before th^appoynted hour:
The end of strife, nor stay of state,
stands not in peoples power.
The God that guides the heavens high,
in secret does behold:
The fine and fleeting feeble course,
of earth and massy molde.
The heart may heave, the breast may bl^e,
the body sigh and swelt:
The face by open sins may show,
of privy pa^hons felt.
But all the storms have little force,
to rid man's wretched days:
As by these (...) plain I prove,
through torments sundry ways.
Well those from whom the Gods restrain
the scope, and use of will:
Must bend the back, and bow the joints,
to bear the burden still.
And yet no toil nor grief so great,
but finds at length some ease:
There follows after swelling floodes,
a quiet calmie seas.
By mean of suit and labors long,
and gracious Prince indeed:
A sweeter soil these Prisoners sound,
that better blood did breed.
But kept apart as Fortune shapt,
and so in silent shade:
(As place and time did license grant)
a fresh complaint they made,
Of crooked chance and strange extremes,
that so^dred faithful hearts:
Whose sugared love was ever mixed,
with ba^e and bitter smartes.
And never after like to meet,
nor set no eye nor vewe:
The one upon the other Lord,
a matter much to rue.
Long in the broyle of this conflict,
and battle of the mind:
They past their time with bare belief,
of better happ behind.
And wearing out with wailings long,
their weary lives God wot:
And finding haven chooked up,
where passage should be got.
At ankor under watch, and ward,
in tossed Bark they lay:
From whence there was no quiet means,
nor hope to escape away.
The Lady now for last farewell,
betook her self to tears:
And of despair in pearsed breast,
a double portion bears.
Her hollow cheeks and daseled eyes,
declarde her death was near:
And bad her keepers to prepare,
both shrowding sheet and Beer.
For nature did deny her life,
her heart was taynted so:
That cankred thought should come full soon
and make an end of woe.
Her color changde her cheerful looks,
and countenance wanted spreete.
To ^allow ashes turnde the hue,
of beauties blossoms sweet.
And drery dullness had bespred,
the wearish body throw:
Each vital vain did flat refuse,
to do their duty now.
The blood forsook the wonted course,
and backward ganne retire:
And left the limbs as cold and swar^e,
as coals that wastes with fire.
The moisture taken from the tree,
the leaves drop down apace:
When sap dries up and fayles the root,
the branches loose their grace.
Some bows you see do flourish fair,
and groes a goodly height,
And some by frost, and cold air nipt,
and so are blasted straight.
As every fruit and flower in field.
to yield to sudden claps.
So all that breathes with living soul,
are subject to mishaps.
How should this dame desire to live,
that hourly wore away:
Who would not shed some tears to see,
this tender twig decay.
What stony heart could suffer more,
and bear with even hand:
The weary wight of worldly woes,
and whiske or whipping wand?
And when she saw her hour^ approach,
and death his duty crau^:
And she amid her chiefest prime,
must go to greedy grave.
She took of World a noble leave,
and calling for a friend:
(Who lives yet and can report,
how she did make an end)
She said with loud and comely voice,
O world I thee forsake:
I have been here a Pilgrim long,
and now my leave I take.
Of all thy pomp and pleasures vain,
that makes my senses blind:
Whose glory does begin with pain,
and ends with grief of mind.
In dungeon deep of dayntie thoughts,
thou hold every wight:
And feeds their foolish fancy still,
with toys and trifles light.
Thy prisoner was I borne to be,
and Adams children all:
(Like Captives here condemnde to die)
must suffer for his fall.
But now the chains and loathsome lincks,
that lay on shoulders weak:
(And all the bands and clogges of care)
in shiuers small shall break.
And I from cage shall mount the skies,
more swift then bird with wing:
And flickar like a simple dove,
where shining Angels sing.
I bring a badge and livery both
that my good master CHRIST:
Did leave for such as bears his cross,
through fogges of wordly miest.
Yea shaking off this sinful Soil,
me think in clouds I see:
Among the p^rfit chosen Lambs,
a place preparde for me.
Here is no home, nor harbring house,
but Cabbens built on sand:
That every pirrie puffs down,
or still on proppe^ do stand.
Our Fathers spreets possess in peace,
the Country that we crave:
We are but strangers, far from home,
that nothing certain have.
These were her words and many more.
which follows as she spoke:
I did (quoth she) by brittle life,
O Lord thy wrath provoke,
For which I now repent me sore,
and trusting to receive,
Free pardon for my former faults.
ear soul shall body leave.
My faint and feeble vessel frail,
so fears thy justice great:
That it appeals from curse of Law,
unto thy mercy seat.
I am but worms meat well I wot,
all flesh is naught but grass:
To earth and ashes out of hand,
must all my pleasures pass.
I want the force, thou have the might,
to strive with Death and Hell:
Thou art the Rock, the corner Stone,
the fountain, and the Well.
From whom the springes of life must run,
and unto whom again:
The thirsty souls, and hungry hearts,
for help do trudge amain.
Who has been washed in thy blood,
is whiter than the snow:
O let the streams and flood of grace,
with favor on me flow.
In book of life, let write good Lord,
my name among the rest:
That ordaynde were, ear world was made
to sleep in Abrams breast.
Blot out the blemish of my brow,
that at the latter day:
May strike the conscience with despair,
and cloaked crimes bewraie.
Give boldness to the bashful sprite,
that fears from hence to flitte:
Make hope, and faith now fl^me to see,
great God in glory sit.
Wi^h closed hand, than breast she knocked,
so gave a sigh* and stayed:
And then conceiude some inward joy,
with cheerful face she said,
Do mourn no more, O trembling soul,
that knows not where to stay:
Come from the kaytiffe carraine corpse,
and cabben ^ade of clays.
And look upon the Lamb of God,
whose death thy ransom paid*
That blessed babe the virgins Son,
that borne was of a maid.
Come silly bud out of the Den,
where naught but darkness is:
And look on everlasting light,
and loving Lord of bliss.
The lusts of flesh and worldly pomp,
I hope are quentch in mee^
Through faith alone from sin and bo^d,
I have escaped free.
And with that word in sign of joy,
a Psalm full loud she sang,
The solemn noise and sound thereof,
thorowout the chamber rang.
And ending that to prayer straight,
of her own mind she fell:
The standers by whose tears burst out,
at this her last farewell
Began to give her comfort than,
of life and welfare both,
Yea live I shall and do right well,
(quoth she) I know for troth.
But that is in another world,
the hope of this is gone:
And reason is it should be so,
for here there lives none,
But sees the vainesse of our state,
and tastes such torments still:
That sundry times, they wish themselves,
from hence with right good will.
Here is but toil, and sweat of brows,
and endless labor ^ound:
And nothing reapt but wretched wrack,
and broken sleeps unsound.
Where I shall go I cease from pain,
and so such joy possess:
As heart scarce thinks, nor head conceiues,
nor tongue may well express.
Then hold your peace, knit up your talk,
and trouble not the spreete,
That draws from hence and hopes it is,
for better place more meet.
A Lady thoe that virtue likte,
and there some credit had:
^eplyde and said O noble dame,
indeed you are too sad.
These panges shall pass, these ^^ts shall fade
and all these passions die,
As they have done when you full often,
in such like sort did lie.
O Madame speak no more of that,
my time draws (...) (quoth she)
I shall not die, but make exchange,
of breath and life I see,
The glass is run, the Clock will strike,
death does approach apace:
My course is done, the Judge draws near,
to sit upon my case.
No longer here I may abide,
the packing day is come:
Death bids me now unarm my self,
and hear the mortal Dr^^.
That calls me hence, as naked sure,
as to the world I came:
The course of Nature shows me too,
that Earth and Dust I am.
The Harrolde of long home is sent,
to summon me in have:
Then stay me not, for in that point,
both tears and words ye wast.
Yet ear I part, good friends (quoth she)
behold what hope I have:
And note what faith, and badge of Christ,
I carry to my grave.
And mark, how I confess with mouth,
that Christ has shed his blood:
For me, and those that erst in state,
of deep damnation stood.
And by his passion I am saved,
and not by my deserts:
But by the help of him that knows,
the thoughts of secret hearts.
Now staying here, she looked about,
and to a Knight she spoke:
And him desired with humble words,
that he the pains would take.
To show the Prince what past her mouth,
O tell him sir quoth she:
This is the suit, and last request,
that must be made by me.
Unto his highness whose estate,
our blessed Lord maintain:
And pray him to forgive me now,
for I confess it plain.
I made a fault and sore offense,
when I against his will:
Estrangde my self from his good grace;
for any hope or skill.
But from my breath unto this day,
my heart and thought was clear:
From breach of subjects duty sure,
and I protest it here.
I never meant nor purposed yet,
in word, in deed, nor thought:
No harm (nor lodgde one il conseit,
nor spark of evil sought)
To him as God may witness bear,
to that which now I speak:
Save now alas by oversight,
of feeble fancies weak^.
I feel and find the price thereof,
and suffer for the same:
An open check and privy plagu^,
and pinching publik blame.
I hope his highness has forgot,
the fault I did commit:
And as he is a noble Prince,
in Regal throne to sit.
And judge his subjects causes all,
so hope I of his grace:
He will receive my children poor.
and help their heavy case.
O God forbid for Mothers fault,
the Children should abye:
No grain of grudge, nor ground of guil^,
in guiltless babes do ly^.
I do bequeath them now quoth she,
unto the Princes hands:
In hope the favor that they find,
shall ease the fathers hands.
My nature shows a mourning cheer,
to part from them God knows:
For children find small comfort here,
when hence the mother goes.
If God move not the Princes mind,
to pity their estate:
Now as the Lady did at large,
about her Babes debate.
Upon her dear bought jewel than,
she cast her only thought:
Yea for whose sake and great good will,
she was in trouble brought.
And pausing on this matter through,
a heavy sigh she gave:
O good sir Knight said she to one,
a thing of you I crave.
Commend me to my worthy friend,
and bid him comfort take:
And hope in God and Princes grace,
though I do world forsake,
He may do well and freedom get:
but me he shall not meet:
Till from the cave of pampred flesh,
departes his groaning spreete.
Whiles life I had, I honored him,
and safely kept my vow:
As life did bind me his in all,
so death does loose me now.
From him and all my worldly joys,
but though my friend I leave.
On high where dwells a greater friend,
(if hope not me deceau^.)
I trust to see his babes and him,
and though much grief it is:
To leave them here in bitter bale,
yet note I go to bliss.
Where is no mind of combrous cares,
nor cause of sorrow known:
O tell him that above I hope,
these storms shall be ore blown*
And as a scroule is ^apped up,
yea so shall all things here:
(When soul shall be immortal made)
unto our view appear.
No sooner of the soul she spoke,
but sudden change began:
A right figure of death.
In looks and limbs of deadly show^;
with color pale and wan.
The eyes did stare, the body stretch,
the strength and force did fail:
The teeth they chattered in the Cheeks,
the hands did quake and quayle.
The mouth did some, the head did shake,
the flesh it quiuered fast:
The feet waxt cold, the face did sweat,
full swift the pulses past.
The heart did heave and beat in breast,
the breath like earth did sent:
At ears, and nose the stiffled Ghost,
and vital life sought vent. A pattern of Death.

Though gasping breath brought passions on
and grip^ her heart full hard:
Yet showd she through those sharp assaults
to ^rend a great regard.
And calling for a bo^e of Kings,
among them chose she one*
In which was set by cunning Art,
a rich and precious stone.
Hold carry this quoth she good Sir,
to my dear noble Knight:
He can remember what that stone,
presents unto his sight.
The other token that I send,
it is a weighty ring:
Best likt and dearest bought God wot,
of any earthly thing.
And when you shall give him this gift,
desire him well to mind:
The little Impes the pretty souls,
the babes I leave behind.
And bid him bring them up in fear,
of God and Prince I say:
L^e! that is all I do require,
of him my dying day.
I have no gold to send my Babes*
but blessing I them give:
Which God confirm with grace good stor^
as long as they shall live.
O yet there is another ring,
which lo my lone must see:
Where is my picture: death I mean,
and tell my friend from me,
That I as cold and senseless too,
shall be in little space:
As is that shadow dum and deaffe,
and spritelesse shape of face.
This done she turnde her head aside,
and bad them all farewell:
Twere good quoth she in sign of death,
I heard the passing bell.
For such as live may pray the while,
and know when bell does toule:
Into the bowels of the earth,
the body parts from soul.
Yet meet they shall when trumpet sounds
and that the dead arise:
And both together shall ascend,
I hope to starrie skies.
With this began the battle fierce,
between her life and death:
Like Ghost she lay, whiles heart did groan
and mouth gepte wide for breath.
Then said she Lord into thy hands,
I do commend my spree^:
And so her self closde up her eyes,
and hid her head in sheet.
And went away like infant young,
clean void of storm or rage:
Or like a body falls a sleep,
that cannot speak for age.
Thus breathless lay this Lady now,
like weighty lump of clay:
(That erst had life and feeling force)
and past like flower away.
But when the news of this was brought,
unto her Playffeers ears:
With roaring voice, and blubbred eyes,
there gushed out such tears,
That witnest well with outward signs,
what woe he^ felt within:
And truly told when she did end,
his delour did begin.
Be rest of sleep, and robde of rest,
he romed up and down:
And cast of weeds of worldly pomp,
and clapped on mourning Gown.
No ease nor pleasures could possess,
nor feel the taste of meat:
Resolude to pine and sta^^e himself,
his griefs they were so great.
No council could him comfort long,
and still alone he drue:
To mourn, to m^ane, to houle, and cry,
and make complaint an^e.
And worn away with woeful sighs,
when sorrow helped not:
At length the life must be sustaynde,
with some relief ye wot.
But how he takes this mischief yet,
and how the matter goes:
It passes far my reach, and wit,
to judge I tell you troth.
His Lady gene, as you have heard,
when days and years were spent*
In thraldom long, yet after that,
was better fortune sent.
For into Princes grace again,
he came by blessed chance,
And so he lives in open World,
where virtue may advance:
Both him and many thousands more,
that Noble lives do lead,
And wisely walk with upright minds,
and steps of honor tread.
Lo here you Dames of high renown,
a Ladies death set out:
Whose life for faith, full few shall find,
that seeks wide world about.
To God and Prince repentaunt sure,
to world a mirror bright:
Wherefore with tongue, and true report,
resounde her praise a ^ight.
FINIS.

