The most true report of James Fitz Morris death, and o there is the like
offe^ders: with a brief discourse of Rebellion, dedicated to the ribht
worshipful my loving freende M. Drew Drewrie, brother to the honorable sir
Willyam Drewrie, lord Justice of Irelande. Written by Thomas Churchyard Gent.

Imprinted at London by Edward White, dwelling at the little Northdore of S.
Paul's church, at the sign of the Gunne.

IF I had been forgetful of a willing promise made for a gift, I thought too
present you withal (notwithstanding time lappyng up many matters prevented
me) yet your courtesies toward my self, as generally to the world where you
like, commanded me to remember what I had spoken, in effect not performed.
And further, your just and honest life (whereon good credit and worship has
waited) a double occasion gave me to present you some matter worthy to be
seen of many, because your eyes and judgment not alone, but with noble
company (your honorable brother sir Willyam Drurie the cheef) have pitied the
misery of me^ y^ lately by desarte are in disgrace, and namely the rebellion
of those that thought them selves, both wise and honorable. So for a welcome
home from soil, where sedition has been to often seen, I commit this my
simple gift to your protection and well likyng, and what is spok entherin, God
and good men may defend, though it wanted a sufficient patron to maintain
and manifest a troth, thus reioysyng in the continuance of your accustomed
virtues, I trouble you no further, but desire you to read that follows, and
favor and countenance the same, as our upright judgment shall lead you.

Yours in that he may, at commandment Thomas Churchyard.

Among all the cruel and combrous chances of this world wherein busy heddes,
and wicked wits are occupied (to the body and souls destruction) is no
onething so perilous, as the pestilent plague and smotheryng smoke that civil
dissentio^ brings. Which is bredd in the bowels of rebellion, noursed up in
vile and naughty Nature, and brought to a full perfection, by the pride or
conceit of hateful persons, and unnatural practices. And surely no matter
more to be lamented, then to see one member corrupt an other, and the foot
or inferior parts (whose forse is small, and feebleness great) strine with
the hedde, or deuie to do their duty, and bear that they are able. For in
a manner it is a monsterous vewe to behold, some branches of a tree yield but
bitter berries, and all the rest of the bows to bear most sweet and
acceptable fruit. And a more odious sight it is to see a civil manne, become
a savage beast, virtue and valliauncie, converted to villainous vice and
treachery: The subversion of kingdoms, and corrupter of all Commonweals,
which ruste and canker once taking root, destroys not only pure and fine
metal, but maintains gross and foul infection, the mother of mischeef and
disorder, whereby clean life and good manners is forgotten, and leaude
behavior is most in mind, and embrased.

In the days of our Forefathers many hundredth years ago men were so nobly
bent and disposed (and honored their Country so dearly) that no hazard nor
attempt was refused, that might advance the public state, or enlarge the
bounds and liberties of the same. And some one to rid their country of
Plague, or noisome afflictions, have offered their lives, and sought death as
willingly as life and worldely felicity, is among the greatest number desired,
the courage of Marcus Curssius, and many others of manly mind bears witness
to that matter. Yea, some to rid good and peaceable people, that wishes
quietness, from wicked war (and the pride of a tyrant) have adventured to
work wonders: and bring to pass things, beyond the common compass of
man's policy. Let the boldness of Musius Sceuola stand for an argument
sufficient in the proof of this cause. And so sonderie, yea, a multitude of
renowned personages (their order of life and death revived) brynges record
enough of their noble deeds, and virtuous dispositions. But as those worthies
did wear away, and the season became old (through continuance of time) so
new fashions and manners wared ripe in a little while after, and were so well
liked for their sudden change, and alteration of spirit, that the old
fidelity and value of men's estimation, being waied in the ballaunce of new
found fancies, began to lose weight, and wanted many grains of goodness
(that our Elders honored) it has suttellie been sold, and finely laid up,
yet used over often and tasted to much, and yet the custom is not so good,
that it may breed a Law in man's Nature, nor make men leave the usage of
old virtue, for the cumiyng trade of finenesse new vice, that every day
changes condition, and looks neither to GOD, the world, nor well doing, but
passes to sonderie practices in some kind of sort, against heaven and
earth, and so is carred clean from all hope of repentance, rounyng headlong
into a heap of hazardes.

The new treasons, dangerous devises, deuelishe attemptes, and rebellious
rages of diverse wretched people (that for the revenge of a little wrong, settes
abroche many broiles) argues a marvelous decaie in the minds of men, that
has been given to do good, and expresses plainly that our ancestors
nobleness is out of memory, and the world is wonderfully inclined to follow
badde customs, and curious knackes of cruelty, murtheryng friends that never
offended, and fauouryng foes that daiely seeks mischeef. The blood of that
honest gentleman Harry Dauells, cries out upon those filthy practices, and
the murders without mercy committed of late, does manifestly declare, the
villainous exchange of this inconstaunte world, which nouseleth bloody
hearts in tyranny, and bringes forth the curssed fruit of Caine, that God did
not leave unpunished.

You may read of some noble warriors, that after they were banished their
country, through the fury of the people, and mutabilitie of Fortune: yet they
behaved them selves so worthily, when they looked backwarde to the body and
bowelles of the native soil they were borne in, they refrained their hands
from dooyng violence, and kept their hearts and their heddes from woorkyng of
injuries, especially toward their Prince and Country, which modeste and
gentilnesse (when it was well considered of) wan them a greater credit then
they had before, and brought them home again, and in a good likyng of the
Commons ever after. But as you may read in many good aucthours, the goodness
of such men that honored their country: So may you see the lightness of
some people, led so far beyond the bounds of obedience, and love of their
Prince, that they leave no shameless matter unsought, nor no mischeef
vnministered, where they ought to be profitable members of the state, and
preseruatours of the common weal.

It is assuredly more the^ miraculous (and as we might properly say, a thing
paste all reason) to see a man forsake his Country, and cut himself in
pieces, by abandonyng the same, and then to run a gaddyng after every
shadow, and give him self over to the leadyng and gouernemente of a stranger,
who can not inwardly esteem him, because he has betrayed the body whereof
he was a member, and deceived his owneself by sowyng dissension, where duty
commands concord, and he of duty ought to be a subject, a matter that
if men would wisely way (and thoroughly look into) might keep them from
witless wanderyng abroad, and preserve them at home in more quietness of
mind.

Well, now behold what brusteth out of rebellion, and change of good
conditions, and regard how God prepares instruments, to put them down that
Satan has advanced, and you shall find that the almighty fights the
battle, when the policy and power of man fails, or waxes feeble. You may
remember, that marks this world, how Shaen Oneall was strong in the feelde,
and yet wanted force and cunnyng, to keep his hedde on his shoulders. And an
other called Roorioege who delighted in rebellion, was left headless ere he
was ware, and all by the providence and just Judgment of the Almighty, who
holds the bridle in his own hand, and tourneth both horse and man, the
very same way he has appoincted for their destruction. And where one rebel
by sufferaunce escapes the scourge, a thousand lights in the lashe, and
feles the whip of Gods wrath and displeasure.

And may not this last example be rehearsed, for a testimony of Gods
veugaunce when he lists to strike: yes undoubtedly, it may he recited,
because Fitz Morris was thought wise, valiant, strong, learned, experimented
in Marshall affairs, and a great trauailer to stir up troubles, which fell
upon his own hedde, when neither wisdom could prevent it, nor his rebellious
power could withstand Gods doing and ordinance, and who so deeply notes the
manner of his death (and dangerous deastenie that drew him to his end) shall
see the infinite Majesty of God shine, in the purpose and determinations of
men, especially when they go about good things, whereby God is known and
glorified, and the world in those purposes is dispatched of troublesome
rebels.

I pray you was not this a divine work, when men of his own nation and
acquaintance, were moved in courage, either to co^quere Fitz Morris, or
suffer death in the attempt. And after this resolution, went so manfully
about their business, that all was brought to such pass (though with loss
of life to the executioners thereof) as better could not be devised, nor be
brought to effect. The act was noble: the hazard great: The manheade not
little. And the matter shall remain regestered in the book of Fame, whiles any
Borrowe, Borcke, or Town, can set forth good service, or show any notable
exploite.

Now the manner of his death is looked for, but first the la^dyng of him self
and his whole company should be spoken of, which was so simple and so far
paste his hope, as neither it does merit remembrance, nor carries any piece
of credit with it, recite it who pleases. For albeit he made much ado, to
bring to pass much matter, little was performed to the purpose, in the
answeryng of his own exspectation, for in deed diverse things when contrary
to that he desired: And albeeit some strength by fortification he sought, yet
weakly and barely he began, and foolishely ended his life. Though animated
with worse in condition then him self, he took in hand a great adventure,
and dallied a while on the hazard of hap, and the aduaunture of time: the
one doubtful, and the other subject to chance, yet neither Fortunes
dangerous dealyng, nor times mutabilitie could daunte his outrageous desire,
nor at any season make him shun the danger he was in. But busiyng his
brains and senses, about needelesse sleightes, and subtle seditions, he fell
in the hands of his enemies, who charged upon him most valliauntly, and with
much ado overcame him (because he stoutly made defense) and stroke of his
hedde, when least he looked for such a desteuie, and short dispatch of this
world. Some reports there are bruted abroad (to affirm it for trothe I can
not) that one Borcke a gentilman for a pardon granted by the Lord Justice,
for the loss of a hand made promise with the same pardoned hand, to
purchase the Princes favor, and so to kill Fitz Morris, But how soever the
matter went, or the brethren called Borcks agreed in that poinet. Foricertaine
Fitz Morris lost his life, being hurt by the Borckes, and shot into the
hedde by a good and perfect Hargabozier, and had his hedde stricken of, although
those that came against him, were much less in number then him self: A thing
to be noted, and a matter wherein often, right and trothe ever has shined,
and gotten great glory, which is a sign that victory restes not in a
multitude, but depends rather in Justice, and equity of the quarrel and
cause.

Thus the world may behold the wonders that God woorketh: Good people may
be ware, how they offend the prince, and their country. And rebels are
curbed, and made hold in heddes by this open rebuke. And to conclude, the
opinion of thousands is such, that a rebel lives without love, wa^ders with
out wit, feightes in fear, dies without honor, and lies without grave, as a
prey to the wild wolffe, and food to the carren Crow, lest as a spectacle for
many eyes to look into, and shall rest as a perpetual wonder to the wise, and
matter of reproach for every tongue to talk upon. Now if better occasion had
procured me to put pen to paper, you had not received this simple discourse
at my hands. Thus farewell good Reader, till my book long promised be
Printed, that presently is coming out, and has changed the name of Chippes,
and is called Churchyardes Choice.


