THE MISERY OF FLAVNDERS, Calamity of France, Misfortune of Portugal,
Unquietness of Irelande, Troubles of Scotland: And the blessed State of
ENGLAND.

Written by Tho. Church-yarde Gent. 1579.

Imprinted at London for Andrewe Maunsell, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at
the Sign of the Parret.

TO THE QVEENES MOST ^xcellent Majesty, Thomas Churchyard, wishes all
heavenly blessedness, worldly felicity, and vnremouable good Fortune.
Having a duetifull desire, most redoubted sovereign, to be daily exercised
in some seruisable device and action (that may please my Prince and country)
I neither spare pains nor season, to purchase through practice of pen, and
study of head, my desired hope.

But waiyng the greatness of your Majesty and Princely judgment, I am to
seek, not only what words does best become me, but likewise what works
I should present, especially to her highness, that has such gifts from the
heavens, as all our earthly imaginations, and base matter here below, may of
right give place unto.

And to offer any present where such parfections do abound, and the
fountain of many graces does freely flow, the presumption were great, and
the boldness scarce pardonabel. Yet most gracious Lady, albeit I dare not
bring water to the well head of knowledge, and comfortable spryng (from whence
all kind of people do draw succor and releef) yet my hope is, that my
humble and upright meaning (of this my work) shall find favor in your
highness sight.

In which work I compare, Flaunders, France, Portugal, Irelande, and
Scotland, to be the shell of a precious Nutte, the sweet Kirnell whereof is
the blessed state of ENGLAND. And though with worldly wickedness, and
troubles of our time, the goodly shell is somewhat wormeaten and cracked, the
Kirnell shows it self so sound, that Gods great goodness and glory is
partly or altogether therein expressed.

And now by my verses and description is only touched (by all curtuous and
reverent means) but the troubles and misfortunes of every country a part,
going no further in any frase of speech, then Christian zeal, love, and
duty may command a good mind to set out, as knows our living Lord,
who send your Majesty many good and gracious new years, with a blessed and
prosperous old reign over us.

FINIS.
THE MISERY of Flaunders.
THE soil and welthie seat,
where people plenty found,
with scarcities scorge is plaged sore,
and made a barraine ground:
Where fruitful pleasures great,
was looked for in our days,
And where for wealth, and worthy things,
did run our worldly praise.
O what a change is this,
that neighbors mourn therefore,
And foreign foes are grieved at heart,
to see the euerelesse sore:
That now no sense can salve,
nor wit can help in haste,
Nor man may sone, by force reform,
till wars and will maks waste.
O Havoc Reuells son,
and Riotte sister dear:
To foul misrule, a mother vice,
that raignde full many a year.
In vieu and corners cloase,
O nourse of noughtie prancks:
And needless pains and labor lost,
that can deserve no thanks.
Why should I blame abuse,
where Gods great wrath bears swaie.
And peoples heads, will have it so,
and worldly wits decaie:
So ronnyng on the race,
of crooked careless stepps,
Out goes good order at a iompe,
and in rude manner lepps.
That at his first rebounde,
Shaks all in sonder straight:
And each thing cracks, that feels the force,
of wilful hauocks weight.
Now leave that long discourse,
that hateful havoc bryngs:
(By mean of rage, and revel route)
and speak of other things.
That Flaunders groens to feel,
and sondrie sighe to see:
And none but wails that weyes the weight,
of stacts in each degree.
Why should rich Flaunders now,
to Fortune, poor give place?
That had the heart, and hap with all,
from harms to hold her face,
Among the best of name,
that wealthy state could show:
Do ask no more but leave the cause,
to him that all does know.
Yet I with speeches free,
may tell what troubles are:
In Flaunders now, for that their broils,
began of countries care.
And matters fit for pen,
awhile to treat upon:
Good Whetstons for to sharp dull wits,
the rest I look not on.
That seru's for special spreetts,
that sees through Moon and Star:
So thus to leave of weighty things,
and come to Flaunders war.
(That world bewails and weeps,
that sees thereof the end:
And knows that head and shoulders must,
their countries cause defend.)
My muse bidds me be bold,
for therein wants no skill:
To use apt words, and search out woorks,
to strain the ynkchorne quill.
For causes known to world,
then why if men may ask,
Does Flaunders learn the doleful dance,
and comes in open Mask,
With drom and trompet loud,
to wake the world from sleep?
That at sweet rest and peace will laugh,
and at sour war will weep.
Why does friends faule at jar,
and slide in sects by swarms?
And heapyng mischeef on their heads,
are ground of their own harms.
Why leaps some from their hold,
and taks the weakest part?
And so forsakes God and man,
to win a world by art.
Why ha^lls the horses wrong,
that in right course should go?
Why do the wise heads embrace self will,
and weaue a web of woe?
The cause does show it self,
for where dissension is,
There are few matters well in frame,
and many things amiss:
Now is no another noyes,
but howlyng up and down:
And doubt and danger bryngs great fear,
in many a noble town.
Now wanders peoples mynds,
like waves of troubled seas:
And neither man nor child God wot,
is free from wars diseas.
Death dwells in each man's door,
and threatens mischeeus great:
The rich but maeks a hongrie meal,
the poor he starus for meat.
Was never seen such want,
in any soil before:
And feawe have little coming in,
but spends on the store.
The Soldiour liu's by spoil,
the Marchaunts trade is don:
The Plowman letts the plowe alone,
and out poor people ron*
As though that men were mad,
and know not where to go:
In doubt to find a faithful friend,
and sure to meet a foe.
The Pater noster men,
Or Mal content, they say:
Has brought our people such a plague,
as breeds their whole decaie.
Each Christian heart does weep
to know the careful case:
Of Flaunders now, who to the change,
of worldly chance giu's place.
FINIS.
THE CALAMITY of France.
WHat Kingdom may, compare with woeful France,
Whose civil warrres, did last God wot too long:
The mighty men, thereby felt great mischaunce,
The feeble folk, were forest to suffer wrong,
And no estate, was free from scath and ^oile,
Such fury raingde, in rage of peoples mynds,
The weaklyngs went, to ruin, to wrack, and spoil,
As trees be torn, with blast and whirlyng wynds,
Strong goodly tounes, were beaten down to ground
Hye walls and towers, were battred flat as Cake,
When trompetts blast, and drum did slaughter sound,
And bloody blade, did wicked murder make.
O listen now, and hear my tale a while,
The wars of France, so sharp and cruel wear,
The son himself, the father would begile,
And brother still, of brother stood in fear,
With poison foul, and murder every wheare.
The country through, was spread and plaged sore,
And for to make, the scourge, and mischeef more,
One friend by craft, the other would betraie,
And surety none, in Princes pallaice stood,
The house of God, where people ought to pray,
And altar stone, was daiely stainde with blood.
The streats was filde, with corses vilie slain,
And in the stream, and flood the babes were flong,
And Ladies throats, with knives were cut in twain
There was no hope, when larumbell was rong,
Both wives with child, and little children young,
Were stabbed in, with Daggers diverse ways,
Some from their bedds, were floung amid the street,
Such murders Lord, were in those bloody days:
As women lay, without a cloute or sheet,
(All dead and bare, a rufull sight to see)
In open plain, yea men of ancient years,
Were mangled sore, and some of high degree:
And noble race, and of the Deuze Peers,
Were naked left, and wounded to the death,
And goodly girlls, lay groulyng void of breath:
In market place, the fury was so great,
The rage was such, that none might escape the sword
Nor nothing could, ne cool nor quench the heat:
Of Civil war, that both at bed and board:
Was bloody still, and yet the more was slain,
The more the broile, and greef began again.
To tell you all, their battles here a row,
Would move your mind, and heavy heart to tears,
At sondrie times, their own report does show,
(And good record, thereof true witness bears.)
They lost in feeld, two hundredth thousand men,
Yet still their minds, on murder ran so fast,
They went about, nothing but bloodshed then,
To sight it out, as long as life might last,
Revenge did work, and weaue an endless web,
Desire of will, a woeful threede did spinne,
The floode of hate, that never thinks of ebb,
A swellyng Sea, of strife brought gushyng in.
The rooted wrath, had spread such branches out,
That leaves of love, were blasted on the bow,
Yet spitfull twiggs, began so fast to sprout,
That from the heart, the tree was rotten throw.
No kindly sap, did comfort any spraie,
Both bark and stock, and body did decaie.
So that it seemde, the soil infected was,
With malice moods, that smells of mischeef great,
Their golden land, was tournde to rustie Bras:
And each thing wrought, as God had cursed the seat,
The ground thought scorn, to bring forth fruit in tune
The Uines did rotte, the blade would bear no corn,
Like Winter foul, became the Summers Prime,
The pleasant plotts, brought forth wild brier and thorn
With Rain and storm, the land was vexed still,
The ire of God, the people could not shun,
Great grew the greef, that came by headstrong will,
And all these plagues, by proud conceit begone,
That thought to rule, perhapps past reasons lore,
Treat that who please, my muse not framde therefore:
Of wars and woe, I mean my pen to strain*
In breef discourse, for Wisdoms vieu alone,
I skippe over doubts, I dare not be to plain,
Least fire fly out, from flinte and stricken stone.
Those broills abroche, the realm ran all to ruen:
The heads waxte sick, the members were amiss,
The notes were naught, the song was out of tune,
And badde is best, where such rude Music is.
Blood was so sought, that Butcherie boar the swaie,
A man and beast, were waied both a like:
The Sheep must dye, the Wolf would have his pray,
The rich would rule, the poor must pass the pike,
The house must burn, that could not make defense,
The head must of, that had more wit then needs,
The fullest baggs, were searched for their pence.
The vains were sought, that most the humor feeds,
The good might starve, the badde found all the grace,
The wise might walk abroad, and tell the trees,
The faunyng fools, were most prefarde in place:
The waspes would suck, the honey from the Bees,
And to be plain, abuse in all degrees,
Bred naught but war, and nourisht such debate,
That all to torn, did lie that noble state.
And when one race, or noble house did rise,
With force of arms, to make reuolte or stoer,
Ten thousand flockt, as thick as stars in skies.
About the streats, before the Princes door,
No words might serve, nor reason could prevail:
The people waxte, as wild as chafed Dear,
Yea though they heard, their wives both weep and wail,
Their children cry, their friends make mournyng chere
To bloody fight, in fury fell they all,
And though on heaps, dead coarses lay in vieu,
The people made, accounte thereof but small.
For battle did, but malice still renew.
A great man's death, cost many small men's lives,
A small offense, did make a great adoo,
When men forget, their children and their wives,
And madlie faulls, to hate their country too.
A little spark, will make a marvelous fire,
And then both Prince, and Law is out of mind:
Good rule is drounde, and children do conspire,
Their fathers deaths, and kinsmen out of kind,
Do turn and change, as weather Cock with wind.
O France, who looks, upon thy bloody ways,
And notes but half, the pageant thou have played:
Will be therefore, the wiser all their days,
Or at the least, will howrely be afraied.
To play such pranks, as thou poor France have done
Thou had a time, and wretched race to run.
For others weal, that can good war^yng take,
Thy neighbors have, had laisure to regard,
The harms of thee, and so a mirror make:
Of thy great doole, and dulfull destiny hard.
Can greater plagues, be seen in any soil?
Then, revel rage, and havoc every way,
A civil war, with wicked waiste and spoil.
A deadly botche, that striks stout heart by day.
And kills by night, the harmles in his bed,
O civil war, thou have a Hidras hedde:
A Uipers kind, a Serpents nature throw,
A Spiders shape, a form of ugly Tode:
A Deulishe face, a shameless blotted browe,
A bloody hand, at home and eke abroad.
And if a man, would painte a monster right,
Set out in shape, but eiuill war to sight:
Painte all the harms, that cruel murder bryngs,
And sure that Snake, will show ten thousand stings.
A man may not, in colors setforthe well,
A rude revolt, a wretched civil brawll:
He were as good, assaie to painte out hell,
And seek to show, the sorts of torments all,
That silly souls, do feel with damned spreetts.
Who sees reuolte, in feeld or civil streets,
Will think he meetts, madd dogs disgisde like men,
Or else wild Wolves, that lives in savage wood:
It passes wit, and cunnyng art of pen,
To blase out wars, began on mortal food.
And namely broills, that breeds in public state,
The cause whereof, both God and man does hate.
O France the flower, and gardaine of the earth,
The soil of wealth, and topp of triumph all:
Where is become, thy pastyme and thy mirthe,
Thy glory great, that worldly joys we call.
Has wild revolt, made tame thy gallants gaie,
Fie on that braule, that breeds so great a fraie.
Fie on that war, that bryngs rich people bare.
And foul befaule, the birds that files their neaste,
Reuolte bryngs realms, and mighty kings in care,
And roots up peace, and plants discord in breaste.
Though wilful heads, in haste revenge will take,
And for some shreaude, devise draws out the blade,
Beware through heat, how civil war you make:
It wounds the state, and marrs all honest trade,
It rotts sound hearts, and spoils each common weal,
A curelesse sore, that no sweet salve can heal.
The sour mischaunce, that France has self thereby,
(And slaught ers great, which lasted many a year)
Does stand so fresh, and full before your eye,
That world may see, men bought that war full dear:
The flood of strife, did run so through the realm,
Some dreggs must needs, be left behind the stream.
In which deep dross, may lie more harm then good
God shield each land, that loves and fears the Lord,
From such abuse, and thirstyng after blood,
And plant therein, sweet peace and mild accord:
From which pure tree, there springs a precious balm,
That keeps of storms, and bryngs a quiet calm.
FINIS.
THE MISFORTVNE of Portugalle.
AS France did smarte, through rage of civil war,
And Flaunders is, not free from such like foil:
So other soils, by mean of wicked jar,
When least is thought, are offered to the spoil.
Whose wretched ruen, the wise does daiely rewe,
To make the fond, reform their life a new:
But where was peace, and love long linked fast,
And people waxt, both rich and stout of mind,
If their mishappe, and mischeef come at last,
What heart in breast, or man is so unkind:
That will not wail, the woe of such a land,
Who God alone, has touched with mighty hand.
In Portugal, befell a dolfull case,
The straungest chance, that has bin heard of late,
There was a king, who had great gifts of grace,
A Princely spark, of goodly port and state:
And as his shape, was semely to the sight,
So lo within, his mind was shapte a right.
For form of face, and other outward shoes,
Were answered full, with greatness of the heart:
And in that Prince, as now report there goes,
Of special points, was many a noble part.
Among the rest, was one full much to note,
He sought no will, nor would of women dote,
Desirde renown, and yet despisde delight,
And loathed lust, yet loud a merry mean,
To pastyme bent, yet banished pleasure quite,
And glad to lead, a life most pure and clean.
And always meant, to do some mighty deed,
Against the Turks, such noble mind he bore:
That of the like, a man may hardly reed,
And in our days, was seldom seen before,
Well, what auails, to blase his virtues more.
His mind was such, he would not idle sit,
He held good fame, more worth then heaps of gold:
And to maintain, his courage and his wit,
Against the Mores, a power prepare he would.
So with his friends, and such as wishte him well,
He shippyng took, and spread the seas with sails,
But now I have, a woeful tale to tell.
And now in deed, my muse both weeps and wails,
And I my self, of right ought be full sadd,
To show at large, what ill success he had,
Both he and his, full safly set on shore,
On enemies ground, and rangyng where they would:
His foes him met, and fought with him so sore:
(Whose strength and force, were stronger treble fold.)
That he was slain, and all his people lost:
And few of them, returned home again,
Such was their fate, that sought that curssed cost.
To make us muse, that does a live remain,
And make us know, by this great foughten feeld:
There is no life, but must to Fortune yield.
For at one time, three kings made there their end,
But none of them, may christen men lament:
Save this good king, to whom the Lord did send,
A sudden fall, to our great discontent.
Yea, way the loss, and worth of christen blood,
An let the case, be thoroughly understood.
There was not such, a loss these hundredth years,
Be judge thereof, that knows what Princes are:
And of the state, and rule of kyngdoms heers,
And Portugal, thou lucklesse land of care,
Be thou the judge, if I speak trothe or not,
Look how thou will, thou can not hide thy woe:
In mournyng black, let all thy people go:
Proclaim a fast, and stretehe your hands on hie,
And in the streats, for sorrow houle and cry.
For since thy king, is taken from thee thus,
That was before, sent thee to thy great joy:
There is behind, a sorer plague yewus,
If careless heads, of earnest make a toye.
Could more mishappe, to any soil befall,
Then lose the Lamp, that gave the country light:
(And in the dark, can find no torche at all,
Nor candell clear, to walk in Winters night,)
Could Fortune work, to men a worse despite:
Then take a way, their hope and comfort quite.
Could people lose, a Pearl of greater price:
Then such a Gem, as world conscarcly show.
Could Heathen men, wish any worse device,
To us, then give, so great an overthrow.
I fear the baebs, that learns their Christ's cross row,
Will quail for this, when we are in our grave.
The loss is yet, like fruit that is but green,
On goodly trees, that blasted is with wind:
But when the want, of apples shall be scene,
With more regard, the matter shall we mind.
Leave that to him, that gius and taks away,
Who can at length, his secrte will bewraie.
Now sheep from fold, may ron and meet the wolf,
Now gide is gone, the flock to ruen must fall:
Now greef paste cure, comes in through gushyng golfe,
Now Prince is dead, adue poor Portugal.
Thy date is done, except for deastnie strange,
God send some chance, to counterpaise the change.
In Skies of late, was seen a blasyng Star,
A Comete bright, that threat^^^ plags at hand,
Which did presage, perhapps this bloody war,
And Plags that are, a brotche in many a land.
God is displeasd, and sure his wrath is great,
When Turcks do scorge, and plage the chrsten kings:
This angry sign, and fearful sudden heat,
Maks wisemen way, the weight of further things.
Where mighty trees, are rent with thunder crack,
With tremblyng fear, the people homeward run:
The tempests rage, that brings ruen and wrack,
Where danger is, each living thing will shonne:
So such as see, where plague or wars encreace,
Will seek for health, and pray to live in peace.
FINIS.
THE VNQVIETNES of Irelande.
TO treat of Irelands toil,
and tell the troubles now,
(and paint you out in prose or verse,
the countries sorrow through)
Would sure contain more time
and carnest matter both,
Tha^ easly me^ would spare to spend
or world would think a trothe.
For there these many years,
has strief in state been storde,
And seldom in the quiet sheath,
can rest the trenchyng sword.
The soldiers that are sent,
to keep the land in awe:
Are feign to march through thick and thin,
and after lie in straw,
And feed on what they find,
but lo plain countrymen,
Does say our horse, eats up their corn,
and Coignie now and then.
Maks wife and children cry,
and leaus the land full bare:
It Is hard to know if commons poor,
or soldiers feels most care.
The greef so common is,
that each one bears a piece,
And God he knows who licks the fat,
or shears away the flece.
But now to tell the toil,
and trauaill soldiers take,
To those that knows not what it means,
it would a wonder make.
For who that there can serve,
and suffer what does fall,
May bide the bront of any war,
in Christen Kyngdoms all:
The strength and straits are such,
that men must pass sometime.
The rocks and mountains are so strange,
whereon the soldiers clime:
They can not well be told,
nor numbered here a right.
And touching mighty woods and boggs,
I could name such a sight:
As would you weary make,
to read or look upon,
And who demands the trothe of those,
that has the iourneis gone.
Shall hear a thousand things,
which worthy is the note,
The labor, pain, and proof thereof,
will never be forgote.
Some feels it in their joints,
and shall whiels lives they bear,
And so be bold, who tries that soil,
may venture any where:
For toil does daiely grow,
amidde that troubled land,
But how the cause thereof does rise,
with wisdom be it scande.
To hear the people cry,
and see their bare estate,
Would sure move tears in any eye,
that does the country hate.
I can but wish them well,
my duty claims the same,
For that they are our neighbors nere
and ought with equal name,
Like subjects live with us,
for since one, Prince we have,
One mind and manner should we show,
good order that does crave.
The hand does love the arm,
and arm with legs agree,
And all the joints the body bears,
in perfect peace must be:
So head shall well be serude,
but where those members jar,
There will burst out some bold abuse
some braule, or irksom war.
Though Irelande has bin long,
in most unquiet case,
It will be well, when God shall plant,
in peoples hearts his grace:
I hope to see that day,
and that in season short,
That my plain pen shall find great cause,
to yield them good report.
FINIS.
THE TROBLES of Scotland.
IF Flaunders, France, or Portugal compare,
With Scotland now, for trobles, strange it were:
For that is soil, of sorrow and of care,
And cheifest seat, of sadness any where.
That often has had, within it self such stoore,
As spoilde the land, and kept the country poor:
And when that wars, awhile had taken leave,
(And woe bade want, to lay down spear and sheelde:)
The one by sleight, the other would deceive,
And than sharp sword, should plead the case in feelde.
Yea in the house, short dagger did the deed,
When murder might, serve time or turn for need:
And nousled thus, they were God wot in blood,
In rage they would, not spare, ne hye nor low:
Not one might buy, his life for worldly good,
If murthryng hands, were bent to give the blow:
Their heinous acts, sufficient proof does show,
I need not name, the persons they have flaine:
For slaughters cry, through highest clouds does go,
And daiely craves, of God redress again.
The murtheryng mind, is never free from foe.
Nor sure of freende, nor yet of life in fine,
But dwells in doubt, and lius like curssed Caine:
O happy wight, that has such grace divine,
That never will, his heart nor conscience stain,
With brothers blood: and blessed is that hedde,
And hand withal, that never blood did shed.
Both beasts and birds, will fall out sondrie ways,
And strive awhile, and yet at length agree:
But as they waste, their collar so decaies,
And clean forgotte, the quarrels are you see.
Shall man, that has, the reason to forbear,
Be worse then beast? O God that fault forbid,
Shall malice find, a place and succor there,
Where Gods great gifts, ought lie like treasure hid?
Shall hearts of men, (the temple of the Lord)
Lodge murder vile, and nourishe foul discord?
Shall those that knows, what law and peace is worth,
Break Law and Peace, and breed dissension still?
The tree is badde, that bryngs such branches forth:
The hedds are vain, that shows no deeper skill,
The ground is naught, that breeds but scratting brers
And soil not good, where murder still appers.
And yet the ground can bear no bla^^ of this,
Men's hearts unsound, turns many things amiss.
Or else the fate, that is from heaven sent,
And cruel course of Planetts (...) be cause:
That people are, to troubles (...) bent,
And so forgetts, good rule and wholesome laws.
If Planetts could, work that effect in man,
Where should Gods grace, have force and virtue than?
It were a fault, and error wonders great,
To trust or think, that Planetts could do ought,
In man who taks, his force and kindly heat,
His form and shape, his sense and feelyng thought,
From him that sitts, above the Stars and sees,
How Planetts move, and how the world agrees.
Would God those soiles, where greatest iarrs have bin,
And all the sorts, and people of the same:
Would from henceforthe, such trade of life begin,
As in our world, might purchase endless fame.
For bloody brauls, that hurly burly breeds,
With murders foul, and treasons void of fear,
Coms out of vice, and spryngs from wicked seeds.
They are a dross, and Darnell in good Corn:
A graceless grain, that poisons man and beast:
An open plague, a privy prickyng thorn:
A bankette fine, to grace a filthy feast:
A dishe of swill, dreste up like dainty cheer:
A mess of brothe, that marrs the D^^^er quite:
A cold conceit, of Cookrie boughtfull dear:
A connyng knacke, of knau^ie spi^ste with spite:
A trick new learnde, beyond the Alps I trow:
A toye brought home, by those that trauells far:
A simple Snake; a smilyng suttell shrowe:
A sign of Peace, but ground of gre^^ous war.
What can be named, of all vile earthly things,
But murders reach, and monstrons treason bryngs:
The land that has, a^^d his bowels bred,
This sore disease, and will no medson take:
Is sure not well, and sick from feet to head,
And of it self, but small account does make.
No state can stand, where Justice bears no swaie,
The legs are lame, that full of humors are:
The man must fall, that has no certain stay,
Where virtue wants, vice walks but thin and bare.
A patched waule, is shakte a sonder straight:
It lasts no while, that is set up by sleight:
Our Nature haets, the thing that is not good:
And such as halte, are spied by upright seuce:
And kind abhors, the blade embrued in blood:
Who striks the weak, that can not make defense,
Dare not in feeld, a point to meet his foe.
Who maeks a band, to murder one alone,
Loves neither Prince, nor commonwealth I know:
And who delites, to here the giltlesse groan,
Does bear man's shape, and Tigers nature show:
Well, let that pass, great troubles may a rise,
In angry world, that is displeasde for naught:
But such as fall, to murder are not wife,
Their wits can not, conceive how man was wrought
Nor who regards, the wrongs good people have:
Whils giltlesse blood, a right revenge does crave.
FINIS.
THE BLESSED state of England.
WHat blessed hap, and happy days,
our Kingdom does posses,
the wealth and peace that here abou^ds
to world may well expres:
What greater joy ca^ people have
than rest and riches both?
And many other fruitful things,
that on those branches grows.
What earthly fame, is like to this?
what wisdom can be more?
Than shun the broiels, that folly bryngs,
and lay up wealth in store.
For wars when cause commands the same,
what can we wish so well
Than, at a time of troubles great,
in quiet house to dwell.
But way a while with judging wit;
what woe our neighbors taste:
What wealth goes out, what worlds vnreste
comes in with war and waste,
A lusty brute, cries all for war,
and such as little have:
With Princes pay, or poor men's goods,
would feign go gaie and brave,
But tastyng wars, both he and more,
that buys their knowledge dear,
That goes out well, coms home with loss,
and than rests quiet here.
Cries out of wars, finds fault with toil,
and trusts to that will last,
And so with sad and heavy mind,
forgetts the labors paste:
And faulls to take the ease we here
enjoy, with peace at home.
A Jewel which full fea we shall find,
that lists abroad to rome.
For round about us every where,
the world so runs on wheels:
That we are blessed that here no part,
of their affliction feels.
Here have we scope to skippe or walk,
to run and play at base:
Still void of fear, and free of mind,
in every poincte and case.
Here friends may meet and talk at will,
the Prince and Law obaied:
And neither strange, nor home borne child,
of Fortune stands afraied.
Here hands do reap the seeds they so we,
and heads have quiet sleeps:
And wisdom gouerns so the world,
that reason order keeps.
Here mercy rules, and mildness raigns,
and peace great plenty bryngs:
And sollace in his sweetest voice,
the Christmas carrowle syngs.
Here friends may feast, and triumph too,
in suertie void of ill:
And one the other welcome make,
with mirthe and warm good will.
The ground it bryngs such blessyng forth,
that glad are forrains all:
Amid their want, and hard exstreems,
in favor here to faull.
Here wounded staets do heal their harms,
and strangers still repair;
When mischeef makes them march abroad,
and drive them in despair.
Here thousands haunt and find releef,
that are in heavy case:
And freendly folk with open arms,
does silly souls enbrace.
Here things are cheap, and easly had,
no soil the like can show:
No state nor Kingdom at this day,
does in such plenty flow.
The trau'lar that has paste the world,
and gone through many a land:
When he comes home, and noets these things,
to heaven holds up hand:
And museth how this little plotte,
can yield such pleasures great:
It argues where such graces grow,
that God has blessed the seat.
Both Prince and people every one,
and where his blessyng is,
There neither wants no earthly joy,
nor hope of heavens blis.
This I WILL, is Kirnell of the Nutte,
and those that near us dwell,
(Our foreign neighbors round about,)
I count them but the shell:
That holds in this Kirnell sweet,
as Nature has a ssiende.
And as some shells worm eaten are,
yet Kirnell sound we find:
So sondrie soils, about this I Will,
are cracked, and croshte ye know:
With furies rage, and force that fills
their country full of woe.
Which force of men, or rage of war,
maeks calm the lookers on:
And bids wise heads, to quench hot fire,
and stand as cold as ston.
When strief would storre up quiet state,
to strive for feeble strawes:
And leave the love of countries zeal,
and hold with foreign cause.
O ENGLAND, thou art blessed in deed,
thy neck is free from yoke:
Thy arms are strong, thy body sound,
and in good hour be spoke,
Thy youth and age have able joints,
to try thy cause in feelde:
And as that now in troublous times,
the Lord has been thy sheelde.
So look when comes in, cunnyng knacks,
thy whole account is made,
That plainnes shall make finenes feel,
the weight of Bilbowe blade.
More blessed than thy neighbors all,
by proof thou art as yet:
More likely art thou by that cause,
in peace and rest to sit.
More good in season have thou done,
than thousands well can way:
Most happy is thy state therefore,
and surer stands thy stay.
Than may thou be the Kirnell sweet,
that many wish to have:
But none can spoil, nor scarce dare touch,
such grace great God thee gave.
That guard shall keep the Kirnell long,
from worm and wicked foil:
And send good fortune sondrie ways,
unto this blessed soil.
FINIS.

