A PLAIN OR most true report of a dangerous service, stoutely attempted, and
manfully brought to pass by English men, Scotts men, Wallons and other worthy
soldiers, for the taking of Macklin on the sudden, a strong City in
Flaunders: set forth at large with special points to be noted: by Thomas
Churchyard gentleman. 1580.

Imprinted at London by Ihon Perin, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the
Sign of the Angel.

TO THE RIGHT honorable my singular good Lord, the Lord Norrice: Thomas
Churchyard wishes blessedness of life, much honor in the world and the
best hap can be desired.
MY good lord the favor and Noble dealings toward me in the days you were
lord ambassador in France, when your aid and policy (by mean of a
passeport) conuayed me from danger to the Prince of Orrange, made me often
remember that such courtesies with good will or service should be requieted.
But having small power for the publishyng of duty, and little ability to
requite a good turn (watchyng occasion to be grateful) I take such matter
as time does minister for a furtherer of my expectation, and a mean to
increase my credit with your lordship. And considering when doleful news was
brought of one of your cheifest sons dedde in Irelande, I wrote a heavy
Epitaphe, I thought now hearing great and goodnewes of another (both in nature
and valliancie brother to the eldest who GOD has called) to make a piece of
ame^ds, for the saluyng of my first presumption, and the thoroughly expressyng
of my present desire of duetifull doing. So my good Lord leauyng circumstance
of words and filed phrases of florishyng ceremonies, I fall to my purposed
matter. It has been an old manner, and a new finenesse in this cunnyng
world, that such as could purchase praise or commendation by their own
practices (either by pen or tongue) would reap the glory they could get to
themselves, and leave out the fame of others, if trothe by tract of time
reveled not rightful causes, and gave each well doer the reward of their
works, then if those manners of men, finenesse of the world, and greediness
of glory runs away with have to their own commodity, and no benefit to
others: Blame not any nation (properly given to their private praise) to tread
down the laud and honor of any strange people, neither borne in their
Country, nor coming to their soil, but to serve for money and such report
of fame, as the Country may spare from them selves to the Soldiers, that
serve for these two causes before rehearsed. Not withstanding because the
eager minds of men (that bites at every blaste of fame) shall not breed by
their boldness, neither abuse nor ill custom, whereby the estimation of
forwardmen should be hindered, nor the quick forwardness of vainglorie should
not find too mutche occasion to triu^ph on the advantage of time, I have now
time as I think with trothe and good laisure, written such intelligence to
the world of the taking of Macklin, as I hope shall serve for a testimony that
my pen is ever honestly occupied, and that no writer may willingly (if
license permit) suffer further report of news to be published, then the wise
of the world allows, and the general opinions of men may embrace. Thus
wishing truth always (as a torche to burn on the topp of a hill) to be
looked on, and affections of men to be tried and wrested to the best
constructions of that which best becomes a good world to hear, I present to
your Lordship the true reports I have heard for the winnyng of Macklin, and
such things as there happened at Macklins mischance: written not for that
such matter (or a great deal greater) can be hid from a noble man of your
calling. But presented to keep my acquaintance with my good friends, and
cause the world to imagine I was borne under a Marcial planet and sign: and
neither spares pen, study, nor pains to prefarre Marciall people, and honor
the worthiest sort of men. So hopyng your Lordship looks on my willing mind
to do well, and turns your face from the defectes of my base phrase and
writing: I wish your honor daiely to increase, with the blessyng of God upon
your house and children. From Westminster the last of April: your
Lordshippes at commandment.

Thomas Churchyard.

Macklins mischance.
AS each Country and Nations seeks their own credit and advancement, so
hardly any foreign soldier rea peth fame in a strange sovle he serves in: I
mean an English man seruyng out of his own Country (joined with strangers
in action) stands at reward of common report, or is subject to the affection
of the people where he serves, who regardes more their own estimation, then
the fame of a foreign Soldier, which soldier rather for fame then reward,
goes from the native soil he was borne in, and serves a strange people for a
small piece of money, but yet a great portion of praise and good renown. This
not spoken nor applied to the discredit, and hindrance of any strangers well
doing, but in the defense and service of the English Nation, whose labor,
charge, courage, readiness, and warlike minds, is not inferior to the
greatest neighbors, (or furthest of you can name) nere us, in any Marciall
order, manner, discipline of war, or hazard of life.

And for a proof of these special points herein rehearsed, the most wars of
christendom bears such testimonial and witness of their forewardnesse
(though here at home God be praised is peace) that few or none has been so
forward in the feeld, nor more daungerously served. Then injury it were, and
clean against good nature of men, and order of arms, that any nation for
their own glory (vain as a shadow) should eclips the dezartes and
valiauncie, of the English now seruyng in Flanders, drawn thither for fame
(and their own desires to do well) and live from debt of the world and
danger of the Law. In whose commendation, and for the trothe of matter now
penned, under good will of the wise, and sound judgment of the world, I
enter into a discourse and plain order of the taking of Macklin, dispraisyng
no Nation at the service, nor leauyng out no matter is true, because trothe is
to be embraced, and matter depending of flattery or affection, is utterly to
be disalowed.

It happened I being at the Court (where the trothe of many things is most
certain) I saw a letter written out of Flaunders, from the hands of a
gentilman, whose eyes beheld the very service and enterprise, and the winnyng
of the great town of Macklin, and the letter was so well penned, and went so
directly to the matter (in every point and order) touching the particulars and
general taking of the same city, that I was forced by the credit of the
gentilman that wrote (and by probable confirmation of sonderie other reports)
to believe the letter to be most true, and worthy the rehearsal to the open
world. But amassed at the strangeness of the hazard, and wonderyng not a little
at the attempt (which was marvelous) I bethought me how the Spanyardes upon a
resolution among themselves suddenly set upon Antwarp, and in a small season had
the people at their mercy, and town at their pleasure: and yet me thought
this enterprise for the winnyng of Macklin, surpassed all the exploites that
ever before I heard of, or in deed thoroughly understood. Tha^ waiyng how
slightly I had gone over the Services of Flaunders, in a book called my
Choice knowing that I had forgotten both master Norris, master Ca^dish,
master work, and a number of others very valiaunte gentilmen, that merits
more praise then my pen can give the^. I thought to make amends with the next
work I should set out, and so peisyng in the balance of an upright
judgment, the weight and value of the valiauncie of men, and the inuinsible
courages that resolute soldiers does show. I took an accasion to publishe
the letter I have spoken of, and to stretche out the fame and honor of my
countrymen, that otherwise might be darkened by disdain, or drouned in
forgetfulness, for want of true record that proceadeth from the pen of an
honest writer, who justly may be bold without blushyng, to report that he
hears, and may be proved to be true. In the wars between the Prince of
Orrange and the Malle contants, for causes I need not to touch Mounsire de
Fammai, and Mounsire de Temple, being as some say, the drawers of a drift, and
to be at some execution of the practice, as appears by many men's opinions,
the ix. of April early at a determined hour, by the consentes and devises of
such as governed in Marciall affairs. Master Ihon Norrice with seven
Enseantes, being but eight hundredth Englishmen (or somewhat more) he Collonell
of those companies, with the aid of the Scotts and Wallons four hundredth,
approached in orderly march and manner (without sound of Dromme) nere the
walls of Macklin, Monsire de Famai promisyng before that the Soldiers (on his
honor) should have five months pay for their further encouragemente to that
and all other the like services.

And these whole companies approached, and deuidyng them selves some for the
skalle in one place, and some in an other, the one part with Boats well
manned, and the other wadyng very depely to enter upon the skalyng Ladders,
some negligence or haste by some not spoken of, had almost discouraged the
whole attempt: And in the end failed their footyng, and forced Master
Norrice and the power with him, to advance them selves toward the enemy,
and dwell upon their guard (with the loss of sometime) before the face of the
Town, which by means of noyes and Alarm the day being come, was in a
readiness for defense, and shot of their pieces to their most advantage,
and the assailantes discourage, defendyng a Courtaine very stoutly, against
the which Courtain maisier Ihon Norrice was feign to draw five hundredth
shot, not meaning thereby to enter. For the Boats by mischaunce of vnladyng
of them were drouned, and the five hundred shot was drawn to this one place,
to procure the people in the town to repair thither, whiles some appointed for
purpose, at an other place should enter with more ease and less danger. But
those that were putt to the plonge for to wade, found the water so deep, that
it came above their shulders: a matter to be marueled at, a hard adventure,
and a sore escape: But by that means they found away to enter by Ladder at a
Gate, where they passed five several times with some small power, but could
enter no more but one person at once. Yet hap served so well, no resistaunce
in that corner was made, till three hundredth of the English soldiers had
possessed a piece of the town: And then the Albanoies horse men, thinkyng to
break through the force of footmen, charged them. So such as foolishely
adventured to far of the footmen, fell into the danger of the Albanoies,
whereon the horsemen gave an other charge, and tastyng with their boldness
the pushe of the Pike, and seeing the English stand stoutly at defense, the
Albanoies wheeled about, and forsook that manner of fight, with the loss of
diverse of their horsemen.

After which repulce the Albanoies had no mind any more to come so nere
danger, whereby the Burgoes of the town began to quail, and stood in a
little mase and doubt of the matter. Then the whole tounes men and soldiers
forsook the rampires and manned both brigges and streates as well as they
might: in this season and hard fight both doubtful and dangerous. The
English, Scottish, and all the other Soldiers for that attempt present,
having passed over the gates, walls, and places of readiest entry, marched
forewardes (criyng a noble word) and found great resistaunce at the end of
every streate by which sharp encounter they were feign by little and little
(as Fortune served their hopes) to win their ground with some loss of
Soldiers who minded more victory, then cowardly to retire, and at the last
with mutche a do and long bickeryng (the tounes men for their liberty and
lives, and the assailantes for fame and conqueste) they came in vewe of the
Market place, where the tounes men and their stoutest companies stood in order
of battle, every way flancked with ordinance: But as the French man faieth,
Il falloit aualler cela, the Soldiers meaning to try what Fortune durst
do, gave a lusty charge, and by Gods help, and the great courage of
sonderie stout gentilmen, and officers of credit and value, they had the
upper hand of their enemies, with whom they made as short work as they might:
But in deed before apparaunte victory could any way be known, great
struggling and stout stir on both sides was seen* and master Ihon Norrice
was matched with a lusty Limlifter, a breachlesse Freer called Brother Peter,
the only manne that made and maintained all the broile and business, who had
put on a resolute mind, either to kille Master Norrice, or else to be slain
him self, and dealt blows so bravely in this his determination, that he hitt
master Norrice with a Halbert two full thwackes on the Curate, which blows
were sone revenged by master Norrice, who dispatched ye Freer, and gave him a
dedde pay in recompense of his pains. This gallaunte Freer thus slain, ended
all the strief and biodie braule: for then every one cried Misericorde, and
fell pitifully at the feet of the Soldiers, who findyng victory used not
mutche extremity. For the number of all those that were slain were not above
two hundredth persons: one letter declares that the gouernoure with the
Albanoizes, dispairyng a little before the overthrow fled (out at a back
Port or Posterne) to Louaiu and so saved their lives: another letter says the
governor was taken prisoner. Our English Nation lost in their company a
fifteen Commoners, but as I believe they were all gentilmen Soldiers. For to
the number of thirty English men were slain, and four score sore hurt:
which argues of eight hundredth, one hundredth and more were likely to have
paid their lives for their enterprise. And further the loss or hurtyng of so
many our Nation, manifestly declares that they did most of the service, and
deserves therefore the most honor: how so ever the printyng of the first
news be taken and understood, one Master Smithe, two valiaunte
Lieutenantes, Master Humfrey Turner an Enscante, Master Jones a gallant young
Soldiour, were worthily seen serve, and slain in the action. By a misfortune
after the fight Master Whitchurche, and Master Heddleis brother of the Guard
was slain: and of all the other Nations that came with the English, as yet can
be known was but two persons slain in the enterprise.

Now yet I pray you, hear what an other man of good credit wrote of this
matter, who stood and plainly beheld the service from the beginning to
the end. The power of twelve hundredth in all, whereof eight hundredth were
Englishemen, set forward from Filforde and came to Macklin, as eager as Hawks
that seeks their pray, wadyng to the chinne, and climyng over Iron gates, as
men that cared not for life, so fame might be gotten. Yea surely says he, the
strength of the town considered, there was never under the cope of heaven,
such an enterprise taken in hand, and brought to so glorious a victory. For
says he though very good captains might after long fight and hurtes forsake
the assault, these soldiers were so desirous of service, that they would not in
any case at no time retire, and being entered the town but a very few, they
fought it out so manfully, that master Roulande York s^ept into the water,
wadyng after them to their succor: And at the present displaiyng of his
Enseant, he lost his Lieutenant, his Sergeante, and Master Jones his Enseante
bearer, and he him self shot through his Dublette, and Master Norrice not as
a Collonell, but as a common Soldiour, led his Soldiors the way through
thick and thin, where most danger appeared. And encountered Friar Peter, who
was cheef leader of all the Priests in the town, he was in danger to be
slain, for the Friar first shot of his piece, then he took him to his Pike
or Halberte, and last fell to his sword, and so like a courageous Confessor
valliauntly lost his life. And when all the broyle was in a manner ended, he
says that looked upon all these doings, Mounsire de Temple, and Mounsire de
Fammai came to the town, or were peradventure about the town nere the
service, for the aunsweryng their hope, and furthering of the matter expected.
Yet have they no such cause to be written of, as those that were the only
executioners of the service in deed: where fore the first printed book of
this news must be wayed, according to the trothe and vmore of the matter.

After the town was won, Master Norrice did what he might too keep his
people from pillage, but in the mean while Temples men ioynyng with the
Scotts got the best booties: whereupon the Englishmen fell to take that
easily might be had, either of Churchmen or Cloister houses, but especially
they searched the Cloisters and Religious places, saying they were Inquisitors
for to seek out Copes, Surpleses and Uestinentes, and to take so good an order
by their Commission, that no Mass should be song nor said in Macklin many a
long year after, for want of gilted Challices, and golden Copes.

And the Shrine of Saint Tomball was so terriblie handeled, that it was both
removed out of his place, and left not worth a penny. And the Soldiers were
so wealthy, that the old custom of the Spaniardes was taken up again, for
Dice play began so merrily on the top of Drommes heddes, that money could
not tarry in the bothome of men's purses. Men that have by their forwardnes
found such good Fortune, are to be excused though they merrily pass a
little money a way at Dice: Declaryng by that pastime which stands on good
hap to win, or evil luck to lose. The whole (...) of man stands but
on hazard and chance: a matter that soldiers do mutche mark, and the world
can not deny. But for all their plaiyng at Dice (which Soldiers will not be
varred from) their Capitaines and Leaders, as it is reported, had more regard
to that which was so hardly gotten, and yet to redeem a Captain out of
prison, master Norrice has paid a great sum of money, which money was
most nobly employed: my freende good Captain Morgane that now is in
Macklin, will I warrant you confess the same when he is asked. An other
poincte of honor is to be spoken of. For when a Nonrie in the town was ready
to be spoiled, Master Norrice hearing that some English women were among the
Noonnes, defended them from harm, and set them free, and used other
courtesies more, that is worthy the noting. When I heard of this noble part
of a Soldiour, I remembered how a great conqueror, in a manner of the most
part of the world, having Darius wife and a number of gallaunte Ladies under
his mercy: used himself so honorably toward his captives, that for fear to
be tempted with their beauties, he would not scarce come where they were, and
yet were the prisoners so reverently and honestly used (being women of great
calling and birth) that Darius thought him self happy (though unfortunate
Prince he was) to be conquered of such a noble king as Alexander, who could
not only conquer his own affections, but win his enemies hearts by his
favorable and Princely dealings: And surely greater honor is gotten by vsyng
victory wisely, then by ouerthrowyng a multitude with manhood, without
showing mercy and gentilnesse. A conqueror by repressyng cruelty by
courtesy, is hadd in admiration of his very enemies, and a victor without
virtue and pitiful consideration, is hated among his friends, and despised
generally among all kind of people. Now you must note that the Englishemen,
and such as entered the town by hazard, fury of shot, danger of sword,
and pushe of the Pike, are not a little to be honored and praised, and more
to be commended then thousands of those that stood a far of, and gave but
the lookyng on. And you may see by the same some men are happy, not only
to pass through many perilles, but likewise to live long, and make them
selves and their soldiers ritche: and cause the fame of their Country to be
spread as far as the wind can blow, or the Sun may shine. And the more
happy be our Englishemen and Scotts men, with all the rest of this attempt,
that they dwell as yet in the place they have taken, and mind not to part
there fro, till the poor Soldiers be pleased. And the keepyng the said
Town in their hands all this while, argues they have deserved too have the
charge thereof, though Mounsire Fammai bear the name to be the Governor of
Macklin.

Thus have you heard the effect and rehersall of two letters, sent into
England from those in Flaunders, that saw Macklin both won and lost,
which coming to light and to the open eye of the world, shows that all
tounes, fortresses, and holds (be they never so strong) are subject to sudden
overthrows, and in the divine disposition of the Almighty, who visits a
number of our neighbors, with many kinds of callamities, to make us bear in
mind his Omnipotente power, and our own duties to GOD and our Prince. This
piece of service I have touched, because every Nation prefarres their own
Countriemen, and the English do they never so well, and be the first at a
breach (or at the saulte of a Town) they are the last shall be spoken of, and
the worst rewarded) especially where best they deserve, and most should be
made of. I fear it is some men's Deastenie, neither at home nor abroad to
reap no benefit of their labors. So for this season I bid you farewell,
myndyng hereafter to show other seruises that are forgotten in my book of
Choice, that was over hastily Printed, and must be run over again, both for
the fame of some therein left out, and the troth of some matters I was wrong
instructed of. And to keep the people in some good likyng of me and my
works. I am presently setting out a discourse of the late yeartquake, not
touched of any writer in English here tofore: Though some have touched many
good points to be noted, both learnedlie and louynglie with duetifull order,
declared to God and the world. Thus once again crauyng your patience and
judgment. to read before you condemn, I bid you adue, and go about the
Printyng of my book presently promised.

Finis.

