A POSTIL or orderly disposing of certain Epistles usually red in the Church
of God, upon the Sundays and Holidays throughout the whole year.

Written in Latin by David Chytraeus, and translated intoo English by Arthur
Golding.

Seen and allowed according too the order appointed.

Jmprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman.

for Lucas Harrison and George Bishop.

Anno Domini. 1570.

To the right honorable Sir VValtar Myldmay Knight, Chancelour of the Queens
Majesty's court of Exchequer, and one of her highness most honorable privy
counsel. Arthur Golding wishes health, prosperity, and increase of all godly
knowledge, with long continuance in the same.
RIght honorable, forasmuch since the coming forth of the Postill of
Hemingius upon the Gospelles in English, the good liking of his wholesome
doctrine, and his well handling thereof too the plain understanding, even of
the simple and too the profitable edifying of al sorts, have caused many too
read the same with great willingness and diligence: The parties that were the
procurers of that benefit too their Country, have with like good meening
requested me to add some Postill or exposition upon the Epistles also to the
intent that the well disposed Reader might have more full instruction in those
parts of scripture which are most usually and continually red in the Christen
Churches. In performance whereof, (upon the special good report and
commendation of such as are learned) I have translated this Postill (or, as the
Author himself terms the^, these disposements) of David Cythraeus, containing
in ground and substance of matter, the selfsame things that the other work
does: Howbeit, handled and disposed after another sort. For neither uses he
so many subdiuisions as does Hemingius: and besides that, he conueyeth his
matters intoo the manner of Sermons methodically, disposed after the order of
Rhethoricke, instructing the Reader too frame the parts of his oration aptly,
and too enlarge the same plentuously, according as opportunity of time,
person, and matter shall require. Also in such places as have any dark
phrases or hid sense, he expounds the words gra^merlike, opening the
propreties of the tu^gs and the figurative speeches, whereby he gives great
light to the text. Agein, in diverse cases he draws the matters into form of
Arguments after the manner of Logic, too the intent the Reader should look
thoroughly intoo the matter, and wey it accordingly. In which respects although
this work may seem more necessary for the learned (or at least wise for such
as be well entered in the liberal arts, and foreward in knowledge) than for
the simple and meaner sort: yet notwithstanding there are other respects also
for which even the simplest that is of any capacity may fare the better by
him. For like as the terms of art in setting down and disposing of matters
according too art, are somewhat dark to such as are not acquaynted with them,
which is not a thing so greatly material too be stumbled at: So his
discoursing and setting forth of matters perteyning too faith, religion,
doctrine, and ame^dment of manners (which are the cheef points that al men
should look for) are very plain, orderly, manifest, and utterly void of all
obscurity and darkness. Yea and he so evidently and effectually beats into
his heerers heads, the right sense and meening of the holy scripture, that it
may seem he had a singular care and regard too be understood of all men. And
not in these Epistles only, but also in many other parts of holy scripture
both of the old Testament and of the new, has he traveled right paynfully,
lernedly, and godlily, to his own great co^mendatio^ among the skilful, and to
the great commodity and furtherance of the christen common wedle. Wherefore, I
am the bolder to match this translation with the former of Hemingius (as it
were the form with the matter) and to dedicate it to your honor, trusting that
you will of your accustomed goodness give me leave to shroud my simple
doings under the shadow of your favor, which thing I most humbly request.
For I thought it an unmeet and unseemly thing, yeaand against reason, to
separate those works in dedicatio^, which are al one insubsta^ce of matter. And
therefore submitting myself and it to your good pleasure, I cease to trouble
your honor any further. Finished at Powles Belchamp, the last day of March*
1570.

Upon the byrthday of the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ.
FOr as much as it is a custom in the Church of God too begin the New year
at the birthday of the Son of God, so as the same day which was the
commencement of our salvation, should also lead the beginning of the year: at
this my entrance with most earnest suit I beseech our Lord Jesus Christ ye
son of God who was borne for us, and given too us, that the year ensuing may
be luckie and too the welfare of Gods church, of the common weal, of the
studies of lerning, and of us and our housholdes. And because the son of God
was to this end sent, and that his taking upon him our frail and weak nature,
mainteineth and preserves all the whole mass of mankind too this end, that
out of it he may (by the voice of his gospel) gather too himself an
everlasting Church, and (abolishing sin and death) restore righteousness
and eternal life: I beseech him with all my heart, that for his glories sake,
he will teach and govern us, and dwell in us and be effectual in us, and
also maintain the light of the true doctrine concerning himself, and the
knowledge of lerning needful for his Church, and the harbroughes of the
Church, and wholesome peace: that mo may acknowledge him rightly, and set out
his praise for evermore.

Now in the treatyses concerning the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, who
was borne for us, and given too us, there be three places chiefly too be
considered, and set forth too the people.

First concerning the person of the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ borne of
the virgin Marie, in whom the two natures of God and man are by a wonderful
leage knit together. 2 Of the causes of this wonderful coupling of the two
natures in Christ: and of the benefits or profits that redound too us men by
the birth of Christ. 3 Of the applying of Christ's benefits, which thing is
done by faith, which afterward is effectual by good works.
Therefore after the old custom of the Church, there are three Epistles wont
to be red in the three offices on the birth day of Christ, taken out of Heb. 1.
Tit. 3. and Tit. 2.

The first Epistle (Heb. 1.) does chiefly set forth the doctrine concerning the
person of Christ.

The second, (which in Tit. 3.) sets out the benefits of our savior Jesus
Christ, with most clear and apparent words.

The third (which is red in the second too Titus) co^teineth a sum of the
doctrine concerning good works which must follow the faith that applies
Christ's benefits* unto us.

I will therefore entreat of every of these three Epistles in order, the
exposition of which may be distributed intoo three birthdayes. But first of
all I will recite a disposement of a sermon which may breefly comprehend a
sum of the doctrine concerning the Incarnation or birth of the son of God
our Lord Jesus Christ too be uttered too the people.

THE ENTRANCE.
The consideration of Gods secret purpose concerning the redemption of mankind,
and the wonderful coupling of the Godhed and manhod in the son of God our
Lord Jesus Christ, far surmounteth the wisdom of all Angels and men. Yet
will God have us too learn the beginnings of this wisdom, in this life, and
(toogither with the Angels and all the saints in heaven and earth) too
beehold this wonderful birthe of the son of God with earnest mind, and too
magnify it with true faith and thankfulness. For the son of God has
voutsaued this most high honor chiefly upon us men, that he would take the
substance of our nature upon him. And for our salvation sake is he become man:
that setting us free from sin and endless death, he might restore unto us
righteousness and life. This is to be understood of the memorial of the
promised seed, kept always in the hearts of the faithful, and renewed by
preching and talk and not of the keeping of any appointed holyday.
And therefore all the church (even from the beginning of the world, which is
now 5531. years) has kept this feast, renewing and spreading abroad the
promis concerning the woman's seed that should crush the serpents head.
Wherefore let us also join our endeavor too the fellowship of the whole Church,
and (toogither with all Saints) consider the beginnings of the doctrine which
concerns the woonderful aliance of the Godhed and manhod in Christ, and the
benefits that he has brought us by his birth: specially seeing the
everlasting salvation of us all, consists in the true acknowledgment of our
Lord and sauyoure Jesus Christ, the very son of God and of Marie.

The proposition and partition.
Now will we distribute all this most large doctrine of this feastfull day,
intoo three places. And first (by Gods help) we will speak of Christ's
person issuing of the virgin Marie. 2. Of the causes of this wonderful
coupling of the two natures: and of Christ's benefits. 3. Of the applying of
the same.

Of the first.
IN our Lord and redeemer Jesus Christ borne of the virgin Two natures in
Christ.
Marie, there be two natures knyt toogither by an indissoluble bond, that is
too wit, the Son of God, the word, of one self same substance and of one
self same continuance with the eternal Father, and the nature of man taken
of the substance of the virgin Marie. John. 1. The word became flesh, that is
too say, the son of God became man, or the son of God took too him flesh,
or the nature of man, so as they be one person, Jesus Christ. Philip. 2.
Christ being in the shape of God, thought it no robbery too be equal with
God, but abased himself, taking upon him the shape of a servant, and became
utterly like too the residue of men. Too the intent these things may be the
easlyer understood, the doctrine of the common Cathechisme is too be repeted
in this place. What God is: how he is too be discerned from counterfeit Gods:
how many persons of the Godhead there be: how the three persons are too be
discerned one from another by evident marks. For only the second person the
son of God coupled man's nature unto him. And let the description of the
person of Gods son be recited out of the Cathechisme, the which I will
expound in the disposement of the foresaid Epistle. Heb. 1. Also let the names
of the son of God be declared among which the cheef is, the word, which is
attributed to Why Christ is called the word.
him for many causes. But the cheifest are two. First, for that the son is
the full and perfect image of the everlasting father, like as our speech is the
image that expresses and shows the thoughts of our mind. Secondly, for that
by the son, Goddisclosed his wonderful purpose concerning the creation and
redemption of mankind, and uttered to our first parents his promis concerning
the seed that should crush the serpents head.

Basilius. Why is he called the word? Because he proceeded out of the mind,
and was begotten without all affection, and is the image of him that begat him.

Nazianzen He is therefore called the word, because he is in respect of the
father, as the word is in respect of the mind, not only because his generation
was void of all affection, but also for the knot of conjunction and the lively
representation.

This only begotten son and word of God, was always at hand too mankind
even from the beginning of the world. The son of God was always with the
fathers.
He received our first parents: he sat at the helm in the Ark of Noe: he was
a guest with Abraham: he showed himself too Jacob face too face, that is too
wit, in the self same shape and pattern of man's nature, which he should
afterward take upon him: he appeared too Moses in the bush: he was with the
people of Israel in the wilderness: and he inspired all the Prophets. At
length when the fullness of time foresette of God was come, (namely the year
of the world 3962) he took upon him man's nature in the womb of the virgin
Marie, and by personal union cuppled it too himself, according as was
foretold of him in the promises, that he should be borne of a virgin. For in
this respect is he called Why Christ is called the woman's seed.
the woman's seed. Genesis 3. and Siloh, that is too say, the virgins issue. Genesis
49. And in Esaias the. 7. Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and his name shall be
called Emanuell, that is too say, God with us. Now although we cannot by the
sharpness of our own wit, spy out the manner of this wonderful cuppling of
the Godhed and manhood in Christ: yet notwithstanding, these entrances which
God has opened unto us, are too be faithfully learned and believed. And
chilore^ may learn the sum of this doctrine out of the Creed of Athanasius.
The creed of Athanasius.
This therefore is the right faith, that we believe and acknowledge, that our
Lord Jesus Christ the son of God, is both God and man. God, of the substance
of the father begotten before all worlds, and man of the substance of his
moother borne in the world. Perfect God and perfect man of reasonable soul and
humane flesh subsisting. Equal too the father as touching his Godhead, and
less than the father as touching his manhood. Who though he be both God and
man, yet is he not two, but one Christ. One, not by turning the Godhead intoo
flesh, but by taking manhood intoo God. One altoogither, not by confounding the
substance, but by union of person. For like as the reasonable soul and flesh
is one man: so God and man is one Christ.

The.ij. Concerning the causes of the coupling of the two natures, and of the
benefits of Christ's birth.
THe principal efficient cause of the wonderful coupling of the Godhed and
manhod in Christ, is the very person of the son of God making suit in that
secret counsel of the Godhed, for mankind, and turning upon himself the most
rightful wrath of God against sin, and joining too himself our nature by ever
lasting and indissoluble bond. Secondly the holy ghost has sanctified the
flesh taken of the substance of the virgin Marie, and fashioned in Mary's
womb, the body of Christ ready too be borne. Luke. j.

The causes enforcing the birth and Incarnation of the Son of God our
mediatoure, were chiefly four. First the Gods mercy and loving kindness.
exceeding love and mercy of God toward mankind, which he would not have
forlorn for ever. Secondly, Gods justice binding men either too obedience, or
too sufficient punishment. Therefore when man had transgressed, it was of Gods
justice.
necessity that the punishment should be performed by man. Thirdly: Now that
the price might be of full value, and the greatness of the desert, might
exceed the greatness of the sin: it beehoued the redeemer too excel all
creatures, and too be a person of the Godhed. Fourthly: It is the duty The
duty of a redeemer and high priest.
of a redeemer and high priest, too appease Gods wrath, and too overcome sin
and death, and too be at hand in all places, and too here and defend the
Church, and too restore ryghtuousnesse and eternal life unto it. But this
can no man do, that is not also Emanuell, that is too say, in very deed and
by nature, God.

The outward forcing cause is sin, and the most sorrowful Sin and damnation.
damnation of all mankind, which God would not should utterly perish.

The final cause is showed in the Sermon of the Angel. Man's salvation.
Behold I bring you tidings of great joy, for there is borne too you a
savior, Christ the Lord.

For the highest benefit yt the son of God has wrought The benefits of
Christ's birth.
unto us by his birth, is salvation, that is too say, deliverance from Gods
wrath, from sin, from death, from curse of the law, from the tirannie of the
devil, and from endless damnation: and on the other side atonement with God,
joy of conscience, adoption too be the sons of God, the gift of the holy
ghost, righteousness, and everlasting life. Too be short, the word of God
Jesus Christ, is become that which we be, too the intent he might make us
fully that which he is. For (that I may use the words of Ciprian,) Christ the
son of God voutsaued too become the son of man, to the intent he might make
us men the sons of God: He took upon him the shape of a servant, too the
intent he might set us free, that are the servants of sin and death. He was
wounded that he might heal our wounds: and it was his will too die, that he
might give us mortal wights immortality. These benefits are brefly contained
in the promises made too Adam and Abraham. In thy seed shall all nations be
blissed. Also the womans seed shall tread down the serpents head. And the
sum is uttered in clear and lyghtsome words by Paul, Galath. 4. After that
the fullness of time was come, God sent his son borne of a woman, made under
the law, too the intent he might redeem those that were under the law, yt we
might be adopted the sons of God, of which notable sentence I will entreat
more at large the next Sunday.

The.iij. Of the applying.
NOw forasmuch as these are great good things which the How Christ's benefits
are applied too us.
son of God brings: the sorrowful minds dema^d how we wretches defiled with
sins, can atteine them. That do ye Angels teach: unto you is borne a savior.
And Esaias: a child is born unto us, and a son is given unto us. And hereuppon
is grounded this sentence. John. 3. So God loved the world that he gave his
only begotten son, to the intent that all y^ believe in him should not
perish, but have life everlasting. For too this purpose was the son of God
sent, that we al, whoo are utterly unworthy and horibly defiled, should be
accepted of God for his sake, and atteyne remission of sins and eternal
salvation. And we are most straightly commanded of God, too believe assuredly
that these good things are given us for his sons sake, and through this faith
shining before us, too sing all our life long with the Angels.

1 Glory be too God on high, that is too say, now that How and why glory is
given too God.
the son is borne, for the same sons sake is true and perfect glory
yielded unto God: not only for that he is God, wise, rightuous, and a judge:
but also for that he is mercifall, and certainly accepts us for his sons
sake, and rewards us with eternal life. This glory do neither heathenmen,
nor Turks, nor hipocrites, but only they that believe in the son that is
borne too us and given too us, yield unto God. 2 In earth peace, that is too
say, men have God reconciled Peace.
and favorable too them, and maintain mutual love among themselves. 3 Too men
gladness, that is too say, although miseries Gladness.
and distresses befall them, yet are their hearts quiet and merry, and rest
steadfastly in this souereine goodness, that the son is borne too us and
given too us.
THE CONCLUSION.
In the knitting up, let the three places be repeted, and let a thanksgiving
be added for the sending of the son, and a prayer, that God will voutsaue to
gather a church too his son among us, and kindle our minds and hearts with
his holy spirit, so as we may look somewhat more deeply intoo this
wonderful devise of our redemption, and magnify it with thankful hearts.

Upon Christmas day.
The Epistle. Heb. j.
GOd in times past diversely and many ways spoke unto the fathers by Prophets:
but in these last days he has spoken unto us by his own son, whom he has
made heir of all things, by who^ also he made the world. Which son being
the bryghtnes of his glory and the very image of his substance, ruling al
things with the word of his power: has by his own person purged our sins,
and sits on the right hand of the majesty on hie, being so much more
excellent than the Angels, as he has by enheritaunce obtained a more excellent
name (than have they). For unto which of the Angels said he at any time? Thou
art my son, this day have I begotten thee? And agein: I will be his father,
and he shall be my son. And agein when he brings in the first begotten
son intoo the world, he says: And let all the Angels of God woorship him.
And of the Angels he says: he makes his Angels spirits, and his ministers a
flame of fire. But unto the son he says: thy seat (o God) shall be for ever
and ever. The scepter of thy kingdom is a right scepter. Thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity. Wherefore God even thy God, has anointed
thee with Oil of gladness above thy fellows. And thou Lord in the beginning
have laid the foundation of the earth, And the heavens are the works of thy
hands. They shall perish, but thou endurest. They all shall wex old as does a
garment: and as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed.
But thou art even the same, and thy years shall not fail. Unto which of the
angels said he at any time: Sit on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy
footstool? Are they not all ministering spirits, sent too minister for their
sakes which shall be heirs of salvation?

The disposement.
The Epistle pertains too the kind of cases that teach. The parts or chief
places are two.

1 A description of the person of the son of GOD our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 A
gathering together of the witnesses which confirm that Christ is more
excellent than the Angels, and show the difference between Christ and the
Angels.
The first place.
IT is a great and wonderful benefit of the son of God, and Chrysts
apperings too the Fathers in old time.
worthy too be set out continually with thankful mind and voice, that of his
exceeding goodness, coming forth from his secret dwelling place, he
discovered himself to mankind by assured and open testimonies. Yea, eue^ he
himself clothing him with a visible shape or form of the manhod that was too
be taken upon him afterward, talked with the first men and the rest of the
Fathers face: and with his own mouth reveled the promis of grace whereby the
first parents were received, oftentimes renewing the same in his communications
had with Abraham, Jsaac, Jacob, Moses, David, Esaias, Jeremy, Daniel. etc, and
at the length in ye year of the world 3962 was borne man of the virgin Marie,
and many years together sowed ye doctrine of his gospel among men and confirmed
it with miracles. Of this exceeding great benefit, this epistle makes mention
at the beginning, and afterward joins there unto a description of the son of
God our lord Jesus Christ.

The son of God is the second person of the Godhead A description of the
second person in the Trinity.
begotten of the everlasting father, and is the substantial and full image and
brightness of the eternal father, more excellent than all the Angels, by whom
al other things in heaven and earth are created and preserved. The which son
took man's nature of the virgin Marie, so as God and man are one person Jesus
Christ, who by himself through his passion and death, has clenzed our sins,
and being raised again sits at the right hand of the father, and gives
remission of sins, righteousness, and eternal life, to all that flee to him
by faith.

This ordinary description of the person of gods son, may by good lerning
be builded out of the testimonies of this first Proves of Christ's Godhead.
Chapter too the Hebrews. For, that the son of God is a person of the
Godhead distinct from the father, it is manifestly confirmed by the.xliiij.
Psalm. The Lord even thy Lord has anointed thee with the oil of gladness.
Also: this day have I begotten thee. Therefore is he God and a person distinct
from the father that begets him.

That he is begotten of the father, the very name of Son declares, and so
does the saying of the second Psalm, this day have I begotten thee.

That he is the substanciall and full image of the father, it is manifest, in
that he is termed the express image of the fathers substance.

The Greek word Apaugasma, signifies the brightness that isseweth from
another light. Therefore like as light and the brightness that isseweth from
the light are always together: so the father and the son are coeternall.

That he has created all things and susteyneth al things, it is manifest by
this saying: who^ he has made heir (that is to say Lord) of al things, by
whom also he made ye worlds, that is to say al things in the world. By him were
al things John. 1. John. 5.
made. My father works eue^ unto this hour, and I also work.

Bearing, (that is to say carrying, upholding, and maynteyning) all things by
the word of his power, that is to say, by his almighty word.

That he took upon him man's nature, he will show more at large in the
second chapter. Here he sets forth but the cheef office and benefit of
Christ, for which he became man, when he says, By himself purged he our sins.

This short saying conteyneth a sum of the whole doctrine of the Gospel
concerning Christ's benefits, concerning the difference between the Law and
the Gospel, and concerning forgiveness of sins, or justification.

The Law purges not, ne takes away sins, but increases Christ only
purges sin.
sin, and makes it out of measure sinful. Romans 7.

The sacrifises of the Levites purged not sin, but were figures of Christ's
sacrifice.

Our own works and munkish ceremonies purge not sins. Only Christ by
himself, (that is too say by the sacrifise of his body offered upon the altar
of the cross,) has purged us, and has for evermore made perfect those that
are too be sanctified, as is said afterward in the 7. 9. and 10. chapters. And
1. John. 1. The blud of Christ the son of God cleanses us from all sin, and
justifies us and makes us heirs of everlasting salvation and glory. For we
shall be glorified with Christ who sits at the right hand of the Majesty,
that is too say, reigns in equal power and majesty with the eternal father.

The.ij. Of the difference between Christ and the angels.
TOo the intent this thing may be the more evident, first let the definitions
of them be understood.

Angels are spiritual substances created by God after his What Angels be.
own image, and ordained too sing glory too God on high, and too be ministers
upon earth, of the church or of the heirs of everlasting salvation.

The description of ye son of God, is recited a little before.

By these descriptio^s and the testimonies cited in the text of the Epistle,
seven differences may be gathered.

1 Christ is verily and by nature the son of God, begotten of the substance
of the eternal father. Psalm. 2. This day have I begotten thee. 2. Reg. 7. I
will be a father too him, and he shall be a son too me.

The Angels are not verily and by nature the sons of God, but only by
adoption or grace. Ergo Christ far excels all the Angels.

2 Invocation is an honor too be attributed only too God the searcher of
hearts, according too this saying: Thou shall worship ye Lord thy God; and in
general, whosoever is worshipped, is better than he y^ worshippeth: But God
commands that Christ shall be called upon, yea even of the Angels: Ps. 96.
Worship ye him all ye Angels of God* Ergo Christ is both God, and also far
more excellent than all the Angels.

3 Christ is the maker of heaven and earth. Psa. 101. Thou O Lord have founded
the earth from the beginning.

Angels are substances created, as Psalm. 103. is said: which make thine
Angels spirits, and thy ministers a flame of fire, that is too say, clear
substances, which in sheerenesse, force, nimblenesse, and swiftness, are like
too fire.

4 Christ is an everlasting king, bearing a rightful scepter, and justifying
all that flee unto him. Psa. 45. Thy throne O God endures for ever and ever,
the scepter of righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom. But the Angels are
but only the servants of this king, and impart not their righteousness unto
any others.

5 Christ is verily and naturally the son of God. Ps. 45. O God (Christ,) thy
God (the eternal father,) has anointed thee with the oil of gladness for
thy fellows sakes. Now the Angels are not God, but creatures.

6 Christ is anointed with fullness of the holy Ghost, too the intent he may
annoint his fellows, that is too say, the rest of the members of the church.

The Angels are not anointed with fullness of the holy Ghost, neither can they
of their own power anoint others and garnish them with the gifts of the holy
Ghost.

7 Christ sits at the right hand of the eternal Father, that is too say,
reigns in equal majesty and glory with the everlasting father.

The Angels sit not at the right hand of the Father, nereigne in equal power
with the eternal father: but are the ministers of Christ and of the whole
church, pitching their tents round about all those that fear him, according
as is said more at large concerning the office and benefits of the holy
Angels, upon S. Michaels day.

The second Epistle. Titus. iij.
BUT after that the kyndnesse and love of our savior God to manward appeared:
not of the deeds of righteousness which we wrought, but of his mercy he
saved us, by the fountayn of the new birth, and with the renewing of the holy
Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our savior, that
we once justified by his grace, should be heirs of eternal life, through hope.
This is a true saying.

The disposement.
IT perteyneth too the kind of caces that instruct. For it is a doctrine
concerning the benefits of our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God borne too us
and given too us, comprehending a sum of the Gospel concerning our
justification and salvation.

Now forasmuch as there is no wisdom more needful and profitable for ma^kynd,
neither any other good thing greater and to be sought of me^ with more earnest
desire and endeuer, than the doctrine that concerns the manner and mean how
too atteyne everlasting life and salvation: Let the doctrine of this epistle
be with singular heed and diligence fastened in the innermost closets of men's
hearts. For the righter consideration and weying whereof, I will reduce the same
too the accustomed places of instruction or orderly questions.

This word Salvation comprehends all the good things The definition of
salvation.
that God bestows upon his Church for his sons sake which was given to us
and borne too us of the virgin Marie: that is too wit, forgiveness of sins,
atonement with God, deliverance from Gods wrath, from sin, from death, and
from the Devils tyranny: the gift of the holy ghost, regeneration and renewing
of our nature, abolishment of sin and death and restorement of righteousness,
life, and endless joy. All these benefits does Paul meene in this place,
when he says: he saved us: And the Angel in the first of Matthew: Thou shall
call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sin.

Paul distinguishes the parts of Christ's benefits intoo righteousness and
life are the sum of Christ's benefits.
two members, which cleave toogither as it were the cause and the effect,
namely righteousness and life: and these things repeteth he in sundry words.
We are justified (that is too say, we obtain forgiveness of sins, and
are accepted for rightuous) through his grace or free good will: and are made
heirs of everlasting life. The same Paul had said a little before, that we
are saved by the wasshing of regeneration, (that is too say by Baptim, wherewith
we are dipped in token of remission) and by renewing of the holy ghost, by
whom a new life and righteousness is kindled in our hearts.

The cheef efficient cause of our salvation, is God regenerating The efficient
cause of salvation.
us, justifying us, and receiving us too the inheritance of everlasting life,
of his exceeding great goodness, and love toward mankind, and of his free
mercy and grace.

And the words are piththye and effectual wherewith Paul describes the
efficient cause of our salvation, in this place. The greek word Chrestotes,
signifies properly goodness, Goodness.
coveting too do good, and too profit all men of a free good will. It comes
of the word Chraomai, which signifies too use: and thereupon comes Chrestos,
which signifies such a one as willingly and easly yields himself unto other
me^ to use him: such a one is Christ, in deed a good man, yea a common good
thing* Philanthropia, louingkindnesse, betokens not only a courtesy Loving
kyndnesse.
and gentleness to speak unto or a meeldnesse in ordinary meetings, in
countenance, in speech, and in outward behavior: but in especially a burning
love toward mankind, which y^ son of God has uttered by this notable
warrantyze, in that he has by everlasting and indissoluble bond cuppled too
himself the mass of our nature, and is becomme our Emanuell and brother, flesh
of our flesh, and bone of our bones, and undertook the most bitter torments
of death for us. Of this loving kindness is spoken. 1. John. 4. Herein is the
loving kindness of God toward us made manifest, that he has sent his only
begotten son intoo the world, that we might live through him. Also Christ,
John. 3. So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son. etc.

Eleos. Mercy is too be touched with the feeling of another Mercifulness.
man's misery, too succor the distressed, and too assuage and take away their
miseries of a freeharted goodness and pitifulness, which executes not the
sharp extremity of the law.

Therefore albeit that al calamities, death, and everlasting torments (too which
we are subject by reason of sin) be most rightful punishments: yet
notwithstanding, God of his exceeding goodness pitying us, is in deed sorry
for our loss (like the louingharted father that is strike^ with great grief
for the misery of his son,) and of his wonderful gentleness and mercy
helps us, and by sending his son (who for us was borne, crucified, and
raised from death again) has restored unto us righteousness and everlasting
salvation.

Grace signifies the free good will or favor, or the mercy Grace.
of God receiving us for his sons sake.

The forcing cause, or the mediator and spokesman that Our mediator or
spokesman.
moves God too bestow everlasting salvation upon us wretches and unworthy, is
the only son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, who by his birth has delivered us
from the Devils power, and voutsaued too become the son of man, that he might
make us the sons of God, and has taken upon him the shape of a servant,
that he might set us at liberty: And by dying vanquished death, that he might
give too us mortal wightes, immortality, life, and glory everlasting.

This man alonely does truly possess the name of Jesus, Who they be that
dishonor Christ.
or of the sauyoure of mankind: neither imparteth he this his honor too any
creature, too any virtues, or too any deserts of ours. And like as the Arians
by taking away the glory of Godhead from Christ, or the Heathen by yielding the
same honor too their feyned Gods, do commit horrible reproach against Christ:
even so also do they sin right horribly, which too our own works (be they
never so good,) or too the merits of saints, impart the honor of
justification and salvation which is too be attributed al whole unto Christ
only, and surmise these things too be also necessary unto salvation. For
although we do some works of ryghtuousnesse, Our own righteousness is of
no desert.
(like as the ryghtuousnesse of Aristides, surnamed the ryghtuous, of Phocion,
of Aecus, and of others is commended to be more beautiful than the morning and
evening stars:) yet are these deeds of righteousness in no wise deserts of
eternal salvation, but are slight shadows of outward discipline defiled with
much foul filth of sin, which is purged only by Christ.

The isntrumental causes, or the means by which God offers, applies, and
performs unto us everlasting salvation The gospel and baptim are
instruments of salvation.
and all the benefits of his son, are the gospel which is the power of God to
salvation to every one that believes, and the sacrament of baptim which is the
lauer of regeneration and renuance by the holy ghost. For masmuch as al men by
their carnal birth are born defiled with sin, and be the children of wrath
and endless damnation, Ephesians. ij. Psalm. lj. it is not possible for us too
become the children of God and heirs of eternal salvation, until we be borne
a new or begotten agein, (that is too say obtein forgiveness of sins for
Christ's sake) and adopted intoo the place of children and heritage of Gods
kingdom.

Now, the holy ghost begets us agein by two means: by the word or glad
tidings concerning Christ, and by the sacrament of baptim, as is said Ephesians. v.
Cle^sing it by the washing of water in the word.

And the instrument in us whereby we receive the eternal Faith the instrument
vvhervvith we take hold of salvation.
salvation offered us in the word and the sacraments, is only faith which is
in any wise too be required in the use of the sacraments, as it is clearly
said: whosoever believes and is baptized shall be saved. Also, ye are saved
by grace through faith, and not by works. And it is a known rule, that not
the sacrament, but the faith of the sacrament justifies. And therefore in this
place, must faith needs be comprehended also. He has saved us, (that is too
wit which believe,) by the washing of the new birth.

The effect of justification, is the renewing of nature by Renevvment of nature.
the holy Ghost poured out richly upon us, whoo by little and little abolisheth
and mortifieth the sin that remains in us, and our false opinions, and our
sinful inclinations and affections: and kindles in our mind a new light of
the true knowledge of God, and in our will and heart a new righteousness or
love of God and our neibor, or a new obedience toward all the commandments
of God. Of this renewment Paul reasons more at large. Ephesians. iiij. Coloss.
iij. and ij Cor. iiij. and specially Romans vj.

Another effect is life everlasting, or the manifest and perfect The effects of
justification.
acknowledgment of God and our Lord Jesus Christ, and a sound and perfect
obedience or righteousness without any sin or blemish: and a true and
unspeakable joy in God, utterly void of all sorrow and grief. The beginning
and first fruits of which life, is the renewment of the holy ghost: but the
perfection and fullness of it is yet hoped for, and shall most assuredly be
performed. Therefore says Paul, that we may beecome heirs of eternal life
according too our hope, it is a sure saying. etc.

Then let us give thanks with our whole heart too the son of God our Lord
Jesus Christ, for that he has brought unto us these so great good things by
his birthe: and let us pray unto him with earnest suit, too kindle the
fullness of faith in our hearts, that they may be quite out of dout, that it
is a faithful saying, and may embrace it with most steadfast faith, and atteine
the inheritance of eternal salvation.

The third Epistle. Tit. ij.
FOr the grace of God that brings salvation unto al men, has appeered, and
teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we
should live sober minded, righteously and godly in this present world, looking
for that blissed hope and glorious appeering of the mighty God, and of our
savior Jesus Christ, which gave himself for us, too redeem us from all
unrighteousness, and too purge us a peculier people unto himself, fervently
given unto good works. These things speak and exhort and rebuke with all
commanding. See that no man despise thee.

The disposement.
It pertains too the kind that instructs.

For in most learned wise and in singular lyghtsomnesse of words, it sets
forth a brief doctrine concerning good woorks, which must of necessity follow
the faith yt receives the benefits of Christ borne too us and given too us.

The opening of this Epistle may be divided intoo three places.
j A definition and the special kinds of things that are good woorks in deed
and acceptable too God, that is too say too renounce ungodliness and worldly
lusts. too live. Soberly. Uprightly. Godlily.

ij The forcing causes which ought too stir up every man too the study of
virtue and the exercise of good works. iij The efficient and final causes,
or how good woorks may be done, and how they may please God.
The first place.
THe grace of our savior Christ has shined unto al me^, not that they should by
abiding in darkness through ignorance Good works must follow justification.
of God, of sin and of death, walow in all lusts and wickedness: but that by
the abolishment of sin and death, they should begin a new and a rightuous
life agreeable with the will and word of God.

No dout therefore, but man being justified and saved by faith through the free
mercy of God for Christ's sake, ought of necessity from thencefoorth too shun
sin, and too beegin a new life agreeable with the law of God.

And these are true principles. New obedience is of necessity and of duty.
Good works are needful, according as Paul expressly says. We must needs
obey: And in this place he says, that the son of God is therefore borne for
us, and given for us, that (sin being abolished) we should follow good
works.

And he defines good works or new obedience, (by the Good works or new
obedience.
privation or taking away of the contrary and by a distribution) too be the
renouncing or shunning of ungodliness and worldly lusts, and too live
soberly, uprightly, and godlily.

The word ungodliness, comprehends all sins repugnant Ungodliness.
too the commandments of the first table: that is too wit, Epicurish
carelessenesse, and contempt of the wrath, judgment, and word of God:
Epicurish and Academicall doutings, Idolatry, superstition, distrust,
presumption, and such other.

Worldly lusts conteyne all the corrupt inclinations and Concupiscence or
lustfulnesse.
sins of the second table, the welspring whereof is concupiscence according as
is said in an old verse: Of all misdoing and offense, the welspring is
concupiscence. And it is most manifest y^ the more part of miseries and
mischeeues do grow of a desire of excellency, honor, riches, reuengement,
pleasures and lusts that are in all mankind.

The kinds of good works he deuideth intoo stayednesse, righteousness, and
godliness.

Stayednesse (which of the Greeks is called Sophrosyne, and Stayednesse.
of the Latins modesty, frugalitie or temperaunce,) signifies not only a
soberness or sparenesse of diet in meat and drink, but also a maistering or
brideling of all the affections and motions of the mind and body, in behauior,
in gesture, in talk, in apparel, and in all other things.

Righteousness includes within his compass, an vniuersarl Righteousness.
obedience too the magistrates and laws, and the other virtues of the second
table.

Godliness conteyneth the virtues of the first table, as Godliness.
the true knowledge of God, louingnesse, hope, invocation, thanksgiving,
patience, and such other. And so Paul has comprehended the duties of all
virtues, or all good works, in three words.

Of the second.
THe forcing causes that must stir up every man too the The causes that move
too good works. Gods commandment.
study of virtue, and the exercise of good works, are in this Epistle
reckened too be four.

The first is Gods commandment teaching us and most straightly charging us
too renounce or shun ungodliness and sinful lusts, and too live soberly,
uprightly, and godlily.

The second is blissed hope of the appeering of the great Hope of glory
God and of our savior Jesus Christ, who at his glorious coming too judge the
quick and the dead, shall give most ample rewards too the godly Saints, that
have lived soberly, uprightly, and godlily in this present world: and shall
with everlasting punishment over whelm the ungodly, which have abandoned
themselves too worldly lusts in this life.

The third is the final cause for which Christ was sent, the Abolishment of
sin.
son of God our Lord Jesus Christ was therefore born, and rose ageine, not
that we might welter in our sins, and from he^cefoorth still defile our
selves with the foul filthiness of our misdeedes: but that he might redeem us
and set us free from al unrighteousness, and that sin and everlasting death
might be taken from among us: and that we being cle^sed from sin, (not only
by imputation of ryghtuousnesse, but also by beginning too put away sin it
self) should from henceforth earnestly and with a singular love and ardent
zele do good woorks, and serve God in all righteousness and holiness before
him all the days of our life. This matter is entreated of at length by Paul.
Romans vj.

The fourth cause is of the nature of correlatiues, that is Thankfulness
of things that have relation one too another. The church is the people of
purchase, or the peculiar and proper people of God, chosen out of the rest of
mankind, and hallowed too the one Lord God: Ergo the Church must with singular
zele obey, and do the things that are acceptable too this her redeemer and
Lord.

It is thought that the Greek word Periousion answers too the Hebrew word
Segula, which in Exodus xix. is translated a holy people, and in Ps. cxxxiiij.
possesion, and in Pet. j. Ep. ij. chap. the people of purchase, that is too
say, a people purchased and redeemed with the blud of Christ, that they should
be his propre and peculiar people.

iij. How good woorks may be done, and how they may please God. Although that
ye outward limbs (as the eyes, the tung the hands etc.) may after a manner be
bridled by man's diligence How woorks become good.
and by the proper strength of man's will: so as they may do honest and just
woorks, and not fall intoo manifest offenses for bidden by the law of God
(according too that which is said in the former Epistle. Tit. iij. not by the
woorks of righteousness which we our selves did): yet notwithstanding, the
inward obedience, and the obedience that pleases God, the true fear of God,
the true trust in gods mercy, the true and earnest calling upon God, true
patience and steadfastness in bearing out adversity and death, cannot be
performed, except the will (which is a prisoner and bondslaue too sin) be set
at liberty and aided by Christ: according as Christ himself says, without me
ye ca^ do nothing. And in this place Paul says expressly, that Christ has
redeemed and cleansed us, too the intent we should follow good works.

Therefore in the acco^plishment of good works, there meet three causes. The
first and principal is Christ, redeming and clensing us from all iniquity, and
by his holy spirit kindling in Christ's working in us by his spirir.
our mind the light of true acknowledgement of God, and mindfulnesse of Gods
commandment concerning true obedience to be performed unto him, moving,
enforsing and helping the will, that it may be able too obey Gods
commandment.

The second cause is Gods word, by which Christ is effectual in instructing us
too renounce all ungodliness and worldly By his word.
lusts, and too live soberly, uprightly, and godly.

The third is the mind and will of man, not striving against Christ when he
teaches us and rules our members, that they By man's willingness.
may yield themselves in righteousness to God, unto sanctification. Also for
this Christ's sake, our own good works please God, although they do not as
yet fully satisfy Gods law, but be joined with great weakness and
uncleaness of nature remaining in us. For as the person of man becomes good,
rightuous and acceptable too God, only through faith for Christ's sake, who
gave himselffor us etc: so the works that are wrought by a person that is
justified and reconciled too God, do please God, not for their own
worthiness, but through the grace of God which woorketh salvation too all
men, or for Christ's only sake through faith, as is said Heb. xiij. By him do
we offer the sacrifise of praise always unto God. And j. Pet. ij. Offer ye
spiritual sacrifises acceptable too God through Jesus Christ.

Upon the day of S. Steven the first Martyr.
The Epistle. Acts. vj. and.vij. chapters.
ANd Steven full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among the
people. The^ there arose certain of the sinagoge: which are called Libertines,
and Cyrenites, and of Alexandria, and Cilicia and Asia, and disputed with
Steue^. And they could not resist the wisdom, and the spirit with which he
spoke. Then sent they in men, which said: we have herd him speak blasphemous
words against Moses, and against God. And they moved the people and the
elders and the Scribes: and came upon him, and caught him, and brought him too
the counsel, and brought forth false witnesses which said: This man cease
not too speak blasphemous words against this holy place, and the law, for we
herd him say: this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change
the ordinances which Moses gave us. And all that sat in the counsel, looked
steadfastly on him, and saw his face as it had bin the face of an Angel.

The.vij. Chapter.
THen said the chief Pressed: is it even so? And he said: ye men, brethren and
fathers, harken. The God of glory appeered unto our father Abraham, while he
was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran, and said unto him: come out of
thy country, and from thy kindred, and come into the land which I shall show
thee. Then came he out of the la^d of Chaldey, and dwelt in Charran. And after
that his father was dead, he brought him from thence, intoo this la^d in which
ye now dwell, and he gave him none inheritance in it, no not the breadth of a
foot: and promised that he would give it too him too possess, and too his
seed after him, when as yet he had no child. God verily spoke on this wise,
that his seed should be a soiourner in a strange land, and that they should
keep them in bondage, and entreat them evil. 400. years. But the nation too
whom they shall be in bondage will I judge said God. And after that, shall
they come forth and serve me in this place. And he gave him the covenant of
Circumcision. And he begatte Isaac, and cyrcumcised him the eigth day, and
Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob the twelve Patriarchs. And the Patriarchs having
indignation, sold Joseph intoo Egypt. And God was with him, and delivered him
out of al his adversities, and gave him favor and wisdom in the sight of
Pharao king of Egypt. And he made him governor over all his household. Then
came there a dearth over all the land of Egypt, and Canaan, and great
affliction, that our Fathers found no sustenance. But when Jacob herd that
there was corn in Egypt, he sent our Fathers first. And at the second time,
Joseph was known of his brethren, and Joseph's kindred was made known unto
Pharao. Then sent Joseph and caused his father to be brought, and all his kin,
three score and xv. souls. And Jacob descended into Egypt, and died, both he
and our fathers, and were translated into Sychem, and were put in the sepulcher
that Abraham bought for monye, of the sons of Emor, at Sichem. But when the
time of the promise drew nigh (which God had sworn to Abraham) the people
grew and multiplied in Egypt, till another king arose, which knew not of
Joseph. The same dealt suttely with our kindred, and evil entreated our fathers,
and made them too cast out their young children, that they should not remain a
live. The same time was Moses borne, and was acceptable unto God, which was
nourished up in his fathers house three moonethes. When he was cast out,
Pharaoes daughter took him up, and nourished him up for her own son. And
Moses was learned in all manner wisdom of the Egiptians, and was myghtie in
deeds and in words. And when he was full forty year old, it came intoo his
heart too visit his brethren, the children of Israel. And when he saw one of
them suffer wrong, he defended him and avenged his quarrel that had the harm
done to him, and smote the Egiptian. For he supposed his brethren would have
understand, how that God by his hands should give salvation unto them. But
they understood not. And the next day, he showed him self unto them, as they
strove, and would have set them at one ageyn, saying: Syrs ye are brethren,
why hurt ye one another? But he that did his neighbor wrong thrust him away
saying: who made thee a ruler and a judge over us? What, will thou kill me, as
thou did the Egyptian yesterday? Then fled Moses at that saying, and was a
stranger in the land of Madian, where he begat two sons. And when forty
years were expyred, there appeered too him in the wilderness of mount Syna,
an Angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bushe. When Moses saw it, he
wondered at the sight. And as he drew near too behold, the voice of the Lord
came unto him: I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Moses trembled and durst not behold. Then said
the Lord to him: Put of thy shoes from thy feet, for the place where thou
stand is holy ground. I have perfectly seen the affliction of my people
which is in Egypt, and I have hard their gronyng, and am come down too
deliver them. And now come, and I will send thee intoo Egypt. This Moses whom
they forsook saying: who made thee a Ruler and a judge? The same GOD sent
both a ruler and a deliverer, by the hands of the Aungel which appeared too
him in the bushe. And the same brought them out, showing wonders and signs in
Egypt, and in the red sea, and in the wilderness. xl. years. This is that Moses
which said unto the children of Israel: A prophet shall the Lord our God
raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear. This
is he that was in the congregation, in the wilderness with the Angel (which
spoke to him in the mount Sina) and with our fathers. This man received the
word of life to give unto us, too whom our fathers would not obey, but cast
it from them, and in their hearts turned back ageyn intoo Egypt, saying unto
Aaron: make us Gods too goo before us. For this Moses that brought us out of
the Land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. And they made a Calfe in
those days, and offered sacrifice unto the image, and reioysed in the works
of their own hands. Then GOD turned him self, and gave them up, that they
should worship the host of the sky, as it is written in the book of the
Prophets. O ye of the house of Israel, gave ye too me sacrifices and meat
offerings by the space of. xl. years in the wilderness? And ye took unto
you the tabernacle of Moloh, and the star of your God Rempham, figures which
ye made to worship them. And I will translate you beyond Babylon. Our fathers
had the tabernacle of witness in the wilderness, as he had appointed them,
speaking unto Moses, that he should make it according to the fashion that he
had seen* which tabernacle also, our fathers (that came after) brought in with
Iosue into the possession of the Gentilles, which God drove out before the face
of our fathers, unto the days of David: which found favor before God, and
desired that he might find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob. But Solomon
built him an house. Howbeit, he that is highest of all, dwells not in temples
made with hands, as says the Prophet: heaven is my seat, and earth is my
footestole, what house will ye buyld for me, says the Lord? or what place
is it that I should rest in, has not my hand made all these things? Ye
stifnecked, and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye have always resisted the
holy Ghost: as your Fathers did, so do ye. Which of the Prophets have not
your Fathers persecuted? and they have slain them which showed before of the
coming of that just, whom ye have now betrayed and murdered. And ye also
have received the Law by the ordinance of angels, and have not kept it. When
they herd these things, their hearts claue a sunder, and they gnashed on him
with their teeth. But he being full of the holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly with
his eyes intoo heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the
right hand of God, and said: Behold, I see the heavens open, and the son
of man standing on the right hand of GOD. Then they gave a shout with a loud
voice, and stopped their ears and ran upon him all at once, and cast him out
of the City, and stoned him. And the witnesses laid down their clothes at a
young man's feet named Saul. And they stoned Steven calling on, and saying:
Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice:
Lord lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had thus spoken, he fell
a sleep.

The disposement of the accusation of Steven, and of his defense, out of the
readings upon the Acts of the Apostles.
The sum of the accusation may be included in this Sylogisme.
IT is a blasphemy too teach, that the law of The points vvherof Steue^ is
accused.
Moses given by God himself iustifyeth not, but is to be abolished together
with the temple and the rites of the sacrifices and all the politic
ordinances of Moses. Steven teaches that the Law and sacrifices of Moses are
not needful too the atteynement of forgiveness of sins and everlasting
salvation, nor the cheef woorshipping of God: but that they and the whole
common weal of Moses and the temple shall decay together: Ergo Steven is
giltye of blasphemy and treason, and is too be stoned to death according too
the Law, Leuit. 14.
Against this so heinous accusation Steven having his heart and countenance
cleared with the light of God, makes a long defense, wherein he answered too
the Mayor or first part, denying it too be blasphemy to teach, that the law
of Moses justifies not, and that the ceremonies and sacrifices of Moses are
not the true and cheef woorshipping of God, and that the rites of Moses
together with the common weal and temple must be done away.

Therefore, the sum of Steuens answer for his defense may be included in
four Syllogismes.

The.j. Of justification.
Righteousness and eternal salvation is bestowed after one selfsame manner
upon the fathers Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all holy men, in all times of the
world. The Fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc, obtained forgiveness of
sin, and everlasting salvation not for the law and sacrifices offered in the
temple, which at that time were not yet ordained: but only by ye promise of the
blissed seed which they took hold on by faith: Ergo, we also are made heirs
of righteousness and everlasting salvation, not by the Law and sacrifices of
Moses, but by that only seed of Abraham that was promised, even our Lord Jesus
Christ, according also as Peter witnesses afterward: we believe yt we are
saved by ye grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, like as our fathers were saved
also.
Her upon it is rightly concluded, that the ceremonies of Moses, or the law
and sacrifices of Moses are not needful to salvation.

The.ij. Of the promises.
ALl Saints must needs obtain the principal promise Atteynment of gods
promises
made too all the Saints. For otherwise the promise were in vain, and too no
purpose. Unto Abraham and the other Fathers was given promis of blissing and
of the inheritance of the land of Canaa^, and yet Abraham obtained not so much
as one foot breadth of the land at any time in possession: Ergo, the blissing
that was promised too Abraham was another thing than this bodyly common weal,
and sacrifices of Moses: that is too wit, forgiveness of sins, and the true
and everlasting good things.
The.iij. Of the true worshipping of God.
THe principal woorshipping of God is always one, and Worshipping of God.
common too all the saints, throughout al times of yt world. The fathers
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Joseph, did doutlesse woorship God a right, and yet
observed not the ceremonies of Moses Law, which at that time was not yet
delivered, ne offered sacrifices in the temple which was not yet at that time
builded: Ergo the Mosaicall ceremonies and the sacrifices that are offered in
the temple of Jerusalem, are not the true and cheef woorshipping of God,
according as the Prophet says: I will have mercy and not sacrifice, and the
knowledge of God rather than burnt offerings.
The.iiij. Of the abrogating of the law and common weal of Moses.
Moses himself says: The Lord our God shall raise The institution of a new
law.
up unto you a Prophet from among our brethren, Here ye him: Whosoever shall
not here that Prophet, I wilbee revenged of him. But now is that Prophet come
that Moses promised, which teaches plainly that the Law and ceremonies of
Moses are not necessary too justification and salvation: Ergo, he is too be
heard, or it is too be believed for a certeintie, that the law is abrogated.
Or let the Argument be framed in this wise.

Christ (whom Moses himself commanded too be herd) is the end of the Law,
for the ceremonial and politic laws and all the common weal of Moses was
ordained too this end, that it might be the seat of the church, and a place
for Christ too be borne in, and that it should cease as soon as Christ was
exhibited. Christ whom Moses (in the.xviij. of Deuteronomy.) commands too be herd
is now exhibited: Ergo the Laws of Moses toogither with his common weal and
temple shall be abrogated: and that too this end, yt the very same doing away
of it may bear witness, that the Messiah which was promised too the Fathers,
is already exhibited: and that the laws of Moses are not necessary too
salvation.
This is the sum of Steuens long oration, which comprehends the cheef
Articles of the Christian doctrine. Of which things the full exposition may be
fetched out of my wrytings that conteyn the sum of the doctrine, and of my
expositions upon Genesis and Exodus, the notablest Stories of which books
Steven cites, for the most part in this Oration.

Of Steuens martyrdoome.
MArtyrdoome signifies witness bearing, whereby we witness What martyrdoome is.
before other men, not only in voice* but also with our blud, and by our death,
that the doctrine of the Gospel concerning the son of God our Lord Jesus
Christ, is certain and vndeuybable, and never shrink from our confession of ye
true doctrine, for all ye most bitter hatreds, terrors, and bodyly torments
in the world: too this end, that the true knowledge of God may be preserved,
and the certeyntie of the true doctrine and the faith of others that be of the
weaker sort may be confirmed: And finally, that it may be a witness of the
judgment to come, and of the endless immortality and glory of the Saints.

The parts of martyrdoome may be called, the confession The parts of
martyrdoome.
of the true doctrine which is made with the mouth: and the sufferance or
torment of the body, and loss of life, for a man's steadfastness in standing
too the true and vncorrupt doctrine of Christ.

Commonly they make difference, that those are confessors, Confessors.
which have endured hatred, terrors, imprisonmentes, and some other hurts of
the body for confessing Christ, but yet have not bin put too death, as the
holy men Athanasius, Paphnutius, Macarius, John Frederick Duke of Sanonie,
Luther and such others.

And those are Martyrs that have spent their blud, and their Martyrs.
life in their confession, as Saint Steven: the most of the Apostles: Ignatius
Bishop of Antioche, who was cast unto beasts by Traiane, Attalus who was
roasted upon a spit at Lions in the time of the Emperor Antonie Vere: Vincent
who was most cruelly rent a pieces in Spain by Diocletian: Laurence who was
broyled upon a greedyron by the Emperor Decius: Boniface Bishop of Mentz,
who was put too death by the Fryselanders the year of Christ, 775: John Hus:
And in our days many are slain for y^ truths sake, and by cruel woounds do
purchase a noble death.

The efficient causes are.
FIrst, the holy Ghost the conforter, who releeueth our infirmity The holy
Ghost.
and kindles in our hearts a myndfulnesse of Gods most straight commandment
too prefer our profession before life and all worldly things: and of the
promises of life and glory that shall ensew. Ageyn, he adds strength to the
will and heart, that they may be both willing and able to endure bodily
punishements, reproach, and death for our professions sake.

Secondly, the word of God, which both enioyneth profession, Gods word.
and threateneth the renouncers with most sore manaces of casting away for
ever, and offers promises of life, glory and crown everlasting, too those
that constantly profess Chrysts truth. Math. x. He that denies me before
men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven. ij. Cor. iiij.
The lightness of affliction for the twincling of an eye, purchaceth an
everlasting weyghtynesse of glory. Psalm. Cxv. Precious in the sight of the
Lord, is the death of his Saints. ij. Timoth. Now is there a crown of
righteousness laid up for me.

Thirdly, man's mind thinking upon Gods commandment Man's mind
and the promises of the Crown of eternal glory, wherewith the constant
witnesses of the true doctrine shall be adorned: And his will and heart which
(through the help and furtherance of the holy Ghost) believes the promises,
and conceyuing an assured hope of immortality and glory everlasting, endures
death quietly and with a cheerful mind, as is said of Steven, He went
rejoicing in his breast, and through strong hope his harms suppressed.

Besides these three causes of steadfastness common too all Martyrs, there is
another also in Steven the first Martyr, namely, the singular comfort by
beholding the Son of God, who showed himself visibly unto him. By which
showing Christ is always with his Church.
we also may learn this, that the son of God sitting at the right hand of
the Father is not utterly gone away from the Church, but is in deed present
with it, regarding it, comforting it, defending it, and helping it, like as he
is here present with Steven at his death, refreshing and strengthening him by
showing himself too him, that he may with a glad and cheerful mind suffer
death for Chrysts quarrel, and receive a crown of glory that shall never
wither.

The matter wherabout martyrdoome is occupied, is the The matter that makes a
Martyr.
true and vncorrupt doctrine set forth in the Gospel, concerning the person
and benefits of Christ, and concerning the true woorshipping of god. For (as
says Apollinaris) whereas Christ's truth is not, there is no true
martyrdoome. And the saying of Peter is known: See that none of you suffer as
a murderer or an evil dooer, etc. and Austins: not what any man suffers,
but wherefore he suffers is too be considered. Also Ciprians: It is the cause
that makes a Martyr and not the martyrdoome. Therefore are not madbraynd
fellows too be honored with the title of martyrdoomme, which are justly put
too death for their sedition and manifest blasphemies.

The form of martyrdoome is the confession of y^ truth, or the witness which
is borne too the truth, both by the lively voice, and by the bludshed and
death of the party.

The ends and effects of martyrdom are these.
First, Gods glory, which is set out and spread far abroad Gods glory.
by the witnessebearings of the Martyrs.

Secondly, the preservation of the true doctrine concerning Maintenance of true
religion.
God. For unless there should from time too time be stirred up some Martyrs
or witnesses of the true doctrine, who in the persecutions of Tyrants should
prefer the profession of the truth before their own life: within a while the
true knowledge of GOD upon earth would be quite quenched with* Idolatry and
errors. Strengthening of the weak.


Thirdly, that the weaker sort are strengthened, and the Church enlarged by
the example of the constancy of the Martyrs. The church was founded upon
blud, and by blud has it encreaced. Certeintie of doctrine.


Fourthly, that the deaths of the Martyrs may be witnesses of the certeintie
of the doctrine of the Gospel: like as Steven by his bludshed and death
seals up the doctrine concerning the Messiah promised too the Fathers, and
now performed. Witnessing of the immortality.


Fifthly, that they may be witness of ye immortality, and of the judgment
too come, wherein Tyrants and Hipocrites shall be cast intoo endless pains,
and the holy Martyrs be honored with everlasting rewards. Reteynement of
salvation.


Sixthly, that the godly may not lose the forgiveness of sins which they have
received, and the inheritance of everlasting salvation. Math. xxiiij. He that
continues too the end, shall be saufe. Romans x. By the mouth is acknowledgement
made too salvation. virtues that go with martyrdoome.


The Alyances or neybourvertues of martyrdoome, are Steadfastness, Stoutnesse
in bearing out adversities, Patience, Continaunce, and in especially earnest
faith, hope and calling upon God. Vices that fight against martyrdom.


The thing that fyghts against martyrdoome, is reuolting, or renouncing of the
true doctrine: which either proceeds of an epicurish skornfulnesse and malice
(as the reuolting of the Emperor Julian) or ryseth of fearfulness and
infirmity of mind, (as the renyall of Peter and of many others:) or else is
committed in fact, as when those that understand the true doctrine of the
Gospel, are present at the Idolatrous service of the Mass, and dissemble
their meening: or when we bear about the Gospel in our mouth, and yet
answer not too our profession in life and behavior.

Upon the Sunday next after Christmas day.
The Epistle. Gal. iiij.
AND I say, that the heir (as long as he is a child) differs not from a
servant, though he be Lord of al, but is under tutours and governors, until
the time that the father has appointed. Even so we also, when we were
children, were in bondage under the ordinances of the world: but when the time
was full come, God sent his son made of a woman, and made bond unto the law,
to redeem them which were bond unto the law: that we through election might
receive the inheritance that belongs unto the natural sons. Because ye
are sons, GOD has sent the spirit of his son into our hearts, which cries
Abba Father. Wherefore now, thou art not a servant, but a son: If thou be a
son, thou art also an heir of God through Christ.

The disposement.
It perteyneth too the kind that instructs. For it reckeneth up in order the
effects or cheef benefits of the son of God, who is borne too us, and given
too us: and he sets them plainly out, by a similitude taken of Servants and
Heirs.

The cheef benefits which the son of God has obtained for the church by his
wonderful birth, are four.

1 Redemption from the curse of the Law. 2 Adoption too be the sons of God.
3 The giving of ye holy ghost, who cries Abba father. 4 The heritage of
eternal life.
Of these benefits will I speak in order and breefly. And I exhort the
heerers too consider diligently and advisedly, and too bestow in the bottom
of their hearts, this notable sentence which comprehends the sum of the
whole Gospel. After that the fullness of the time was come, or after that the
time appointed by the eternal purpose of God was fully come: that is too wit*
the year from the creation of the world. 3962. God sent his son, borne of a
woman, made under the law, too the intent he should redeem those that were
under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. And because we
are sons God has sent the spirit of his son intoo our hearts, crying Abba
father. Therefore thou art no longer a servant, but a son. And if thou be a
son, thou art also an heir of God through Christ.

Now let us first consider the notable record concerning Christ is very God.
the two natures in Christ. God sent his son borne of a woman. This Jesus
borne of the virgin Marie, is the only begotten son of God, and that, not by
adoption, but by nature: Ergo he is by nature very God also, according as we
have hard the other day of Christ's birth out of the first Epistle the first
Chap. too the Hebrews. And herevntoo let us add the like sayings, John. iij.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, etc. and Ioh. j.
We have seen the glory of him as of the fathers only begotten. j. Ioh. iiij.
Herin appeered the louingnesse of God, that he has sent his only begotten
son intoo the world, that we might live through him.

This son of God was borne of a woman: Ergo, he is Christ is very man.
by nature very man also. Paul takes these words out of the first promise
concerning Christ, made too Adam and Eve, the woman's seed shall crush the
serpents head. And it is worth the considering, that he says, Of a woman,
that he might give us too understand y^ the son of God took upon him man's
nature of the substance of the virgin Marie: and not that he was sent down
from heaven through the Uirgin Marie, as through the pype of a conduit.

Here ensues a beadrol of the benefits which Christ has brought us by his
birth.
MAde bond to the Law, too redeem them that were under the Law. Exceeding
great and unsearchable wisdom is contained in these few words. Which though
we be not able too perceive thoroughly in this Dimnesse: yet is it too be
unfolded breefly, that the heerers may look somewhat nearer upon it.

Gal. iij. Paul says: Christ has redeemed us from the Redemption.
curse of the Law, and is become accursed for us. For it is written, cursed is
every one that abides not in all things that are written in the Law.

For it is an everlasting and unchangeable Maximee of Gods justice, that men
must either obey Gods Law without any sin: or else by sinning become
accursed, and so be cast intoo eternal peynes. Therefore when as all whole
mankind was become subject too the curse of the Law, too Gods dreadful wrath,
and too everlasting damnation thorough sin Romans iij. Too the intent all
mouths might be stopped, etc, It was decreed by the wonderful advice of the
Godhead, that the son taking our nature upon him, should turn upon himself
the burden of the Law, of Gods wrath, of sin, and of eternal damnation,
and pay the full rau^some for us: like as if one were greatly oppressed with
det, or hild prisoner in Turkey and should be set free by another that would
undertake either the burden of the det, or of prisonership for him, and pay
his ransom. Therefore uses Paul in this place the word Ransom, which is
as much too say, as too buy a man out by paying his full worth for him. We
could not be set free by our own deseruings, virtues, or weldooings. Not Abel
by his death, not the meekness and patience of Socrates or Phocion, not
Royalty, not power, not artillery, not wealth could compass this thing. Oaly
we may thank God who has given us victory by our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has nailed the curse of the Law too his cross. Collos. ij. And he shall say
too vanquished death, Death, where is thy sting? Hell, where is thy victory?
The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the Law. j. Corinth.
xv. And death did spread it self intoo all men, because all men have sin. But
sin is not imputed where there is no Law, etc, Romans v. All these mischeeues,
that is too wit, sin, Gods wrath, the curse of the Law, the Devils Tyranny,
and endless damnation, has the son of GOD (who is given too us,) turned
upon himself, and redeemed us from these evils, That we by adoption might
receive the heritage of sons.

The second benefit is Adoption too be the sons of god. Adoption.
The only begotten and natural son of God, begotten of the substance of the
Father before all worlds, is our Lord Jesus Christ. John. j. and.iij. j. Jhon.
iiij. By and for this only begotten son are we received too be sons by
adoption, whom the eternal father embraces with fatherly good will for his
beloved sons sake, as brethren of Christ, and heirs of the heavenly light,
wisdom, righteousness, and life everlasting. Than which benefit a greater
cannot be devised. j. John. iij. See what a louingnesse the Father has
voutsaued upon us, to name us the sons of God. Right deerbeloued, Now are
we the sons of God, and yet has it not appeered as yet what we shall be
hereafter. But we know that as soon as that shall appear, we shall be like
unto him, because we shall see him as he is. John. j. He gave them power too
become the sons of God, as many as believe in his name. Math. vj. Our father
which art in heaven.

And because ye are sons, GOD has sent the spirit of his son intoo our
hearts, crying Abba father.

The third benefit is the giving of the holy Ghost, who The gift of the holy
ghost.
kindles in our hearts the true calling upon GOD. Here must the whole
doctrine concerning the holy ghost be repeted: what the holy ghost is: how
great a benefit of God it is, that by this breath of his own breast he imparteth
himself unto us: what are the benefits or effects of the holy ghost: too whom
he is given: and how he is forgone. We will rehearse the sums of this
doctrine ageine in the opening of the Epistle upon Whitsonsunday. One of the
cheef effects or benefits of the holy ghost, is true calling upon GOD.
Therefore in Zachar. xij. He is called the spirit of thankfulness and prayer,
that is to say, a witnessebearer in our hearts, that we are accepted into
favor, and a kindler of true invocation in our hearts, and of assuredness
resting upon God, and waiting at Gods hand as at the hand of a most kyndharted
father, for help and deliverance in all our sorrows and miseries.

Therefore art thou no longer a servant, but a son. And if thou be a son,
then art thou also an heir of God through Christ.

The fourth benefit is the inheritance of eternal life, Inheritance of
endless life.
which shall be the beholding of GOD, where through the Church (when it is
raised from death) shall see God face too face, and shall enjoy Gods wisdom,
light, ryghtuousnesse, gladness and life for all ever. To this haven let us
have an eye in the short race of this mortal life, and let us direct all the
deuyses, desires, and doings of this life, too the atteynement of the same.

Upon Newyeeres day.
The Epistle. Gal. iiij.
BUT before that faith came, we were kept and shut up under the law, unto the
faith which should afterward be declared. Wherefore, the Law was our
scoolemaister unto the time of Christ, that we might be made ryghteous by
faith. But after that faith is come, now are we no longer under a scoolmaister.
For ye are all the sons of GOD, by the faith which is in Christ Jesus. For
all ye that are baptized, have put on Christ. Now is there no Jew, neither
Gentle: there is neither bond nor free: there is neither man nor woman: but
ye are all one thing in Jesus Christ. If ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise*

The disposement.
IT perteyneth too the kind that instructs. For it sets forth a doctrine
of three places.

1 Of Gods Law, and of the propre uses or effects of the Law. 2 Of the
benefits of the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ who was given too us and
borne too us, which are the deliverance of us from the prison and maistership
of the Law, forgiveness of sins, adoption too be the sons of God, and the
inheritance of everlasting life. 3 Of the Applying of the sons benefits: that
is to say, of faith, whereby we put on Christ or are clothed with Chrysts
righteousness, and are all made rightuous and heirs of eternal life as many
of us as believe, without any difference of Nation, of degree, or of kind.
First, Of Gods Law.
BEfore that faith came, we were kept shut up under the Law, etc.

First it behooves the hearers too bear in mind, that Paul A warning for Paul's
mening.
in this place does not put a difference between the times y^ were before
Christ's coming, and after Christ's coming: as though the Jews before
Christ's coming had had no more but the knowledge of the law, and had not
known aught at all concerning Christ or the faith in Christ. For Paul speaks
of the church of al times, in which both y^ doctrines (as well of the law as of
the gospel) are always preached. And always in all the godly, before that
faith comes (that is too say, before the light of the true knowledge of
Christ or of faith is kindled in the heart) the prison of the law is felt, in
which all men are shut up as prisoners of sin, of Gods wrath, and of eternal
damnation, that they may atteyne righteousness and salvation everlasting, for
Christ's sake only reveled in his gospel. This is the natural exposition of
the first sentence, before faith came, they were kept close prisoners unto
that faith which was too be reveled. Now too the intent the doctrine of this
place may be the easlyer considered, it must a little be unfolded by putting
it intoo an order, and it is too be declared.

1 What the law is. 2 Which be the parts of the law. 3 What are the causes,
and chiefly what be the ends or the uses, and what are the duties of Gods
law. 4 Of the abrogating of the law, or of the setting of the believers free
from the law.
Paul in this place names two uses or effects of the law. The workyng of the
law.
The first is that the law shows all men too be prisoners of sin, of Gods
wrath, and of endless damnation for sin. Therefore doothe the law justify
or save no man, as is said Romans iij. Too the intent all mouths should be
stopped and all the world be made subject unto God, because that by the
deeds of the law no flesh shall be justified in his sight: For by the law
comes the knowledge of sin. Romans v. and vij. By the law sin abounds:
by the law sin is made out of measure sinful. etc. In this prison of the
law are all men hild prisoners, before such time as comfort is kindled in the
heart through faith. This prison did our first fathers feel when they were
accused by the voice of the law, until faith came, or until there was given a
promise of the seed that should tread down sin and death, and break up the
prison of sin. This prison felt David when Nathan accused him too his face:
Jonas when he was shut up in the whales belly, Ezechias in his sickness:
Daniell in captivity. And finally all the godly sustain in their hearts the
like dreadfulnesse rising of the feeling of Gods wrath showed by the law, and
of the consideration of the punishments that ensue, until such time as faith
be unhealed and kindled, whereby men's hearts are sustained and refreshed with
healthful comfort.

Secondly. The law is our schoolmaster unto Christ.
THe duties of a Schoolmaster are three. The first is too The duties of the
law too teach us too know God and our selves.
teach: the second too frame manners: and the third too chastise or punish the
offenders. So the law of God first teaches us concerning God, that there is a
God and what manner a one he is, and what manner a one man's nature is by
creation, and what was that image of God or original righteousness in man,
namely an agreeableness too the law of God. It teaches also of sin and of
the penalty of sin, of the last judgment, of the resurrection of the dead
and the life everlasting, of outward discipline or honest government of
manners, and such other things.

Secondly it frames our manners in this outward and To frame our manners aright
civil conversation of life. And it is as a rule of life or good works, in
which those that are borne ageine must show their obedience too God. That
thing may be showed according too all the hestes of the ten commandments.

Thirdly it chastises us with the threats of Gods wrath Too correct offenders.
and endless damnation, and it punishes us with death, sickness and other
miseries, all which are sermons of the law concerning Gods dreadful wrath
against sin.

And the law is called our schoolmaster unto Christ, for The law dryueth us
too Christ.
three causes.

First because the law by showing us the hugeness and horriblenesse of sin,
and by pronou^cing us subject too Gods wrath and everlasting damnation, drives
us too seek our Physician and helper the son of God, who alonely has by
his own death taken away sin and death, and delivered us out of the prison
of the law.

Secondly because Christ orderly is effectual only in In whom Christ is
effectual.
those that eschew the outward offenses forbidden by the law of God, and frame
their manners according to Gods law: He is not effectual in those that
wittingly and willingly persevere in outward offenses contrary too Gods law.

Thirdly, because the Ceremonies of Moses were preachings The law a shadow of
things do come.
or figures instructing the church concerning Christ's benefits, as the Lamb
that was slain for Passover betokened Christ the Lamb of God which takes
away the sins of the world. All the Leuiticall sacrifices were sermons of
Christ's sacrifice.

Let yoongmen bear in mind this exposition of Paul's saying, The law is our
schoolemaister unto Christ, and so much the more let them look that they
frame their manners according too honest discipline, too the intent they shake
not off the grace of Christ, but continue the Temples and dwelling places of
God, that Christ may dwell in them and be woorkfull in them.

Upon the Sunday next ensuing the Circumcision of our Lord.
In this church of Rostocke, before noone is expounded the story of Christ's
Baptim out of the third Chapter of Matthew: and after noone the Epistle Tit.
iij. concerning the lauer of regeneration and renewment by the holy ghost. The
disposement of which Epistle is recited heretoofore on the feast of Christ's
birth.

Upon twelfth day.
The Epistle. Esaias. lx.
GEt thee up betimes and be enlyghtened O Jerusalem, for thy light comes,
and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For lo while the darkness and
cloud covers the earth and the people, the Lord shall show thee light, and
his glory shall be seen upon thee. The Gentyles shall walk in thy light, and
kings in the brightness that springs forth of thee. Lift up thine eyes and
look round about thee, al these gather themselves and come unto thee. Thy
sons shall come too thee from a far, and thy daughters shall gather about
thee on every side. Then thou shall see and be a flote, and thy heart shall
wonder and be enlarged, when the abundance of the sea shall be turned unto
thee, when the power of the gentiles shall come unto thee. The multitude of
Camels shall cover thee, the dromedaries of Madian and Epha: All they of Saba
shall come bringing gold and incense, and uttering the praise of the Lord.

The disposement.
THis feastful day which commonly is called the day of the Things to be noted
concerning the Epiphanie or twelfth day.
three kings, was in ancient time named Epiphanie, that is too say the feast of
Christ's appeering or showing himself openly too the world. For they write y^
as on this day, being the.vj. of January, (how be it in sundry years) both
y^ star appeered too the wise men or divines of Persia: and Christ was
baptized in Jordan, where the whole Godhed did show it self openly by evident
witness, so as the three several persons were seen and beheld by John
Baptist: and also Christ uttered his own glory by his first miracle at the
marriage in Cana of Galilie, And therefore in the hymn of Sedulius which
begins O Herod wicked fo. etc. they are joined all toogither.

And although it be a more likelyhod, that the marriage in Cana was kept some
other day: yet notwithstanding diverse old fathers are of opinion, that the
selfsame day two year after Christ was borne, the wysemen came unto him, and
that the same day in the thirtyth year after his birth, was Christ baptized
also, according as Nazianzene of set purpose takes upon him the story of
Christ's baptim too expound upon the day of Epiphanie, which they name also
the holyday of lyghtes. And Epiphanius in his disproofe of fond tales, the
hundred four score and seventh page, has noted many pleasant things worth
the knowing, concerning the time of the coming of the wise men and other
stories which bring singular light too the things that are declared by the
Evangelists.

And this sermon of Esaias is red upon this day, because it seems too agree
with the story of the wysemen, which coming Of the wise men that came unto
Christ.
too Jerusalem by the light of a star that went before them, offered gold
and frankincense too Christ our Lord. Heeruppon also peradventure it might
rise, that they were called kings, whereas they were not kings, but Magies, that
is too say, preests and divines of the Persians. Neither is it certainly known
whither they were but only three, or mo that came unto Christ. And that they
came not immediately the.xiij. day after Christ's birth, both the length of
their The time of their coming.
forney shows, (for the nearest borders of Persia unto Iewry are two
hundred and twenty Germane miles off from Iewry: And Saba the head City of
happy Arabie, is about two hundred and four score miles from Jerusalem:) and
also Luke the Evangelist manifestly proves, who writes that Christ the.xxx.
day after, was offered in the temple and born in Simeons arms. Whereupon it
follows he was not the same time a banished person in Egypt.

Moreover the names of the wisemen are pleasantly and The names of the wise men.
lernedly devised. Melchior, that is too say, a king of light or a lightsome
king. Balthazar, that is too say, a captain or general of the wars. Caspar,
a secretary or Chauncelor. For these names betoken that the king with his
Capteines and officers of courts, or that the whole state of government both of
peace and war, ought too serve Christ.

But I will leave these vymatters, and go in hand with Esays sermon which is
wont too be set forth this day in the church, which is altogether a
prophecy of Christ's kingdom. The chief places are three.

j Of the person and benefits of Christ the king. ij Of the multitude or
Church gathered toogither of Jews and Gentiles which is subject too this
king. iij Of the tributes, or duties and services which the Church on her
behalf does yield and perform agein too her king Christ.
THe Prophet begins with an exhortation, wherewith he provoke the whole
church and all men too receive Christ the king and light of the world
reverently, and too embrace his doctrine.

Get thee up betimes: neglect not, despise not thy Lord and Earnestness in
receiving and keeping the truth.
king Jesus Christ, be not luskish or cold in heering and learning his
doctrine: but get thee up betimes, that is too say, use watchfulness,
diligence, and earnestness in hearing and mainteining the doctrine of the
gospel: embrace thou Christ the light of the world reverently and heartily, and
endeuer too hold him fast. As is said Romans xiij. It is time for us too rise
from sleep, because salvation is nearer tha^ when we believed.

Be enlightened. Hear, receive, and embrace Christ the true light which
lyghteneth every man that comes intoo this world, by which light the true
knowledge of God, true righteousness, and eternal life is kindled in our
hearts.

The first place is of the person and benefits of Christ.
THree notable names are given unto Christ in this prophecy, The sundry names
and glory of Christ. Jehovah or Lord.
which lernedly describe and beautifully set out his person and benefits.

For first he is named Lord or Iehoua, that is too say, in very deed and by
nature God. Like as also in Jeremy the.xxiij. and.xxxiij. he is called the Lord
our righteousness.

Secondly, he is called the glory of the Lord: first for his The glory of the
Lord.
being, because he is the full and express image of the everlasting father,
representing and showing the whole father: as in the Epistle too the Hebrews,
he is called the bryghtuesse of his glory, and the very image of the fathers
substance. Also Exodus xxxiij. Show me thy glory. And secondly because that by
his gospel he procures true and due glory too his eternal father, according as
the angels sung when Christ was born. Glory be too God on hie.

The foundation of Gods glory are the being and the power What it is too give
glory to God.
of God. The bound thereof is our acknowledgement and setting of it forth.
Therefore, we the^ yield true glory unto God when we acknowledge and confess,
that God is: that God has care of mankind: that God has truly opened his will
to mankind in his word uttered by his son: that God is wise, rightuous,
soothfast, free, chaste, pitiful: y^ he releaseth us our sins and receives
us when we flee too his son, of his own free grace and not for our
worthiness or deserts: that he harkeneth too those that call upon him: and
that he saves them for his sons sake who was borne too us and given too us.

This doctrine concerning the true acknowlegement of Gods being and will, and
concerning the true services too be performed too God, does the son of God
spread abroad among mankind by his ministers, and boweth men's minds and
hearts too the acknowledging of this doctrine and too true obedience, that God
may be magnifyed at many men's hands with true glory, which cannot otherwise
be yielded unto God, but by acknowledging of Christ y^ light of the world.
For although the heathen Philosophers and the hipocrytes do after a sort
grant that there is a God, and that the wicked are punished: yet yield they
not too God his true and full glory, because they are ignorant of Gods will
disclosed in his Gospel.

Thirdly Christ is called our light, because y^ in the hearts Why Christ is
called our light.
of men who erst were overwhelmed with the mist of ignorance of God, of sin,
and of death, he by his Gospel kindles the light of the true knowledge of God,
true comfort, ryghtuousnesse and eternal life, by which light they are
defended against death, sin, the Devils tyranny, and endless damnation.
John. j. The son of God is the true light which lighteneth every man that
comes into this world. Ioh. viij. I am the light of the world. Esaias. xlix. I
have given thee too be a light too the Gentiles, that thou may be my
salvation too the ends of the world. Also Esaias. ix. The people that walked in
darkness has seen a great light. Al whole mankind, Kings, Princes,
Philosophers, wisemen, and learned men euerychone of them walk in most thick
darkness, overwhelmed with sin and death, so long as they are without Gods
word: until the star that appeared too the wise men, (that is too wit the
word of God) do rise in their hearts and work everlasting life and
righteousness in them.

The second place, concerning the church of Christ gathered of the Jews and
Gentiles: or concerning the calling of the Gentiles.
THe true Church or people of God are all those that with Who are the true
Church.
steadfast faith embrace the light of the world our Lord Jesus Christ, or which
believe in Christ: not only Jews borne of the offpring of Abraham, dwelling
at Jerusalem, which had the Law given by GOD himself with notable signs and
wonders, and the state of government ordained by the voice of God, and the
keeping of the promises concerning the Messiah, which were from time too time
renewed and always preserved in this people: But also the Gentyles that walk
in the light Christ, that is too say, which are lightened with the true
knowledge of Christ, and by faith receive forgiveness of sins,
ryghtuousnesse, and life everlasting, offered too all Nations in the promise of
grace made unto Abraham. Here may the whole doctrine concerning the church
and the calling of the Gentyles, be repeted out of Romans ix. x. xj. xv. Ephe.
ij. Act. x. xv. etc. Esaias. ij. xj. xlij. xlix. lj. liiij. lv. lvij. etc.

For upon singular forecast did God put a difference between Why God did put
a difference between the jews and the Gentiles.
the Jewish people and the Gentyles, by circumcision and other ceremonies
delivered in the Law of Moses, for this cause chiefly, that the true church
of God the pillar and seat of the true doctrine concerning God and his son
our Lord Jesus Christ, might be known and seen with men's eyes. For
inasmuch as it is his will that every man which is too be saved, should be
graffed intoo the Church, and joined too Christ by the ministry of his
Gospel: he chose a certain people in which ye promises concerning Christ
should be preserved, and Christ the redeemer be exhibited, and teach, and
woork miracles, and be made a sacrifice, and be seen risen agein from death.

Exceeding great therefore were the privileges of the The prerogatives of the
jews.
Jewish people, whom God has chosen too himself from among all Nations, too
be his peculiar possession, a Royal preesthod, and a holy Nation: with whom
he made a covenant with his own mouth and by circumcision, whom God had
garnished with his own word, with his promises, with his Testamentes, with
Fathers, Laws, woorshippings, everlasting preesthod, and with the birth of
Christ as touching the flesh.

On the contrary part, the Gentyls wanted all these good The wretched state of
the Heathen.
things: they were without Christ, strangers from the state of Israel,
forreners from the Testamentes and promises, without hope and without GOD in
the world. And therefore did ye Jews very far prefer themselves before the
godless and Idolaters Gentyls, and deemed that Christ together with his
kingdom and benefits perteyned only too themselves. It is then an exceeding
great benefit of God, that he has called too the light of his Gospel, not
only the Jews, but now also the. Gentyles, Greeks, Arabians, Madianits,
Nabathyes, and others according as they are divided by distribution in this
prophecy of Esaias.

But in the doctrine of the calling of the Gentyles these Gods unchangeable
rule in calling men to salvation.
three articles are always too be considered. First, that the promise of the
Gospel is universal, and that God is not an accepter of persons, but is
indifferent too all men according too that one rule expressed in the Gospel.
This is the will of God, that every one which believes in the son of GOD,
should have everlasting life, and that he which believes not in the son,
should be damned. This rule does God observe without change, in men that are
to be received to eternal salvation, or too be cast away: neither respects
he any person, that is to say, he considers not other byfals in men
perteyning nothing to this Rule, as riches, poverty, lerning, ignorance,
power, circumcision, uncircumcision and such like. Secondly, the calling of the
Gentyles puts us Salvation is of free gift and not of desert.
in mind, that forgiveness of sins and eternal life, are bestowed upon the
believers, of free gift, and not for the woorthynesse of their own virtues or
works. For since the Gentyles (which were defiled with Idolgaddings, lusts,
and other sins,) for saking their purpose of sinning, and fleeing unto
Christ the son of God, are received as well as the Jews, who had always
framed their conversation honestly, according to the rule of Gods law: it is
an evident proof that the Gentyles (who are signified under the show of the
unclean beasts in the vision of Peter) are cleansed from their sins, not by
their own power or works which are wicked and damnable, but by faith through
the free mercy of God for Christ's sake only, as is said Acts.x. That which
God has cleansed, call not thou common or unclean. But God has cleansed our
hearts with the blud of his son through faith, as is said, cle^zing their
hearts by faith. And. ^. John.j. The blud of the son of god clenzeth us from
all sin. Thirdly, it gives us too understand, that circumcision and the
other ceremonies of Moses Law are not necessary to salvation.

The third place, They shall all come from Saba, bringing gold and
frankincense, and singing praise unto the Lord.
THe true and cheef service of God, are not the ceremonies The true service or
woorshipping of God.
of Moses, or the offerings and sacrifices of beasts: but the spiritual hosts
or sacrifices of praise, that is to say, too preach the true doctrine
concerning God, too call upon god aright, too give him thanks, too acknowledge
him, to disprove false opinions, to employ a man's goods about the maintenance
of the ministry and of the studies of learning, and to direct all the
purposes, practyses and deeds of our life to the praise of god, as it is
co^^aunded Do ye al things to the glory of god.

These cheef and highest services of God are shadowed in What is represented by
gold.
the very presents of the Arabians. For gold is a representation of true
doctrine and pure faith: as it is said in the Psalm: The commandments of the
Lord are more to be desired than Gold and much precious stone.

Frankincense is an image of true prayer and thanksgiving, What is represented
by Fra^kincense.
which mount up too heaven, and refresh God with a most sweet and acceptable
sent, as is said in Apocalip. v. They had vyols full of odours, which are the
prayers of the Saints.

The Altar of atonement is Christ our Mediator, by The Altar of atonement is
Christ.
whom only GOD is pacified, and acceptable sacrifyces are offered too God. For
there is no Altar accepted of God, but only his son Christ. Upon this Altar
let the Gentyles offer, not rams, or other dead beasts, but spiritual
sacrifices, quick, holy, and acceptable to God, which is their reasonable
service. Romans xij. and let them glorifye and praise God for his mercy performed
unto them.

Upon the first Sunday after Epiphanie.
The Epistle. Romans xij.
IBeseche you therefore brethren, by the mercyfulnesse of God, that ye make
your bodies a quick sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto god, which is your
reasonable serving of God, and fashion not your selves like unto this world:
but be ye changed in your shape by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove
what thing that good and acceptable and perfect will of God is. For I say
(through the grace that unto me given is) to every man among you, that no man
stand high in his own conceyte, more than it becomes him too esteem of
himself: but so judge of himself, that he be gentle and sobre, according as
God has dealt too every man the measure of faith: for as we have many members
in one body, and all members have not one office, so we being many, are one
body in Christ, and every man among our selves one another members.

The disposement.
THe more part of the Epistles whose disposemeutes we have set out hithertoo,
have setfoorth the peculiar doctrine of the Gospel concerning the person and
benefits of Christ, and concerning Justification. Now those that follow,
perteyne more too the doctrine of the Law, and comprehend precepts of good
manners, which must ensue the benefits of Christ received by faith. And these
three Sundays following, the whole twelfth Chapter of the Epistle too the
Romans is wont too be expounded orderly in the church. All the which is an
exhortation containing precepts of all good moral works, or of all virtues
which God exacteth in his Law. But forasmuch as the orderly expositions of
the virtues, distributed intoo the precepts of the ten commandments, are
jointly recited in a peculiar book of Rules of life: I will make no
declaration at all of the virtues in this place, but only expound the words
and the phrases.

The first part of the Chapter which they read on this day in the church,
conteyneth chiefly two places,

1 A general exhortation too new obedience, or too a life conformable too the
will and word of God. 2 Of meeldnesse and lowlynesse, and of the shunning of
curiosity and statelynesse.
Of the first.
I Beseech you brethren, that you make your bodies, etc, It is a general
precept of new obedience containing the whole ten commandments, taken of
an Antithesis of the Leuiticall services or sacrifices.

Make your bodies, that is too say, dedicate ye too God, not the bodies of
beasts as the Leuiticall Priests did, but your own selves: Offer ye too
GOD, your minds, your wills, your deuyses, your studyes, your affections, and
your doings all your life long: and so rule them, that they may please God.

A sacrifice, that is too wit, set a part too holy uses, appointed Sacrifyce.
too the honor of God, as if he should say, the Leuiticall Priests offered
beasts unto God, but offer you too God your own mynds, thoughts, studyes, and
al your doings: do all things too his glory: kill ye the remnants of u^nne,
lewd inclinations, and the affections yet sticking in you: be ye patient in
tribulation and torments, as Paul, Laurence and Attalus were, who gave their
bodies too be offerings or sacrifices.

Quick, not dead beasts, but all your whole life, and your selves, who shall
live for evermore. Quick or living.


Holy, Hallowed by the holy Ghost, pure, and clean, that is too wit, by
imputation of Christ's holiness, and by beginning Holy.
too be holy.

Your reasonable service. Let not your service be brutish Reasonable service.
or unreasonable, such as is the service of the Heathen that know not God, or
of the superstitions, or of the Hipocrites which have no true reason lyghtened
by the holy Ghost, nor true knowledge of God, nor true fear and faith. But let
your service be reasonable wherein your mind may rightly acknowledge the being
and will of God, and understand what services please God, and what works
please not. Let it have the true fear of GOD, and true faith. Let it not
persuade it self, that it pleases God by the work wrought.

And fashion not your selves like unto this world. Be Worldlynesse.
not like unto this world: acquaynt not your selves with ungodliness, fleshly
carelessness, wanhope, nor with any of the leawd lusts, affections, and
wickednesses of the ungodly in this world.

But be ye changed in your shape by the renewing of Renevvment of mind.
your mind. Get ye new knowledge and new affections, as the fear of God,
faith, louingnesse, hope, patience, and such others, in your hearts, agreeable
too the good and perfect will of GOD which is uttered in the Law and the
Gospel.

The second part: Of myldnesse which brydleth statelynesse, curiosity,
ouerweening of a man's self, trust in a man's own cunning or policy, which
makes a man too take many things upon him without calling.
HEre would be recited the whole doctrine of myldenesse and lowlynesse, and of
the contrary vices, out of the exposition of the virtues of the fourth and
first commandments.

For I say, that is, I warn you, yea and I heartily beseech all and every of
you in discharge of mine office and duty which God has committed unto me.

That no man be wyser in his own concceit, than needs. Myldnesse.
Ouervveening, misvveening, and forvveening.
That no man have a stately opinion of himself, nor rashly and proudly misdeem
other me^, nor deuyse new interpretations and opinions of his own brain, as
Arius, ye Anabaptists and all other Heretics, are wyser in their own conceits
than they ought to be, and keep not themselves within ye measure of faith,
that is too say, within the bounds of God word. But being puffed up with an
ouerweening of their own wisdom, they coin new opinions and suttletyes.
Ageyn, they are proud and attribute more to themselves in opinion, concerning
themselves and their own sayings, than is due too their infirmity. And
afterward in their doings they vaunt them selves above their power, they
thrust themselves into other men's vocations, they reform and rule other
me^nes matters, and they neglect their own.

Let him be wise according too meeldnesse. The true and Christen wisdom.
Christian wisdom is too hold a man's self mildly with the bounds of the word,
that is left us by Christ, and to acknowledge GOD, and to obey him according to
the word by him delivered.

All man's wisdom without Gods word, is (as Socrates Worldly wisdom.
says in Plato) a doutfull dream. And the same Socrates says, that
therefore Apollo had judged him wise, because he knew he was not wise at all.

But the beginning or the sum of true wisdom is the fear of the Lord. That
is too say, the true acknowledgeme^t, invocation, and praising of the
everlasting God, and of his son our Lord Jesus Christ, according too Gods
word or the gospel taught by Christ.

According as God has dealt to every man the measure of Man's bounds
faith. Let every man abide within the bounds of faith or of Gods word, or of
the whole doctrine of the Gospel. And out of these let them not raunge upon
trust of their own wisdom.

Ageyn, let every man esteem of himself according to the measure of his own
gifts which he has received, and let him The right use of gods gifts.
employ the same too the common welfare of the whole body of the church as in
man's body the gifts and offices of the diverse members are directed too the
common preservation of the whole body. This similitude is handled more largely
by Paul.j. Cor xij. and Ephe. iiij.

Upon the second Sunday after the Epiphanie.
The Epistle. Romans xij.
SEeing that we have diverse gifts, according too the grace that is given unto
us: if a man have the gift of prophecy, let him have it, that it be agreeing
too the faith. Let him that has an office, wait on his office. Let him that
teaches, take heed too his doctrine. Let him that exhorts, give attendance
too his exhortation. If any man give, let him do it with singleness. Let him
that rules, do it with diligence. If any man show mercy, let him do it with
cherefulnesse. Let love be without dissimulation. Hate that which is evil,
and cleave too that which is good. Be kind one too another with brotherly
love. In giving honor, go one before another. Be not slothful in the
business which you have in hand. Be fervent in spirit. Apply your selves
too the time. Rejoice in hope. Be patient in tribulation. Continue in prayer.
Distribute unto the necessity of the Saints. Be ready to harbor. Bless
them which persecute you: bless I say, and curse not. Be merry with them that
are merry, weep with them that weep: be of like affection one toward
another. Be not hie minded, but make your selves equal too them of the lower
sort.

THis Epistle cleaves too the last that went before. And first it reckeneth up
the sundry gifts, and diverse kinds of charges, which God has ordained in his
church, that they should be employed too Gods glory and the common profit of
the whole church, and not too the augmenting of pride and busy meddling with
many things.

Whither it be prophecy, according too the agreablenesse Prophecy.
of faith. Prophecy (as it appears by* j. Cor. xiiij.) is in the new
Testament, the gift of the interpreting the Prophesies of the scripture.
Therefore he counsels them, that their expounding of the scripture should be
y^ agreeableness of faith, that is too say, that it should agree with the
whole doctrine of the gospel, or with all the Articles of the faith.

Let this precept be made manifest by examples. The interpretations Heretical
prophesying.
which the Anabaptists teach upon the sayings in the v. of Matthew,
concerning oaths, and not revenging, do fight with the rest of the Articles of
Gods word, which expressly aloweth lawful oaths, and the reuengement that is
done by Magistrates.

The popish interpretation of this principle, we are justified Papistical
prophesying.
by faith, that is by faith countenaunced with love, or by faith and the rest
of the virtues jointly to^gither, agrees not with the whole doctrine of the
gospel, which manifestly avouches y^ we are freely justified by faith only,
for Jesus Christ sake, and not for any works of our own.

Or ministership, in ministering. These speeches are clipped. Ministers.
The meening of this is: he that is a minister of the church, or a deacon
gathering and distributing the almesses of the church, let him minister in
such wise as he ought too do. This sentence therefore enioyneth faithfulness
and diligence in all parts of the ministry.

Or he that teaches in doctrine. Let the teacher of the Teachers.
gospel in church or in school, teach aright, and let him faithfully spread
abroad true doctrine concerning God.j. Tim. iiij. Take heed too thy doctrine.
This precept may be amplified by distribution, and may be breefly spoken of
all the articles of Christen doctrine.

Or he that exhroteth in exhortation. Exhortation to repentance Exhortation.
and al good woorks is one of the kinds of Ecclesiastical sermons.j. Tim. iiij.
Give diligence too reading and exhortation. Tit. j. Let him be able too exhort
by sound doctrine.

He that gives, let him do it with singleness. That is too How to give.
say, he that bestows upon his heerers either doctrine, counsel, or money,
let him do it with singleness, and with right heart in deed. Let him mar
nothing, let him look for nothing in reward or recompense.

Let him that rules, do it with diligence. Whither he be How too rule.
a temporal or spiritual governor, let him in his office be heedfull,
diligent and faithful, like Iosaphat.ij. Paralip. xix. who was diligent in all
parts of government. He ordered Churches, civil judgments and consistories,
and made wars. etc. Paul is a diligent teacher.

Our princes neglect ye cheifest parts of their office, namely God grant there
be none such in England.
the care of Churches, of judgments, of discipline, of studies and of
doctrine, the defense of innocents, and the punishment of offenders. And
either they are slothful, or busy about mooneshine in the water, or else
they do hurtful things, they build, they hawk and hunt, they make great
shows and feasts and they move unnecessary wars.

He that shows mercy, let him do it with cheerfulness. How to show mercy.
This precept is of mercy and benefiting, which must proceed from a cheerful
and welwilled mind* God loves a cheerful giver.

Let love be unfeigned. Here follows a register of precepts Love toward
ones neibor, or true friendship.
concerning the duties of love, or concerning all virtues, the declaration of
which may be fetched out of my little book of the rules of life.

The love of a man's neibor comprehends all the virtues of the.v. vj. and
vij. commaundeme^ts. But in especially unto friendship is the first sentence
too be applied, let love be unfeigned. That is too say: let your good will
toward your friends and generally toward your neibor be true, uncorrupted, and
vncounterfetted: let it not rise of an evil cause, but let your wills be
coupled or knit together in ye love of goodness.

Be kind one too another with brotherly love. Let there be Brotherly love*
among Christians as among brethren, true goodwill and kindness* that is too
say, natural and earnest love, such as parents are wont too bear toward
their children. For God has put a natural loving kindness or chariness intoo
the hearts of fathers and mothers, to the intent to put us in mind of his love
toward his own son Jesus Christ, and toward us his sons by adoption, and
too the intent they should be as bonds of alyance and mutual good will
between man and man.

In giving honor go one before an other. Reverence is a Reverence.
virtue of the fourth commandment, acknowledging Gods gifts in other men,
and yielding too them their place and honor, and by the example of it self
alluring others too meeldnesse and reverence. The two vices that beset it, are
flattery or soothing, and pride, or disdeinfulnesse.

Be not slothful in that ye take in hand. Diligence is a Diligence.
virtue of the fourth commandment executing the labors agreeable too a man's
vocation, faithfully, diligently, and consta^tly. The vices that beset it, are
slothfulness or restinesse and ouerearnestnesse or too much meddling.

Be fervent in spirit. A zele burning in the love of God and Zele.
of ryghtuousnesse, and being angry with all those that deface Gods glory,
pertains too the first commandment and the fifth. The vices that beset it
are fumishnesse or rigorousnesse, and coldness or pliablenesse.

Apply your selves too the time. It is a kind of wisdom Taking of time.
which neglects not occasions offered to dispatch a man's matters well, and
considers what thing, with what persons, what time, and in what place it may
be earnestly pursued and obtained: howbeeit saving always our duty too God,
the steadfastness of our profession, and honest discipline.

Rejoice in hope. Hope of eternal life certainly promised Hope.
for Christ's sake, and the looking for asswagement of the miseries in this
life according too Gods will, does singularly sustain, cheer, and strengthen
men's hearts. Romans v. and viij. And Nazianzene: nothing is wo^t too cheer us so
much as a good conscience and a good hope. The vices that beset it, are
despair, presumption, and the folish and vain hopes of men.

Be patient in tribulation. Patience ageine, pertains too Patience.
the first precept. The vices that beset it are impatiencie and wilful
stubbornness. As for example, the stubbornness of Seruetus and of the
Anabaptists.

Continue in prayer. The true calling upon God belongs Prayer.
too the first and second commandment. The vices that encounter it, are
omitting too call upon God, or nonpraying and heathenish babbling without faith,
and al false Inuocations or misprayings.

Distribute too the necessity of the Saints. Doing of good Liberality.
turns pertains too the seventh commandment. The vices that encounter it,
are harmefulnesse, gripplenesse, and wastfulnesse.

Be ready too harbor. Hospitality pertains too the.vij. Hospitality or
house keeping.
commandment. The vices that encounter it are harborlesnesse, nigardship, and
lavishness.

Bliss them that persecute you. Meekness is a virtue of Meekness.
the fifth commandment repressing wrathfulnesse and desire of revenge, and
laying aside hatred and grudge, for God and the common quietness sake. The
vices that encounter it are hatred, desire of revenge, spitefulness,
reioycement at other folks harms, and sheepishnesse.

Be merry with them that be merry. Freendlinesse is a virtue Frindlinesse or
gladsomnesse*
that wishes well too the good, and rejoices in their good success. The
vices that encounter it, are enuiousnesse, spitefulness, and lightness of
belief.

Weep with them that weep. Pitifulness is a virtue of Pity.
the fifth commandment, which is touched with the feeling of good men's
misfortunes, and helps those that are in distress. The vices that encounter
it, are cruelty, reioycement in other folks harms, and fond pity.

Be of like affection one too an other. Desire of concord or Concord.
peaceablenesse is a virtue of the fifth commandment. The vices that beset
it, are quarelousnesse, debatefulnesse, and lazynesse.

Be not high minded. But make your selves equal too the Lowliness and
mildness.
lower sort. Lowliness and mildness are virtues of the first and fourth
commandment. The vices that encounter the^, are pride and feyned holiness.

Concerning these virtues and the vices that encounter them, there are
measurable expositio^s set out with good sentences and examples in my little
book of rules of life, which I would wish too be added to the disposements
of the Epistles, in the end of this book.

Upon the third Sunday after the Epiphanie.
The Epistle. Romans xij.
BE not wise in your own opinions. Recompense too no man evil for evil.
Provide aforehand things honest, not only before God, but also in the sight of
all men. If it be possible (as much as is in you) live peaceably with all men.
Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath. For
it is written, vengeance is mine, and I will reward says the Lord. Therefore,
if thine enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him drink. For in so
doing, thou shall heap coals of fire on his head. Be not overcome of evil,
but overcome evil with goodness.

HE proceeds in the register of precepts of virtues or good works, by the
exercise whereof Christenfolk must show their obedience too Godward.

1 Be not wise in your own opinions. Mildness and willingness Mildness.
too be taught, not chalenging greater wisdom too it self than is agreeable
too ones infirmity, nor trusting in ones own gifts, but heering others and
giving place too such as give good advice, is a virtue that pertains to the
iiij. and viij. precept of the ten commandments. The vices that encounter it
are pride, stiffenesse of opinion or wilfulness, and Academical douting. 2
Render to no man evil for evil. Meekness repressing desire Meekness.
of revenge. The full doctrine of this virtue is wont to be recited in the
opening of the fifth commandment. 3 Provide things honest in the sight of al
me^, Warenesse Shunning of stumbling blocks.
of eschuing stumbling blocks which withdraw the minds of the weak from the
true doctrine. Now an offense or stumbling block is a false doctrine, or a
misbehauior in life, which impeacheth Gods glory and other men's salvation,
either because it seduceth, or because it gives occasion of slau^dering the
gospel and the Church, or else because it provoke other too do like wise.
Too this point may all the whole doctrine be referred which is set forth in the
place that concerns offenses. With the meening of this Epistle agrees the
saying of Christ. Mat. 5. Let your light so shine before men yt they seeing your
good works, may glorify your father which is in heaven. 4 If it be possible,
as much as in you is, have peace with all men. The desire of peace pertains
too the.v. commandment. 5 Avenge not your selves, but give place to the
wrath, that Reuengment.
is to wit of God. Unto the fifth commandment of the ten, pertains
meekness which represseth anger and desire of reuengeme^t, giving place too
the wrath of God, who either by himself without mean, or by the Magistrate
punishes wrongs. For in the chapter following, Paul establishes the vengeance
that is done by the magistrate.
Thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head. That is too say thou shall
heap punishment. For the more unthankful he is toward thee for thy
weldooing, so much the sorer shall he be punished. Or thou shall set him on
fire with love of thee when it shall grieve him too be overcome with thy
kindness and courtesy.

Upon the fourth Sunday after the Epiphanie.
The Epistle. Romans xiij.
OWe nothing to any man but that you love one an other. For he that loves
another has fulfilled the law. For these other commandments. Thou shall not
commit aduoutrie. Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not
bear false witness. Thou shall not lust: and so forth: (if there be any
other commandment) they are all comprehended in this saying, love thy
neighbor as thy self: love hurts not his neybor. Therefore is love the
fulfilling of the law.

The disposement.
THe state of this Epistle is a general exhortation too love or too good works
enjoined in the.x. commandments.

The chief places of Doctrine, are three.

1 Of this saying. Owe nothing too any man, but that ye love one another. 2 Of
loving a man's neybor, which comprehends all the virtues and good woorks of
the second table of the ten commandments. 3 Of the fulfilling of the law.
The first place.
PAy all men their dues, and oweno man any thing save mutual Righteousness
comprehends all virtues.
love.

It is an old and usual definition, that righteousness is a virtue which
yields too every body that which is his own, or which yields too every body
that which is due. And it co^prehendeth all the other virtues, and a man's
full obedience toward the whole law of God or the.x. commandments, which are
the rule that shows what duties we owe too God, what too other men, and
what too our selves. All the duties that are to be performed immediately unto
God himself, are comprised in the virtues and commandments of the first
table: namely, true knowledge and calling upon God, fear of God above all
things, faith, love, glorifying, acknowledgment etc. Unto magistrates is due,
honor, obedience, love, reverence, toll of things growing upon the ground,
custom of things brought in from foreign lands, and service both in matters
of peace and war. Ageine, too parents, schoolemaisters, masters of
households, and gardens, there is too be yielded reverence, honor, obedience,
and thankfulness. And unto the rest of men, and chiefly too friends,
husbands, wives, children, kinsefolke and strangers, or fremfolke, there must
be yielded all the dues of good will, of faithfulness, and of well doing. In
bargains, in borowings, in buying, in hyring and letting, and other things,
the money and wares and all other things that are due, are too be performed too
every man. For these things are due even by bond of civil order, and even the
Magistrate punishes those that pay them not. Therefore Paul in this place
commands these things to be performed in such wise, that afterward we may
be utterly free from the bond of civil government.

But the bond of nature and of God, is of another sort: binding The law of God
and of nature.
all men too perform too their neybors mutual love in heart and also outward
duties, which the civil magistrate co^pelleth no man too do. As for example,
the Samaritane does good too the wounded wayfarer and the priest and the Leuite
ouerpassing him are not punished by ye magistrate, although they wickedly
neglect mercy due by the bond of nature. Even so by the bond of God and nature
we be bound too aid such as stand in need of our help, with counsel,
doctrine, defense, travel, money, and other alms deeds, although the civil
magistrate punishes not such as let slip these duties. This is the meening of
the words. Owe nothing too any man, save mutual love.

Of the second.
TO love a man's neybor, is, upon the true knowledge of What it is too love
our neybor.
Christ foreshining in our hearts, and upon faith assuring us y^ God of his
mere goodness loves us for his sons sake, too submit our selves on the
other side unto God and too obey him, and for his sake to embrace other me^
with hearty good will: and to impeche no man's life, body, name or goods, but
(too the uttermost of our power) to do the^ good by all y^ means we ca^.

The special kinds or duties of love toward a man's The several sorts or
degrees of love toward ones neybor.
neybor, are al virtues or good woorks enjoined in the second table of the.x.
commandments, which are comprehended all toogither in this saying: love thy
neibor as thy self. Mat. xxij.

In the fourth commandment we are willed to love our parents, children,
brethren, masters, magistrates, subjects. etc.

Unto the fifth, which is thou shall not kill, perteine these duties of
loving, too work none evil too our neybor, or too impair no man's body,
good name, or goods, but too defend and mayntein them too our power. Which
virtue is named ryghtfulnesse and manliness. Also too this commandment
pertains frindship, which is a cherisher of mutual good will: a faithfulness:
a seeking of concord: a meekness which yields not to anger and desire of
reuengement: a gentleness which bears with the blemishes or defaults of
other men. etc.

Unto the sixth commandment, thou shall not commit aduoutry, pertains the
mutual love of married couples, earnest, pure, and not lusting after other men
or other women. Also chastity which appaireth not ye cle^nesse of it self or
of others. And stayednesse which yields honor to ye parties own body.

Unto the s^uenth, thou shall not steal, belongs ryghtfulnesse, absteining
from other men's goods: and weldoing or liberality toward whosoever is in
need.

Unto the eight, thou shall not bear false witness, is referred, not to hurt
a man's neibor by false witness, slau^ders, back bitings, raylings or other
untruths: but in all a man's doings and sayings to be soothfast, fre^dly,
courteous, faithful. etc.

In the nynth commandment thou shall not covet, is required a perfect
soundness of all the powers and desires of man's nature agreeable with the
rule of Gods law, and burning with the pure and chaste fire of the love of God
and our neybor, and void of all lust or concupiscence, or of all sinful
inclinations, affections, or desires of corrupted nature, wherewith men being
now stirred up, do set more by money or glory than by God himself: like as that
foolish loouer in Plautus cries out, I had lever this woman loved me, than
all the Gods that ^n the world be.

So Paul in this place refers almost all the virtues of Gods commandment
is the rule of virtues.
good woorks to this one point of loving, and makes the precepts of the. x
commandments too be the ground and rule of love or of all good woorks. For
God will have all the whole life of christen folk, al their thoughts, devises,
endeuers and doings too be ruled by the squire of the word which he has
left among us, as he says in Deuteronomy. xij. What I command thee, that do thou
unto the Lord: neither put thou too, neither take thou away. Ezech. xx. Walk
not in the co^maundeme^ts of your Fathers, for I am the Lord your God, walk in
my commandments, and keep my judgments and do them.

Then are not the.x. co^maundeme^ts to be hissed out of the church, and out of
the life of christians, as the Antinomians cauil Antimonians.
which banish the law into the court of ye civil magistrate, or else bear folk
in hand yt the law serves to none other purpose but too accuse, and condemn.
For we see that Paul in this place urges the.x. commandments upon
christians, as the squire and rule of good woorks and of all their life.

Of the third.
Love is the fulfilling of the law, that is to say, sound, perfect, The love
of God.
and continual obedience toward all the commandments of Gods law without any
sin or blemish, such as is required in the law of God. Deuteronomy. vj. Math. xxij.
Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and thy neybor as
thy self.j. John* v. This is the loving of God, that we keep al his
commandments. Such a loving of God and our neybor, burning and perfect with
the whole heart, without any lusts or sinful inclinatio^s, and without any sin,
befalls to no man, Christ only excepted. For in all men, (ye^a even in those
ye be regenerated) the law of the members (or y^ sinful inclinations and
affections (keep war like enemies against ye law of God. Gal. v. Ro^ vij. and
they strive against the spirit of God. And in all me^ (yea eue^ in the holiest)
there remains lothsom filthiness of sin, which hinders our love and
obedience, that it cannot fully and perfectly satisfy y^ law of God, nor of it
own woorthynesse please God.j. Ioh. ij. If we say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves and the truth is not in us.

Then seeing no man's love (be he never so holy) is the We can do no vvoorks
to justify our selves
perfect fulfilling of Gods law: it is plain too be seen that no man is
justified before God by his own love, or his own good woorks: but that we are
freely for Christ's only sake delivered by faith from the curse of the law,
from sin, and death, and restored too righteousness and life Gal. iij. Romans
iij.

Now when we through the free mercy of God for Christ's How love engenders
in us
sake, are received and justified by faith, and endued with the holy ghost:
then also is the law stablished by faith, not only because that through faith
the full and perfect righteousness which Gods law claims, is imputed too us
as though we our selves had thoroughly satisfied Gods law: but also because
that through faith and the true knowledgment of Christ foreshining in our
hearts, and through the help of the holy ghost moving our hearts, there is kindled
in our mind a new and brighter light, and a stedier assent, and a confidence
and gladness settling it self in God, and a childly awe and a pure and more
burning love of God, and a stedier purpose of obeying God, according too all
the commandments of his holy law. Which newbegonne obedience likes God, not
for the own worthiness thereof, but through faith in Christ, that is too wit,
because the person of him that obeys is accepted by faith for Christ's sake,
as in.j. Pet. ij. is said: Offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable too God by
Jesus Christ.

Upon the Sunday called Septuagesima.
The Epistle.j. Cor. ix. and.x.
Perceive ye not, how that they which run in a race, run all, yet but one
receives the reward. So run, that ye may obtain. Every man that proves
masteryes absteyneth from all things. And they do it too obtain a
corruptible crown: but we too obtain an incorruptible crown. I therefore so
run, not as at an uncertain thing. So fight I, not as one that beats the
air, but I tame my body, and bring it unto subjection, lest by any means
after that I have preached to other, I my self should be a castaway.

The.x. Chapter.
BRethren I would not that ye should be ignorant of this, how that our
fathers were all under a cloud, and all passed through the sea, and were al
baptized under Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and did all eat of one
spiritual meat, and did all drink of one manner of spiritual drink. For they
drank of the spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ.

The chief places are three.
1 Of diligence and busying our selves in the woorks of our own vocation, and
in the following of the actions of all our whole life, in such wise, as they
may serve too Gods glory, and atteine reward in everlasting life. 2 A general
exhortation too new obedience, or a life agreeing with Gods will, and too
shun the offenses which as God punished in the fathers wa^dering in the
wilderness, so will he also punish horribly in us, if we commit the like
faults. 3 That the church of the fathers and of the Christians is all one,
which is gathered by the word and the sacraments, and is fed and maintained
all with one spiritual meat and drink.
The first place.
THe rule which Paul in this place puts forth garnished with the two
similitudes taken of running and wrestling, is a most profitable and necessary
rule, not only of the duty of teachers or ministers of the church: but also of
our studies and of all the devises and doings of our whole life. In all
vocations, What is to be done in all intents, drifts and purposes of this life.
and in ordering all the devises, endeuers and deeds of our life aright, we
must needs have a certain end and bound set before us, to which as it were to
a mark we may leuel all our business that we take in hand. Agein it behooves
us skilfully to chose the means that lead directly to the same end: and to
use necessary heedfulnesse, exercise, earnestness, and steadfastness in
necessary heedfulnesse, exercise, earnestness, and steadfastness in getting
and keeping those means. Like as the ru^ners in a race have their eye alwais
upon the mark set up before them, and with all earnestness and pains taking
do enforce and endeuer themselves the streightest way too it. And as the
wrestlers bend themselves wholly against their copemates that they may give the
foil and obtain the wished reward of victory. For as Plato says: A man
must not wanderingly gaze at many things, but steadfastly ame one thing, and at
the same level all his doings as it were at a mark.

This is the common and uttermost end of all vocations, The common end and
drift of al a man's doings.
and of the whole life of man, which Paul himself has a while after appointed,
do ye all things too the glory of God, and be not a stumbling block too
Gods church. That is too say: let the end of al your doings be of God, or the
true acknowledgment, invocation, and glorifying of God, and the welfare and
quietness of Gods church.

Besides this, every several vocation has peculiar bounds The ends of
authority or civil government.
and ends by it self, as the civil magistrates bounds and ends are too
bridle the misbehauiors of his countrymen with honest laws, too decide
controversies by rightful justice, too maintain peace, too defend the good,
and too punish the unthrifts and offenders.

The ends of the ministry of the gospel, are too teach the The ends of the
ministry.
true doctrine of the gospel aright, too minister the sacraments, and too
perform the other parts of their office faithfully, for the glory of God, and
that many men may be saved.

The ends of scholars life or of our studies are wisdom, power The ends of
learning.
of vttera^ce, or wise and eloque^t godliness, or too have good skill and to
judge aright of things, that is: too say well and live well.

Too the intent we may attein and retein these ends, we Settlednesse.
must choose the means that lead the right way too them, like the runner which
takes his next way too the mark, and stragleth not with uncertain moving and
blind starting this way and that way in his race. For he that minds too
attein too the place that he ameth at, must follow but one way and not wander
many ways. For (that I may use the words of Seneca) that were not too go but
too gad. So the champion Eutellus settles himself against his adversary only.
He beats not ye air in vain, but stands stiff and stout in sight, with
either hand he thumpes a maine on Dare as thick as he can smite.

Therefore like as the runners look ever too their mark, and the champions
employ all their shifts and practices too smite their adversary: and start
not aside with blind braids, ne beat the air with rash strokes: so let every
man in his vocation, (and specially the teachers and ministers of the church)
choose out wisely the means that lead straight too the right end: and in
exercising the same, let them use diligence and continuance, yt they may in the
eternal life attein the promised reward of their diligence. Let the^ teach the
pure doctrine of the gospel faithfully. Let them continually beat upon the
places The description of a good and skillful minister.
of doctrine yt are necessary and most auailable too the norishment of true
godliness, as the places of repentance, of faith, of the person, office and
benefits of Christ, of true invocation, of the cross, of good works. etc.
Let them attemper them selves too the capacity of their hearers. Let them
examine, instruct, and strengthen the rawer sort. Let them steadfastly and
stoutlye stand with the truth against Heretics. Let them fight against their
own nature, and their sinful lusts. Let them bear with some infirmities and
offenses for common quietness sake. Let them allure their heerers with
examples of all virtues. Let them bridle ambition, wrath, desire of
reuengement, covetousness, and other affections, that they deface not the
doctrine of the gospel with stu^bling blocks, and themselves become
castawayes, or lose the inheritance of eternal life: Like as Paul says, that
he looked narowly too himself, or chastised his body, subdewing it, taming it
and bringing it in subjection: that is too say, with great heed and
straightness he restreyned and kept under foot the sinful inclinations and
lusts of his heart, and compelled both the inward powers of his soul, and the
outward members of his body, as his tung, his eyes, his hands and his feet
too be serviceable and obedient too the judgment of his mind, or to Gods will.

Most men in the world are in bondage to their affections, Unnecessary dealings.
and are ruled by the^, so as they being enflamed with loves, hatreds,
couetings, fond hopes. etc. do take in hand unrighteous and unnecessary
doings, in which they perish: as for example, Paris was brought in bondage too
his own love. Pompey gave himself over to ambition, malice, and spitefulness.
Xerxes being pricked with pride and desirousnesse of reuengement, made war
against the Greeks. Many heritikes being set a gog with vain glory, sprede
abroad and maintain false opinions. Othersome do brable about needless
questions, rather curious than profitable. Other teachers give themselves too
sluggishnesse, other too meddling with many matters, and othersome too other
affections.

Paul therefore even by his own example exhorts all ministers and doctors
of the church, with singular care, heedfulnesse, and diligence, too hold in and
too bridle their minds, wills, hearts, and outward members, that they serve
not their own sinful inclinations, or the Devil spurring them foreward, but
the will and word of God.

But the text of this present Epistle shall become more clear to the eye, if the
ancient manner of the Greekish gamings be considered and the terms of them
well understood,

Among the Greeks, in their gaming places there were The five naked Games, or
exercyses of Actiuitie.
five kynds of exercises most ancient. Running, Buffeting, Leaping, Coyting,
and Wrestling. And these were called the naked Games, because the Gamers
exercised themselves naked in those games.

The Runners that ran a furlong through (that is to wit, Running.
sixhundred foot or half a quarter of a mile) were called Stadiodromoi, that
is too say, Furlongers. And they that ran the race duble, or which (when they
came at the mark) ran back agein to the baryers, were called Dubblefurlongers.

The Buffeters encountered either with fistes or with sandbagges, as Entellus
and Dares do in Virgill. Buffeting.


The Leapers contended either in the swiftness, or in the Leaping.
highness, or in the farnesse of the leap.

The Coyters were those that exercised themselves in Coyting, it was like our
throvving of the hammer.
throwing a coyt of stone or iron up in heyghth, or out at length, with which
kind of exercise Apollo is reported too have slain Hyacinthus, and Peleus his
brother Phocus by mischance.

The Wrestlers being naked, and anointed with oil, and Wrestling.
besprent with dust, and gryping one another, stryued to cast either other to
the ground.

These exercises were used both in the common scooles of The diet and demean or
of those that contended in the said Games, and their rewards.
every several City, as in Lycey and Academie at Athens: and specially in
their holy Gamings (as they termed them) that is to wit, the Olympians,
Nemeans, Pythians, and Isthmians: In which the Gamers absteyned from meats
and pleasures, that weaken men's bodies, and kept themselves to a certain diet
necessary to make the powers of their body strong and stedye. And they that
wan the maystrie having delivered to them a branch of Palm by the ouerseeer
or judge of the games, were wont to be proclaimed victors in the holy Games,
and to be crowned with a garlond, at Olympus, of Olif: and at Nemea of Apium.
And the Gamings of Olympus were had in so great estimation in Greek, that it
was in manner a greater and more honorable thing too have obtained the reward or
garlond in those holy Gamings, than too have triumphed at Rome. Therefore Plato
in his fifth book of Laws, says that he is the best Citizen of all others,
that counts it a greater beauty and honor too him, too obey reverently the
laws of his country, than too win the maysterie in the Gaming of Olympus or
in any other Gaming.

Out of this ancient custom of the Greekish Games, An excellent similitude.
Paul takes in this place many notable words. Every man (says he) that
tries maysteries, whither it be in running, wrestling or buffeting, does
with great warenesse and diligence forbear the meats, pleasures and all other
things that weaken the powers of the body or which may abate their
nimblenesse, and either hinder or disappoynt them of the victory. Even so
Chrysts soldiers susteyning a continual encounter and wrestling with the
Devil, and their own sinful lusts and outward entycements, must throughout
the whole race of their life absteyne from al things that offend either God or
godly and weak persons: and specially from Idolatrous meats, of which Paul
does chiefly entreat this whole disputation of the.viij. ix. and.x. Chapters.

They that run in a race. Hercules is reported to have run A furlong.
full. 120. paces with one breath at ye gaming of Olympus. That space is properly
called a fur long. Also the lists wherein they contend in running is termed by
the same name.

But one receives the reward. The Greek word is The reward of victory.
Brauion, which signifies the reward or the palmbraunch yt was given too the
victor by the ouerseer and judge of ye game, who bare in his hand Rabdon, that
is to say an officers warder, and gave too the victor a branch of Palm. And
therevppon the said word Brabion is thought too come by transposing of letters.

They do it to obteyn a corruptible crown, namely in the gamings at Olympus, of
wyld Olif: at Isthmo, of Pynetree: at Nemea, of Apium, in the Pythians, of
Appletree, etc.

And the victors were wont too take the garlonds foort with from their heads,
and set them upon the Altars of the Gods immortal, meening thereby that
victory is the gift of God, yt they acknowledge their receiving of victory at
gods hand.

Hontos pycteno, that is too say, So play I the champion Interpretation of the
Greek words.
or so contend I with many stroks, as did Entellus and Dares in the fifth book
of Virgils Aeneas.

Hupopyazo mou to soma. Suidas interprets these words thus: I look
diligently or narowly too my body, that is too say, I use a singular warenesse
and circu^spectnesse to rule all ye motions both of my body and my mind, in
such wise as I may obtain the wished reward that I contend for.

Also this word Hupopia signifies the blewnesse about ye eyes, and generally
the swellings that rise of labor, properly called knubbes, or y^ come of
strypes called wales, which rise up bluish or blackish where the body has
bin smitte^, by reason that the blud being forced out of his propre place and
gathering about the place that is stricken, does there fester, and cause the
skin too look black and blew. Paul therefore meant by this term a hard
chastisement of his body, and such a repressing of his lusts as was annexed with
great pain.

The second place.
A General exhortation too new obedience or too endeuer and diligence too do
goods deeds.

The arguments are three.
FIrst, of ye profit or rewards wherewith diligence in going Of the behoue
fullness of doing well.
through faithfully with the labors of a man's voratio^, and in framing y^
intents and doings of a man's life, according to ye rule of gods will, shall
without fail be reco^pe^sed in the everlasting life. For like as they y^ run
in a race, or they y^ overcome in Buffeting are crowned with a garlond: So in
the warfare of a Christen man's life (and specially in the ministry) they
that feight faithfully shall receive an vncorrupt crown of glory in the
everlasting life.j. Pet. v. ij. Tim. iiij.

Secondly, of the discommoditie or penalties. Least it Of the discom moditie of
doing ill.
may by any means come to pass, that when I have preached unto others, I my
self may become a castaway, that is too say, lose the heritage of eternal life.

Thirdly, by examples of the fathers or of the Israelites Examples.
in the wilderness, who falling away and defyling themselves with Idolatry,
whordome, and impaciencye, lost the grace of God, and were piteously
overthrown and destroyed in the desert.

The third place.
THe Church of the Fathers or Israelites and of the Christians One church of
God in all ages gathered by one mean and fed with one food.
is all one, which is gathered together by the word of the Gospel and by the
Sacraments, and is fed and preserved by all one spiritual meat and drink.
For there is but one selfsame Christ, for whose sake all the holy men of all
times have obtained remission of sins. And there is but one selfsame Gospel,
by which all Christ's benefits are offered and applied too men.

But the outward fashions of the Sacraments differ. Figures of Baptim.
And the clowd that covered the people, Exodus xiij. and the water of the red
sea, through which the Israelites passed, Exodus xiiij. were representations of
Baptim. For even as God covered and defended his people with the clowd, and led
them safe through the waves of the sea by the service of Moses, and by these
tokens showed that he had a favor to that people: Even so does God impart his
benefits too us by the water of Baptim, washing us from our sins, and hyding
and covering us as it were with the shadow thereof from the heat of his wrath.

Concerning the spiritual food (whereof the Manna given Figure of the Lords
supper.
from heaven in the wilderness (Exo. xvi.) was a figure) with which the
souls of the believers are fed, and everlasting life is begone in them, like
as this bodily life of men is sustained with wheaten bread: more plentiful
exposition may be taken out of the sixth Chapter of John.

Upon the Sunday called Sexagesima or Shrouesunday.
The Epistle.ij. Cor. xj. and. xij.
FOR ye suffer fools gladly, because that ye your selves are wise. For ye
suffer even if a man bring you intoo bondage: if a man devour: if a man take:
if a man exalt himself: if a man smite you on the face. I speak as concerning
rebuke, as though we had bin weak. Howbeit, wherein soever any man dare be
bold (I speak foolishly) I dare be bold also. They are Ebrewes, even so am
I. They are Israelites, even so am I. They are the seed of Abraham, even so am
I. They are the ministers of Christ (I speak as a fool) I am more: In
labors more aboundaunt: In strypes above measure: In prison more plenteously:
In death often. Of the Jews five times received I every time.xl. strypes save
one. Thryse was I beaten with rods I was once stoned. I suffered thryse
shipwreck. Night and day have I bin in the deep of the sea* In iorneying
often, in parelles of waters, in parels of robbers, in ieopardies of mine own
nation, in ieopardies among the Heathen, in parels in the city, in parels in
wilderness, in parels in the sea, in parels among false brethren, in labor
and travail, in watching often, in hunger and in thirst, in fastings often, in
cold and in nakedness. And beside the things, which outwardly happen unto
me, I am combred daily, and do care for all congregations. Who is weak, and
I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? If I must needs rejoice, I
will rejoice of mine infirmities.

The.xij. Chapter.
THE God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blissed for evermore,
knows that I lie not. In the City of Damascon, the governor of the people
under king Aretas, laid watch in the City of Damascens, and would have caught
me, and at a window was I let down in a basket through the wall, and so
escaped his hands. It is not expedient for me no doubt too rejoice:
Nevertheless, I will come too visions and revelations of the Lord. I know a
man in Christ above.xiiij. years agone, whither he were in the body, I can not
tell, or whither he were out of the body I can not tell (God knows) which was
taken up into the third heaven. And I know the same man (whither in the body
or out of the body, I can not tell, God knows) how that he was taken up
intoo Paradise, and herd words not too be spoken, which no man can utter. Of
this man will I rejoice, of my self will I not rejoice, except it be of mine
infirmities. And yet though I would rejoice, I should not be a fool: for I
would say the truth. Nevertheless, I spare, least any man should think of
me above that he sees me too be, or hears of me. And least I should be
exalted out of measure, through the abundance of revelations, there was given
unto me unquietness of the flesh, the messanger of Satan, too buffet me:
because I should not be exalted out of measure. For this thing besought I the
Lord thryce, that it might depart from me. And he said unto me: my grace is
sufficient for thee. For my strength is made perfect through weakness. Very
gladly therefore will I rejoice of my weakness, that the strength of Christ
may dwell in me.

WElneere all the whole latter Epistle to the Corinthians is an Apology of
Paul defe^ding himself against the y^ slau^dersof the false Apostles who
despised his doctrine, authority, and ministration, and preferred themselves
before him, and vpheld yt the Jewish ceremonies were to be laid upon ye
Ge^tyls, as of necessity too salvation. And truly they alleged the examples
of Peter and the other Apostles, who in Iewrye and the countries bordering
thereabouts hild still ye ceremonies of their own country. And this defense of
Paul's is necessary, too the intent the truth and certeintie of the doctrine
of the Gospel which Paul had taught, and the authority of Apostleship and
the faith might be preserved in the church. It perteyneth too the kind of
cases yt are Judicial: The ground of the Epistle before red, is: I Paul am a
far more excellent minister of Christ, than are the rest.

The cheef Arguments or reasons are two.
FIrst, he that with greater faythfulnesse and constancy spreddeth abroad the
gospel of Christ, and endures more travel, persecution, and trouble for
profession of the gospel and for the faith, is woorthely also too be deemed
greater and excellenter than the rest.

I Paul have endured greater peynes and mo in number, mo perils,
imprisonments, punishments and such other miseries in spredding of the gospel,
tha^ any of the false Apostles: Ergo, I am far too be preferred before them.

Secondly, too who^ more manifest visio^s of greatest things are showed from
heaven by god himself: he (as more familiar and deerer to God) ought of right
to be preferred before others.

Paul was caught up intoo the third heaven, and there had showed unto him a
notable revelation from God: Ergo, etc.

This is the effect of this days Epistle which our aunceters The causes of the
Lento^ fast.
have in this respect appointed too this time of the year, for that it makes
mention of fasting, labors, watching, and other exerc^ses that serve to keep
under and mortify y^ flesh: which things their meening was, that men should
take upon them specially these fortye days going before Easter, too the
intent that the body being chastized and brought in subjection, me^nes mynds
be more fit, more bent, and more desirous too consider the wonderful passion
and death of the son of god, and too repent themselves earnestly of their
misdeeds.

Out of this Epistle may be picked four places of doctrine.

First, of the duties or true ornaments of an Apostle or any minister of the
gospel, which are, faythfulnesse in spreading abroad the doctrine of the
Gospel, and steadfastness and patience in bearing out the labors, trubles and
torments, which accompany the profession and ministry of the Gospel.

Secondly, the doctrine of the cross: and of the twelve causes for which God
does chiefly lode his Church and the godly sort with so huge a heap of
adversities: which are too be fetched out of the place that concerns the
cross and adversities.

Thirdly, of the visions and revelation made unto Paul.

Fourthly, the most sweet comfort set forth in this saying: My grace
suffyseth thee, for my power is made perfect by infirmity.

Now forasmuch as ye text of ye Epistle is some what long, and in diverse
places somewhat dark: I will orderly and breefly expound the phrases and words
of the Epistle.

Because many boste according too the flesh, I will boste True glory or
boasting.
also: True glory is the allowable consent of God and of a man's own
conscience judging a right and of other men judging a right of virtue or
weldooings. Or it is a notable and renowned fame spread abroad every where, for
many and great deserts either toward ones countrymen, or his country, or
all mankind. The vices that encounter it, are bravery or vau^ting, wherthrough
we set out ourselves beyond measure even without cause: And blockishnesse or
lyghtnesse, caring no whit at al what other men deem or report of us. And
forasmuch as the groundworke of glory is excellent False Apostles.
virtue, and too deserve well at other men's hands: The directest pathway too
glory, is too haunt virtue, and not too covet too seem best, but too be best,
as Aeschylus says. Agein it is the greatest folly that can be, and a plain
token of dotage, too covet the bare gloryousnesse or opinion of excellency and
the brute of the people, without the foundation which is true virtue: Or too
boast according too the flesh: that is too say, of fleshly, outward, and vain
things, as of the nobility of a man's country or house, of a man's own
wisdom and virtue, or of ceremonies, and in especially too vaunt and prefer
him self before other like a Thraso. For so do fools in deed, whom
vayneglorie sets in a gog. And Plutarch says most fynely, it is a right
pleasant thing too us too here our own praises blazed by others: but too
here another man praising himself, it is the irkesomest thing that can be.
Paul minding too eschew that fault, tells the Corinthians before hand, that
forasmuch as he was compelled by the false Apostles, he would take upon him
too play the fool a while, to the intent they might understand the
doltishnesse and fond bragging of the false Apostles, against which (if it were
lawful too bost of himself) he was able too set true praises beseeming the
Apostle of Christ, which all godly men might acknowledge in him. And he adds
iestingly, ye willingly bear with fools, because your selves are wise. And he
ouerth wartly girdeth the false Apostles, which (under pretense Reprofe of
vaynglorie.
of the ministry) usurped Lordship and tyranny too themselves over the
church, and took meat and drink (which Paul earned with his own hands) and
wages, and rewards of the Corinthians: And vaunting themselves with Thrasolike
bragging, vexed the Corinthyans with Tyrannical reproaches.

I speak as concerning rebuke, as though we had been weak. That is to say, I
am compelled to object this tyranny and covetousness of the false Apostles to
you, to the intent ye may perceive how reprochefull and unbeseeming things ye
bear with, and that ye may be ashamed, that whereas we as weak and feeble
have usurped unto our selves no tyranny over you, (no nor so much as taken due
meat and drink of you) you notwithstanding have more willingly obeyed the
false Apostles than us.

Howbeit wherein soever any man dare be bold, that is too Example of christen
bosting.
say. Of what thing so ever any man dare boast, or where of soever the false
Apostles dare vau^t and brag themselves, I also dare brag as well as they.

I speak through foolishness, that is too say, through the fond bragging of
the false Apostles, I am also constreyned too play a fools part, and too set
out mine own commendation.

They are Hebrews, that is too say, the offspring of Heber the great
graundchilde of Sem the son of Noe. Genesis xj. the which Heber was borne the
year of the world. 1723. the year after the flud. 67. and he lived unto the
year of the world. 2187. which is the. 79. year of the age of Jacob or Israel
the father of the twelve Patriarchs, of whom all his posterity were called
Israelites, that is too say, vanquishers or Princes of God, or freemen, of
Shara and El, like as of Heber they were called Hebrews, that is too say
wayfarers, of the word Yauar has passed over, whereof comes Bethabara, that
is too say, the house of passage.

The seed of Abraham, that is too say the offspring of Abraham, Who are the
children of Abraham.
and heirs of the most ample promises which are delivered to Abraham in Genesis
xij. xv. xviij. xxij. That is to wit, not only the Jews, borne of the seed of
Abraham as touching the flesh, but also all nations, that with the faith of
Abraham, embrace the promise concerning Christ made unto Abraham, that is to
say, the father of a great multitude. Unto this place may be laid the Sermon
of Paul made at Jerusalem. Act. xxij. and the beginning of the third chapter
to the Philippians.

In labors more abundant, that is to say, I have endured Labors.
more pains in spreading abroad the Gospel, as he says.j. Cor. xv. I have
labored more than they all.

In stripes above measure, that is to say, I have oftentimes Strypes.
received stripes for profession of the gospel.

In death often. I have oftentimes bin in danger of death, Death.
I have oftentimes had Death before mine eyes, when all things manaced present
death.

Forty strypes save one have I received, under color of the Strypes.
law of Moses. Deuteronomy. xxv.

Thrice have I bin beaten with rods, that is to wit by the Whippings.
sergeants of the heathen. Act. xvj. and elsewhere.

Once I was stoned. Act. xiiij. Stoning.


Thrice have I suffered shipwrecke. And within two years Shipwrecke.
after, Paul suffered shipwrecke the fourth time at the I Will of Malta. Act.
xxvij. For he wrote this Epistle at Philippos, the year of Christ. 56. and
sailed to Rome in the Winter time, 57. or. 58.

In iournying often, that is too say, I have traueled much. Travel.
Let the windlasse of Paul's travels be seen in the Table gathered out of the
Acts of the Apostles, and out of his own Epistles.

In ieoperdie of mine own nation, that is too wit, for the Ieoperdy.
trains that were laid for me by mine own kinsmen the Jews. With singular
diligence and cunning was all this Look for these names in the table in thend
of this book.
sermon laid toogither by Paul, and distinguished with Comaze, Colons, and
Periods, and flourished with Antitheses, Iscolies, Homoioptots, and
Interrogations, that nothing could lightly have bin more trimly compacted.
Which thing also. S. Austin in his fourth Book of Christian Doctrine: Austin.
Chap. 7. marketh and unfolds at large the cunning handling of this present
place.

God knows. A warrantize assured by taking the true God too witness.

The Lieuetenaunt of Aretas king of Arabie, by the provocation Aretas.
of the Jews, laid wait for Paul. Act. ix. the third year after Paul's
conversion. Herodes Antipas had taken the sister of this Aretas too his wife,
and put her away upon his rauishment of Herodias: and for that cause there
arose war betwixt them.

Surely it is not expedient for me too boast, namely least I may seem too
feign these things of mine own brain for a certain desire of vainglory. Or
else, for that it avails nothing against the false Apostles, too glory of my
labors and infirmities. I will therefore come too the visions and revelations of
the Lord.

There are chiefly four sorts of visions or Revelations How many sorts of
visions of revelations there be.
from God. For either by his own son clad with image of man's nature: Or by
the Prophets and Apostles inspired with his spirit: or by notable dreams: or
else by visions or shows made too me^ awake, has he discovered too his church
what his will is.

Of visions also there be chiefly three kinds.
FOr either it is so, that Images and pictures of things too Visions of three
sorts.
come are showed too the eyes of me^ awake, as in the Apocalips of John: or
that Angels appeering in visible shape forshew things too come, as Daniel.vij.
viij. x. or that God offers himself too men too be seen, as it is written
of Moses that he saw God face too face. And in this place the whole Godhead
seems too have showed it self too Paul too be discerned in the open light.

I have known a man in Christ, that is too say, a Christen man, A fourtene
years ago. This Epistle was written too ye Corinthians the.xxij. year after
Paul's conversion, which was the.lxv. year after Christ's birth. Then was this
vision showed unto Paul, not in his way too Damasco, but about the.viij.
or.ix. year after his conversion.

That such a one was taken up into the third heaven. Some interpret this of
the heaven of heavens, in which God shows himself too be seen of the
blissed souls and Angels. For the Hebrews make a difference of three heavens.
The first Difference of heavens.
or lowest heaven is this compass or element of the air where in the clouds
glide, of which it is said: look upon the birds of the heaven: and also, the
way of an Egle in the heaven.

The second heaven is the sky, in which the Mathematicals recke^ up.ix.
several compasses, namely of the Moon, of Mercury, of Venus, of the Sun, of
Mars, of Jupiter, of Saturn, of the stedy stars, and of the first mouer.

The third or highest heaven is supposed too be the heaven Heaven or Paradyse.
of heavens, or the dwelling place of God and the blissed Angels which always
behold the face of the father: and of the blissed souls, which enjoy the sight
of God. Also they name ye same place Paradise, as Christ says too the thief.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, that is too say in heaven, which
is spoken by a Metaphor taken of the pleasantness and goodlinesse of the
gardine intoo which our first parents were put. For the Greek word Paradise
does signify properly a gardine or a field cunningly planted and well enclosed.

Least any man should esteem of me above that he sees me too be or hears
of me. As the me^ of Listra did. Act. 14 who took Paul too be a God,
clothed in the shape of man.

There was given unto me unquietness of the flesh, the messenger of Satan
to buffet me, least I should be exalted out of mesure. The Greek word Scolops
signifies a sharp stake: whereupon comes the verb Anascolopizein which
signifies to gore with a stake. And heerupo^ Lucian terms Christ in mockage,
the visard of Palestine yt was pricked on a post. But in this place of S. Paul,
it seems too signify Metaphorically al singular torments or sharp greefs
both of body and mind, or all kind of adversities, sla^ders, backbitings,
reproach, necessities, persecutions, and such wrestlings or encounters of faith
as are described in Psalm. 69. 38. and elsewhere, and such other like
torments, which among other things put us in mind of the humility and
obedience due unto God, and of Gods power woorking salvation too every one
that believes, by weak and miserable instruments, and accomplishing his
praise out of the mouths of babes and sucklings.

Upon the Sunday called Quinquagesima. Sometime called Esto mihi, and of us
commonly called Shroue sunday.
The Epistle.j. Cor. xiij.
Though I speak with tungs of men, and of Angels, and have no love, I am even
as a soundyng brass, or as a tinkling Cimball. And though I could prophecy,
and understand all secrets, and all knowledge: yea, if I have all faith, so
that I could move Mountains out of their places, and yet have no love, I am
nothing. And though I bestow all my goods too feed the poor, and though I
gave my body even that I burned, and yet have no love, it profits me
nothing. Love suffers long, and is courteous, love enuieth not, love does
not frowardly, swells not, deals not dishonestly, seeks not her own, is
not provoked too anger, thinks none evil, reioyseth not in iniquity. But
reioyseth in the truth, and suffers al things. Though that prophesying
fail, either tongues cease, or knowledge vanishe away, yet love falls
never away. For our knowledge is imperfect, and our prophesying is imperfect:
But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall
be done away. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a
child, I imagined as child. But as soon as I was a man, I put away
childishness. Now we see in a glass, even in a dark speaking: but then
shall we see face too face. Now I know imperfectly, but then shall I know even
as I am known. Nowabydeth faith, hope, and love, even these three: but the
chief of these is love.

The disposement.
THe Sunday of Esto mihi, took that name of the Introit which is taken out of
the.xxx. Psalm, which begins thus. Be thou too me my God of defense, and
my place of refuge, too save me. For thou art my strong hold and my refuge,
and thou for thy names sake shall guide me and norish me. In thee O Lord have
I trusted, and I shall not be confounded for ever. Deliver me in thy
righteousness.

So also the Sunday following is called Inuocauit, of the first word of the
Introit taken out of the xc. Psalm. He has called upon me and I will hear
him, I will deliver him, and I will glorify him.

And it is called the Sunday of Quinquagesima, (that is too say of fifty)
because it is the fiftith day before Easter, like as Pentecost or Whitsunday is
the fiftith day after Easter.

The parts of this days Epistle are three.
1 The love of God and a man's neibor, is too be preferred before all the
gifts of tungs, eloquence, miracles, lerning. etc. 2 A registre of the works
of love containing.xv. special virtues or duties of love. 3 The difference
between the knowledge of God in this life and in the life too come.
PRincipally in all devises and doings, those things only are too be looked
too and sought for, which God most straightly enioyneth too al men. But God
enioyneth too all godly me^ the duties of charity toward their neybor.
Deuteronomy. vj. Mat. xxij. The cheifest commandment is, love God above all things,
and thy neibor as thy self.j. Tim. j. The sum of the commandment is love
from a pure heart.j. Ioh. iij. He that loves not abides in death. Heeruppon
Paul reasons, that the love of a man's neybor is too be preferred beforethe
gifts of tungs, eloquence, miracles, learning, etc, which are not needful for
all Christians.

Strange and unknown languages are no more too the Languages.
profit of the heerers, than sounding brass or a tingling cimball, that
lulleth the ears with a vain sound. Ageine, the gifts of Tungs without
charity, is not true godliness, ne Prophesying and faith.
makes a man a right Christian nor acceptable to God. So like wise Prophesying
which is able too open even the darkest places of al ye scripture, and faith or
y^ gift of working miracles, and al understanding or the knowledge of all Arts,
without louingnesse, is not the cheef and most excellent service of God.

Much wrangling is there in ye disputations of these days Mark well this
discourse and bear it away.
about this saying: If I have all faith, and yet have not love, I am nothing:
and it seems that there is not any more notable saying y^ can be set against
this proposition, Only faith iustifyeth. But I answer, First by the rule of
Logic, The trueness of propositions Hypothetical (that is to say of
sentences grounded upon if) is not too be measured by the vntwyning of the
proposition intoo his parts, but by the knitting together of his members
matching rightly or otherwise among themselves. As for examples sake: If an
Ass fly, he has feathers. This proposition or ground is true, but the members
of it being unknit, are most false, An Ass flies, An Ass has feathers.
Also.j. Cor. xv. If Christ be not risen, in vain is our preaching and vain
is your faith. This proposition in the parts knit together is true, but the
parts being unknit are most untrue. So also this proposition, I^ I have faith
and yet have no love, I am nothing, is very true. But if ye take asunder the
proposition intoo his parts, and say y^ faith is nothing, or he y^ is endued
we true faith is nothing, or is not a godly man in deed, and that love may be
pulled away from faith: all men perceive that this dissolution or dismembering
is false and too be found fault with.

Other some answer that Paul in this place speaks not of the justifying
Faith, but of the gift of woorking miracles, which may be even in the ungodly.
Matthew. vij. But were it so that Paul spoke of the justifying Faith: yet can
it not be concluded thereby, that we are not justified by faith only, or for
Christ's sake only. For certain it is that the love True faith and true love
are inseperable.
of God and a man's neybor do of necessity go jointly toogither with faith.
Like as with the rising of the sun, there goes jointly of necessity the
spreading forth of his beams or light: Even so of necessity love follows
Faith in those that are justified, in so much as he that loves not, abides in
death. Like as that body wherein there remains no feeling or moving, lives
not: and yet it follows not thereupon that feeling and moving are the cause of
life, but life is the cause of moving: Even so the efficient cause of our
justification is God for the obedience, passion and death of Christ only. And
faith is the instrument whereby we take hold of Christ our ryghtuousnesse. Now
must the love of God and a man's neybor of necessity follow Faith in him that
is justified, like as moving and feeling do of necessity follow life. But love
can not proceed, but of faith, like as there can grow no good fruits, but of a
good tree.

Of the second. A register of the works of charity, or of the virtues that
flow out of the true love of God and a man's neybor, as out of a fountain.
LEt them be conveyed intoo precepts agreeing too the ten commandments, and
let them be set out by adding their definitions, and laying the vices too them.

Love is long suffering.
j Long sufferance or patience, is a virtue that represseth Patience.
wrathfulnesse and desire of revenge: And though it have cause too hurt others,
yet for Gods sake and the common peace, it remitteth offenses and bears with
him that did the displeasure, as Aristides bare with Themistocles, Scipio with
the Tribunes, and David with Saul. It perteyneth too the fifth of the ten
commandments. The vices that encounter it are desire of revenge, as in Marius
and Sylla: also cruelty, as in Tyberius and Nero: And overmuch forbearing or
silinesse.

Courteous, or Gentle.
ij Courteousnesse or Gentleness, not only lets offenses Gentleness.
slip and forgiueth them, but also (by all means it ca^ devise, as by
counsel, travel, and aid) does good to others as well friends as foes. For
the Greek word Chrestos (which comes of Chraomai, to use) does properly
signify such a one as easly and willingly yields him self to other folk too
use, as Aristides by his counsel and travel benefiteth the common weal of
Athens, which had bannished him. It perteyneth to the fifth and seventh
commandments. The vices that encounter it are discourtesie or ungentleness,
frowardness or chorlishnesse, also fond lavishness or wastfulnesse, and
counterfeit courtesy or feyned gentleness.

Love enuieth not.
iij Freendlynesse, modesty, or myldnesse, which acknowledges Freendlynesse,
Modesty or myldnesse.
and loves Gods gifts in other men, willing good too the good, and rejoicing
in their prosperity. Against this virtue fyghteth Enuyousnesse, which is
grieved that an other man should excel us or be preferred before us, and
longs too remove him or take him away, to the intent we lose no part of our
estimation: as Saul enuyed the glory of David. Pompey enuyed the power of
Caesar. Marius repyneth for spyght against Sylla.

Love deals not frowardly, or is not given to lewdness or is not malapert
and ungracious.
iiij Good meening, modesty or myldnesse which lies not Good meening
in wait for other folks, like the brothers called Perperanes, who of a
singular ungraciousness and lewdness laying wayt for other men's lives, were
at length taken by Hercules: and he hung them up at his back upon his club.
It perteyneth to the fifth commandment Thou shall not kill.

Love swells not.
v Lowlynesse, repressing pride, acknowledging a man's Lowlynesse.
infirmity, submitting himself unto others, and employing his gifts to the
behoof of others without disdeyne. It perteyneth to the first and.iiij.
commandments. The vices yt beset it are pride puffed up with over weening of
itself, trusting in his own virtue, wisdom, wealth, and other gifts, and
despysing othermen. Every man may behold an example of pride in his own heart.

Love is not disdeynfull, neither is she uncomely.
vj Gravity, which is too do rightful and necessary things Gravity.
constantly, and so to rule all the outward gestures and doings, yt they may
agree with the order of nature, of persons, and of places. The vices that
encounter it, are lyghtnesse: and skornfulnesse, which proudly disdeyning
others, does with vncomlygestures express the pride or the hatred, or the
comtempt, or the ribaudrie of them.

Seeks not her own.
vij Just dealing and Equality, which esche weth greedy encroching,
Iustdealing, and Equity.
has not an eye too ones own commodity, but prefers the common profit and
welfare of other men before his own auayles, like as Paul seeks not his own
ease or advantage, but the soulehealth of his heerers.

Love is not provoked too anger.
viij Meekness or Softness, repressing wrathfulnesse and Meekness.
desire of revenge, and not suffering itself to be put out of patience with
reprocheful or reuyling words. It perteyneth too the fifth co^mmaundeme^t. The
vices that encounter it are wrathfulnesse and simpleness.

Thinks none evil.
ix Freendlynesse, not nourishing mistrustfulnesse and malice, Freendlynesse.
nor misdeeming otherme^ without a reasonable proof. As for example, Alexander
thought none evil of his Phisicio^ Philip, who was reported to have gone about
too poison him.

It perteyneth to the fifth and eight commandments.

Rejoices not in iniquity.
x Ryghtfulnesse and mercyfulnesse, not ioying in the Ryghtfulnesse and mercy.
misfortunes of good men, not delyghtning in dishonestie and wickedness, as
the Devil rejoices at vnryghtuousnesse, and is glad of otherfolks harms. It
perteyneth to the fifth commandment.

But rejoices in the truth.
xj Ryghtuousnesse and truth, allowing the things that Righteousness and
truth.
are ryghtfull and true, and disaslowing the things that are wrongful and
false. It perteyneth too the fifth and eight commandments.

Bears with all things.
xij Patience, bearing with other men's infirmities and Patience.
blemishes: as with their waywardness, much meddling, ouerearnestnesse in
matters, yrefulnesse, etc, for Gods sake and common quietness. It perteyneth
to the.v. commandment.

Believes all things, that is to wit, which are too be believed.
xiij Freendlynesse, which is not suspicious, ne conceiueth Freendlynesse.
any evil opinion without a weighty cause, nor believes y^ another man lies
in wayt for him: before he have assured proof of it. It perteyneth too the
fifth and eight commanndements. The vices that encounter it are suspiciousnesse
or mistrustfulnesse, and light belief.

It hops all things, that is too wit, which are too be hoped.
xiiij Hope, of deliverance or assuagement of miseries according Hope.
too the promises of God: or softness, which bears with certain escapes of
other me^, in hope of ame^dment, for like as God bears with our sins,
grau^ting us a space of repentance: so must Princes or private men hope well of
the amendment of other men, till assured tokens of obstinate malice appear.

It endures all things. This is the property of patience.
Patience.
xv Love never fails, it will endure for ever, it will continue in the saints
for evermore, it will never cease, as will the gifts of healing, of lerning of
tungs, the office of interpreting Scriptures, and of ministering the Sacraments.

Whither prophesying fail, the outward ministry of Prophesy.
interpreting Scriptures and the foretellings concerning the falling out of
things too come, shall be abolished.

Tungs shall cease, there shall be no sundry and unknown Tungs.
languages.

Or knowledge vanish away. Faith is in this life a Knowledge.
knowledge or a serching of things that are not too be seen* but in the
eternal life, we shall presently behold the being of God and his will, and
the natures of Angels, and our own souls, etc, of which we have had an
imperfect knowledge in this life.

The third.
FOr we know after a sort. He showed three differences Differences of
knowing God
between our present knowledge of God, and our knowledge that is to come.

First, our knowledge of God in this life is mayned or imperfect, dark, mixed
with dimnesse and douting But in the eternal life it shall be perfect,
lyghtsome, clear, void of al mistynesse and imperfection.

Secondly, Of Lykelynesse. In this life we are like children that begin to
prattle and learn the Abcee of the heavenly wisdom. But in the life to come
we shall be mengrowen, we shall speak perfectly, and shall commence Masters and
Doctors of Divinity, in the heavenly university.

Thirdly, In this life we see Gods being and will in a riddle, that is to say,
wrapped in his word: through a glass, that is too say, by the light kyndled
in us by the holy Ghost.

But then we shall see him face to face. That is too say, we shall presently
behold God without anymist.

Then I shall know even as I am known. That is too say, There shall be then in
me a clear and bryghtsome knowledge of God, even such as is in God knowing
me.

Upon the Sunday called Inuocauit, or the first Sunday in Lent.
The Epistle.ij. Cor. vj.
We as helpers exhort you, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain. For
he says: I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation
have I succored thee. Behold, now is that accepted time: behold, now is that
day of salvation. Let us give none occasion of evil, that in our office be
found no fault: but in all things let us behave our selves as the Ministers of
GOD: In much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in anguishes, in
strypes, in prisonments, in strifes, in labors, in watchings, in fastings, in
pureness, in knowledge, in long suffering, in kindness, in the holy Ghost, in
love unfeigned, in the word of truth, in the power of God: by the armor of
righteousness of the right hand and of the left: by honor and dishonor: by
evil report and good report: as deceyuers, and yet true: as unknown, and yet
known: as dying, and behold we live: as chastened, and not killed: as
sorowyng, and yet always merry: as poor, and yet make many rich: as having
nothing, and yet possessing all things.

THis Epistle perteyneth too the kind of cases that persuade. The state or
sum of the Epistle is this: I exhort you that you here not in vain, the
Gospel wherein Gods free favor and ever lasting salvation are offered unto
you: but that you embrace it and keep it with true faith, and that ye garnish
it with godliness and innocence, and with examples of all virtues, but
specially of patience and constancy, all your life long.

The parts of this Epistle or the cheef places are four.
FIrst, a general exhortation too us too embrace with earnest faith the glad
tidings of gods grace (the su^me whereof Paul has set forth in clear and
lyghtsome words in the end of the foresaid first chapter. This exhortation
he amplifyeth by the circumstance of the time, and by the testimony of Esaias.
xlix. because now is the time of well lyking, and the day of salvation,
namely when the Gospel of Christ, or word of reconcilement is openly
preached by the Apostles.

The second concerns the duties of the Ministers of Duties or points of a
true preacher.
the Gospel, out of which Paul in this place reckeneth up four things.
First, they are Gods fellow woorkmen, by whose preaching and ministry God
offers and imparteth his grace and al his benefits unto us, as he said in
the end of the last Chapter before: we come of Ambassade for Christ, as
though God exhorted you by us. We beseech ye therefore on Christ's behalf,
that you be reconcyled to God, Secondly, they must exhort by sound doctrine,
and allure and incense their heerers to the earnest embracing and practizing
the righteousness of faith and of a good conscience, according as Paul
exhorfeth and beseeches the Corynthians in this place. Thirdly, they must
beware that they estraunge not men's minds from the Gospel of grace and from
the ministry, by giving them cause of offense in their doctrine or
conversation, as is said here, Gyuing no cause of offense in any thing, least
the ministry be misreported. And fourthly, that they beautify the doctrine
and ministry of the gospel, with examples of al virtues, and specially of
patience under the cross, and of stedynesse in their profession: According as
Paul says in this place: setting forth your selves in all things as Gods
ministers by patience. And it is a most weighty saying of Nazianzene: They
that teach well and live amiss, snatch away that thing with the one hand,
which they reach forth with the other. It is better not too teach at all,
than too teach for a fashion. Thou must not pull too thee with the one hand,
and thrust away from thee with the other hand. Thou shall need too talk the
less, if thou do as thou ought too do.

The third part of the Epistle, is.
ABundell or beadroll of the virtues, with which the ministers Virtues that
ought too be in ministers.
of the Gospel and all the godly, must serve God, and beautify the Gospel,
and mortify and hold in the flesh, not only these forty days, but also all
the whole time of their life. Paul reckeneth up in order.x. virtues: the which
(too the intent they may the easlier be discerned and applied to the precepts
of the ten commandments agreeable too them,) I will set them down by tale.

i Patience, that is too say, steadfastness in dangers and Patience.
adversities that accompany the ministry of the Gospel. Of this virtue
there be six obiectes or six kinds of miseries, in which patience is too be
performed, which Paul gathers toogither so as they may be discerned. ij
Labor or peynfulnesse, performing continual diligence Painfulnesse.
and earnestness in executing faithfully the duties of ones vocation. For
honest labors are brydles of lusts. But idleness breeds vices: and men by
doing nothing, do learn too do evil. iij Watchfulness. iiij Fasting or
soberness, and measure or abstinence from meat and drink. v Chastity. vj
Skilfulnesse or true knowledge of Gods being and will, disclosed in the Law
and the Gospel, and wisdom able too judge what is too be earnestly followed,
in what place, and before whom. vij Long sufferance. viij Gentleness and
Courtesy. ix Zeal of the spirit. x Love vncounterfetted.
Unto these virtues he adds in the end the touchestone The touchstone of
Religion.
and rule of religion and christen conversation The word of truth, which we
must embrace, hold fast, and spread abroad by firm faith. And all these things
may be brought to pass and performed of us, not by our own power, but by the
might of God, who helps those that seek aid at his hand.

The fourth place.
Paul entreats in this Epistle chiefly of Patience, which What patience is
is too obey God in suffering miseries, plages, strypes, imprisonment,
poverty, reuylings, slander, punishments of body, death and other dangers,
which accompany the godly profession of the Gospel: and not too be so
discouraged for these evils, that a man should cast away the Gospel, but too
bridle sorrow, and too abide steadfastly in the acknowledged truth, and (by
grounded faith and hope) too wayt for deliverance and everlasting life. And
this latter part of the Epistle is pullished and garnished by Paul with
shyning lyghts of figures, that is to wit, with ten Antithesies, and Look for
these in the table at the end of this Book.
as many Iscolies, and moreover with Homoeoptots, and Homaeoteleuts, and
Anaphoraze. Also a little before, with a long heaping up, or gathering toogither
and a repetition, whereby one selfsame word is repeted in the beginnings of
eyghteen Co^maze. This is the breef disposeme^t of this Epistle, which being
well weyed there may be set forth too the here recerteyne notable places, as
some Exhortation too faith, embracing the free favor of God offered in his
gospel, or some Doctrine of patience and constancy in tribulation and
adversity, which accompany faith, or some other of the virtues out of the
register which we have reckened up.

I at this time will say some what of Fasting.
FOr too this intent have our aunceters appointed this Epistle Why lent was
ordained.
in the beginning of Lent, because in it there is mention made of the fasting,
watching, painestaking and other afflictions in which the godly show forth the
true and earnest repentance of a sorrowful heart, and tame and subdue their
flesh. And although the old primitive Church prescribed no forms or laws of
meats and fastings: yet would it that during these.xl. days men should have
more stay of themselves too live soberly, and to forbear even their lawful
pleasures, that their minds might be more fit fit* and ardent in bending
themselves too the consideration of Gods wonderful purpose concerning the
passion and death of his son our Lord Jesus Christ, and also too true
repentance and earnest Prayer. Afterward also such as were defiled with
outward offenses and excommunicated, were wont this Lent time (before they
were assoyled) too be chastyzed and tried with certain ceremonies, whither
they repented in good earnest and amended from their heart or no. A description
of these Ceremonies of open penance worth the reading, taken out of the
ninetenth Chapter of the Agathine Counsel, is recited by Gracian in his
fiftith distinction, in the Chapter of Lent, and 33. q. 2. c. beginning with
these words. Laborem praesentium etc. admonere.

The Catechumeni also (whom it appears by the stories too have bin baptized,
only upon Easter day and Whitsunday, unto the time of Charles the great) were
wont after that they had given their names, too be tried all the Lent season,
and too be instructed and apposed in the true Doctrine of Christ, and too be
as it were purged with the Ceremonies of Fasting and other things, that they
might come the more woorthely and reverently too the Sacrament of Baptim at
Easter.

And they write that Telesphorus was he that first enjoined The first author of
the Lenton fast.
the forty days Fast before Easter: who was Bishop of the Roman Church about
the hundred and thirtith year after Christ. But it appears plainly by
Irenaeus, (who flourished about the two hundredth year after Christ's birth)
that as yet in those days men were utterly at their own choice for their
Fastings. This man's words, which are worthy too be marked, are recited by
Eusebius in the.xxiiij. chapter of his fifth book. Some are of opinion that
the Fast Diversity in keeping the Lent.
ought too be kept but only one day, some two days, some three, some mo,
and many also the whole forty days. And yet all these, notwithstanding that
they disagree among them selves in keeping the fast, have always bin and are
at peace with us, and the disagreeablenesse of the Fast has not broken the
agreement of the Church. A like place is too be found in the Tripartite
story, in the.xxxviij. chapter of the nynthe Book. But in process of time
custom took such strength, that this Fast was thought too be utterly of
necessity, and that it could not be broken without deadly sin. And there
Austin a mainteyner of the Lenton fast.
is mention made every where of it in Austin, who pleasantly plays the
Philosopher even about the number of the forty days employed unto Fasting by
Moses, Helias, and Christ, in his second book of the consent of the
Evangelists the fourth chapter, and in his hundred and nyneteenthe Epistle too
January, and in his Sermons of the time. In the Greek Church the Wedensdayes
and Frydayes were appointed too be Fasted as it appears by Epiphanius and
others.

Among the Romans, Bishop Innocent (who ruled about the year of Christ. 420)
is reported too be he y^ commanded first the Saturdayes fast, when as before
him, Calixtus (who Saturdays and Emberdayes.
was Bishop the. 220. year of Christ) had ordained the ember days in the four
seasons of the year.

But too the intent the sum of the true meening of Fastings Diversity of
allegorical fastes.
may be discussed, we will first distinguish the several kinds of it. For
our disputation is not concerning the fast that is of necessity as some term
it: nor of the Allegorical fast, which is too abstain from all offenses and
sins, (whereof mention is made in Esaias. lviij. and oftentimes is spoken among
the Fathers as Basil says: The true Fast is the shunning of wickedness, the
brydeling of the tung, the restreyning of anger, the banishing of
concupiscences, (as falls backbyting, lying, and swearing.) The clean ridda^ce
of which things is the true fast: nor of the continual fast or sobriety and
stayednesse in the measurable use of meat and drink too be performed all the
time of a man's life, (of which Hierom says: Let thy fastings be pure,
continual and moderate, and a repaste shunning fullness: For it avails thee
nothing too carry thy belly empty two or three days toogither, if afterward
thou stuff it as full as it can hold:) nor of all kind of abstinence from
the outward commodities of the body, and from all affliction and outward
gesture or countenance of mourning which proceeds from the sorrow of a broken
heart, and of one that in very deed and earnestly repents, Of which is spoken
in Joel. ij. Turn unto me with all your heart in fasting and weeping, and
wayling, and rend your hearts and not your garments: and which in diverse places
elsewhere of the Prophets, signifies true and earnest sorinesse of heart or
repentance showed by outward mourning. As in Dan. ix. x. Leu. xxiij. Ioh. iij.
With which signification agrees the original of the Hebrew word: for ye
word Ianah whereof they fetch their fasting, signifies too afflict or punish.

But properly in this disputacion we entreat and argue of the days fast (if
I may so term it) namely when as it falls out y^ men abstein from al meat
and drink sometimes one day or mo, or a whole day (that is too wit. 24. hours,)
or but till the euentide. This manner of Fasting was used even in the new
Testament, how be it in such wise, that neither the day nor any certain
meats from which a man should abstain, were appointed, but the whole thing
was left free too every good man's conscience, and the opportunity of the
time. But afterward came in superstitious and tyrannical laws concerning
certain meats and days, and ungodly opinions, which it behooves too be
reproved by the word of GOD. There are therefore two distinct questions
concerning fasting. One of the difference and choice of meats and days: and
the other of the abstinence of meats, or of other for bearing. For the
Papists do not only command men too use a Papisticall fast reproved.
more spare diet, or utterly too abstain all the whole Lent time, and every
week upon Fridayes and Saturdayes, too the intent the mind may be more meet
too think upon heavenly things: but also forbid the eating of certain meats,
as of flesh, butter, cheese, eggs. etc. And bear men in hand that it is deadly
sin if any man in the time of fasting do eat flesh, imagining this
forbearing of certain meats too be Gods service, and a work of necessity,
even though it tend too the offense of others. Also they taught in times past
that sins were purged by fasting, or at least wise that the merit of Christ's
Passion is applied too us for them. It was high time that these ungodly and
Idolatrous opinions woorking reproach too the merit of Christ, should be
found fault with. For all men do right well know the texts of the Gospel, The
judgment of gods word concerning fast.
which expressly forbid men too observe differences and choice of meats in
the Church, with opinion of Gods service or of necessity. Coloss. ij. Let no
man judge you in meat and drink. Also, if you be dead in Christ from the
elements of this world, that is too say, from the worldly ordinances, why (as
though ye lived too the world) are ye led with the traditions (of them that
say,) touch not, taste not, handle not. etc. Also.j. Timothy.iiij. Paul
terms it the Doctrine of Devils, which commands men too abstain from the
meats that God has created too be received with thanks giving. Matthew.xv.
Not that which enters in at the mouth defyleth a man, but that which
proceeds out of the mouth. Romans xiiij. The kingdom of god is not meat
and drink, but true godliness, ryghtuousnesse, peace, and joy.j.
Corinthians.viij. Meat commends us not unto God: For neither are we the
godlyer if we eat, nor the vngodlyer if we eat not. And it appears not by
the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, that either by Fasting our sins are
purged, or remission of sins obtained, or the merits of Christ applied too
us: but clean contrarywyse it teaches that the sacrifice and death of our
Lord Jesus Christ the son of God only purges and takes away sin: And that
this benefit is applied too us by faith alone without any woorks of the law,
and much less by works of men's setting up without Gods word and against
Gods word.

Concerning the other question, that is too wit, abstinence How too observe the
outward fast aryght.
from food, forpyning a man's self, and such like exercyses of disciplyne,
we also teach that it is free for every godly man too choose such exercyses
of temperance agreeable to his years and power, too this end, that his mind
being sober, may be more fit and bent too think upon God, too call daily
upon him, too study, and too go through with all the affairs of his vocation
more rightly. But a man must not surmyse these exercises too be of themselves
the service of God, neither are superstitious laws too be made too bind men
too certain days. The true and most weighty causes for which these exercyses
of soberness are too be taken in hand and practyzed, may be fetched out of
my exposition of the.vj. commandment in my Rules of life, and applied too
this place.

Upon the Sunday called Reminiscere, or the second Sunday in Lent.
The Epistle. ^. Thessalonians. iiij.
WE beeseeche you brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that ye
increase more and more, even as ye have received of us, how ye ought too
walk, and too please God. For ye know what commandments we gave you by our
Lord Jesus Christ. For this is the will of God, even your holiness: that ye
should abstain from fornication, and that every one of you should know how too
keep his vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lust of
concupiscence, as do the Heathen which know not God: that no man oppress and
defraud his brother in bargaining, because that the Lord is the auenger of all
such things, as we told you before, and testified. For God has not called
us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. He therefore that despises,
despises not man, but God which has sent his holy spirit among you.

The disposement.
IT pertayneth too that kind which is perswasiue. For it is an exhortation too
new obedience or too good works.

The chief places are three.
1 A general precept that we should direct our intents and doings according
too the rule of the doctrine received of the false Apostles, yea and too abound
(that is too say) too profit in true godliness, and too endeuer too surmount
ourselves, or too be every day better than other. 2 Of chastity. 3 Of upright
dealing which keeps an even hand in all bargains.
Of the first.
IExhort you by our Lord Jesus Christ, y^ ye increase more and more even as
ye have received of us, how ye ought too wakle and too please God.

The rule of faith and Christen life is the doctrine delivered Scripture the
rule of christianity.
by Christ and his Apostles, which only God will have us follow both in the
true knowledge of his being and will, and in the ordering of our behauyour and
life. He will not have us too wander and follow our own opinions, as the
Heathen men, which devised sundry Gods and sundry woorshippings: neither will
he have our deuyses and doings too be governed by our own policy, as the
Heathen men's were, who in whoredom and other lusts, in deceytfulnesse of
bargayning, in idleness, and in meddling with many matters, gave themselves
scope too run at randon without co^trolment.

Therefore Paul by express words in this place says: Christians must
proceed continually and not stay.
we exhort you that according as ye have received of us: so ye walk as ye
ought too walk, and encreace more and more: As if he should say, let the
Doctrine which ye have received of us Apostles, and not men's Traditions or
will woorshippings be the immovable rule and keeplyne of the true knowledge
and service of God: as is said in Ezechiel the.xx. Chapter. Walk not in the
commandments of your fathers. I am the Lord God. Walk in my commandments,
and keep my judgments and do them. Also, look what I command thee, that
only do thou unto the Lord. Neither ad nor diminish any thing.

And Paul commands us not only too walk, that is too say, too live or too
frame all the deuyses and doings of our life, according too the doctrine of
the Apostles: but also too profit more and more, and too surmount and overcome
our selves in true godliness, which is in deed a victory of all others most
goodly and most beseeming a man: according as is said. Too overcome a man's
self, is of al victories the chief and the best. For a christen man can never
long continue and abide in one self same state of godliness. But either
faith, invocation, hope and the rest of virtues increase and augment in him: or
else by slaking of their earnestness, they become more faint, and by little and
little wex cold: specially in prosperity when the heart is open and not for
closed with any sorrow, the^ ye devil creeps in and casts occasions of
falling from without, too the intent he may shake of faith, as he overthrew
David. Wherefore let every of us with singular care, earnestness, heed, and
diligence endeuer to profit: let us with hearty request pray daily unto God, to
rule us with his holy spirit: let us shun the dangers and occasions of back
slydings: let us flee lewd company: let us love stayednesse: let us take upon
us certain and profitable labors and exercises of godly discipline: and let us
bear in mind this saying: In the way of ye Lord, not too go foreward is too go
backward.

The second part.
THis is the will of God, even your holiness, that ye should absteyne from
fornication.

Among the testimonies that are the marks of the true Chastity a mark of Gods
church,
church of God, and that put a difference between it and Heathenish and
ungodly routes, a notable and manifest sign is the true doctrine concerning
chastity and the undefiled bond of wedlock, which is retained only in the
church of God. All nations else have openly set looce not only whoredom or
fornication, but all other more horrible and unspeakable lusts. In Asia and
Affrike even at this day the sect of Mahomet practyseth incestuous confusions
without punishment. In Europe the Popish faction under the false pretense of
Religion, has forbidden a great number of men too marrye, whereas Paul
notwithstanding has said before in express words, that it is the Doctrine
of Devils too forbid marriage.

Forasmuch then as in our Churches the laws of Chastity and wedlock are by
the benefit of God retained and maynteyned truly and soundly, we may assure
our selves even by this sign, that we may the more certainly warrant our
selves to be the Citizens of the true Church of God.

The cause also why Paul in this place urges so sore this commandment
concerning Chastity and eschewing the lusts and vices encountering it, is for
that at Thessalonica (like as at Ephesus and Corinth and other Heathen cities
and famous mart towns to which great multitudes of men were wont to flock
together from all Nations) there was chiefly great confusion of lusts, and
unbridled liberty of all vices which ryotousnesse and wealth breeds. Paul
therefore both in this place and.j. Cor. vj. and Ephesians. v. teaches, that
wandering lusts are not things indifferent, neither that there is any liberty
granted in the Gospel, either of lustful likings, or of craftynesse in
bargeyning: but that they are prohibited most straightly by the commandment
of God, and are most sharply punished by God the just judge and revenger. For
this is the everlasting and unchangeable will of God, says Paul: even your
holiness, which is in the true acknowledgeme^t of God, that ye should keep
your selves clean both in body and soul according to Gods will, and absteyne
from al fornication and all concupiscences forbidden by god: and whither it be
in single life or in the lawful bond of wedlock, every man to possess his
vessel (that is too say his body (which is the dwelling place of the chaste
and holy spirit of God,) in holiness and honor, that is, too maynteyne it
chaste and holy, and not to defyle it with lusts of concupiscence, as the
Heathen have given themselves leave without controllement. In this place is to
be repeted the whole doctrine concerning chastity and wedlock, and in
especially ye eight causes for which all the godly must with singular heed and
diligence defend the honor of chaste shamefastness. Which causes are recited
in the declaration of the virtues of the sixth commandment in my rules of
Tertullians saying
life. Now will I add but only one saying of Tertullia^ most woorthye to be
borne away. Inasmuch as we all are the temple of God, by putting into us the
holy Ghost, who haloweth us: the Churchwarden and cheef Chaplein of that
temple is chastity, which may suffer no unclean or unholy thing too be
brought in thither, least GOD who dwells there, taking displeasure too see
his abode defiled, should utterly forsake it.

The third part concerning interchaungeable ryghtfulnesse, which shunneth
deceyt in bargayning.
THis is the will of God, that no man deceive and beguyle Buying and selling.
his brother in chapmanship, because the Lord is the punisher of all such
things.

The proposition or ground is, Let no man deceive his brother in bargeyning, or
be ye just in your bargaynings.

The reasons are two.
THe first reason is for that it is honest. This is the will of Honest.


God, that no man misuse or deceive his brother.

The second is for that it is profitable. Because God is the Profitable.
punisher of all such things. Although the sent of lukre by any means, seem
sweet for a while, and that they think it high policy that their craftiness
is not espied: yet will god find out the offender: yet has God a revenging
eye: God the revenger sees all things. And experience proves the meening of
Hesiodus verse too be true: By evil means seek Good counsel.
not too gain, such gain as renders loss and pain. God has by wonderful
forecast ordained and established lawful bargayning among men: and he has so
diversely distributed among them the goods that perteyne too the mayntenance
Bargaining and merchandyse appointed by God for singular good purposes.
of this mortal life, that each has need of others help, too the intent,
that in exchaunging of things, and in bargeyning they should put in ure
ryghtfulnesse, love toward their neighbor, and other virtues: and that many
being knit and bound together with these bonds, should live in company and
conversation toogither, and show the doctrine concerning God one too another
and the examples of virtues one to another. Therefore God allows lawful
bargenings, and will have indifferency and vpryghtnesse kept and used in them.
And in this place by express words he forbids defrauding, which keeps
not equality in bargeynes, but catches too himself a greater part than he
ought of right too have. For the word that Paul uses, signifies the same
thing that it does in the fifth book of Aristotle's Ethics, that is too wit,
Pleonectein of pleon echein, which is as much too say, as too have more tha^
right, or too take of another man's goods without recompensing as much for it,
or too increase a man's own stock too another man's loss. The virtue that
encounters it is interchaungeable vpryghtnesse which in marchandyze or
bargening beguyleth not other men, but maynteyneth proportionable indifferency
according too the Laws of Nature. Thou shall not steal. Love thy neighbor as
thy self. Do not too another which thou would not have done too thyself.

Upon the Sunday called Oculi, or the third Sunday in Lent.
The Epistle. Ephesians. v.
Be you the followers of God as dear children, and walk in love even as
Christ loved us, and gave himself for us an offering and a sacrifice of a
sweet savor too GOD. As for fornication, and all uncleanness, or
covetousness, let it not be once mamed among you, as it becomes Saints:
or fylthynesse, or foolish talkyng, or jesting, which are not comely, but
rather giuyng of thanks. For this ye know, that no whoremonger, either
unclean person, or covetous person (which is a worshipper of images) has
any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. Let no man deceive you
with vain words: For because of such things, comes the wrath of God upon
the children of disobedience. Be not ye therefore companions of them. Ye were
sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of
light, for the fruit of the spirit consists in all goodness, and
ryghtuousnesse, and truth. Accept that which is pleasing unto the Lord, and
have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather rebuke
them. For it is a shame even too name those things, which are done of them in
secret: but all things when they are brought forth by the light, are
manifest* For whatsoever is manifest, the same is light, wherefore he says:
awake thou that sleep, and stand up from death, and Christ shall give thee
light.

The disposement.
THe state of this Epistle, is an Exhortation too new obedience or too good
works, and by name it gives precepts of these three virtues.

1 Of the love of God and a man's neighbor. 2 Of chastity which shunneth
whordome, filthynesse and all uncleanness. 3 Of frankhartednesse or liberality
esche wing covetousness which is the service of Idols.
And in this exhortation* Paul uses six Arguments of which the first is
gathered.

1 Of the example of God. 2 Of the duty of children. 3 Of the example of
Christ, who has loved us in such wise that he has given himself too be an
offering and sacrifice for us. 4 Of the comlynesse as it beseems the Saints. 5
Of ye punishements of wickedness. For these things comes the wrath of God
upon all that be disobedient. 6 Of the final cause. Therefore are ye
delivered out of the darkness of sin, and endued with a new light and with
the holy Ghost, that ye should exercise gentleness, vpryghtnesse, and truth.
This disposement of the principal members of this Epistle being considered,
there may a two or three of the notabler places be the easlyer picked out and
entreated of.

An exhortation too newness of life, or too good works in general.
MAny when they here that a man deserves not forgyuenesse of sins by his
good works, what need we Confutation of Meritmo^gers.
(say they) to employ any study or care to do well? Therefore let us give our
selves over to all entycements of pleasure and sin. The wicked and horrible
talk of these men is plainly confuted by Paul in this Epistle. We are not
able by our virtues to deserve forgiveness of sins and eternal life, but
the only son of God our Lord Jesus Christ has obtained these most high
benefits for us by his obedience and death. Nevertheless, there are other
four right weightye causes, for which we ought too strive against the
entycementes of sin, and to exercise ryghtuousnesse, truth, liberality,
chastity and other virtues.

First necessity of the commandment and the det. For this purpose were men
created by God, and afterward redeemed Necessity of commandment.
by the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, that they should obey God and set
forth his glory by living virtuously. Ephe. ij. We are his work, created
to do good works. And an eyghtdayes ago, we have herd: this is y^ will of
God, even that you should be holy. John.v. This is my commandment that you
love one another. And in this Epistle: Be ye the folowers of God, walk in
louingnesse, as the sons of light walk ye. Therefore are ye delivered from
the darkness of not knowing God, and from the darkness of sin, and by the
Gospel lyghtened with the light of knowing God aryght, and endued with the
holy Ghost, that ye should live in new knowledge of God, in righteousness,
in pureness, in doing of good turns, in truth, and in all other virtues
agreeing with the will of God. Nither may al precepts concerning good woorks be
referred.

Secondly, necessity of eschewing peynes present and eternal, Necessity of
eschewing pains.
which vnchaungeably accompanye such as are defiled with sins against
conscience: as in this Epistle there be most grievous threats: Know ye
this, that no whoremonger and unclean person, or covetous person which is
an Idolater, have inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. Let no man
deceive ye with vain talk (that is too wit, that simple fornication,
covetousness, and usury are no sins) for these things comes Gods wrath
(that is too say, horrible plages) upon the disobedient. The horriblenesse of
this threatening may be amplified by expounding the weightynesse of the words,
and putting too of like sayings and examples gathered out of the History of
the whole world.

Thirdly, the necessity of holding fast faith, Gods grace, Necessity of Gods
graces and gifts.
the holy Ghost, and everlasting life. For all these good things are shaken of
by evil works or simes against conscience.

Fourthly, the rewards of good works promised by Rewards:
God.j. Tim. iiij. Godliness has promises of the present life and of the life
too come. For although remission of sins and eternal life be given freely
for Chrysts sake only: yet are good works recompensed with other most
bountefull rewards as well ghostly as bodyly, both in this life and in the
everlasting life.

And Paul gives commandment by name concerning love of our neighbor,
which repressing bitterness, yrefulnesse, backbyting, and all malice, honoreth
well doing, mercy, and frankhartednesse toward others. For the beginning of
the fifth Chapter too the Ephesians hangs too this part of the fourth
chapter. Therefore all the whole sum of the doctrine concerning the love
toward a man's neighbor, etc, may be conveyed hither out of the exposition
of the first, fifth and seventh commandments.

Concerning Chastity which escheweth whordome, uncleanness, Chastity.
and filthynesse, matter too entreat off may be taken out of the methodicall
exposition of Chastity which I have registered in the sixth commandment.

Concerning Covetousness which fyghteth with the first Covetousness.
and.vij. commandments, let doctrine be sought out of the declaration of the
virtues of the.vij. commandment.

Concerning the sacrifice of Christ who offered him self for us too the father
an oblation and sacrifyce of sweet sent, we will speak about a fortnight
hence, upon the Sunday called Iudica. Now will I breefly expound the text.

Be ye folowers of God therefore, that is too say, in love and Followers of
God.
benefiting.j. John. iiij. Heerin is Love, not that we have loved God, but
that he has loved us, and has sent his son, too be a reconcylement for our
sins. Deerbeloued, if God have loved us so, we also must love one another.
GOD is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.

Walk in love, toward God and your neighbor. Too Too walk.
walk is too live, or to rule the will and outward doings in such wise, that
we may love our neybor and do him good.

And gave himself for us. That is also a witness of Christ's fervent love
toward us, which is set out. Romans v.

An offering and sacrifyce. The sacrifyse intoo which was Sacrifyse.
conveyed Gods wrath against our sins, whom it beehoued too be slain and
put too death, too the intent we might be spared.

For a sent of sweet smell. For a sweet savor and acceptable. Sweet smell.
It is a phrase taken out of Moses. Leuit. j. The Priest shall burn it upon
the Altar for a burnt Offering and a sweet smell unto the Lord. Genes. viij.
The Lord smelled a sweet smell. God is woonderfully delyghted in the obedyence
of his son the sacrifyse. And he shows that for his sake our prayers also
and our thanks giving and our almefdeedes are acceptable and sweet unto him,
in like wise as we are delyghted with the fresh sent of a Vyolet or a Rose.
And all the sacrifyses and good works of the godly must be smelles, that is
too say a far spread and well sented fame concerning God.

As it becomes Saints. The saints are clean. Whorehunting, Saints.
filthynesse, ribaudry. etc. are unclean, Ergo they become not Saints.

A covetous man whoo is an Idolater. He is an Idolater Whoo is an Idolater.
either which surmyseth that too be a GOD, which is not God: or which yields
to some other thing that is not God, the honor peculyarly due unto God, as
faith, fear, and love above all things. So is a covetous person an Idolater,
because he bestows his love above all things, and his trust (which are due
only too God) upon his money, and sets more by it than by God.

Ye were sometime darkness, that is too say, without knowledge Darkness.
of God, and nouzeling your selves in all sins: ye were without true
acknowledgement of God, without true ryghtuousnesse, and without life.

But now you are light in the Lord. Now ye are lightened with true knowledge
of God: ye know what woorks please God, and what works displease him: ye
are borne ageine by the holy Ghost.

Upon the Sunday called Laetare, or the fourth Sunday in Lent.
The Epistle. Galath. iiij.
FOr it is written that Abraham had two sons: the one by a bondmaide, the
other by a freewoman. Yea, and he which was borne of the bondwoman, was borne
after the flesh: but he which was borne of the freewoman, was borne by promys:
which things are spoken by an allegory: For these are two Testamentes, the
one from the mount Sinai which gendreth unto bondage, which is Agar: For
mount Sinai is Agar in Arabia, and bordreth upon the City which is now
called Jerusalem, and is in bondage with her children. But Jerusalem which is
above, is free, which is the moother of us all. For it is vvrytten: Rejoice
thou barren that bear no children: break forth and cry, thou that
traueylest not: For the desolate has many mo children than she which has an
husband. Brethren, we are after Isaac the children of promys. But as then he
that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
spirit: Even so is it now. Neue^thelesse, what says the scripture? put
away the bondvvoman and her son. For the son of the bondvvoman shall not
be heir with the son of the freewoman: So then brethren, we are not
children of the bond woman, but of the free woman.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is of that kind that instructs. For it is a Doctrine concerning
the difference of the old Testament and the new, set forth with a similitnde
of Abraham's two wives and their children, taken out of the.xvj. and.xxj. of
Genesis. And therewithal are mingled places concerning the church, or the
difference between the true church and the hipocritall church, and concerning
christen liberty.

The first place concerning the difference of the old Testament and the new.
A Testament in general is a promis whereby one that is A Testament or last
will.
toward death leaves his will unto others under witness, and bequetheth
his goods too his heirs, and declares what he will have performed on the
behalf of the heirs.

Paul in the nynth too the Hebrews says: Christ is the mediator of the new
Testament, that through his death which befell for the redemption of those
transgressions that were under the first Testament, they which were called
might receive the promis of everlasting life. For wheresoever is a Testament,
there also must needs be the death of him that makes the Testament: for the
Testament is not of authority and force till the Testator be dead.

Christ therefore when he was ready too die for us, made his Testament, in which
he witnesses this too be the will of him and of his eternal father: that all
which repent and flee too him by Faith, should obtain forgiveness of sins
and endless salvation, for his bodies sake which was delivered for us, and for
his bluds sake which was shed for us: and these his goods does he distribute
too us by his word and Sacraments.

The new Testament, Then (too define it most proprely) is nothing else but the
gospel, y^ is too say, A promis of remission of sins, of the holy ghost, and
of life and soulehealth everlasting, A definition of the new Testament.
too be given freely too those that believe, for Christ's sake who dyed and
rose agein for us. This definition is builded upon the words of our Lords
supper, and upon the.viij. and.ix. chapters too the Hebrews, and upon the.iij.
and.iiij. chapters too the Galathia^s. The mediator of this new testament is
Christ, because he has uttered too men the promis of forgiveness of sins,
and by his own bludshed and death, fully discharged the ransom or price
sufficient for ye sins of men, which could not be purged by our own woorks
and sacrifises, and has performed such an obedience as is the very desert for
which remission of sins, the holy Ghost, new ryghtuousnesse, and eternal
life are bestowed upon us. These benefits applies he unto us by his
intercession, and the outward means of his word and sacraments.

The old Testament is properly a publishing of the law, A definition of the
old Testament.
or a covenant whereby God bound the people of Israel too keep the law
delivered by Moses, and on the otherside promised them the la^d of Canaan, and
a certain common weal and defense, and all good things, and added ceremonies
and sacrifyses, too be figures of the person and benefits of Christ, for
whose sake only, the believers are at all times received into the leage of
eternal salvation. For there is but one selfsame principal and everlasting
Testament or covenant of God, by which all the Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles,
and the rest of the chosen at all times are received, that is too wit, The
promis of Gods favor or of forgiveness of sins too be given freely for
Christ's sake. Act. xv. Romans iiij. By these definitions it appears The
difference between the old* Testament and the new.
that the difference between the old Testament and the new is in manner the
same that is between the law and the gospel. In another place we have
recited.vj. differences of the law and the gospel, among which the cheef are
these two. The first is in the manner of the promises.

The law or the old Testament promises good things, but unto such only as
keep the law incorruptly.

But the Gospel or the new Testament promises remission of sins and
everlasting life freely for Christ.

The second is of the effects. The law or old Testament delivers no man from
sin and death, ne gives inheritance of eternal life, but denounces us the
bondslaues of sin and death, accusing and increasing our sin, and casting
us intoo endless damnation.

But the Gospel or promise of the new Testament, delivers the children of
the promise from sin and death, and makes them heirs of everlasting life
and of all heavenly good things. This difference of the old Testament and the
new, or of the law and the Gospel, or of the people of the law and the
people of grace, is chiefly set out by Paul in this Epistle and garnished with
the Allegory of Abraham's two wives and their children, which Allegory is
brought in this place not too confirm, but too beautify and garnish the
matter: For like as Abraham had two wives, Agar a bondwoman, Agar, Sara,
Ismael, and Isaa^
and Sara a freewoman, by whom he had two sons, Ismael bond, and Isaac his
heir: Even so God delivering too men two kinds of doctrine the law and the
gospel, or the old and the new Testament, has two peoples among mankind, of
which the one embracing only the law seeks ryghtuousnesse and eternal
salvation by observing the law delivered by God in mount Sinai, and proudly
despises the glad tidings of Gods free fau^r and of faith, like as the most
part of mankind, and specially the ^ewes and other hipocrites which know none
other ryghtuousnesse than the ryghtuousnesse of the law, ye image of which
people is Ismael born as touching ye flesh without Gods promis, of ye handmaid
Agar (by which name the Arabians are wont too call mount Sinai) Genesis xvj. who
imagines that the true children of Abraham or heirs of God, are made or
begotten, by the fleshly regeneration and by the law, or by deserts and
works of men.

This people being begotten too bondage upon Agar, or by Gods law published
upon Mount Sinai, extends even too the same City which is now called
Jerusalem, or too the sinagog of the Jewish people, which although it vaunt it
self stoutly too be the true Church and people of God, descended from
Abraham, having the law and Ceremonies delivered them by God: yet is it in
bondage with the children thereof: that is too say, is not by the law delivered
from sin and death, nor made heir of ryghtuousnesse and eternal salvation,
but continues oppressed with the thraldom of sin and death, and is cast out
of the heavenly house or Church intoo endless damnation.

Now if the very law of God delivered by God himself A very good argument.
upon mount Sinai, begets none but bondmen, ne delivers any man from
death and sin: much less can the works of men's traditions procure
ryghtuousnesse and inheritance of eternal life.

The other people or son of God by Sara the free woman borne ageine of the
free promis of the gospel, trusts too no woorks or merits of his own, nor
too any prerogative of the flesh: But rests by faith upon the only and free
mercy of God promised for Christ's sake, accounting his own ryghtuousnesse
which is of the law, too be but dung, so he may win Christ, and obtain Gods
ryghtuousnesse by Faith.

This Church embracing the free promis of the Gospel by The heavenly Jerusalem.
Faith, is that heavenly or spiritual Jerusalem dispersed through the whole
world, and the moother of us all, bearing new children and new heirs too God,
from time too time, by ye ministry of ye gospel without the law and without
woorks. Now albeit y^ this true church which without ye law and without woorks is
made heir of ryghtuousnesse and everlasting life, be despised before the
world, and oppressed with persecution, and has not the law too her husband,
and therefore seems utterly barrein, and has not so many disciples nor so
many sons as Agar has or as the law has that was made upon mount Sinai: yet
is she before God most glorious and most fruteful, and daily (not by her
husband the law but by the gospel and spirit of Christ,) conceueth, bears,
and brings up children without number, exempted from the bondage of sin and
death, and set free from the tyranny of the law, and made heirs of all Gods
benefits.

Of this free woman Sara and this heavenly Jerusalem, we know our selves too
be Citizens and the heirs of God, when we embrace the promis of the Gospel
by true and effectual faith. By this applying of the figures too the
difference of the old Testament and the new, and of the people of grace, or of
the true Church and the counterfeit Church, it is no hard matter too espy after
what fort each member in the text agrees too this Doctrine, and how the
phrases are too be understood.

Upon the Sunday called Iudica, or the fifth Sunday in Lent.
The Epistle. Heb. ix.
CHrist being an hye priest of good things too come, came by a greater and a
more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is too say, not of this
building, neither by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood he
entered once intoo the holy place, and found eternal redemption. For if the
blood of Oxen and of Goats, and the ashes of a young Cow when it was
sprinkled, purified the unclean as touching the purifying of the flesh: how
much more shall the blood of Christ (which through the eternal spirit, offered
him self without spot too God) purge your conscience from dead works, too
serve the living God? And for this cause he is the mediator of the new
Testament, that through death, which chanced for the redemption of those
transgressions that were under the first Testament, they which are called,
might receive the promis of eternal inheritance.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is of that kind that instructs. And the state of it or the
matter whereof it entreats, is a doctrine concerning the preesthod and
sacrifise of Christ.

The chief places are three.
1 Of Christ's preesthood, and of the benefits of his preesthode. 2 The four
differences between Christ's sacrifice and the sacrifyse of the Levites. 3 Of
the difference between the old Testament and the new.
The first place concerning Christ's preesthod.
FIrst and formest let us consider the definition. A priest in What preesthod
is in general.
general is a person ordained of God too teach the gospel, and too offer
Sacrifyses and too pray too God both for himself and for others, having Gods
promis whereby he may warrant himself that he is herd. By this description there
appear too be three chief duties of a priest. First too teach, not only the
law, but also the Gospel concerning Christ. Secondly too offer Sacrifyses
commanded by God. For a Sacrifyse is a ceremony or work commanded of God,
which we yield unto God too honor him withal, that is too say, too witness
that he is the true God whom we woorship after that sort.

That priest does offer God a sacrifyse,
That shows the Gospel forth in ryghtfull wise.
These offices are common too all priests. But in this Epistle A definition of
the highest priest or of Christ.
is entreated of the highest priest, of whom let this definition be fastened in
mind. The high priest Christ is a person immediately ordained by the eternal
father, and anointed with ye fullness of the holy Ghost, too the intent he
should bring forth the Gospel out of the secret bosom of the everlasting
father, and make intercession for the whole Church, having promise that he
shall assuredly be herd, and too offer sacrifice, (that is too wit himself)
once for all: By which sacrifice he deserves remission of sins,
righteousness, and everlasting salvation too the whole Church. This whole
definition may be builded and warranted out of the textes of the Epistle to ye
Hebrews. But this days lesson of the ninth chapter, entreats chiefly of the
third part of Christ's preesthod, that is too wit, of his Sacrifice.

And too the intent this doctrine concerning the sacrifyce Gods justice meddled
with mercy, was the cause of christ's sacrifyce.
of our high priest Christ may be drayned from the very springs: first let us
consider that God is verily and vnchau^geably just, and that it is an
everlasting and unchangeable rule of Gods justice, that the reasonable
creatures should either perfectly and thoroughly agree with Gods wisdom and
righteousness, or (if they agreed not,) that they should suffer punishment
accordingly, and be horribly destroyed. Therefore in as much as the first man
and woman had offended and forgone the ryghtuousnesse and soundness that was
given them in their creation: they were too be cast away intoo eternal
damnation. But of his unmeasurable mercy, the son of GOD made intreatance
for mankind, and too the intent Gods Justice might be satisfied, he offered
himself too punishment and too make amends too Gods most rightful wrath.
And so upon the wonderful tempering of Gods Justice and his mercy toogither,
there was a decree enacted of receiving men intoo favor for the sacrifyce of
the son of God, whereby Gods wrath was too be pacifyed, and righteousness
and everlasting salvation too be recovered too mankind.

For this sacrifyce of the son of God, all the elect have at all times
obtained remission of sins and inheritance of eternal life, as is said.
Acts. iiij. There is none other name under heaven, in which we must be
saved, than the name of Jesus Christ.

And too the intent men should be put in remembrance, and Why the sacrifysing
of beasts was ordained.
taught of this sacrifyce of Christ's, God ordained the sacrifysing of beasts
even from the beginning of the world, which in no wise purchased remission of
sins, (as is said in this Epistle, It is impossible for sins too be taken
away by the blud of Bulls and Gotes:) But were figures or images of Christ's
true sacrifice, by which is obtained continual and everlasting redemption from
sin, and the heritage of eternal life. This doctrine concerning Chrysts
sacrifyce, which is the foundation of righteousness, salvation, faith, and
christen Invocation, let us myndfully think upon: not only these few days,
but in all our whole life, and in our daily prayers.

Yea and at all times there has bin sacrifysing in the The sacrifises of the
He^athe^.
world, even among the Heathen, not only of beasts but also of men: as,
Calchas, Alexander, lulian, the Frenchemen at their passing over Po, and others
slew men and offered them in sacrifise. These customs were borrowed out of the
church of the Fathers, (which had spread abroad the doctrine concerning the
sacrifysing of the man Christ that was too come,) and of evil zeal in
cou^terfetting the example of Abraham. And here unto were added superstitious
opinions, that God was pacifyed and made at tone with us for the preciousnesse
and woorthynesse of the sacrifyses. But in deed there is but one only sacrifyse
of Christ that reconcyleth too God, the merit and recompense whereof pacifyeth
Gods displeasure, of which the other sacrifyses of the Fathers and of the
Leuits were but shadows.

The second place.
Paul therefore in this Epistle compares the figurative Differences of
Christ's sacrifise and the Leuiticall sacrifises.
preesthod of the Leuits with the preesthod of Christ. And before in the vij.
chapter he rehearsed eight differences which I have expounded in another place.
In this days lesson are reckened up four differences between the sacrifyse
of Christ and the Leuiticall sacrifyses: of which the cheifest is.

First, Christ being a high priest of good things too come, Eternal salvation.
(or of eternal good things,) that is too wit, of blissing, and deliverance
from sin, which the Fathers by their sacrifyses witnessed themselves too
look for:) found everlasting redemption (that is too say, deliverance from
sin, from gods wrath, and from everlasting death) and atonement with God,
and clenzing of the conscience from dead works (that is to say from sins,
for which we are subject too death) and also the free giving of the heritage
that was promised.

But the Leuiticall preests by their sacrifysing of Cattle, Leuitical
sacrifises are figures.
of Calves, and of Gotes, deserve not eternal redemption, but only are figures
of the true priest Christ, and make men holy only concerning the outward
clennesse of the flesh.

Secondly, Christ offered but once only, and but one sacrifyse, Christ's
sacrifice once for all
by which he purged all sins of the whole world. But the Leuiticall preests
offer sacrifyses daily, and enter intoo the holy of holyes every year, and can
not deliver those from sin for whom they offer, as is said more at large in
the beginning of the.x. chapter.

Thirdly, Christ is entered in by his own bludshed, or Christ purges by his
own blud.
has purged the sins of all men by his own bludshed, as is said.j. John.j.
The blud of Christ clenzeth us quite from all sinfulness. But the Leuitical
priests sprinkle the altar with the blood of Calves and Gotes, which purges
not sins: but all the bludsheds of beasts in the Leuiticall sacrifises were
only figures of Christ's bludshed, by which only the church is redeemed: as in
Act. xx. Ephe. j. Col. j. j. John. j. Romans v. and elsewhere is written.

Fourthly, the Leuiticall preests when they should make Christ is entered into
heaven.
sacrifise, entered yearly intoo the holy place or temple made with man's
hand. But Christ is entered even intoo heaven, that is too say, intoo the
sight of GOD, and is privy too Gods secret purpose concerning man's
redemption.

Upon Palms Sunday.
The Epistle. Philip. ij.
LET the same mind be in you, that was also in Christ Jesus: which when he
was in the shape of God, thought it no robbery too be equal with God:
nevertheless, he made him self of no reputation, taking on him the shape of a
servant, and became like unto man, and was found in his apparel, as a man.
He humbled himself, and became obedient too the death, even the death of the
cross. Wherefore God has also exalted him on high, and given him a name
which is above all names: that in the name of JESUS, every knee should bow,
both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth: and
that all tongues should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the
praise of God the Father.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is of that kind that is persuasiue. For it is an Exhortation too
lowlynesse or humility, taken of the examples and rewards of Christ's
humility.

The places of doctrine are these:
1 A notable witness of the two natures in Christ, very God and very man, to
be joined too the rest which are gathered toogither in the place concerning
the son of God. 2 Of Chrysts passion and death. 3 Of the advancement or
glory of Christ reigning. 4 Of humility or lowlynesse.
The text of the Epistle.
THe ground of the exhortation which Paul purposes, is set down next before
the words of this days Epistle. Let every one of you through lowlynesse
think another man better than himself. Be lowly.

Too this proposition he adds a reason grounded upon the example of Christ.
Let the same mind be in you, that was in Jesus Christ: that is too say, Let
there be true lowlynesse of mind in you as was in Christ, who being in the
shape of God, (that is too say being God in very deed and by nature) did
notwithstanding abace himself before the eternal Father, beneath all Angels
and men.

Who being in the shape of God, that is too say, in the nature and substance of
God. For the Greek word Morphe signifies a substa^tiall shape or express
and personal image, and not a proportion, figure, or counterfeit wauing before
ones eyes. This therefore is the meening: Christ when as he was in the shape of
God, that is, when as he was in deed and by nature God: or, whereas he was the
shape and lively image of God the father, begotten of the substance of the
father, and equal too God the father in power, majesty, and glory:

Thought it no robbery too be equal with God. The Greek phrase is (...)
which is, too commit robbery. Like as (...) too make a passage, or too pass.
So like wise (...) too count it robbery, that is too say, too rob. So is
there a very like phrase, Heb. x. Treading the son of God under foot, and
accounting the blud of his Testament unholy, that is too say, dishonouring it.
The meening therefore is: He thought it no robbery too be equal with God,
that is too say, He usurped not equality with God. In this his calling when it
was decreed that the son should beeco^me a sacrifyse and obey God in
suffering death, he used not his power against his calling, nor was proud or
haultye for this his equality of the Godhead, which he usurped not, ne
possessed too the wrong and dishonor of ye other, but obtained it by birth as
a good thing of nature.

But humbled him self, that is too say, he exercysed not his godly power, but
humbled and abased himself in such wise as he took upon him* the shape of a
servant, that is too say, the substantial shape of man, or the very nature
of man body and soul. He is termed a servant, both for taking upon him
man's nature, subject to death and other miseries: and also for his
seruisablenesse in teaching and suffering, as he himself says Math. xx. The
son of man is not come too have service done unto him, but too do service
himself, and too give his life as a ransom for the whole multitude of
mankind. Also let the younger sort bear in mind that this most common and
ordinary manner of speech of the Church, whereby we say that the son took
upon him the nature of man, is taken out of this place of Paul, and out of
the second too the Hebrews: for he took not upon him the Angels, but the
seed of Abraham, that is too say, he cuppled not too himself the nature of
Angels, but the nature of man, of the posterity of Abraham.

Framed after the likeness of men, that is too say, he became Marcion and the
Manichees.
altogether like other men. He was no Ghost or counterfeit of a man as Marcion
and the Manichees surmysed: but a very man and in all things like his brethren,
yea and mortal also, sin only excepted. Heb. ij. iiij.

And in fashion he was found as a man, that is too say, not only in proportion
and gesture of body, but also in inclinations and motions of mind, in
fearfulness, sorowfulnesse, ioyfulnesse, and other affections, which
notwithstanding were well ordered in Christ, and conformable too his heavenly
mind.

He humbled or cast himself down, becoo^ming obedient Christ's humility.
too death, even too the death of the cross. This notable sentence has
Ciprian expressed with great lyghtsomnesse of words, in his sermon of
Almesdeeds: Christ the son of God would become the son of man, that he
might make us the sons of God. He brought himself low, y^ he might lift us
up which lay under foot, he took upon him the shape of a servant, that he
might make us free. He was wounded, that he might heal our wounds. He was
contented too dye, that he might give us mortal wyghtes immortality.

Wherefore God has also exalted him on high. God has exalted Christ the man,
and servant that was crucified and dead for us as in respect of his manhod.

He has given him a name which is above all names, that is too wit, Iehoua, or
the Lord, which is the peculiar name of the only true and most high God the
maker of heaven and earth: as is said in Esai. xlij. I am the Lord, this is my
name, and I will not give my glory too another. This name Iehoua or Lord, is
not only attributed too his Godhead, which had it from everlasting, but also
too his manhod, the which is jointly woorshipped and served in one selfsame
woorship and service, toogither with the son of God, the word to which it is
united.

That in the name of Jesus every knee should bow. Some IESV.
deryue the name Jesus of the Hebrewe word Jehovah which being unutterable of
it self, is (as they wryght) made vtterable by putting in the letler Ieschua,
and so by contraction Jesus, that is too say, the Lord incarnate or God become
man. Paul takes these words out of Esaias. xlv. Turn unto me and ye shall
be saved all the ends of the earth: for I am the Lord, and there is none
other, unto me shall every knee bow, and unto me shall every tung swear.

That JESUS Christ is the Lord, that is too say, that he is the Lord, or in
very deed and nature GOD. By this Grammatical declaration of the words, the
ruder sort may the ryghtlyer understand the Text of the Epistle. Which, in as
much as it is red upon this day, chiefly in this respect, because it makes
mention of the wonderful abacement and death of the son of GOD, the
memorial whereof is celebrated by all the Christen Churches of the whole world
as the next week. Let a sum of the doctrine concerning the passion and death
of our Lord Jesus Christ included in the usual questions of Methodicall order
be repeted in this place. The consideration of the wonderful purpose of GOD
concerning the redemption of mankind wrought by the son of God our Lord Jesus
Christ, who suffered and was crucified for us, far surmounteth the wisdom
of all Angels and men.

Too this end has God by the wonderful temperature Why Christ was made a
sacrifyce.
of his Justice and mercy stablished this secret decree, and made his son
(who is the Mediator) a sin offering and sacrifyse: too the intent that we
men being set free from Gods wrath, from sin, and death, might be made the
righteousness of God, as is said.ij. Cor. v. And in consideration of this
marvelous benefit, let us acknowledge the horrible wrath of God against our
sins, and the unmeasurable largeness of Gods mercy toward us, and also
let us stir up the fear of God, faith, and thanksgiving in our hearts.

It is an eternal and unchangeable Maxim of Gods justice, that the
reasonable creatures, should either thoroughly agree with the wisdom and
righteousness of god, or else suffer due punishment and be horribly
destroyed for not obeying. Forasmuch therefore as the first man and woman had of
their own frank and freewill cast from them the righteousness and pureness
which God had given them in their creation: they ageine on the other side were
too be cast intoo eternal peynes. But the son of God of his unmeasurable
goodness pitying mankind, made intreatance for us, and too the intent Gods
wrath might be satisfied, he offered himself too punishment and too make
amends unto Gods most just displeasure: and so in that secret counsel of the
Godhead, this decree was made, that the son of GOD taking man's nature upon
him, should beco^me a sacrifise, and by his passion and death pacifye Gods
dreadful wrath, and satisfye his justice, and restore forgiveness of sins,
ryghtuousnesse, and everlasting life too all those that flee unto him by faith.

Now, the passion of Christ, is first a feeling of Gods dreadful The first part
of Christ's Passion.
wrath against all the sins of mankind, which were poured out upon Christ as
upon a sacrifyse, which great burden of Gods wrath enforces Christ too say
thus: My soul is heavy even unto death. And agein: my God my God why haste
thou forsaken me.

Men's minds are not able* too see thoroughly the greatness of this extreme and
unutterable sorrow of Christ's, because they understand not she greatness of
sin and of Gods wrath which is a consuming fire. Notwithstanding, men's
minds are too be stirred up too consider truly and earnestly the horrible
wrath of God against sin, both by the miseries of all mankind, and the
examples of the consciences of wicked men, and also by the testimonies of Gods
word: too the intent that they on their behalf may the cleerlyer perceive
the greatness of the mercy and benefits of Christ, who has undertaken that
dreadefull burden of Gods wrath for us.

Notable testimonies of the true and horrible wrath of God, Testimonies of gods
wrath against sin.
are first the innumerable calamities of all mankind, as the death of all men,
swarms of diseases, fluds, burnings, wars, destructions of Cities, and other
innumerable miseries of all men, and the slaughters of all the Saints, (as of
Abel, and John Baptist,) by which notwithstanding, Gods wrath could not be
pacifyed, but that the son of God must be made a sacrifyse.

Ageine the greatness of Gods wrath is after some manner showed by the
examples of many men, who for the conscience of one wickedness, have bin
stricken with most heavy fearfulness which has driven them too fordoo
themselves: As the examples of Orestes, of Aristobulus king of the Jews, of
Judas the traitor, of Theodorich of Verona and of diverse others.

Now if the feeling of Gods wrath against one sin alone, do breed so bitter
sorrow in the heart, that it dispatcheth a man of his life: What an unmeasurable
huge heap of Gods wrath and of horrible sorrows (think you) were thronged upon
Christ, who sustained, not one sin alone, or the sins of some only one man,
but mine and thine, yea and al men's offenses, Idol gaddings and murders: all
their sinful inclinations, affections, and outward faults: toogither with the
fire of Gods wrath against these sins?

Being overwhelmed with this houge burden of Gods wrath, he cries out. Psalm.
xxij. O God my God, why haste thou forsaken me? My heart is become like melting
wax, my strength is withered like a potsherd, and thou have brought me down
too the dust of death.

This feeling of the houge and horrible wrath of God against all the sins of
all men, was the first and cheifest part of Christ's passion.

The second part was the heaviness and exceeding great The second part of
Christ's passion.
torment rising in his heart for the feeling of Gods wrath against sins and
for the fear of death and tearing of his body, which so appalled all the
parts of his body, that he swet drops of blud.

The third and lyghtest part of all, was the tearing of his The third part of
his passion.
body and streyning of his sinews, when he was whipped* and buffeted and
fastened too the cross with nails.

The causes of Christ's passion.
IT is not the wisdom of any creature, that can search out the causes of Gods
wonderful purpose concerning the redemption of mankind, too be brought too
pass in this wise, that the son of God should make intreatance for us, and
take our nature upon him, and be sacrifysed for us: nevertheless, God will
have the consideration of this wonderful Decree begone in this life.

The principal efficient cause is the will of Gods son The love of Gods
son.
making intercession of his own mere motion, for mankind fallen intoo sin and
death, and offering himself too this obedience and punnishment, whereby he might
make satisfaction for mankind. John.x. I am the good shepeherd, and I give my
life for my sheep.

The inward cause that moved or enforced him too do so, Gods mercy tempered
with justice.
is the unmeasurable mercy of God te^pered with his justice. For since that God
is vnchaungeably just, he is in deed and horribly angry with sin, and
destroys sinners like a consuming fire. Neither relenteth he his anger
against sin, of a fondness and lyghtnesse: but vnchaungeably and most
straightly keeps this rule of justice, that men shall either perform due
obedience, or else abide the fire of Gods wrath. Therefore God receives not
men that are fallen without equal and sufficient amends: which forbicause mankind
was not able to yield, and therefore was too be cast intoo endless torments:
the son of God being inflamed with unmeasurable love and mercy toward
mankind, makes intretance for us, and too ye intent Gods justice should be
satisfied, he undertakes him self the punishment and amends making for our
sins, and taking our nature upon him, becomes a sacrifise susteining Gods
dreadful wrath against sin, and pays too Gods majesty a ra^some too the full
value of our sin, vanquishing sin and death, and restoring men too
ryghtuousnesse and eternal life.

The outward cause that moved or enforced him so too do, The fall of Adam.
was ye fall of our first parents, and the sin that from thens did shed it self
intoo all us, who for the same must have perished in everlasting pains, had
not the son of God bin sacrifysed.

The isntrumental and outward woorking cause, are the The feendes and the
Jews.
Devils and their instruments the Jews, who burning in hatred against Christ,
for finding fault with their wickedness and false opinions, coueted too rid
him away and too destroy him, too the intent they might without check
maynteine their hypocrisy and wicked lusts.

These enforcing and final causes make an infinite difference between the
will of the Jews crucifying Christ, and the will of God: Who being moved by
his own exceeding mercy toward mankind, and through the entreatance of his
son, would have Christ too suffer, too dye, and too rise alive agein, too the
intent he might restore men too life and everlasting salvation.

The matter wherein as in moulds Christ's Passion was The matter of Christ's
Passion. The form or manner.
wrought, are the mind, will, heart and body of Christ.

The form or manner, is the very feeling of Gods horrible wrath, and the
anguishe as well of Christ's mind as of his body, and his chyldly obedience,
through which he willingly submitted himself with true reverence and
wonderful lowlynesse too the eternal father, and without grudging or repyning
endured Gods wrath poured out upon him, and most bitter formentes, for the
love of Gods justice and man's salvation.

The end of his Passion is, first, that mankind being redeemed The ends too
which Christ* suffered.
with sufficient ransom from Gods wrath and everlasting damnacion, might be
rewarded with ryghtuousnesse and everlasting life. John.iij. Like as Moses
lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness: so must the son of man be lifted
up, too the intent that all that believe in him should not perish but have
life everlasting. Secondly that we might become conformable too the image of
Gods son, (that is too say that we might be like the son of God our
pattern) in bearing the Cross. Romans.viij. Thirdly that we should follow
the example of Christ's patience and meekness.j. Peter. ij. Fourthly, that we
in all our life should express the humility that Christ performed in his
passion. Philip. ij. Through lowlynesse of mind, let every man esteem others
better than himself. And let the same mind be in you, that was in Jesus
Christ. Fifthly that being dead to sin, we might live uprightly and
blameless. For like as Christ carried down our sins intoo his grave, and
abolished them by his death: even so we mortifying the dregs of sin as yet
sticking in our flesh, must perform new obedience and ryghtuousnesse agreeing
with the will of God. j. Peter. ij. Christ bare our sins in his body upon
the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live too ryghtuousnesse.

The effects of Christ's passion, are all his benefits, which for instruction
sake we will distribute intoo eight forms.
FIrst the redemption of mankind from Gods wrath, sin, Redemption.
death and the devils tyranny. j. Tim. ij. There is but one mediator between
God and man, the man Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us too redeem us.
The second benefit Remission of sins.
is remission of sins. Ephesians. 1. and Col. 1. In whom we have redemption and
remission of sins by his blud. The third is reconciliation or atonement with
God. Romans viij. When Reconciliatio^.
as we were enemies too God, we were reconcyled too him by the death of his
son. Ephesians. v. Making peace, that he might reconcyle the Jews and Gentyles in
one body unto God* by his cross. The fourth is Justification. Romans iij. We
are justified Justification.
freely, by his grace, through the redemption made by Jesus Christ, whom GOD
has appointed a seat of mercy through faith in his blud, too declare his
ryghtuousnesse in y^ he forgiueth y^ sins which are past. The fifth is the
giving of the holy ghost and of holiness. Gal. iij. Christ has redeemed The
holy Ghost.
us, and is become accursed for us, that we might receive his spirit by faith.
John. vj. If I go not away, the comforter shall not come too you. The sixth is
the destruction of the Devils The destruction of the Devils kingdom.
kingdom. Hebr. ij. By death he has abolished him that had the power of
death, (that is too wit the Devil) and reconciled those that for fear of
death were in bondage all their life long. The seventh is the abolishing of
sin and death. j. Cor. xv. Abolishment of sin and death.
Death is swalowed up intoo victory. O death, where is thy sting? O Hell,
where is thy victory? For the sting of death is sin, and the power of sin
is the law. But thanks be unto God, who has given us victory by our Lord
Jesus Christ. The eight is everlasting life and salvation. Everlasting life
and salvation.
John. iij. The son of man must be lifted upon the Cross, too the intent
that every one which believes in him should not perish, but have life
everlasting.

The application of these benefits is made by true repentance How Christ's
benefits may be applied too us.
and faith. That is too wit, when acknowledging gods wrath, and the
horiblenesse of our sins, we are earnestly afraid and heartily sorry that we
have offended God: and by faith acknowledge that Christ the son of God
suffered and was crucified and made a sacrifise for us, and persuade our selves
assuredly, that for this sacrifyse of Christ's, our sins are forgiven us, and
ryghtuousnesse and everlasting life given us.

Of this Application there are testimonies too be seen every where. And
notable is this saying of Christ. John. xvij. I sacrifyse my self for them,
that is too say, I offer my self for them, that they also may be holy in
deed. And I pray, not for them only, but for all that shall believe in me
through their prayer. In this prayer Christ our bishop or priest executes the
cheifest duty or office of a high priest, and applies his sacrifyse too the
whole Church. Therefore in this place the whole Doctrine concerning the
preesthoode and sacrifyse of Christ, is too be thought upon and repeated.

Upon Easter day.
The Epistle. j. Cor. xv.
PVrge therefore the old leven, that ye may be new dowe as ye are sweet
bread. For Christ our Easter Lamb is offered up for us. Therefore let us
keep holyday, not with old leven, neither with the leven of maliciousness
and wickedness, but with the sweet bread of pureness and truth.

The disposement.
THe fou^dacion of our faith and salvation, and the end and Our haven and
comfort*
mark of the whole story of the gospel, and the chief haven of comfort in
which only our hearts may rest in all troubles and in death, is the most joyful
resurrection of the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, where through he being
conqueror of sin, death, hell, and the feends hy him vanquished, leads a
glorious triumph, and imparteth unto us that flee unto him, ryghtuousnesse
and eternal salvation, calling agein even our bodies from death unto life.
This exceeding great and wonderful woork of God, and benefit toward us worthy
too be had always in memory, let us embrace and set out continually with
thankful heart and voice.

This Epistle is of that kind that is perswasiue. For it is an exhortacion too
the true celebration of the feast of Easter, that is too say, too the true
acknowledgement of the person and benefits of the sacrifyse or Lamb Chtyst,
slain and offered up for us upon the Altar of the Cross: and too true
repentance, or acknowledgement of our own sin and of Gods wrath conveyed
intoo this Lamb: too true faith (in the greefes which rise upon the feeling of
Gods wrath, and the beholding of our own sin, death and other calamities)
assuredly believing that our passover is slain and offered up already for us,
and that our sins are taken quite away by this Lamb of God, and that even
when we be dead, life and joy everlasting shall doutlesse be restored too us
with Christ who is risen agein. Upon which Faith there must ensew new
obedience, or clensing from the sin that yet remains in our nature, and a
beginning of new light, ryghtuousnesse, and conversation wholly agreeing with
the will and word of God, and continewally setting forth these incomparable
benefits of Christ with godly mind and voice.

This is the true Celebration of the Passover in this life, yea and for
evermore: Untoo which Paul exhorts us by a representacion of leuened bread,
taken of the custom of the Jewish Passover. Now too the intent the sum of
the most large Doctrine set forth in this Epistle may the easlyer be
comprehended in mind. Let us distribute it intoo three places.

1 Of the word Pascha or Passover. 2 A conferring of our Passover with the
Passover of the old Testament, which caryeth with it the doctrine of the
benefits of Christ the Lamb that suffered for us, and rose agein for us. 3
How we may celebrate this feast of Passover aryght in this life.
The first place.
THe word Pascha which is an Hebrew word, derived of Pascha or Passover.
the verb Pasah, signifies in English a Passingby or a Passingouer, namely
in that the Lord passing through Egypt, slew the firstborne of the Egiptians,
and spared the Israelites whose door poostes were sprinkled with the blud of a
Lamb. Exodus xij. Secondly it signifies the holyday wherein the rememberance of
that Passover is continued by killing of a Lamb. Luke. xxij. The feast of
sweet bread drew nigh, which is called Easter. Thirdly in this Epistle it
signifies the Paschall Lamb which was a sign or rememberance of the Lords
passing through Egypt, and of the passing of the Israelites through the red
Sea: And it was a figure of Christ the true Lamb that was offered up for us,
and passed by death too the eternal Father, that by his passage he might
obtain us deliverance out of the bondage of Egypt, that is too say of the
Devil, sin, and death, and restore us ryghtuousnesse and everlasting life.

Now as soon as Christ the true Passover was once offered, the figuring
passover ceased, and there was instituted The true passover.
a new Passover, the name where of does properly agree too that day in which
the son of God our Lord Jesus was offered up for our sins upon the Altar
of the cross. But the Christians (to the intent they would dissent from ye
Jews, who kept their Passover the.xiiij. day of the moon of the March^.
first mooneth) did (after the time of the Apostles) remove the feast of Easter
unto the Sunday that followed next after the said foorteenth day of the moon,
or the full moon of the first mooneth, upon which day Christ rose agein from
death. Therefore in this saying (Our Pesseouer for us) the word Passover is in
the Predicament of Relation: the foundation whereof the person of Christ, and
the bound is that Christ is appointed too be slain and too pacifye Gods wrath
against our sins, which are conveyed intoo this Lamb, or laid upon this
Lamb too bear. Let the yoonger sort at the beginning consider this
signification of the word Passover, and therewith all let them also mark the
times. The first passover was instituted at the passing of the Israelites out
of Egypt, the year of the world. 2453. From the first passover or from the
departure of Israel out of Egypt unto this Easter of the year after Chrysts
birth. 1570. are passed. 3079. years. From the first passover unto the
passion of Christ the Pascall Lamb that was offered for us, are, 1542. years.
From the last Jewish passover which Christ hild with his Disciples before his
passion, are passed. 1537. years. And from the beginning of the world unto
this present year. 1570. are accounted. 5532. years.

The second place. A comparing of the Jewish Passover with passover of the
Christians.
THe Story of the institution of the Jewish passover and the ceremonies* of
the same are described in Exodus xij. which in very goodly portrayture peynteth
out the doctrine concerning the person and benefits of Christ, and concerning
the new obedience that is too be yielded too God. All the said comparison may
for instructions sake be divided intoo six Articles.

The marking out of the time. For as in the first mooneth The time.
(the beginning whereof was always the conjunction or meeting of the Sun and the
Moon next too the equinoctial of the spring time) the tenth day of the
mooneth, the pascall Lamb was too be chosen out of the whole flock, and too
be kept til the.xiiij. day or full moon: So Christ the tenth day of the
first mooneth, that is too wit, upon Palmesunday entered into the city of
Jerusalem, and the.xiiij. day was taken in the Gardein, and sacrifysed for
the salvation of mankind.

2 Of the person of Christ. As the Lamb was too be Chrysts person
chosen without spot, a Male, and a yeerling: So is Christ a Lamb without spot,
without guyle, undefiled, and clearly without all sin and blemish. j Pet. j.
Hebr. vij.

3 Of the sacrifise of Christ. Like as it behooved the Lamb Chrysts sacrifyse.
too be slain and offered by the whole multitude. So was Christ our Passover
offered for us. Hither may all the doctrine concerning the passion and
sacrifyse of Christ offered upon the Alter of the cross, be referred.

4 Of the benefits of Chrysts sacrifyce. Like as God spared The benefits of
Christ's sacrifyse.
the Israelites whose posts were sprinkled with the blud of the Lamb, even so
all they that are sprinkled with ye blud of Jesus Christ, obtain forgiveness
of sins and everlasting life, according too this saying: Behold, the Lamb of
God which takes away the sins of the world. j. Pet. j. Ye are redeemed with
the precious blud of the immaculate Lamb Christ.

5 Of the applyment of Christ's benefits. Like as the The applyment.
posts of the Israelites were sprinkled with a bundle of Isop dipped in the
blud of the Lamb: So is the virtue and woorking of Christ's blud or sacrifise,
offered and applied too us, by his word, and by the sacraments of Baptim and
the Lords Supper. Psalm. lj. Thou shall sprinkle me with Hisop O Lord, and I
shall be made clean.

6 Of conversion or new obedience. Like as it behooved New obedience.
the dowe too be taken out of the houses of the Israelites, and that they
should eat unleavened bread: So Paul wills us too put away the old Leven,
that is too say, sin, false opinions, and lewd lusts: and earnestly too
practice sincere faith, prayer, and al virtues that please God, and so to keep
a continual feast of Passover in unleavened bread of vncorruptnesse and
truth.

The benefits of Chrysts resurrection, are chiefly three.
FIrst, glorious deliverance from the tyranny of the Devil, The benefits of
Christ's resurrection.
sin, and death: and restorement of righteousness and everlasting life,
which Paul sets forth with excellent lyghtsomnesse of words and figures.
Col. ij. Ye are risen agein in Christ through faith in Gods power, who has
raised him from death, and with him also quickened us who were dead in our
sins, forgiving us all our trespasses, and putting out the ha^dwriting that
was against us in the law written, which he has taken away and fastened too
his cross, and has spoiled rule and power, and made a show of them openly,
and has triumphed over them in his own person.

Let us always have before our eyes this most beautiful description of the
victory and triumph of Christ rising from death. And because he terms it a
Triumph, let us consider the comparison.

When the Roman Captains made war with puissant A description of a Triumph.
Kings and overcame them in battaill, they were wont too be carried intoo the
city of Rome sitting in a charyot of gold, and a chair of Iuorye, which was
drawn by four white horses. Before the Charyot were led and set out too the
show, the vanquished enemies and Kings that were prisoners. And alost before
the charyot were carried tables in which were painted the battles, the winnings
of Cities, and the other things done by the conqueror. After the charyot
followed the soldiers by whom the conquest was made. Unto them were rewards
given. The Graundcaptein that was the Conqueror, being crowned with bayleaues
or fig leaves was led intoo the Capitol, where kneeling down before the Altar
of the most mighty and most merciful Jupiter. he gave him thanks for
bestowing that victory upon the Romans, and when he had made his sacrifise,
departed too the court.

So when Paulus Aemylius had vanquished Persey, King of Macedonie, he led him
prisoner in Triumph, and his son also who afterward became a Clerk in Rome.

Of this manner of the Roman triumph does Paul take pattern in this place.

Christ our king has hild continual and sore war with The Triumph of Christ.
the whole kingdom of Satan, which is divided intoo certain principalities,
Potestates, and degrees. At length by his own death he has overcome death, by
his passion he has taken away sin, by beco^ming accursed he has set us
free from the curse of the Law. These three enemies, sin, death, and the curse
of the law or the handwryting of our own conscience, are the cheifest sinews
of the Devils power. These has Christ vanquished and taken away, not with
gunnes, swoordes and spears, but with his own cross. This caryeth he in
Triumph, and upon it fasteneth he our enemies the Devil, sin, and the
accusation of the Law or the handwryting of our conscience: and of the
subduing of these does he make his show.

Of this most high benefit of Christ's resurrection speaks Paul, the
greatness whereof no tung of man is able too utter. All goods, all
Lordshippes, all kingdoms are nothing in comparison of this benefit. For
whereas all men must needs dye: yet shall those that flee unto Christ's death
and Resurrection with faith, be delivered from death, and shall be crowned
with ryghtuousnesse, life, and glory everlasting.

The second benefit is true comfort and joy of heart in all The true joy and
comfort.
miseries, too those that uphold themselves with assured hope of the
resurrection and the everlasting life with Christ.

Art thou poor, despised, sick, bannished, etc? Christ who is risen from
death, will defend thee, comfort thee, govern thee, and at length render thee
eternal life.

All men saeke and wonderously covet gladness and joy in this life, and
comfort in adversity. The covetous pesone delyghteth more in his monye than in
God. The Marchantman ioyeth in his gain. Kings and Princes make wars too
enlarge their Dominions, that they may afterward take their pleasure with ease.
But there is but only one joy and comfort that is stedye, namely Christ rising
from death, and raising us up toogither with himself and quickening us.

The third benefit is Resurrection of our bodies, whereof we will (by Gods
help) entreat too morrow.

Of the third place.
THe true keeping of the Easter feast, is all the whole time The true keeping
of Easter.
of our life too acknowledge Christ our passover offered for us, taking upon
him the sins of the world, and earnestly too repent us of our sins which
are put over too this Lamb: and in our anguishes (which rise by the feeling of
Gods wrath, or by beholding our own sins, death, or other calamities,)
stedely too believe that Christ our passover is offered up for us: and that
our sins are taken away by this Lamb of God: And that (even after we be
dead) we shall doutlesse be restored too life and joy everlasting with Christ.

And too the intent we may be thankful too Christ for these his so
exceeding great benefits: we must ageine on the other side with reverent mind
and voice set them forth, and so frame and govern our whole life, all our
intentes, endeuers, and doings, that they may please Christ and agree with his
will and word.

In this meening Paul says that too keep the passover is all one as too
purge the old leven, (that is too say sin, or the old man, or forworne and
false opinions concerning God,) lusts, vicious inclinations, affections, and
out ward actions fyghting against the Law of God.

He boroweth his manner of speech, of the Jewish Passenuer, in which they were
compelled for seven days toogither too eat unleavened or sweet bread,
whereupon it was also called the feast of sweet bread. And thereuppon comes
the custom ye is used at this day too distribute unleavened bread in the Lords
Supper. Also oftentimes elsewhere in the Leven.
scripture Leven betokens false doctrine or faulty behavior and sins,
which make other folks the worse and mar (or make sower) all the meal or
lump of dowe. Paul therefore wills the old leven too be purged away, that
is too wit, that false doctrine and other sins should be cast out and taken
away by repentance.

That ye may* be new dowe, that is too say, a new New dowe.
lump or new men, sprinkled and clenzed with the precious blud of the Lamb
Christ, and having new light, new ryghtuousnesse, and new obedience acceptable
too God.

As ye are sweet bread, that is too say, unleavened, or Sweet bred.
without the leven of sin, or rightuouse and holy, namely by imputation of
Christ's ryghtuousnesse and holiness, and by beginning new obedience, but not
as yet by accomplishing it. And therefore there is as yet need of continual
purging the remnaunts of sin. There remain in all the Saints in this life,
great weakness, and much filthynesse of sin. The mind is still steyned
with the dregs of the leven of many doutings and false imaginations
concerning God: against which, those that be borne ageine by the holy Ghost,
do keep continual war by help of the holy Ghost. Faith, fear, love of
GOD, and the rest of virtues are very faint and feeble in the will. And on
the contrary part, there be many sinful inclinations and vehement
enforcementes too carelessenesse, distrust, and pride: many burning flames and
heates of lewd lusts, and many furious fyers of affections in the heart,
against which they strive that are regenerated by the holy Ghost.

These dregs and filthynesse of the old leven does saint Paul will us too
clenze out continually during our whole life, and in the mean while too assure
our selves by faith, that though we be both unworthy and unclean: yet for
the son of GOD our Passover offered up for us, (who is the roof that
covers our filthynesse,) we are thorough exceeding great mercy received,
and by imputation of his clennesse and holiness unto us, are accepted for
pure sweet bread, that is too say, for ryghtuouse and holy, as fully as if
there remained no dregs at all of the old Leven in us. But we have spoken of
this principal meening of this Epistle, a little before. Now let us go
thorough with the Exhortation too the true keeping of this Feast of Passover.

Therefore let us make good cheer. In the Greek it is What it is too keep
holyday.
Heortazomen, which is as much too say, as let us keep holyday, either of the
word Rhezo, too do holy things, or of the word Agora, which is a
congregation or assembly, or else of the word Ageiro, which signifies too
come toogither or too assemble. Heortazein therefore signifies, not too eat
or too drink, and too spend the time in fond and slouthful idleness, but too
celebrate a feastfull day, or too allow a Saboth, or too assemble too the
ministration of the Gospel: too here the doctrine concerning the person and
benefits of the Lamb Jesus Christ, who suffered for us and is risen again:
too have a feeling of Repentance: too believe that we are accepted of GOD for
this only Lambs sake: And upon trust of this Lamb, too demand and look for
all good things at gods hand: too acknowledge him: too give him thanks: too
mortify the remnantes of the leven or of sin sticking still in us: and with
new light, righteousness, and obedience, too glorifye God both all the time of
this life and evermore.

Not with old leue^, that is too say, not with following sin Old leven.
against conscience.

Nor in the leven of maliciousness and wickedness, yt Greek word Kakia is a
general name of al vice, and signifies ye sins of ouersyght or done
willingly, which are committed by negligence, lyghtnesse, or wantonness: As,
Honorius offends through negligence or slothfulness. Yea and sometime even
a good man may do amiss and yet be a good man still. But the word Poneria
is a more sore and heinous name of singular and prepensed malice and of desire
too do harm, which even delyghteth in wickedness, too whom it is even meat
and drink too do another man displeasure and to hurt him wickedly, as in Nero,
Diocletian, and Julian, etc.

But with the sweet bread of pureness and truth, that is too say, with the
pure doctrine concerning God, and with pure acknowledgement and confession of
the doctrine, and with true faith, true fear of God, true invocation, true and
unfeigned love of God and ones neighbor, thanksgiving, and continual
obedience, which is not counterfeit, nor hypocritish, but void of craft, guyle,
and leude lusts, pure and true. And so does Paul in these two words
pureness and truth, comprehend the whole life of a Christen man, and all the
duties of godliness, or all virtues.

Upon the second and third holidays in Easter week.
The Epistle. j. Cor. xv.
BRethren, as parteyning too the Gospel which I preached unto you, which ye
have also accepted, and in the which ye continue, by the which also ye are
saved: I do you too wit, after what manner I preached unto you, if ye keep it,
except ye have believed in vain. For first of all, I have delivered unto you,
that which I received: how that Christ died for our sins, agreeing too the
scriptures, and that he was buried, and that he rose ageine the third day,
according too the scriptures: and that he was seen of Cephas, then of the
twelve. After that, he was seen of mo than five hundred brethren at once, of
which many remain unto this day, and many are fallen a sleep. After that
appeared he too James, then too all the Apostles. And last of all he was seen
of me, as one that was born out of due time. For I am the least of the
Apostles, which am not worthy too be called an Apostle because I persecuted
the congregation of God. But by the grace of God, I am that I am. And his grace
which is in me, was not in vain, but I labored more abundantly than they
all, yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me. Therefore whether it
were I or they, so we preach, and so have ye believed. If Christ be preached
how that he rose from the dead: how say some among you, that there is no
resurrection of the dead? If there be no rising agein of the dead: then is
Christ not risen. If Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and
your faith is also in vain, yea, and we are found also false witnesses of God.
For we have testified of God, how that he raised up Christ: whom he raised
not up, if it be so that the dead rise not ageine. For if the dead rise not
agein, then is Christ not risen agein. If it be so that Christ rose not, then
is your faith in vain, and yet are ye in your sins. Therefore they which are
fallen a sleep in Christ are perished. If in this life only we believe on
Christ, then are we of all men the myserablest. But now is Christ risen from
the dead and is become the first fruits of the^ that sleep. For by a man came
death, and by a man came the Resurrection of the dead. For as by Adam all die:
even so by Christ, shall all be made alive, and every man in his own order.
The first is Christ, then they that are Christ's at his coming. Then comes
the end, when he has delivered up the kingdom too God the father, when he
has put down all rule, authority, and power. For he must reign till he have
put all his enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed,
is death. For he has put all things under his feet. But when he says, all
things are put under him, it is manifest, that he is excepted, which did put
all things under him. When all things are subdued unto him: then shall the
son also him self be subject unto him that did put all things under him,
that God may be all in all things. Else what do they which are baptized over
the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized over the
dead? Yea and why stand we in in ieoperdy every hour? Be my reioysyng which I
have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. That I have fought with beasts at
Ephesus after the manner of men: what auantageth it me, if the dead rise not
ageine? Let us eat and drink: For to morrow we shall dye. Be not deceived:
evil speakings corrupt good manners. Awake truly out of sleep, and sin not.
For some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this too your rebuke. But
some man will say: how arise the dead? with what body come they? Thou fool
that which thou sowest, is not quickened, except it dye. And what sowest thou?
Thou sowest not that body that shall be: but bare corn (I mean either of
wheat, or of some other) and GOD gives it a body at his pleasure, to every
seed his own body. All flesh is not one manner of flesh, but there is one
manner flesh of men, another manner flesh of Beasts, another manner flesh of
fyshes, another of birds. There are also celestial bodies, and there are
bodies terrestrial. But the glory of the celestial is one and the glory of
the terrestrial is an other, there is one manner glory of the Sun and an
other of the Moon, and an other glory of the Stars. For one Star differs
from another in glory. So is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in
corruption, and ryseth in incorruption. It is sown in dishonor, and ryseth in
glory. It is sown in weakness, and rises in power. It is sown in a natural
body, and rises a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a
spyrituall body, as it is also written: the first man Adam was made alyuing
soul, and the last Adam was made a quickenynge spirit. Howbeit, that is not
first which is spiritual, but that which is natural, and then that which
is spiritual. The first man is of the earth earthy: the second man is the
LORD from heaven. As is the earthy, such are they that are earthy. And as is
the heavenly, such are they that are heavenly. And as we have borne the Image
of the earthy, so shall we bear the image of the heavenly. This say I
brethren, that flesh and blood can not enherit the kingdom of GOD. Neither
doothe corruption inherit uncorruption. Behold I show you a mystery. We
shall not all sleep: But we shall all be changed, and that in a mooment, in
the twinckelyng of an eye (at the sound) of the last trumpe. For the trumpe
shall blow, and the dead shall rise incorruptible, and we shall be changed.
For this corruptible, must put on incorruption, and this mortal, must put on
immortality. When this corruptible has put on incorruption, and this mortal
has put on immortality then shall be brought too pass the saying that is
written: Death is swallovved up intoo victory. Death where is thy styng?
Hell where is thy victory. The styng of Death is sin: and the strength of
sin, is the law. But thanks be unto God, which has given us victory,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore my dear brethren, be ye steadfast
and immoue able, alvvayes rich in the woorks of the Lord, for as much as ye
know how that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

The disposement of the.xv. Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
which is the seat of the Doctrine concerning the Resurrection or rising of the
dead.
THe most joyful end and haven of the whole Christen life and Faith, and the
souereine and most assured comfort in all the miseries and sorrows of this most
flightful and wretched life, is the Resurrection from death and the blissed and
everlasting life with God: In which not only our souls remaining after death
shall enjoy the beholding of our Lord God in quiet peace and ioyfulnesse: but
also our bodies which were rotted and consumed in the dust of the earth, shall
live ageine, and be repaired, and being joined with their souls ageine and
set free all sin and death, shall be glorified and receive immortal honor.

And where in death they heertofore were dround,
they shall hereafter wear the raiment bright
Of true renown, and evermore be found
before the Lord in endless life and light.
This doctrine concerning the Resurrection of our bodies (which is the peculiar
wisdom of the christen church) is evidently confirmed and lyghtsomly set out by
Paul in this xv. chapter of his first Epistle too the Corinthians. Therefore it
is of that kind of cases that instruct.

The chief parts of the whole disputation are three.
1 Whither there be any rising of the dead. 2 What manner a one it is, or what
manner of bodies they shall rise with. 3 Of the cause of the rising of our
bodies which is Christ's victory, in which he swalowed up sin, death, and hell
by his death, and restored eternal life and glory too his Church by his
Resurrection.
THe entrance intoo the matter puts us in mind that the true and needful
Doctrine concerning the chief articles of the Christen faith, is often and
continually too be repeated and beaten intoo the hearers ears: Even in this
consideracion, because the Gospel is the power of God effectual in woorking
salvation too every one that believes. I do you too understand, or I put you
in mind of the Gospel which I have preached unto you, which you have embraced
by faith, by which also you be saved if you hold it fast by faith, unless
peradventure by this time having shaken off faith, you have believed in vain:
This selfsame gospel (I say) do I put you in mind of, that you may bethink
you, wirh what words I have preached unto you. For I have delivered. etc.

The proposition, state, or ground of the first part is, The dead shall
undoubtedly rise agein.
THis proposition does he warrant by six Arguments. First, of the efficient
cause. The total or sufficient cause The efficient cause of our resurrection,
which argument holds of consequence
of a thing being set down, the effect follows of necessity, in such time
and manner as the cause or the will of God has appointed. Christ who is the
cause of our Resurrection and life, is verily rise^ in his very body from
death, and has promised of certeyntie that he will raise unto life the bodies
of all men that be dead: Ergo without any dout even our dead bodies shall also
rise agein.

Paul concludes this argument in the form of an Ethuthymema. Christ who was
dead is risen ageine in very deed. Ergo we also shall rise agein when we be
dead.

The consequent is of force, holding from the efficient and sufficient cause,
too the effect: which he will accomplish as he has promised.

This reason of the consequence, Paul himself poynteth out a little after.
For seeing that by man came death, by a man also must come the resurrection of
the dead. For like as in Adam all men die: So also by Christ shall all men be
called agein too life.

The Antecedent, (which is the ground work of the Resurrection of our bodies,
and of our whole Faith and salvation,) That Christ is risen.
is confirmed at large by Paul. First by witness of the Scripture, which
testifyeth that Christ dyed for our By testymonies of the prophets.
sins. Esaias. liij. Daniel. ix. Zach. iij. and.xiij. Psalm.xxij. And that he
rose agein the third day. Osee. vj. in the story of Jones. Psalm.xv. Zach.
xiij. Esaias. xj. Acts.xiij. Secondly by the record of many that saw Christ
after he was risen, By record of such as saw him.
and were familiarly conversant with him full forty days. Christ the same day
that he rose from death, appeered, not only too Cephas or Simon Peter, and the
twelve Apostles, of whom Paul makes mention in this place, but first of all
too Marie Maudlin. John.xx. Mark.xviij. next too the rest of the women. Math.
xxviij. Thirdly too a cupple walking intoo the feeldes, whom the Apostles
believed not. Mark.xvj. Fourthly too Cephas or Simon Peter. Fifthly too
Cleophas and Nathanael as they were going toowards Emaus, too whom at their
return, all the Apostles give credit. Luke the two and twentieth. Sixthly too
all the Apostles as they were assembled toogither, saving Thomas. Luke the
four and twentieth. John the twentieth. j. Corinthians. xv. And all these
appeerings were made the very day of his Resurrection, upon which day also S.
Hierom is of opinion that Christ showed himself too James the less, of whom
Paul makes mention in this place. Afterward he showed him self sundry times
too the Apostles when Thomas was with them, and at the sea of Tyberias. John
xx. xxj. Also in Galilie too mo than five hundred brethren at once. And also
too his Apostles, or too the three score and ten and too all the rest of his
Disciples. Finally after his Ascension Christ showed himself too Paul also,
that he was risen again.

Paul's second argument.
WE see the Apostles do preach that Christ is risen Of the authority of the
Apostles.
from death: Ergo there is in very deed a rising ageine of the dead. The
consequens holds of the authority of the Apostles who are sent from God, and
are assured that they cannot err.

The third argument is a bringing back by impossibility. An argument by
impossibility.
It is impossible that two full contraries should both at once be true or false.

This Exposition, The dead rise not ageine, or no dead folks rise ageine, is
false:

Ergo the contradictorie or full contrary proposition, The dead shall rise
ageine, is true and certain.

The minor or Second part of the Argument is proved thus: of truth there can
come nothing but truth. But of this proposition No dead folks rise ageine,
follow things manifestly false and irksome too here, namely, that not even
Christ is risen again, and that the preaching of the Apostles is vain, which
are false witnesses of GOD, and so GOD himself who has avouched that he
raised Christ already and will hereafter call all the dead again too life,
should be a liar. But for as much as these things are manifestly false and
impossible, it follows that the proposition out of which these things
ensue, is false. And therefore the plain contrary is true, namely that the
dead shall rise.

The fourth argument.
IT is impossible that the best and holiest part of mankind An argument of
right and reason.
should be created only too the miseries of this present life and too eternal
destruction. For seeing that God is ryghtuous, and also a judge: it must needs
fall out, that the godly and the ryghtuous must at one time or other be in
good case, and the wicked in ill case.

But those that live godlyly in Christ Jesus, are of all men most miserable in
this life:

Ergo it must needs be that there remains an other haven and another life,
in which the godly being raised from death, shall be set free from all misery,
and be crowned with eternal bliss and glory.

The fifth argument.
But now is Christ risen from death, and is the first fruits of the dead.

Fifthly he repeteth the first Argument and reason which A repetition and
confirmation of the first argument which holds of consequence or of
necessity.
holds of consequence, expounding and enlarging the consequence with many
words: Christ is risen ageine: Ergo all the dead shall rise. He proves the
consequence. For like as by Adam death entered upon all men: So by Christ the
cause and author of life, all men shall be called too life agein. In this
order, that the first fruits or first of them that rise ageine from death, be
Christ himself. Then those that be Christ's, or which have departed out of
this life in the faith of Christ, shall rise at Christ's coming too judgment.
Afterward shall be the end of the world or of worldly things, when he shall
deliver up his kingdom too God the father, that is too say when he shall bring
unto his Father all the whole Church gathered toogither on earth by the
ministry of the Gospel: too the intent that all kingdoms being abolished,
and all power as well of Devils as men suppressed, yea and the ministry of
the son of God (whereby he gathered his Church in this world cessing,) only
GOD without other means may reign in the godly, and be all in all, filling
all things with his light, wisdom, ryghtuousnesse, life, blissednesse, and
glory unspeakable.

The sixth Argument.
THe very manner of Baptim whereby we are first graffed An Argument taken of
our profession and order in baptim.
intoo the church or body of Christ, betokens that we look assuredly for
the resurrection from death: for they are baptized over the dead, or over the
graves of the dead, as it is used in these days also: protesting in the
behalf of the dead, that they believe of a certeintie that they shall return
too life ageine, according as the Creed which we hold professes in our
Baptim. And the very dipping in the water and taking out agein, is a token and
representation, not only of the abolishment of sin, and of the regeneration
and renewing of the soul, but also of the death of our bodies and the rising
of them ageine.

The.vij. Why are we also in danger every hour.
HErepeteth the.iiij. Argument and amplifyeth it by an A repetition of the
fourth argument which holds of right and reason:
absurdity of Epicure heathnishnesse ensewing it, which he describes in
words taken out of the.xxij. of Esai. And he expresses the reproof of it in
a verse of Menanders. Evil communication corrupts good manners. With which
agrees this saying of Theogius: Thou may lern good of the good, but if thou
keep company mith the wicked, thou marrest thine own mind.

The.viij. Argument, of a like.
LIke as seeds that are cast intoo the ground do rotte there An Argument
taken of the like thing.
and spring up agein, and each of them yield forth most goodly fruit in their
kind: So our bodies being sown intoo the ground and buried, shall certainly
live agein and rise ageine much more beautiful and bright than they were here
upon earth. This comparison has Stigelius expressed in very trim verses.

This corn that grows of body void of blud, in lively plyght,
Immortal honor after death our bodies does behyght.
Deep underneath the turned clod the dried seeds lie hid
In which a man would ill suppose that any strength abid.
Yet growing up by secret mean they rise agein, and bear
A greater strength encreast too more tha^ heretofore they were.
Even so our courses being laid too rot in holowe grave
A lively beauty afterward in glorious state shall have
When death has hild the^ down awhyle, anon they shall arise*
Eternally too live in light with God above the skies.
Right many and notable tokens of the resurrection has Tokens of the
resurrection impressed in nature.
God imprinted in the whole nature of things, which too consider after a
reverent and godly fashion, it is behouefull. The day does daily fade intoo
night, and is buried in darkness. But in the morning killing his death, and
breaking out of his grave of darkness, it becomes alive agein as Tertullian
says. And this intercourse of days and nights is fynely expressed in this
Greek ridle:

A father there is that has sons nine and three,
And each of those sons eke has children thrice ten:
Not one like another, some fair and white be,
Some black, all immortal, yet dead now and then.
The Moon dying every mooneth quickens agein and The Moon.
recouereth her light that she had lost.

The beams of the Stars which are dimmed by the The Stars.
rising of the Sun, are kindled agein in the night.

The four seasons of the year, Lenton, Summer, Harvest The seasons of the
year.
and Winter do fade and return by mutual course.

In Springtyme the earth that was dead and barrein in the winter, becomes
lively agein and brings forth herbs, grass, flowers and fruits. The trees
are clad agein with leaves, flowers and fruits.

The swallows which were dead and buried in the waters Svvalovves.
in wintertyme, recover life agein in the Springtyme.

Flies also and other Cutfoules which were killed with Flies.
cold, recover their former force and life by warmth.

The Phoenix breeds ageine with fire, and her own ashes: The Phoenix.
For she perishes too live, and yet she ingenders hirself, atteyning
immortality by the benefit of death, as Lactantius says.

Finally, all this most beautiful Theater of heaven and earth which was made
of nothing, gives us to understand that God who made all things of nothing,
may with much more ease at the latter day restore our flesh or bodies agein,
which have bin somewhat before, than he made them at the beginning. But in
thinking upon this Article, let us always This is the surest ground and
Argument for a Christian.
have our minds and our eyes fastened upon our Lord Jesus Christ's death and
resurrection, and upon the promises concerning the restitution of our bodies
and the eternal life too ensue without fail after this life, warranted by the
Resurrection of himself and the raising up of Lazarus and others. John. xj. I
know he shall rise agein in the resurrection at the last day. Jesus said unto
her: I am the resurrection and life. He that believes in me, yea though he
were dead, he shall live. John. vj. This is the will of my eternal Father, that
every one which sees the son and believes in him should have life
everlasting, and I will raise him up at the last day. John. v. The hour shall
come that all that are in their graves shall here his voice and come forth,
those that have done good, too the resurrection of life, and those that have
done evil, too the resurrection of judgment. Io. xix. I know that my
Redeemer lives, and I shall rise out of the earth in the last day, and shall
be compassed ageine with my skin, and in my flesh shall I see my God. I shall
see him my self, mine own eyes shall behold him, and none other: this hope is
laid up in my bosom.

This restitution of dead bodies, and commencement of Sufficient vvarrant for a
true Christian.
new and everlasting life, is not only warranted by evident textes very openly
and clearly in the sermons of Christ and his Apostles: but also was manifested
too the eyes of the Apostles and the rest of Gods church that was at those
days in Iewrie, when by the space of full forty days, Christ being risen
agein and many of the Patriarchs and Prophets that were risen with Christ,
were openly and familiarly conversant with the Apostles and Marie his moother,
and a great company that was joined with them, (for Paul in this Chapter
witnesses that he was seen of mo than five hundred brethren at once) and
talked with them of the kingdom of God. Act. j. of the wonderful state and
redemption of the Church, of heavenly reuelatious, of the promise of the seed
that should crush the Serpents head, or of the person, office, and benefits
of Christ, of the abolisheme^t of sin and too the restorement of our bodies
and of the life everlasting. Upon these heavenly reuelements warranted by sure
and evident records, let us set our eyes when we think upon the
resurrection of our bodies, and the life too come.

Philosophy knows utterly nothing of the restoreme^t Philosophy knovveth
nothing of the resurrection.
of the dead bodies, but holds opinion that they perish, and are resolved
intoo the stuff whereof they were first made, and utterly come too nothing,
after the same sort that the bodies of brute beasts do. Neither has it any
sure and stable belief at all concerning the immortality of the soul and the
everlasting conversation with God and the blissed wyghts. But as in a dubble
and doutfull matter, it disputes too and fro of it, and reasons that
(whither men's souls remain after death, or whither they dye and perish with
their bodies) yet there is none evil at all in death. And the cheef reasons
whereby men's souls are avouched too be immortal, are gathered toogither by
Cicero in his first book of Tusculane questions: which it is good too
consider, too the intent, the co^ferring of them may bring some light too both
the kinds of doctrine.

The first reason is of Authority.
Antiquity, the nearer it was from the creation and from Antiquity.
the offpring of GOD, so much the better did it see what things were true. All
Antiquity was of opinion yt men's souls are immortal: and that man by
departing out of this life is not so clean swept away, that he should utterly
perish:

Ergo, it is true that men's souls are immortal.

He proves the minor or second part.
1 By natural instincts. 2 By the Law of their preests. 3 By the ceremonies
of buryall. 4 By Canonization.
The second reason.
IN all matters, the consent of all Nations, is too be accounted Consent of
all Nations.
the Law of Nature.

All men, whersoeuer they be, do agree in this, that there is somewhat, which
perteyneth too those that are departed out of this life.

Ergo, we also ought too be of the same opinion.

The third reason.
THe proof of Nature must be taken of every such nature The best natures.
as is best.

The best of all sorts of men, as Princes, Poets, woorkme^, and others do
hold most steadfastly the hope of immortality.

Ergo, men find by nature that men's souls are immortal.

The fourth reason.
EVery thing that moves it self, is ever moved, and is everlasting:
Selfmouing.
The soul of man moves it self.

Ergo, it moves ever, and is everlasting.

The fifth reason.
THat which is not co^pounded of the Elements is not corruptible: Simpleness
vnco^pounded.
man's soul is not co^pounded of the elements.

Ergo, man's soul is not corruptible or mortal.

He proves the minor thus:
NO nature compounded of the Elements, has ingraffed in it instincts of
knowledge, power too search secrets, memory able too conceive and bear away
things most diverse, foresyght of things too come, so many Arts. etc.

Man's mind has ingraffed in it instincts of knowledge, ableness too invent
new things, too call too mind things past. etc.

Ergo, man's mind is not compounded of the elements.

The sixth reason.
IT is an immovable maximee of Gods providence and justice, Right and reason.
that good should befall the good, and evil should befall the evil: But in
this life the good fare woorst, as Socrates. etc.

Ergo, there must needs remain another life, in which the good may receive
good, and those that in their humane bodies have led their life like Gods,
may return too the Gods from whom they came.

These foresaid six Arguments are the Arguments of Cicero.

The second part of the Chapter.
IN what sort shall the dead rise, and with what manner a body come they?

Paul answers, that the word of the Almighty GOD Gods almyghtynesse.
ought simply too be believed, though we know not the manner how God will
bring too pass the things he promyseth. For (as saint Iustine says) It is
an evident token of unbelief, too demand (as too Godward or in Gods matters,)
how any thing is or may be done. For faith alone ought too dispatch all
doutes in us. Paul therefore in this place rebukes such as be inquisitiue of
the manner how dead men's bodies rotten in their graves and consumed too
nothing shall come too life ageine: commanding them too settle their mynds by
faith simply in the promise and word of the almighty God. And against our
distrustfulnesse he sets an Example most ordinary in nature, concerning the
growing of corn which springs up of the seed cast intoo the ground and dead
and consumed intoo fine cinder. Therefore can God easly raise our buried corses
out of the dust intoo which they be turned and buyld up the whole body
ageine, making it much more beautiful and glorious than it was before: like as
thou sowest not the same body that shall grow up, but bare corn which
rotteth in the ground, and yet there springs up other corn of the same kind
and substance, much better and more full of sap, clad, garnished, and sensed
with spindle, ear, husk, ails, etc.

Al flesh is not a like, but there is one flesh of men, an other Diversities of
glory in the resurrection.
of beasts, etc. That is too say, All the dead shall not rise with like honor,
but there shall be a difference, howbeeit, not in the substance but in the
glory of them that rise.

Also there be heavenly bodies and there be earthly bodies, Living soul.
that is too say, there shall be a difference between the bodies of the godly
and the bodies of the ungodly.

There is one glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon, and another
glory of the stars, y^ is to say, eue^ among the godly and the Saints in
heaven there shall be a differente of glory. For like as one Star excels
another in bryghtnesse: so shall Christ, the Prophets, Apostles, and other
constant Martyrs and acknowledgers of the son of God, shine bryghter than the
other common sort of the godly, as is said Dan. xij. Then shall the learned
shine like the bryghtnesse of heaven, and those that have instructed many in
ryghtuousnesse shall shine like the Stars for ever and ever.

Then declares he by four Iscolies set one against another, The state of our
bodies in the resurrection
what manner of bodies the bodies of them that rise agein shall be: verily even
the selfsame yt they be at their burial as touching their substance, but
immortal, made bright, and glorified.

Wherein the phrase of Paul's writing is too be considered, how the nowne
adjective in form of a substantive is joined too the subject by the
preposition In. It is sown in corruption, that is too say, it is buried in the
ground a mortal or corruptible body* It ryseth in incorruption, that is too
say, it ryseth an incorruptible or immortal body. It is sown in dishonor,
that is too say, a foul or ylfauoured body, stinking and crawling full of
worms. It ryseth in glory, that is too say, glorious, shyning, cleared, and
pure from all blemish. It is sown in weakness, that is too say, weak,
frail, transitory, of a days continaunce, a shadow, a froth, a Ghost, a
steme, a blast, a fether, a breath, a puff, a dream, a bubble, a flud, a
temple, a strydey, a wynd, a dust.

It ryseth in power, that is too say, myghtie, strong, florisshing, and free
from all infirmity. It is sown a natural body, that is too say, living the
natural life by reason, sense, and nourishing power, which is sustained with
meat and drink, and is increased, and begets, and may dye. It ryseth a
spiritual body, that is too say, living the spiritual life, kindled by the
holy Ghost, which is not maynteyned with meat and drink, ne begets, ne
dies, but is like the life of the Angels, Math. xxij. and like the life of God.

The first man was made a living soul. Genesis ij. That is too Living soul.
wit, not simply as the beasts live: but such a one as Christ should also with
his spirit quicken without meat and drink, too the spiritual and everlasting
life.

The first man is of the earth earthly. He alludeth too the The first man.
original of the word Adam, which signifies earth or clay, whereof he was
made, like as also among the Latins, man is called Homo of Humus, which
signifies the earth, as if he had said, made of the earth, clay, and earthly.

The second man is the Lord from heaven. Christ being The second man.
risen from Death, has now a heavenly, immortal, and glorious body, too which
our bodies shall in all respects be like and conformable, when they are
raised ageine from Death. Phil. ij. Like as before Death they were altoogither
like Adams body, which was subject too Death and other miseries.

Flesh and blud cannot inherit the kingdom of God, that Flesh and blud.
is too say, this corruptible body defiled with sinful inclinations and
fleshly affections and subject too death, cannot possess the kingdom of God,
unless it be altered, (and of a body mortal, defiled and stained with sin)
be made a body pure and clean, and fined from all filthiness, and immortal.
The same flesh that is buried shall rise agein, and the same substance of flesh
and blud shall remain still, as Job says: I shall see God in my self, whom I
my self shall see, and none other for me. For as Tertullian reasons plainly
in his book concerning the resurrection of the flesh, God forbid that God
should for evermore abandon too destruction man's flesh which is the work of
his hands, the care of heart, the case of his breath, the Queen of his works,
the heir of his liberality, the priest of his religion, the souldyer of his
warfare, and the sister of his Christ* etc.

Behold I show you a mystery, that is too say, I will more plainly expound and
declare that which I told you more darkly in my former words, when I said:
that flesh and blood should not possess the kingdom of God. For that saying is
too he understood, not of the substance of flesh and blood, but of the
exchange of their properties. For it behooves this corruptible body which we
now bear about us, too put on incorruption: and this selfsame mortal body too
put on immortality, before it can obtein possession of Gods kingdom. Some also
shall not die at all, whom the son of God shall find alive at his coming too
judgment: but they shall be sodeinly changed, and endued with new light, glory,
power and immortality.

The third part of the Chapter.
THen shall the saying be fulfilled which is written. Esaias. xxv Osee. xiij.
Death is swallowed up intoo victory, O Death where is thy sting, O Hell where
is thy victory? The sting of Death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law.
But thanks be to God who has given us victory by our Lord Jesus Christ.

The efficient cause of the raising of our bodies, and of restoreme^t The
efficient cause of our resurrection.
of ryghtuousnesse and everlasting life: is the son of God our Lord Jesus
Christ, who in his Death has swalowed up our Death, and by his ryghtuousnesse
and obedience has purged our sins, and pacifying Gods wrath and taking away
the curse of the law, has gotten us victory against sin, death, and the curse
of Gods law. For these three are the cruellest enemies of mankind, and the
cheef mischeues and plages which most cruelly and feersly make hauock of all
mankind, without difference, killing them and devouring them euerychone.
Therefore Paul in this place by feining a person, peinteth Death and sin.
out death like a most mischeuous outlaw or cruel soldier armed with a pike
or a darte, that is too wit with sin, wherewith he assaileth all mankind
without gainsaying, and pusheth all men through and kills them. For by reason
of sin all men are subject too death, and are slain by death, as is said. Romans
v. By one man sin entered intoo the world, and by sin death. And so death
ran over al men, because al men have sin. Also, sin reigned by death,
slaying all men. The very same is the meening of the words in this text, the
sting of Death is sin, that is too say, all men are slain by Death because
of sin.

Now when this sting or spear of Death wexeth dull and blunt, so as sin cannot
execute his full force upon us and be felt: Gods law like a whetstone
sharpneth sin, and both shows the greatness and horriblenesse of sin, and
also makes Gods law.
it more heinous: so as sin may become out of measure sinful, and being fully
felt too be so, may strike dreadful fears and astraughtments into men's
consciences: which immediately upon the stirring up and discovering of sin by
the law, do give sentence of death against themselves, and find themselves
guilty of eternal damnation. Too this meening it is said, The power of sin is
the law, as in Romans v. The law entered in that sin might abound. Also. Romans vij.
I had not known sin but for the law. For when the commandment came, sin
revived, and I am dead: that is too say, ye law showed the hugeness and
heynousnesse of sin, and of Gods wrath against sin: and as soon as Gods wrath
was once known, sin which heertofore slept in quietness, was stirred up and
became more strong and effectual, and overwhelmed man with the feeling of Gods
wrath, and with horrible dreadfulnesse and endless Death. For the law exacteth
always of us such an obedience and conformablenesse as is impossible too
man's nature, and too those that are not conformable, it thundreth out this
thunder bolt, Curssed is he that continues not thoroughly in all things that
are written in the law. And so there was no shift but that all mankind being
subdued and oppressed by these most cruel enemies, sin, Death, and the
curse of the law, which are the chief sinews of the Devils The cheef
finewes of the Devils kingdom.
kingdom, must have perished utterly. Neither could he by any power of man or
succor of Angels, have rid himself out of this cruel Tyranny, unless these
mighty and dreadful enemies of mankind had bin vanquished and overthrown by
the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, who was born too us and given to us,
who died for us and rose agein for us, and that his victory had bin bestowed
upon us by faith. j. Ioh. v. Heb. ij. By his own death he put down him y^ had
Lordship over death, that is too say the devil: and reconciled those which
through fear of death were all their life time oppressed with bondage. Coloss.
ij. Ye are risen ageine with Christ through faith, that is wrought by ye
operation of God Our victory in Christ.
which raised him from death. And with him he has quickened us also that were
dead in our sins, and has forgiven our trespasses, and put out the
handwryting that was against us in the law written, and has taken it away, and
fastened it too his cross, and spoiled rule and power, and made a show of
them openly, and tryumphed over them in his own person. Esaias. ix. For the yoke
of his burden, (that is to wit, death and al calamities wherewith mankind is
ouerloden) and the staff of his shoulder, (that is too say sin, which is the
thing, ye staff or the dart with which death pusheth all men through and
kills them) and the scepter of his exaction, (that is too say, the law which
exacteth perfect obedience, and with horrible wrath condemns all men that are
not conformable unto it) have thou overcome or vanquished, as in the day of
Madian. For like as Gedeon did put the Madianits too flight, not with bodyly
armor and weapon, but only with the sound of a trumpet, and by putting them in
fear with burning cressets: even so the son of God vanquisheth his enemies,
sin, death and the devil, with none other weapons than a trumpet, that is to
say the sound of his Gospel, and the fire of his holy spirit which kindles in
men's hearts the light of true faith, settled upon the son of God the
conqueror of sin and death, as is said. j. Ioh. v. This is the victory that
overcomes the world, even your faith. And.j. Peter. v. Whom resist you strong
in Faith. This excellent doctrine in all miseries and sorrows, the most souerein
and assured comfort whereupon our whole salvation is stayed, Paul sets
forth in this place, beautifyed with two testimonies.

Esaias. xxv. Death is swalowed up intoo victory.

Ose. xiij. Death, where is thy sting? Hell, where is thy victory* Now too the
intent these textes alleged by Paul may be understood the better, and the
largeness of the Doctrine and comfort comprised in them be looked the nearer
unto and the easlyer considered: I will add the grammatical exposition of
them. The words of Esaias are these.

In this mountain shall he swalowe up or devour the wrapping Esays prophecy of
the taking away of death by Christ.
of faces wherein all people are wrapped, and the covering wherewith all
nations are covered. And he shall swalowe up death intoo victory. And the Lord
God shall wipe away the tears from all faces, and shall take away the rebuke
or reproach of his people out of all the earth.

Esaias preaches of the benefits of the son of God, that he most puissantly
delivers his Church both from all other most sorrowful and principal
evils, and in especially from Death, which no force and wisdom of man can
overcome: When as by his Death he not only vanquisheth and overthrows our
Death, but also utterly abolisheth it, and swalloweth it up: and wypeth away
and crosses out the reproach and tears of his people, that is too wit, sin,
and all other miseries and sorrows. But in the beginning he speaks
figuratively, when he says that the wrapping of the face wherewith all people
are wrapped shall be devoured. For by the figure Metonimya (which is a
transposing of names) he notes the thing signified by the name of the thing
that betokens it. For the faces of dead folks are wont too be wrapped and
hidden in clothes. These wrappings shall be taken away, that is too say, death
it self shallbee taken away or devoured according as Esaias himself anon after
expounds that properly, which he had spoken erst figuratively, as the
Prophets are accustomed too do. He shall devour or swalow up death intoo
victory, or by swalowing up death the son of God shall get the upper hand,
and shall reygne and triumph, like as death had erst reigned over mankind, and
made havoc of all men and none could wythstande him.

The three score and ten interpreters have translated these Esays prophecy
expounded by Paul.
words of Esaias, thus. And Death preuayling devoured, because Death wastes
away and deuoureth all men. But Paul too the intent too set forth the true and
native meening of Esaias, and too show that it ought not too have bin
translated, Death preuayling devoured, But he (that is too say the son of
God) devoured Death: changes the verb actyue intoo a passive, and so
expresses the same meening, how be it much more plainly and piththely. Death
is swallowed up intoo victory, that is too say, Death which heertofore
devoured al me^, is now it self devoured and swalowed up intoo victory by the
son of God the conqueror of Death, so as now from henceforth the son of
God is a continual conqueror and everlasting tryumpher over Death. For the
Hebrew word Nitzach, is as much too say as too vanquishe, too prevail, too
triumph, and now and then it signifies also everlasting, continual, and for
evermore. Therefore in the Latin translacion of Esaias, we read: He shall
overthrow death for evermore. But we may most safely follow Paul's translation.

The other place is in Osee. xiij.
I Will redeem them from the hand of hell, I will deliver them Osees prophecy
expounded.
from Death. where are thy plages O Death? where is thy destruction O hell?

Oseas also preaches of this most souerein benefit of the son of God, that
although his Church in this world be oppressed with manyfold persecution and
miseries as well as the rest of men that are ungodly: yet will he undoubtedly
deliver it from Death and out of the very jaws of hell, and will endue it with
new life and everlasting ioyfulnesse. For the Hebrew word Scheol* (which
usually they translate hell,) does properly signify the grave wherein the
bodies of dead folks are bestowed, and also the place in which men's souls
departing from their bodies, are reserved till the last judgment day. The
Prophet therefore promises deliverance too the godly members of the church, not
yt they shall be privileged in this life from all miseries and from death it
self: but that when they are dispatched out of this life and buried in their
graves, even then he wills them too look for assured deliverance or
resurrection, and a much better life which shall continue for ever, because
Death (which heertoofore was the plage and destruction of all mankind and
devoured al men) is now ageine devoured and swalowed by Christ our redeemer,
who paying the full price or ransom for us, has borrowed us out, for so do
the Hebrew words Pada and Gaal signify, which the Prophet uses in this
place.

And as touching the words that ensue, (which Hierom Interpretation of the
grammatical sense of the words.
has translated thus: Ero mors tua o Mors, Ero morsus tuus o Inferne. That is
too say, O Death I will be thy Death, O hell I will be thy sting: and which
Paul has expressed by an Interrogation, O Death where is thy sting? O Hell
where is thy victory?) It is evident that the diversity of the
interpretations ryseth of the Hebrew words which have many significations.

For the word Ehe, and the future tence Call is of the verb Haiah by Apocape
(which is a figure that takes away a letter or a syllable from the end of a
word (for the whole word is Ehieh I will be.) And so is the aduerbe where,
which also by transposition of letters is red Aieh. It appears therefore why
Paul and the.lxx. Interpreters, and Aquila of Sinope, and the fifth edition
(all which Ierom cites,) have translated the word Ehe where, and not I will
be. Where is thy indictment or accusation?

The word following Deuareca (which S. Jerome translateth Mors tua, thy
Death) the three score and ten Interpreters translate (...) thy accusation or
indictment, and Aquila, sermones tui, thy sayings,) is likewise of many
significations. For the word Dibber signifies too speak, and also too kill
or destroy. ij. Reg. xxij. Athalia Dedabber slew all the kings stock.
Heeruppon Deber is as much too say as a plage, a murreine, or a destruction.
Exodus ix. ij. Reg. vlt. iij. Reg. viij. And the other word Keleb in the part
following is almost of the same signification, for it signifies a wasting
plage, or destruction, and rooting out. As in the Psalm xcj. Thou shall not
be afraid of Deber, the plage that rages in the dark, nor of Keleb, the
destruction that wastes at the noone day. Where we in our Latin translation
have, A negocio perambulante in tenebris, ab incursu and a Daemonio Meridiano.
Which is, of the business walking in the dark, of the sodein rushing in, and
of the Devil of the noone day.

Therefore the proper meening of Osee is (out of all dout) The proper meening of
Osce.
this Where are thy plages O death? where is thy rooting out O hell? Death and
Hell did heeretoofore bring plage and utter destruction upon all men, through
sin wherewith all mankind is horribly atteinted and appaired: And then
chiefly is this plage felt, then does it show it self, then does it strike a
man intoo horrible fearfulness and sorrows, (which are the enterances intoo
everlasting Death,) when sin is stirred up and rowzed by the law of God, as
Paul says. Romans vij. But Christ by his death and gooing down intoo hell,
has brought a plage and destruction upon death and hell. So that from hence
forth not only Christ himself, but also all the godly that believe in Christ,
may vaunt themselves over vanquished Death and destroyed Hell, with these
words: Death where is thy plage or sting? wherewith thou haste heretofore
murdered all mankind? Hell, where is thy victory: whereby thou have vanquished
all men? Thanks be unto God who has given us victory by our Lord Jesus
Christ, for God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, too
the intent that all that believe in him should not perish but have life
everlasting.

For like as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness: so behooved it the
son of man too be exalted, too the intent that all that believe in him
should not perish but have life everlasting.

Therefore my deerbeloued brethren, be steadfast, immovable, and always
abounding in the woork of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in
the Lord.

He concludes his disputation with a short Exhortation, An exhortation to
steadfastness.
that they should steadfastly hold them too the true doctrine concerning the
Resurrection of the dead and the other Articles of the Christen faith which
they had received of Paul, and not suffer themselves too be drawn away from
it by any likely persuasions of the false Apostles, but endeuer too profit in
true godliness and full assuredness of faith, and the spreading abroad of the
true doctrine, and in executing the residue of the labors of their vocation,
upon trust of Gods help, and hope of luckye success and such as may be too
the welfare of the Church, according too this most sweet promise. Your labor
shall not be in vain in the Lord.

Upon the Sunday called Quasi modo geniti, or the first Sunday after Easter.
IT took this name of the Introit taken out of. j. Pet. ij. As The custom of
baptizing in old time.
newborn babes desire the reasonable and pure milk, that you may grow in it,
if so be you have tasted that the Lord is sweet. For in the ancient Church
when in manner men grown were baptized, it was a custom too baptize on the
Easter holidays, and too give milk to taste, too those that were baptized and
a white garment too put on, which was a token of freedom and innocence.
Whereupon the week is called yet still in Albis, and the Sunday is called the
Sunday in Albis, or white Sunday, and it is that which follows next after
Easter. And the verses out of the hymn Salve festa dies are known.

Behold o holy King great part of thy renown is seen
When sacred baptim does advance the souls by thee made cleene.
Thy soldiers from the silver stream come pure and white of hew
Clean washed from their ancient sin with water fresh and new.
Their raime^t white betokens eke the brightness of their mind
It is the shepeherds joy so fair and white a flock too find.
Therefore also were the reading of this days Epistle and the Introit in which
mention is made of regeneration, ordained, that the baptized might be
instructed concerning their regeneration or newbirth, and of their encounters
and victories against the Devil and the world.

The Epistle. j. John. v.
ALl that is borne of God, overcomes the world. And this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our faith. Who is he that overcomes the world,
but he that believes that Jesus is the son of God? This Jesus Christ is he
that came by water and blud, not by water only, but by water and blud. And it
is the spirit that bears witness, because the spirit is truth. For there
are three which bear record in heaven: the Father, the word, and the holy
Ghost, and these three are one. And there are three which bear record in
earth: the spirit, and water, and blud: and these three are one. If we
receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater. For this is the
witness of God that is greater, which he testified of his son. He that
believes on the son of God, has the witness in him self. He that
believes not God, has made him a lier, because he believes not the record
that God gave of his son. And this is the record, how that GOD has given
unto us eternal life, and this life is in his son. He that has the son,
has life: and he that has not the son of GOD, has not life.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is of that kind of caces that instruct. The state of it is a
doctrine concerning faith, leaning upon the son of God our Lord Jesus
Christ, which faith overcomes sin, death, and receives righteousness and
everlasting life.

The chief places are these.
1 Of faith whereby we are borne of God. 2 Of the object of faith, or of the
person and benefits of Christ. 3 A testimony that the three persons of the
Godhead are all of one substance. 4 Of the ministry of the Gospel, and of the
Sacraments of Baptim and the Lords Supper.
The first place.
THe welspring and soul of godliness and Christen life The commendation of
faith.
and the original and head of our endless welfare, is faith in the son of
God our Lord Jesus Christ our Mediator, King, and Priest: which faith is in no
wise an idle and vain persuasion, but the lively and effectual instrument of
our salvation, whereby we receive intoo us the true knowledge of God,
forgiveness of sins, and all Gods benefits, yea and even God himself, and
overcome sin and death, and obtain righteousness, life, and glory
everlasting.

Of this true and effectual faith there is a notable description A description
of faith.
in this days Epistle, which we will unfold in these words. Faith is a true
perceuerance of Chrysts person and benefits and of all the whole doctrine
delivered by God, and it is an assent whereby we persuade our selves that all
the Articles of the doctrine are true, and in especially believe that Jesus is
the son of God, and Christ or the anointed of God, that is too say, our King,
High priest, Mediator and Redeemer. And it is an assured trust steadfastly
settled in the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, the vanquisher of sin, death
and the Diuil, assuring a man for a certeintie that for Chrysts sake his sins
are released, and himself set in gods favor who receives, heereth, helps,
defends, and freely rewards with life and glory everlasting. This faith in
Christ overcomes the world, that is too say, sin, and the entycementes of
sin, and the Devil himself the Prince of the world, and death which is the
cheef sinew of the Devils power, as is said. j. John. ij. If any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him, for every thing that is of the
world, (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and pride of life) is
not of the Father, but of the world.

Now the life of man upon earth is a continual warfare Man's life a warfare.
and deadly food against four cruel and mighty enemies, that is too wit,
the Devil (who is furnished with a thousand policies too anoy) the sinful
prouocations of our own nature rebelling against the Law of God, the
persecutions of Tyrants: and the afflictions of all sorts both of mind and
body. With these four enemies must al godly folk fight continually as long
as they are in this world. Neither is any man able too overcome them, save he
that is borne of God. But they are borne of GOD, that believe in Who are borne
of God.
Christ, (as is said in the beginning of this Chapter. Every one which
believes that Jesus is Christ, is borne of God) and which with stedye faith
embrace and hold fast the word that is delivered by God, and in whom the holy
Ghost dwelling, purges and puts away the old Leven, or false opinions, and
sinful inclinations and affections: kindles in them a new light, new
ryghtuousnesse, new life, and new obedience agreeing with Gods will.

For in as much as all men are conceived in sin, and How folk are borne a
nevve.
borne the children of wrath and bondslaues of the Devil: they can not become
the sons of God and inheriters of everlasting life and salvation, before such
time as they be borne agein or begotten agein of GOD, that is too say, endewed
with true faith, or new righteousness and life. God regenerateth or begets
men a new, by two means: by the Gospel concerning Christ, or by the word
received by faith, and by the Sacrament of Baptim. j. Pet. j. Ye are borne
agein of incorruptible seed by the word of the living God. John. iiij. Except
a man be borne ageine of water and the holy Ghost, etc. Tit. iij. He has
saved us by the fountain of the newbirth. And these words or terms, just,
ryghtuouse, godly, holy, believing in Christ, borne of God, child or son of
GOD, new man, perfect, sweet or unleavened bread, etc, signify in a manner all
one thing.

The second place.
THe cheef object of faith is our Lord Jesus Christ. And it The cheef object or
thing vvhereon faith rests.
stands the godly in hand too have a right opinion and belief concerning the
person, office and benefits of Christ, according as John says in this
place, that we must believe that Jesus is the son of God, and that he is
Christ, and that he came by water and blood, like as also in this days
Gospel he appoynteth the same end and shooteanker of the story of the Gospel
and of the whole sacred Scripture. These things are written too the intent ye
should believe that Jesus is Christ the son of God, and that by believing ye
might have life in his name.

The name of Son shows that Christ is in very deed The name of Son.
and by nature God, and begotten of the substance of the eternal father, as it
is said in ye Psalm. Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. And in
the Gospel he puts a difference between this only begotten son and the
Saints which are his sons by adoption, and are beloved of the eternal
father, and taken in place of Gods sons and heirs of the life and
blissednesse that is with God, for the intercession of this only begotten son.

Christ or the anointed, signifies the high Priest, or teacher The name Christ.
of the Gospel, the Spokesman and Redeemer of the Church, the King and
conqueror of sin, death, and the Devil, and the restorer of righteousness
and life everlasting.

This Christ came by water and blud: not in water only, Water and blud.
but in water and blud, for he brings the doctrine of the gospel out of the
bosom of the eternal Father, concerning the forgiveness of sins,
righteousness, comfort, the holy Ghost, and everlasting salvation too be
bestowed upon all that are thoroughly put in fear, which wrestle with the
terrors, with Gods wrath, with sin and with death, and thirst or with
earnest desire long after comfort and life, and are washed with the water of
Baptim in token of remission of their sins, as is said in Esai. lv. All ye
that thirst, come too the waters: and John. iiij. and.vij. If any man drink of
the water that I shall give him, it shall become a fountain of water flowing
unto everlasting life.

Neither is he come in water only, that is too say, he is not To come in water.
only a teacher of ye gospel wherewith the thirsty hearts of the godly are
refreshed, but also he is a Redeemer which has with his blud pacified the wrath
of the eternal father against our sins, and redeemed ye whole church from sin,
death, and everlasting damnation. And this holy blud of his does he distribute
too us in his holy supper. Ebr. ix. By his own blud has he entered intoo the
holy place once for all, and has found eternal redemption. Romans iij. We are
justified freely by the grace of God, through the redemption made in Jesus
Christ, whom GOD has set forth a mercy seat by faith in his blood. Math.
xxvj. This is my blud of the new Testament which is shed for many in remission
of their sins.

And it is the spirit that bears witness, that is too say, the The spirit is
a witness of Christ and his doctrine.
holy ghost bears witness of the person and office of Christ, namely y^
this Jesus is Christ, the son of God. and the redeemer that was promised too
the church, as is said John. j. Upon whom thou see the spirit descending and
abiding upon him, the same is he that baptizeth with the holy ghost, and I
saw and bare witness that this is the son of God. Romans j. Who was certainly
showed too be the son of God, by the spirit of sanctification, in that he is
risen from death. Ageine, in the public ministry, the holy ghost preserves,
spreads abroad, and by testimonies of miracles confirms the doctrine
concerning the person and benefits of Christ. Ioh. xv. When the comforter shall
be come, even the spirit of truth whom I will send you from my Father, he
shall bear witness of me, and you also shall bear witness, because you
have bin with me from the beginning.

Because the spirit is truth, or the witness of the holy ghost is true like
as in John. xv. and.xvj. he is called the spirit of truth, because he is
soothfast, and makes folks soothfast, and kindles true knowledge of God, true
righteousness, and true life in the believers.

Of the third place.
THere be three that bear witness in heaven, the Father, The three persons
of the Godhead.
the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one.

Let this evident witness of the one substance or only one selfsame being,
godhead, power, majesty, and glory of the three persons of the godhead, be
considered in this place: and also let the descriptions and differences of the
three persons, namely of the father, and of the son (who in this place and
in Ioh. j. and Apoc. xix. is named the word) and of the holy ghost, be
repeated out of the place concerning God: the cheef points whereof I will anon
after expound upon Trinity Sunday.

The fourth place.
THere are three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, and The end why the
ministry was ordained.
water, and blud, and these three are one.

God has ordained the public preaching of his Gospel, too the intent, the
true doctrine concerning the son of God our lord Jesus Christ who suffered
death and rose agein for us, might be known, and many men be converted too
God by the voice of his Gospel, and so beco^me heirs of ryghtuousnesse and
life everlasting. For God gathers too himself an everlasting Church by the
sound of his word, whereby he both rebukes men's sins, and allureth them
too repentance: and also gives remission of sins and everlasting salvation
too such as repent and believe the word. And always too the word God has
annexed outward signs, which light intoo the eyes, as pictures of his
promises: which signs have all one meening, all one strength, all one use, and
all one effect or working with the word. For by these two means, namely the
word and the outward signs or Sacraments, does God bear witness of his
son, and offers too us forgiveness of sins and everlasting salvation for
his sons sake: and also kindles increases, and strenghtheneth faith in our
minds. And therefore Austin terms a Sacrament, a visible word.

And like as Christ says that the holy Ghost reproves What the word spirit
signifies in the foresaid text.
the world of sin, and bears witness of him: and like as it is said in
Genesis, My spirit shall not judge in man, because he is flesh, that is too
say, I will take away the ministry or use of the holy Ghost from men. So in
this place the word Spirit must most simply be understood of the holy Ghost
reproving the world of sin by the ministry of the Gospel, and bearing
witness of Christ's person and benefits, and of the eternal life.

Water and blud signify the Sacraments of Baptim, What water and blud
signifye.
(which is the Lauer of water cle^zing us clean by the word from all
iniquity) and of the Lords Supper, in which the body and blud of Christ that
was shed for us, is distributed in assurance of remission of sins. And these
three are one, that is too say, they are directed all too one end and have all
one selfsame force, use, and effect. For the means by which God witnesses of
his sons benefits, and by which he imparteth remission of sins and
everlasting life too us, and whereby he rayseth up, increases and confirms
our faith, are always toogither.

Upon the Sunday called Misericordia, or the second Sunday after Easter.
The Introit.
THe earth is full of the Lords mercy. Praise ye the Lord. The heavens are
stablished by the word of God. Praise ye the Lord. Rejoice ye rightuous in
the Lord, praising becomes the ryghtuous. etc. Psalm. xxxij.

The Epistle. j. Peter. ij.
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an ensample that ye should follow his
steps, which did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth: which
when he was reviled, reviled not ageine: when he suffered, he threatened not:
but committed the vengeance too him that judges ryghteously, which his own
self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being delivered from
sin, should live unto righteousness. By whose stripes ye were healed. For
ye were as sheep going astray, but are now turned unto the shepherd, and
Bishop of your souls.

The disposement.
THe state of it is an exhortacion to patience and meekness taken of the
example of Christ who was patient and meek. And therwithall is annexed a
doctrine concerning the merit and benefits of Christ's passion. The ch^ef
places are four.

1 Of patience in troubles which are not procured by a man's own fault, but
happen too him undeserved. It belongs too the first commandment. 2 Of
meekness repressing desire of revenge, and forgiving even open wrongs for
Gods sake and the common quietness. Which perteyneth too the fifth
commandment. 3 Of the causes and effects of Christ's passion, or of remission
of sins, and of the health of our souls restored by Christ's passion. 4 Of
true turning unto God.
The first place.
COncerning patience and meekness, and putting up of reproaches quietly, let
the Methodicall or orderly expositio^s be rehearsed out of the declaration of
the virtues of the first, fifth, and eigth commandments.

Concerning the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the causes and effects
of his passion, which is the chief place of this Epistle, I have entreated
already the last Sunday after Easter.

Now therefore we will unfold the last sentence of the Epistle of this day,
which contains the Doctrine concerning true conversion, and the right
applyment of the benefits of Christ's passion. Ye were as stray sheep, but
now ye are turned to the shepherd and bishop of your souls. These words are
taken out of the.liij. of Esaias, and out of the parable of Christ concerning the
lost sheep. Lu. xv. and out of this days Gospel. John. x. and out of Ezech.
xxxiiij. and out of Psalm. xxiij. and therefore by conferring these places
toogither, there may be gathered a clear proposition.

All man kind without Christ, wandreth in the thick mist Mankind with out
Christ.
of ignorance of God, and in sorrowful darkness of sin and death. And the
wyser and more religious that men be, and with how much the more earnestness
and endeuer they go about too know God and too woorship him aryght: so much
the more do they stray aside from the true God and true godliness, and from
the ryghtuousnesse which pleases God.

The heathen wysemen, Philosophers, Poets, and the folowers Error touching
Gods being.
of Mahomet do openly err: first about the being of God. For either they
allow and woorship a monstrous multitude of Gods and surmised powers: or at
leastwise they deny him y^ is the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, too be the
only true God creator of heaven and earth. Yea they utterly abhor this son of
God who is all one substance with the father.

Secondly they err about the will of God. For although Touching Gods will.
they understand after a sort, that the will of God reveled in his law, is this,
that we should live honestly and uprightly, and eschew the outward offenses of
slaughter, whordom. etc. yet are they able too determine nothing of certeintie
concerning gods love toward us, concerning remission of sins, and concerning
Errors of the papists in serving God.
life, without the gospel of Christ. After all this, not only they, but also
even those that boast themselves to be the cheef members of the true church,
do err manifoldly in doing service to God, and specially in praying: while
some choose the monkish services and woorks, some pilgrimages to Saints, some
masses, some pardons, some other sacrifices, and some one woork, and some
another, every man according too his own fancy, trusting thereby too pacify
God, and too earne life and salvation everlasting. The heathen also offered me^
in sacrifise, and burned their own children in the fire, to the intent by so
hard and bitter a woork, to open to themselves a nearer access unto God. But
al these run very far a stray from the true way yt leads too Christ is the
only way too* God and godliness.
the true God and to eternal salvation. Neither ca^ they by their own power,
devises, or endeuer return agein into the way, unless Christ the shepherd and
Bishop of souls seek them out, and laying them upon his shoulders, carry them
home too his flock and sheepfold, that is too say, unless they be turned too
Christ, who only is the way that leads, brings, and conueyeth us unto God,
and by which alonly we may come too the true acknowledgement and woorshipping
of God, and too the blissed and eternal company with God. He is the truth or
the welspring and founder of the true doctrine concerning God and our own
soulhealth, and he bends our minds to give asse^t too the true doctrine, and
kindles true faith, and true everlasting good things in the hearts of the
godly.

He is Life, that is too say, the author and giver of life and Christ is life.
salvation everlasting, who by his Death has pacified Gods wrath, and
restored ryghtuousnesse and eternal life unto us. Neither comes any man too
the father, that is too say, No man acknowledges, calls upon, and
woorshippeth God aryght, ne becomes heir of salvation and eternal life:
unless he be turned by him and too him who is the shepherd and Bishop of our
souls.

Therefore the Hebrews term repentance (or the ame^dment Repentance.
and changing of a wicked life intoo a life that is virtuous and acceptable
too God,) by the notable and pithy word T^s^ubah, which signifies turning
back or retyring, of the original word Shub, which is as much too say as, he
is returned, he is come back he has called himself home. For all men being
turned from God, have strayed like sheep every man away by himself, as Peter
says in this place. But by the infinite mercy of God, they are called too
repentance, that they should return unto God, and by coming home too their
shepherd Christ, be coupled too God ageine through Faith, and obey him in new
light, ryghtuousnesse and conversation.

In general there be two chief points belonging too a Points of a good
shepherd
good shepherd. The one is to feed his sheep or too lead them too wholesome
feeding: and the other is to defend them from the wolves. For unto these two
points may the other things be referred which are spoken of in Ezech. xxxiiij.
and Psalm. xxiij.

So good Princes which maintein their subjects in honest Good Princes be
shepherds.
awe, peace, and foyzon, (the cheifest benefits in this civil society of men)
and which defend them against outlawes and foreign enemies, are shepherds of
the people.

Good and faithful Bishops or ministers of Churches, are Bishops and ministers
are shepherds.
shepherdes, which lead their hearers intoo wholesome pastures of the
Evangelical doctrine, and of the Sacraments, whereby God imparteth remission of
sins, ryghtuousnesse and everlasting salvation to the sheep yt embrace their
voice by faith: and drive away the Woolues, that is too say, Heretics and
Tyrants by fervent prayer, stout standing too the truth, and evident disprouing
of errors.

But the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ is not a shepherd How Christ is a
shepherd.
and Bishop of our souls, only after the same manner that S. Peter and the
rest of the Apostles and ministers that teach the gospel are: but also he is
our high priest and sacrifise taking up the lost sheep upon his shoulders, and
transferring all our sins, making satisfaction for them with his death and
passion, and even by his own proper power restoring everlasting life and
righteousness unto us. He gives us the holy ghost: he kindles in us new
light, comfort, life and joy settled in God: he defends us from all dangers:
he vpholdeth such as are oppressed with persecution and miseries: he heals
our misdeedes and wounds: he rules the purposes of our vocation: he gives
healthful success: he disapointeth the lets and snares of the Devil: he
represseth the rage of Tyrants: and in the end delivering us from death and
all miseries, he raises us up too everlasting life and glory. And so we see
that in this short text of Peter's, there are contained the cheef and most ample
places of Christen doctrine, concerning sin, true repentance or turning unto
God, the office and benefits of Christ, and the health of our souls: A more
large and full declaration of which things, may be repeted out of my wrytings
that comprehend the sum of the doctrine, and out of the proper and peculiar
exercyses of repentance and faith.

Upon the Sunday called Iubilate, or the third Sunday after Easter.
The Introit.
Be joyful unto the Lord all the earth. Halleluia. Sing Psalms unto his
name. Halleluia. Give glory unto his majesty Halleluia. Say unto God, how
dreadful are thy woorks O Lord in the abundance of thy power. etc. Psalm. lxv^.

The Epistle. j. Peter. ij.
DEerly beloved I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstein from fleshly
lusts which fight against the soul: and se that ye have honest conversation
among the Gentiles, that whereas they backbite you as evil doers, they may see
your good works, and praise God in the day of visitatio^. Submit your selves
therefore to every man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the king as unto
the chief head: either unto rulers, as unto them that are sent of him for the
punishment of evil doers, but for the laud of the^ that do well. For so is the
will of God, that with well doing, ye may stop the mouths of folish and
ignorant men: as free, and not as having the liberty of a cloak for
maliciousness, but eue^ as the servants of god. Honor al me^, love brotherly
fellowship, fear God, honor the king* Servants obey your masters with all fear,
not only if they be good and courteous, but also though they be froward. For it
is thanks worthy if a man for conscience sake toward God endure greef,
suffering wrongfully.

The disposement.
IT is of those kind of cases that persuade. And the state of the Epistle is
this: I exhort you too live honestly, and too be obedient too your superiors.
The places are three.

1 A general precept concerning good manners or new obedience. 2 Of obedience
too be performed too the magistrate, and laws of the country, and of bearing
the burdens of the common weal, yea though they be somewhat too sore. 3 Of
Christen liberty, and the abuse of the same.
The first place.
I Beseech you as strangers and pilgrims* that you abstain from fleshly lusts
which fight against the foul. This first part of ye Epistle is a general
exhortacion too the desire and diligence of doing well, or of repressing sinful
lusts, and to govern all the intents and doings of our life after a godly and
holy manner. Therefore the whole doctrine concerning good woorks or new
obedience, as what it is, why it is to be performed, how it may be done in
this our weakness, and in what wise it pleases god, may be repeated in this
place. The proposition is, Be of good conversation among the Gentiles, that is
to say, live honestly or govern your life and behauior honestly. For
conversation signifies the same thing that life or the purposes and doings of
a man's life. This proposition does Peter co^firm and enlighte^: first, by
entreta^ce: and secondly by setting down ye contrary. Abstein from fleshly
lusts, that is to say, eschew sin, or feed not ye sinful inclinacions and
affections of the flesh, yt is too say of nature corrupted and marred with sin,
which like enemies keep war against the mind lightened with the spirit, or
against the law of God, as is said. To. 8. The meening of ye flesh, or what
soever man's flesh meeneth, thinks, and desires of it self with out the holy
ghost, is enmity against God. To. vij. I see another law in my members (the
same law is it yt he calls here fleshly lusts) fighting against ye law of my
mind (renewed by ye holy ghost) and subduing me to the law of sin which is in my
members. Gal. v. The flesh lusts against the spirit.

Now ye fleshly lusts signify not ye very desires themselves Fleshly lusts
what they be.
created in ye will or sense by god, but ye headiness of ye wicked desires,
affections and doings, raging with great violence against the law of God: as,
in ye mind, darkness and doutfulnesse concerning God: In the will, distrust,
fleshly carelessenesse, pride. etc. and in ye heart, unlawful loves, heats of
irefulnesse, of hatred, of lusts, of desire of revenge, of ambition, of
covetousness, of singularity and such other: out of which as out of a
fountain flow all outward offenses and mischeeues, according as it is truly
said. The grounds from whence all evils do commence, Is heady lust or foul
concupiscence. And in the first of ye Epistle of S. James. Concupiscence
conceyuing, brings forth sin.

Peter uses a very notable and veheemnt kind of speech when he says that the
fleshly lusts or sinful affections do keep war against the soul: that is to
say, like sturdy and cruel soldiers march forth with violent and enemylike
rage against the judgment or commandment of reason renewed by the holy Ghost.
Which encounter or deadly ^^^d between the flesh and the spirit, even in those
that be regenerated, Paul describes with notable words and sentences. Romans
vij. Gal. v. And the encounter of faith and virtues kindled by the holy Ghost,
against vices and lusts bidding them battle, is excellently described in
most lively manner by Prudentius in the battle of the soul: which encounter
the godly do every one of them daily feel within their own hearts.

3 Peter enlarges his proposition with making mention of the enforcing cause,
I beseech you as strangers and Pilgrims. For seeing we have not in this
world a continuing City or a quiet seat and place of rest, but that our home
is in heaven: let us also cast away the desires and lusts of this world, and
lead a holy and heavenly life acceptable too God.

4 He makes mention of one of the final causes of good works: Namely, too
the intent the slanders of the ungodly which father horrible wickednesses
upon the Christen religion, might be proved untrue: and by our godliness,
modesty, and other examples of virtues, many may be allured too learn and
love the Doctrine of the true Church, and thereuppon turning unto Christ,
glorify God, as is said in the fifth of Matthew. Let your light so shine before
men that they may see your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven.

The second place, of the civil Magistrate.
NO worldly power, no armies do more strongly fortify Magistrates ordained by
God.
and maintein the authority of the civil ordinance and the obedience due too
the magistrate, than these commandments of God. j. Peter the second, and
Romans the xiij. which do most streytly charge men too obey the magistrate,
and all man's ordinance or civil order, which in deed is the work of God,
and a singular witness of his wisdom, ryghtuousnesse, and goodness. For God
by his wisdom has made differences in the degrees of persons which rule and
are ruled: as of Magistrates and subjects, Husbands and wives, parents and
children, etc. Also he has by his own voice set forth Laws of virtues* and
of al duties to be performed, too Godward, too the Magistrates, and too other
men: and has appointed and established a form of judgments which are the
defense and execution of the Laws, a Rule of vpryghtnesse too be observed in
bargayning, handycraftes needful for the life, Laws of successions,
punishments of transgressers, defenses of good men, lawful taxes and
tallages, warfare and the law of arms, and all other parts of eiuill order
and policy* too the intent he may be known too be present in all commonweals: and that the duties of justice may be understood and executed, and
that honest discipline, peace, the Universities and Schools of lerning, and
other good things may be maynteyned among mankind.

This civil order is with great ^^ede too be discerned from the vices and
confusions which the f^endes and their instruments, (that is too wit, ungodly
and Tyrannical Governors) do foyst intoo the order appointed by God. And let
the diffinition of a Magistrate be considered, which Paul Romans xiij. and
Peter in this Epistle have set forth.

A Magistrate is a Minister appointed by Gods ordinance The definition of a
Magistrate
and armed with Laws and sword, too be ye keeper of outward discipline and
peace, and too punish th(...) dooers, and too defend and praise the well dooers.

Peter wills men too obey the worldly Magistrate, and Magistrates must be
obeyed as God.
the ordinances and laws made by man that is a Lawful Magistrate, for the
Lord Gods sake, who most straightly commands obedience, and will have
Magistrates too be his deputies and ministers, and the setters forth of his
wisdom, and the executers of his divine Justice: and therefore he vouchsaueth
Magistrates the name of Gods. Psalm. lxxxij. I have said ye are Gods. And
hereuntoo also may the most grave sentence of Plutarch be referred:

Justice is the end of the Law, the Law is the work An excellent saying.
of the Gouerner, the Gouerner is the Image of God who beautifieth all things,
and by virtue the gouerner makes himself like unto God.

Wherefore, for Gods sake who is the author of civil government, let us be
subject too our King and his Capteyns which are sent by him, that is too say,
by God or the King too punish the ungracious, and too maynteyne the good, and
too honor them with rewards. For in that respect are they called gracious
Lords. Luc. xxij.

And men must patiently obey, not only the good, courteouse, Obedience too
Princes, Lords, and Masters for conscience sake.
and gracious, but also the rough, hard, crabbed, and froward Lords or
Masters: yea and bondage (even though it be somewhat with the streyghtest) is
too be endured, as long as we may obey without sin. But all services become
harder and greeuouser in this old age of the forworne world: for as the sins
of the world increase, so also the punishements and miseries as well public
as private are heaped one upon another. Therefore we must the more patiently
bear the burdens of the Magistrates though they be even with the forest. And
although we have before God deserved all punishments: yet notwithstanding when
we have unjust burdens laid upon us by the Magistrate or by others, we may
bear the burden with so much the more quiet mind, because our conscience is
assured that we are blameless. For what soever a man suffers unworthily,
is to be borne patiently: But when the pain ensewes desert, it comes too work
thee woe and smart. And therefore S. Peter in this place says: It is worth
thanks if a man suffer punishment for conscience sake to Godward. That is too
say, it deserves thanks or praise, or it is acceptable too GOD, when a man
bears out injuries patiently in a just quarrel or in Gods behalf. For it is
the cause that makes a Martyr, and not the martyring of him.

The third place.
CHristen liberty is not a lawlesnesse too follow all kind Christen libe^^tie.
of concupiscence and wickedness, and to do what a man lists, as the
seditious Bowers dreamed, who thought them selves exempted from payment of
tributes and from obedience too be performed too the civil Magistrate,
because all Christen men are in^raunchysed intoo the liberty of the sons of
God through Christ. Uerely these men made the Christen liberty a cloak of
their malice. For the christen liberty is a clear riddance from sin, from
Gods wrath, from curse of the Law, and from endless death, given too us by
and for the son of God, who was as a servant and dyed for us: and not an
exemption from the obedience that is too be performed too God or too the
civil Magistrates, as is showed more at large in an other place.

Upon the Sunday called Cantate, or the fourth Sunday after Easter. Sing unto
the Lord a new song, etc. Psalm. 97.
The Epistle. James. j.
EVery good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of lyghtes, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of
change. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we
should be the first fruits of his creatures. Wherefore (dear brethren) let
every man be swifte too hear, slow to speak, slow too wrath. For the wrath
of man works not that which is ryghtuous before God. Wherefore lay a part
all filthynesse, and superfluity of maliciousness, and receive with
meekness the word that is graffed in you, which is able to save your souls.

The disposement. The cheef places are five. The first place is
AN evident proof that God is not the cause of evil. For Not God but we our
selves are cause of evil too our selves.
the beginning of this Epistle matcheth with y^ discourse going before, in
which James has taught that God tempts no man, that is too say, enforces
no man too sin or too fall, but that each man is tempted of his own
concupiscence, (that is too say of his own sinful inclinations) or of the
darkness and vnrulynesse of all the powers of man raging against the Laws of
God. This concupiscence like a welspring bredeth and brings forth actual
sins even in the regenerate, when (over and besides the mistiness of mind,
and the sinful inclinations, and the sodein brayds of affections,) there
comes also an assent or agreement of the will, and a full purpose too commit
the sin even in outward woork. And so has sin his being, not of God, but of
concupiscence sticking in us, or of original sin which is bred and borne
with us. And therefore does James right sagely affirm, that nothing comes
from God but good, as is said in Genesis, God saw all things that he had made,
and behold they were exceeding good, and Psalm. 91. They shall declare that our
Lord GOD is ryghtuouse, and there is no iniquity in him. The same is the
meening of James in this place: Every good gift is from above, and comes from
the Father of light with whom there is no variableness nor shadowing of
change, that is too say, like as God is good: so there proceeds nothing but
good from him. Yea, all good things, virtue, wisdom, and happiness in
compassing things, are the gifts of God only, according too this text, what
have thou which thou have not received? And godlyly and sagely says one in
Plutarch: God has made these things, and he does lend his hand unto me.

All good things come down from the Father of light, Good things are all of
God, and none evil comes of him.
that is too say from God who is the souerein and eternal light, or the
fountain of light and of al good things. And in as much as he is unchangeable
and always good without alteration, and shyning with light of ryghtuousnesse
and vpryghtnesse, he is never turned or shadowed with the darkness of sin,
or at any time the cause of sin, as is said in Deuteronomy. xxxij. God is void of
all iniquity, vpryght and ryghtuouse. Let this text therefore be joined with
the rest which auouche God not too be the cause of sin: and against all the
sleyghtye disputations concerning Gods foresight, and sufferance of sins, and
mayntena^ce of the nature that sins, set this one true, certain, and
immovable sentence, with which the sounder sort even of the Heathen also do
agree. As Euripides in his Bellerophon says: If the Gods peocure any
dishonestie, then are they no Gods.

And Plato also most reverently in the second book of his Common weal the.
390. page, says: It is too be endeuered with all earnestness, that inasmuch
as God is good, no man may (in this common weal which we will have too be
well governed,) say that he is cause of any evil* neither young man nor old
man, either in Poetry or in other Discourse.

The second place: Concerning regeneration.
GOD of his own good will has begotten us with the word of truth, that we
might be the first fruits of his creatures.

God by his word or by his law has kindled in men's Regeneration or
newbirth.
minds a knowledge of their sins, and a fearfulness and greef rising of the
feeling of Gods wrath against sin. And afterward by showing in his gospel
the remission of sins too be given freely for Christ's sake, he kindles
faith in their hearts, whereby they persuade themselves assuredly, that their
sins are released: and intoo the hearts of them that believe he pours the
holy Ghost, who by little and little mortifieth the remnant of sin, and
woorketh new light and new ryghtuousnesse or obedience agreeing with the will of
God. This whole conversion of a man wrought by the ministry of the word or
Gospel, and of Baptim, is called Regeneration, of which is spoken in John. j.
and.iij. j. Pet. j. and elsewhere more at large.

For as by Adam men are begotten of mortal seed of the A similitude.
flesh too this bodyly life subject too sin and death: So are we begotten a
new of pure and incorruptible seed by the word of the living God, and as it
were created a new, too a new and spiritual and eternal life, which is the true
knowledge and calling upon God, true confidence settled in god, and true and
earnest love and obedience, which are the sacrifise and services most
acceptable too God. John. xvij. This is the eternal life, that they
acknowledge the true God, etc. We are his work created too good woorks.

Too the enlightening of this short saying of James, there may be brought in
the sermons that are in John. j. As many as received him, he gave them power
too beco^me the sons of GOD, too them that believe in his name, which are not
borne, neither of the seed nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God. Ioh. iij. Unless a man be borne from above, he can not see
the kingdom of God.

The third place is
A Precept concerning willingness to lern, and the shunning Against rash
speaking, and hasty judgment.
of headye judgment, and babbling which gives sentence rashly of gods
sufferance or determination concerning sins and fallings. And it is a
general warning that we should be swift and vns^outhfull too here, but slow
to speak and well advised ere we judge. Which warning perteyneth too the whole
life of man, and specially too the study of divinity and of other, in which
nothing is more hurtful, than to^ be ripe too soon, and to carry about a
vain persuasion of lerning, and to determine upon most weighty co^trouerfies
rashly and headely. Therefore did Pythagoras enioyn fyueyeeres silence too his
Disciples, yt they should not rashly burst forth to teaching others, before
they had furnished their own breast with true and substantial lerning, yea and
grounded themselves in their doctrine by practyze of certain years.

And Nazianzene wittely reproves the fondness or pride of those that become
teachers upon the sodein, as the Giants in the Fables of the Poets are said
too be bred and borne upon the sodein. These as a most noisome plage does
Plato in Thaeeteto will men too shun, describing the^ among their things in
these words. None of these heereth another man too the intent too learn, but
they breed of their own accord, and burst out with sodein brayde when the toy
takes them in the head: and they think no man knows aught but themselves. For
as much as such selfelerned and selfewilled Doctors import very great harm
and assured destruction too the Church, let us with all earnestness,
diligence, and heed, obey this rule of James, that we be swift, quick,
cheerful, and always redye too here and learn: but in speaking and teaching
slow and circumspect, or (that I may use Platos words) desirous too learn,
desirous too here, and always inquisitiue. For therefore has God given us
two ears and but one tongue, yt he might do us too understand how there be mo
things too be herd than too be spoken.

The fourth place is of of brydling yrefulnesse, and specially Against a^ge^
and trea^nesle.
of brydling impatience or grudge and repyning against God in adversities o^
when things go against us, of which is spoken in the first and fifth
commandments. Men offend very sore in all their life, but specially in their
adversities, hurting themselves and others through impatience. Therefore let us
have before our eyes, the admonishements of other wise me^, as O fool, anger
in adversity avails not.

And in the same Tragedy: Thou give place too anger which always vndooth
thee. And also inespecially this saying of James, The wrath of man works not
the things that are ryghtfull before God, like as Theodosius in his anger flew
five thousand giltlesse people at Thessalonica. Job, Jeremy, and many other
godly persons offended in their troubles thorough wrathfulnesse. Therefore let
us bridle wrath, partly with thinking upon other caces and perilles, and
inespecially with the example of Christ, who says: Learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly of heart.

The fifth is: A general exhortation too eschew sin, and too embrace and hold
faithfully the word of God, which is ye power of God. Therefore laying aside
all uncleanness (that is too say, sin that is bred and borne with us) and
abundance of malice, that is too say, the maliciousness and actual sins
that flow out of it. Embrace ye faithfully and keep ye the seed of Gods
word sown in you, of which you be borne a new, as he said before: Of his own
good will begat he us with the word of truth, by which only and none
otherwise God imparteth forgiveness of sins and everlasting salvation unto
us.

Upon the Sunday called Vocem Iucunditatis, or the.v. Sunday after Easter.
Utter ye the voice of gladness, and let it be heard. Halleluia. Show it
forth too the uttermost bounds of the earth, for the Lord has delivered his
people. Halleluia.

The Epistle. Jacob. ^.
SEe that ye be doers of the word, and not heerers only, deteyning your own
selves. For if any man hear the word, and declares not the same by his
works, he is like unto a man beholding his bodyly face in a glass. For
as soon as he has looked on himself, he goes his way, and forgets
immediately what his fashion was. But who so looks in the perfect law of
liberty, and continues therein (if he be not a forgetful hearer, but a
dooer of the work) the same shall be happy in his deed. If any man among you
seem too be devout, and refrayneth not his tongue, but deceyueth his own
heart, this man's devotion is in vain. Pure devotion, and undefiled before God
the father is this: to visit the fatherles and widows in their adversity, and
to keep himself unspotted of the world.

IN the Sermon of this day, Tauler expounding this most sweet promise of
Christ's. How much rather shall your heavenly father give the holy Ghost too
those that ask, recites that excellent saying which is cited in the place
concerning Invocation, and which otherwise also is wont too be often repeated
and beaten intoo men's heads in our churches, Man's mind is never so greedy
too receive, but that God is much more ready too give, for he is soothfast and a
keeper of his promises.

It was the custom of all Christendom a late years, too Rogation week.
make public processions these two days following, intoo ye feeldes near
unto their Cities and toun^s, and too make solemn prayers for obteinment of
luckie increase of ye fruits of the earth, and for peace, and other good things
at gods hand. And thereupon it was called Rogation week or the week of public
prayers, and the Sunday was called the Rogation day.

Now forasmuch as true invocation is the cheifest and highest Of Invocation and
prayer.
woorshipping of God and the chief ^uttresse and wall of the Church and of all
the godly: and in those Letanies or open Rogations there were many corruptions
of true invocation, and in especial Idolatrous woorshipping of Saints
received and stablished: it is be houefull too open too the heerers, a sound
sum of the true doctrine concerning the right invocation of God comprehended
in this most sweet saying of this days gospel, Verily, verily, I say unto
you, whatsoever ye ask of the father in my name, he will give it you. Ask and
ye shall receive, that your joy may be perfect. Therefore I exhort the well
minded, that in the public exposition of this days gospel, they diligently
consider the doctrine of true invocation, and often beat upon it, and daily
apply the same to their use. For Invocation is the cheef and most highest
honoring of God, whereby our hearts being stirred through the instinct of the
holy ghost, do with true and earnest motion (upon trust of our mediator
Christ) ask and look for all good things both ghostly and bodily, present and
too come, at the true God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, assuredly
warranting our selves that we are herd, and obtein the good things which we
ask, according too his promises.

The parts of all true Invocation or Prayer, are six.
FIrst the calling upon the true God ye eternal father of our The parts of
true prayer.
Lord Jesus Christ made manifest in his church by his assured word, and by his
son now sent: Not feyned Gods, not Jupiter, Apollo, or Pallas, not holy men
that are dead: but the only true God, the father, the son and the holy Ghost
must be called upon.

Secondly the consideration of Gods most straight commandment, which wills
the good things that are promised, too be demanded and looked for at Gods
hand: as in this days gospel, Ask and ye shall receive. Luke* xviij. Pray
always. Psalm. xlix. Call upon me in the day of thy trouble.

Thirdly, repentance or acknowledgement of our sins and of our own
unworthiness, as Daniel confesses himself in his ix. chapter: we have
sinned, we have done amiss. To thee O Lord be righteousness, but unto us
confusion offace.

Fourthly, the calling too mind of the promises concerning remission of
sins, and the heering of our prayers for Christ our mediators sake, as is
said in this days gospel: whatsoever ye shall ask of the father in my name,
he will give it you* if ye ask it in such manner as he has expressed in his
word: Spiritual benefits peremptorily and without any condition: and
temporal or worldly benefits and deliverance from troubles with exception:
first of our own profit and welfare, if he of his fatherly wisdom shall think
the thing too be profitable and wholesome which we ask. Secondly of* the
cross or chastisement of the godly, as is said in Mark, they shall receive
house and lands, howbeeit with tribulation. Thirdly we must not apoint God the
manner and time of our deliverance, according too this saying: if the Lord make
taryance, abide thou his leisure. And fourthly, bodily benefits are not too be
gotten by our own devises, before God bestow them upon us.

Fifthly, faith embrasing gods promis, and assuring it self certainly that a
man's sins are released and his prayers herd for Christ the mediators sake.

Sixthly, the reckening up of the things that are too be asked as well Ghostly
as bodily, which by Christ himself are included in seven petitions. This
profitable and necessaris What divinity is.
Doctrine: let the well minded diligently and earnestly learn and exercise* For
the whole divinity or doctrine concerning God, is not a co^ templatiue
science, whose end consists only in knowledge: But it is also a woorkfull
conscience which consists in daily exercises of repentance, faith,
Invocation, adversities and comfortes: and is too be practysed and put in ure
in all the deuyses and doings of our life, like as James admonishes us in
this present Epistle, that it is not enough too here the doctrine of the
gospel, and too allow of it: and that they are deceived which bestow the whole
effect of their godliness upon that point: But yt there must be joined unto
it faith and obedience as well of the heart as of outward woorks, and (that I
may use the words of Herodotus) thou must make thy deeds like unto thy
words.

Now are there, of the whole Epistle of this day, two parts.
THe first warns us that we have need of new obedience or amendment of life
according too Gods word, as Christ says, blissed are they that hear the
word of God and keep it, by faith with a good conscience.

James co^pareth Gods word too a glass, in which we behold Gods word a
looking glass
both the filth of our sins, which is too be scoured of and cleused: and
also the rule of Gods will, according too which all the devises and doings of
our life are too be directed. They therefore that here the word of God and
do it not, or which endeuer not too wash of the filth and uncleanness of their
nature, and too eschew sins, and too begin a new and fair life agreeing with
the word of God, they (I say) are like a man that beholds his bodily shape
in a glass, and thinks no whit of changing the faults of his countenance.
But he ye looks intoo the perfect law of liberty, that is too say, he that
diligently heereth, lerneth, and considers the doctrine of the gospel, by
which we are delivered from death, and continues in steadfast faith and
obedience of life: he (because he is not a forgetful heerer but also a
performer of the woork,) shall be blissed in his woork, that is too say, shall
witness and declare himself too be blissed, because he expresses true faith
in his deeds. For it is not the meening of James, that we become ryghtuous
before God, by our own woorks and well doings, for he himself in the Synod of
the Apostles. Act* xv. ratifieth this decree, we believe our selves too be
saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. And all the whole Doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles, witnesses us too be made blissed or saved through
free mercyfor Christ's sake only.

Therefore the true blissednesse and christen Religion, is True blissednesse.
too acknowledge God and his son our Lord Jesus Christ aryght, according too
his word, and too have remission of sins for Chrysts sake, and through this
knowledge of Christ foreshyning in us, too bridle our tung by faith in our talk
concerning God, Gods services, and other things, that it speak not things
repugnant too the word of God, and too do good too the fatherless and
widows, and too keep our selves undefiled from the world, that is too wit,
from all sin.

Upon the day of the Assension of Gods son intoo Heaven.
The Epistle. Acts. j.
IN my former treatise (dear Theophilus) we have spoken all that Jesus beegan
too do and teach, until the day in which he was taken up after that he
through the holy Ghost, had given commandments unto the Apostles, whom he
had chosen, too whom also he showed himself alive after his Passion (and that
by many tokens) appearing unto them forty days, and speaking of the kingdom
of God, and gathered them toogether, and commanded them that they should not
depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the father, whereof
(says he) ye have heard of me. For John truly baptized with water, but ye
shall be baptized with the holy ghost, after these few days. When they
therefore were come toogether, they asked of him, saying: Lord, will thou at
this time restore again the kingdom of Israel? And he said unto them: it is
not for you to know the times or the seasons which the father has put in his
own power. But ye shall receive power after the holy Ghost is come upon you.
And ye shall be witnesses unto me, not only in Jerusalem, but also in all
Iewry, and in all Samaria, and even unto the worlds end. And when he had spoken
these things, while they beheld, he was taken up on hie, and a cloud received
him out of their sight. And while they looked steadfastly up toward heaven as
he went, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel, which also said; ye
men of Galilee, why stand ye gasing up intoo heaven? This same Jesus which is
taken up from you intoo heaven, shall so come, even as ye have seen him go
intoo heaven.

The disposement.
A sum of the doctrine concerning Christ's Ascension, out of the readings
upon the Acts of the Apostles.

The chief places are four.
1 The story of Christ's Ascension and triumph is too be considered. 2 A
doctrine of the use and fruit or benefits of the Ascension of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 3 A description of Christ's kingdom. 4 An exposition of the phrases in
the Articles of our belief: he ascended intoo heaven, and sits at the right
hand of God the father almighty.
The first place.
THe foundation of the Christen faith, of true comfort in The Anker^old of
christian welfare,
death and all adversities, and of the resurrection of our bodies and of
everlasting salvation, is the story of the resurrection and triumph of the
son of God our Lord Jesus Christ ascending into heaven, leading captivity
captive, and sitting at the right hand of God, as Paul shows evidently. j.
Cor. xv. If Christ be not risen from Death, then is our preaching in vain,
and in vain is your Faith, and you are still in your sins. And if we trust
in Christ but in this life only, then are we most wretched of all men.
Therefore let those that be well minded diligently and heedfully read the whole
story of Christ's resurrection and Ascension, and gather the testimonies or
proofs (as Luke names them in this place) which avouch Christ too be in his
own very body and in very deed risen from the dead, and ascended intoo heaven.
As for the record of those too whom Christ showed himself after his rising
from death, they are declared in the holy days of Easter last past.

Agein, y^ he might not seem too have bin a ghost, but might Christ's
conversation with his disciples after his resurrection.
show himself to be rise^ in deed with his true body, he was visibly conuersa^t
by the space of whole. xl. days toogither, with the Apostles and a great
congregation of that time, (for Paul declares that he was seen of mo than
five hundred brethren at once) and in his company a great sort of the fathers
and prophets that were raised with him, as Matthew says, that many bodies of
Saints which had slept rose with Christ, and came intoo the holy City, and
were seen of many. And Epiphanius declares yt our first father Adam arose
with Christ. It is a good likelyhode therefore that these Saints which rose age
in with Christ, were the first fathers and prophets too who^ the promis was
first made of the seed that should crush the serpents head and vanquishe sin and
death, and restore righteousness and life ever lasting: as Adam, Abel, Seth,
Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Eve, Sara, Rebecca. etc. With these did
Christ and his Apostles, and Mary the moother of Christ, and other godly folk
of that time talk toogither by the space of full. xl. days concerning the
kingdom of God, divine revelations, the fall of the first man, the promis of the
seed, the wonderful gathering and defending of the Church, the ministry of
the Gospel, the redemption of mankind, and the restoreme^t of righteousness
and everlasting life, as is expressly said in this place: He was visibly
conversant with them by the space of xl. days, talking of the kingdom of God.
Also the contents and sum of these sermons of Christ's, which he made those
xl. days, are noted in Luke xxiiij. where it is written yt he expounded al ye
testimonies concerning Christ which are written in Moses, ye Psalms and the
prophets, and commanded repentance and forgiveness of sins too be preached
in his name. John. xx. As my father sent me, so send I you. Receive ye the
holy Ghost. etc. And in Math. xxviij. and Mark. xvj. the commission of
preaching the gospel and of Baptim, are repeted.

After this scholing by the space of. xl. days, in which (by many most clear
certain, credit worthy, and infallible testimonies) he showed himself too be
risen in his own very body and in very deed, and that the doctrine of the
Gospel concerning the kingdom of God is true and from heaven: He led his
Disciples intoo Bethanie, and from thence to Mount Oliuet, where lifting up his
hands he had his Disciples farewell. Luke. xxiiij. and in most glorious triumph
accompanied with an innumerable multitude of Angels, and with that great train
of holy fathers which were risen with him, was carried up intoo heaven in the
sight of his Disciples, where he has set himself down at the right hand of
God, reigning in equal power and majesty with God the father almighty. j.
Pet. iij. Mark. xvj. Act j. Luk* xxiiij.

And too the setting forth of this story of Christ's Ascension, let the
description of his tryumphe ascending intoo heaven, he added which is written
by David in the Psalm. lxviij. The chariot of God with thousands of thousands
rejoicing, God is among them upon the holy hill of Sinai. He is ascended intoo
heaven, he has led captivity captive, and he has given gifts too men. Our
God is the God of salvation, and our Lord is the Lord that delivers out of
death.

For like as they that tryumphed at Rome, were carried Christ's tryumphant
As^^nsion.
in tryumphant Charyot through the City too the Capitol, upon which attended
many thousands of men, and Kings and Princes were led before the Charyot as
prisoners, and rewards were wont too be given among the Souldyoures: So the
Psalm peynteth out Christ (the conqueror of Death and the Devils kingdom,)
sitting in a triumphant Charyot, too be carried up intoo heaven, before a
great host of the Church of that time, with clappyng of hands of thousand
thousands of Angels: and the feends and all the kingdom of hell too be led
prisoners before his charyot, (as it is said in the second too the Collossians,
that he spoiled rule and power, and made a show of them openly, and tryumphed
over them in his own person,) and most large and bountiful gifts of the
holy Ghost and of everlasting salvation be poured out by the king Christ, who
gives, some too be Apostles, some Prophets, some Shepherdes, and some
Teachers, too the intent we may all come intoo the unity of faith, and of the
acknowledgement of the son of God, as is said more at large. Ephesians. iiij.

The second place.
We will recite six of the cheef benefits of our Lord Jesus Christ, builded
upon this saying of the psalm cited by Paul Ephe. iiij. He ascended up
aloft, led captivity captive and gave gifts too men.

The first and peculiar benefit of Christ the Redeemer Deliverance from sin,
death, and the Devil.
ascending up aloft, is too deliver the Church from the captivity of sin,
death, the Devil, and the whole kingdom of Hell, wherein all men are hild
prisoners. That Christ has brought this deliverance too pass, he shows
evidently, when by the power of his Godhead having vanquished death and the
kingdom of the Devil: he ascends intoo heaven and leads captivity
captive. Psalm. 68. Ephe. iiij. Hereuntoo may be referred the like texts out of
Zachar. ix. Thou have brought the prisoners out of the pit. Ose. ix. I will rid
them from the hand of death. I will redeem them from death. O death I will be
thy death, O Hell I will be thy sting. Psalm. xiij* Who shall give salvation
too Israel out of Sion, when the Lord shall have turned away the captivity of
his people. Psalm. lxxxiiij. Thou have turned away the captivity of Jacob.

Secondly, he ascended intoo heaven, too the intent that executing Mediatorship.
his peculiar office of Mediatorship and high Priest in his own very temple,
he may make intercession for his Church too the eternal father, and perform
the duty of an advocate and Patron, as it is said Hebr. ix. Christ is
entered intoo heaven it self, that he may appear in the sight of God for us.
Roma. viij. Christ being raised from death, sits at the right hand of the
father too make intercession for us. j. John. ij. If any man sin, we have an
Advocate with God the father even Jesus Christ the ryghtuouse. Hebr. iiij.
Therefore seeing we have a high Priest who has perced the heavens, even Jesus
the son of God, etc. Let us approach with boldness too the throne of grace,
that we may receive mercy.

Thirdly, he is ascended aloft, that he may give gifts unto Giving of gifts
unto men.
men, namely that upon such as believe the gospel he may pour out the holy
ghost, who kyndleth true knowledge and calling upon God in all the godly, and
garnisheth ye church with sundry gifts needful to the spredding abroad of the
gospel, and sends forth Apostles, Evangelists, Shepherdes, and Teachers
intoo the work of the Ministry for the restorement of the Saints, etc.
Ephe. iiij.

Fourthly, by Christ's ascension intoo heaven, the way Opening our way intoo
heaven.
thither is set open for us also. And like as Christ in his own body or in
his humane flesh is ascended intoo heaven, where his godhead was before: So our
bodies being raised out of the dust of the earth unto immortal life, shall be
carried up into heaven, and there be garnished with everlasting life, and
glory. j. These. iiij. Those that dye in Christ shall rise first: then we
that are living, shall be taken up with them in the clouds, too meet the Lord in
the air, and so we shall be with the Lord for ever. Ioh. xiij. In my fathers
house be many dwellings, I go too prepare you a place, and John. xvij. Father,
I will y^ those which thou have given me, be where soever I am etc. This
fourth benefit does Tertullia^ set forth with a most grave sentence. Jesus
sits at the right hand of the father: Man, though also God: The last Adam
though also the first word: flesh and blud, though purer than ours, yet
notwithstanding he is the selfsame both in substance and shape, in which he
ascended, and such also shall he come down agein as the Angels affirm. He being
termed the vmper between GOD and man, and having committed too him a pawn of
either part too keep, keeps also the pawn of flesh in himself, as a
scantling of the whole piece. For like as he has left us the scantling of the
spirit: so has he also received of us the scantling of our flesh, and carried
it up intoo heaven in token that the whole piece shall be brought thither in
time too come. Be of good cheer flesh and blood, for you have gotten both
heaven and the kingdom of God in Christ, etc.

Fifthly, Christ's ascending up intoo heaven, warns Putting away of
worldliness*
us too lay a side all desire of earthly things, and too set al our care upon
this point, how we may come too our celestial country of the kingdom of
heaven. Math. vj. First seek the kingdom of God. Coloss. iij. Seek for the
things that are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God: regard
heavenly things and not earthly things.

Sixthly, the cause why Christ went up visibly, was too Too raise our minds
toward heaven.
show unto his Disciples, that he vanished not away like a Ghost, and that
they should not thencefoorth enjoy Christ's visible company: and that his
kingdom should not be worldly, wherein there should be one visible head
guarded with armor and armies.

The third place: Of Christ's kingdom.
LVke writes that Christ forty days full after his Resurrection did talk
with his Apostles concerning the kingdom of God, and that the Apostles
dreaming yet still of a bodily kingdom of the Messiah, asked Christ, whyther
that were the time that he would restore the kingdom of Israel. And therefore
I will in this place repete the whole definition of the kingdom of God.

The kingdom of Christ or the kingdom of God, in this The kingdom of God or
of Christ.
life, is Gods government, whereby he not only maynteyneth and preserves all
things by him created, and specially mankind, and punishes the wicked: but
also through the preaching of the Gospel done by Christ and the Apostles and
other Ministers, gathers too himself a Church, that is too say, a company
of men ryghtly acknowledging and calling upon God, who forgiueth their sins,
and delivers them from the Devils Tyranny, not by politic Laws and bodily
weapons, but by the holy Ghost and his word, defending them wonderously when
they are oppressed with persecution in this life, and at length raising them up
from death and crowning them with glory and life everlasting. By this
definition it appears that Christ's kingdom is not bodyly or worldly, as the
Apostles dreamed, that the time was now at hand in which the Israelites should
have the souereintie of all nations: but that it is spiritual, which shall be
governed and mainteyned by y^ only word of ye gospel and the woorking and
power of the holy ghost, and not by force of arms and man's power, according
as Christ interpreting the sayings of the Prophets concerning the kingdom of
the Messiah, says in this place: ye shall receive power or strength and
ableness too spread abroad and too establishe Christ's kingdom, of the holy
Ghost, whose gifts shall be sheaded out abundantly upon you, and you shall be
unto me, not Captains or warryours, but witnesses, that is too say,
Preachers of the Evangelical doctrine, whereby you shall enlarge the bounds of
Christ's kingdom throughout all Iewrie and Samaria, yea and too the uttermost
costs of the earth, and subdue men unto Christ, that they may obey and believe
his Gospel. Unto this place may the like sayings be referred, John. ix. My
kingdom is not of this world. Lur. xxij. The Kings of the Gentyles are Lords
over them* but you shall not be so. Saint John says in his twentieth Chapter
of his Gospel: As my Father has sent me, so send I you. And under the name
of Gods kingdom are comprehended these things following.

First, the preservation and maintenance of the whole nature of things created
by God, or Gods general operation and woorking.

Secondly, the gathering of the Church by the ministry of the Gospel.

Thirdly, the very doctrine of the gospel it self, by which the kingdom of
Christ is mainteyned.

Fourthly, all benefits which Christ bestows upon his Church, as true
knowledge of God, forgiveness of sins, deliverance from sin and death, and
the heritage of eternal life.

And fifthly, the beholding and company of GOD, as life, light,
ryghtuousnesse, wisdom, and joy everlasting wherewith all the godly shall be
filled in heaven. By this declaration of the word it appears, that when
Christ talked full fortye days with his Disciples, he instructed his Apostles
^ath diligently and at large in all the points of Christian Doctrine, and in
all such things as are necessary too the true knowing of God, too the
government of the Church, and too true godliness and our eternal welfare.

The fourth place.
AN exposition of the phrases, He ascended intoo heaven, and sits on the
right hand of God the Father almighty.

The Article of our faith concerning the Ascension of Christ intoo heaven, is
set forth in the word of GOD with many notable records. As in the four and
twentieth Chapter of the Gospel of Saint Luke the Evangelist. Further in the
sixtenth Chapter of Saint Marks Gospel. And in the three score and eight
Psalm of David the Prophet. And likewise in the fourth Chapter too the
Ephesians. Item in the third Chapter of the first Epistle of Saint Peter the
Apostle. And in the sixth and the twentieth Chapters of Saint John the
Evangelist.

And forasmuch as I have a little before spoken of the benefits in Christ's
Ascension, too the intent the Phrase may be the ryghtlyer understood, I will
now declare the significations of this word Heavens.

For the first Heaven in the holy Scripture, signifies the sky, or the nine
Celestial compasses: That is too wit, the first moveable or mouer, the
Firmament or compass which is decked with the fixed Stars, and the seven
compasses or welkins of the Planets, which stars the Scripture calls the
powers or host of heaven. As is said by the holy Prophet David in the thr^^
(...) thirteth Psalm. By the word of the Lord the heavens are stablished, and
all the powers or host of heaven by the breath of his mouth.

The second Heaven signifies the air. As it is written in the sixthe Chapter
of Saint Mathewes Gospel. Behold, the Fowls of heaven, that is too say, that
fly in the air. And in the third Chapter of Salomons Proverbs. The way of
an Eagle in the Heaven. And in the eight Chapter of the third book of the
kings. If the heaven be shut up and it rain not.

Thirdly, too be in Heaven, is too enjoy the sight of GOD, too please GOD, and
being delivered from sin and Death, too enjoy the wisdom, ryghtuousnesse,
life, and joys of GOD, which are begone by Faith here on earth, and finished
in the everlasting life in Heaven. As Saint Mark in the tenthe Chapter of his
Gospel writes. Suffer children too come unto me, for of such is the
kingdom of heaven.

Fourthly, Heaven signifies the seat and dwelling place of God and of Souls
and Angels, namely where God offers himself too the blissed Angels and
souls too be seen face too face. As is said in the hundred and three Psalm
of the Prophet David. The Lord has prepared his seat in Heaven. And in the
sixte Chapter of Saint Mathewes Gospel: Dure Father which art in Heaven.
This heaven in which GOD shows himself too the Angels and blissed souls
openly, some learned men wryght too be called the heaven of heavens, as is
said in the hundred and thirteen Psalm of the Prophet David: The heaven of
heavens, too the Lord, but the earth he has given too the sons of men.
Also, the third heaven in the second Epistle of Saint Paul too the
Corinthians the twelfth chapter where he writes, that he was caught up above
the airy heaven or Element, and above the sky, intoo the third heaven, that is
too wit, the heaven of heavens, or the Crystal heaven, where he saw things
unspeakable. They are of opinion, y^ Christ ascended intoo this heaven, and
that there he imparteth him self in his true body too be seen of the
blissed Angels and Saints. As the Prophet David says in his three score and
eight Psalm. Sing unto GOD, who is ascended intoo the Heaven of Heavens.
Ephe. iiij. He is ascended above all heavens, that he might fill all things.

The right hand of God, does in the Scriptures most The right hand of God.
usually signify, Gods eternal almyghtynesse, majesty, and glory. It is
written in the hundred and eightene Psalm of David: The right hand of the Lord
has done mighty things, the Lords right hand is exalted. And in the second
Chapter of the History of the Acts of the Apostles: Being exalted by the
right hand of God, he poured out upon us the holy Ghost that he had
promised. Also in the three score and six Chapter of the prophecy of Esai:
Heaven is my seat, and the earth is my fotestoole. All these things has my
hand made. And in the fiftenth Chapter of the second book of Moses called
Exodus: Thy right hand is magnifyed O Lord.

Too sit, signifies too reign and too execute the power Too sit.
and office of a King. As in the ninth Chapter of the Prophet Esai: Upon the
throne of David and upon his kingdom shall he sit. Hereupon comes the seat or
Sea of Rome. Therefore too sit at the right hand of the Father almighty, is
the same thing that too reign in equal almightinesse, majesty, and glory
with him, is. The Prophet David in his hundred and tenth Psalm says thus:
The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand till I make thine
enemies thy fotestoole. This expounds the blissed Apostle Saint Paul in the
fiftenth Chapter of his first Epistle written too the Corinthians, in these
words: Christ must reign till he have made his enemies his fotestoole.

Sometime also, but very seldom, the right hand of God is in the Scripture so
termed, not in respect of God, but of godly men which please GOD, and are
defended by God, and adorned with everlasting bliss: Like as Christ is said
too have set the Sheep on his right hand and the Gotes on his left. But this
signification perteyneth not too this place.

Textes in which the Apostles and Prophets speak of Christ reigning at the
right hand of the eternal father, and making intercession for us, may be
gathered out of Psalm. cx. Romans viij. j. Pet. iij. Ephesians. j. Col. iij. Heb. j. x.
and.xij. Mark. xvj. Luke. xxij. etc.

Upon the Sunday called Exaudi, or the Sunday after the Ascension.
The Epistle. j. Peter. iiij.
Be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer. But above all things have
fervent love among your selves: for love shall cover the multitude of sins.
Be ye harborous one too another without grudging. As every man has received
the gift, even so minister the same one too an other, as good ministers of the
manifold graces of God. If any man speak, let him talk as the words of
God. If any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God
ministers to him: that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus
Christ: Too whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever.

Amen.
The disposement.
THis Epistle is altoogither instructiue, co^teyning precepts of good woorks.
And in order it entreats of. vj. virtues.

1 Of sobriety or stayednesse. 2 Of watchfulness. 3 Of praying. 4 Of earnest
love. 5 Of hospitality. 6 Of diligence faithfully executing the labors of a
man's vocation, and employing the gifts that God has lent him, too the profit
of others, or too the common welfare of the Church and his Country, and
specially too the auauncement of Gods glory.
And there may be propounded too the people sermon wise three places.

FIrst concerning prayer, unto which the virtues of sobriety and
watchfulness are very necessary.

Secondly of loving a man's neybor, whereof hospitality is a part.

Thirdly, faithfulness in doing aryght the labors of a man's own vocation,
for the glory of God and the welfare of his neybor.

The first.
THe definition and parts of true calling upon God, were A commendation of
prayer.
resited an eight days ago: which are needful too be repeted and beaten intoo
the heerers heads, because Prayer is the highest woorship of God, and the
chief and most acceptable Sacrifyse too God, and the strongest defense of the
whole Church, and the well spring and storer of the rest of the virtues for the
most part, and the practyse of the whole doctrine of divinity.

And as there is need of faith persuading a man's self for a certeintie that
he is in Gods favor, and that his prayers are herd for ye mediator Christ's
sake: and also of patience which is not dismayed with long tarianee in
afflictions: and of hope awaiting for deliverance or assuageme^t* So also is
there need of fobrietie and watchfulness, too make true calling upon God.

For when the body being burdened with ye former days Against d^on^^^^esse.
vices, does also ouerlode the mind, and beat down too the ground that part
of the heavenly spirit: there can no earnestness in Prayer, or in any thought
concerning God or godly matters be performed of men that are drunken and
disordered, whom we find by experience not too be meet too perform aryght
the lesser purposes and duties of man's life. Besides this drunke^nesse
expulseth the spirit of grace and prayers out of men's hearts, as Basil has
truly said: Drunkenness expels the holy Ghost. And like as smoke drives
out Bees: so Gluttony expulseth the gifts of the holy Ghost.

Therefore some define sobriety or stayednesse too be a virtue Sobriety which
is a spice of stay* ednesse.
that rules the desires and the use of meat and drink, so as we nether
hinder prayer by too much cramming, nor hinder sleep by too much for ^earing.

Watchfulness also is necessary unto praying, which not Watchfulness
only measures the sleep of the body in such wise as it allows not more
time too it than is requisite too maynteine health: but also shakes off the
restinesse of mind, and drousie sluggishnesse which neglects ye exercises of
true godliness: and performs due heed, earnestness, business, and
diligence in daily prayer, and in ruling the rest of the attemptes and purposes
of a man's life. It neglects not, ^e consumes the time in sleep or
idleness, which is too be employed in prayer and mynding of godliness. It
bableth not the words of the prayer with the lips alone, coldly and yauningly,
and with a wandering mind, but it is settled and busy occupied. For how can he
hope too be herd of God, which heereth not himself when he prays, not
considers what he prays? The times that are most fit for godly and earnest
prayer, are the morning, and the times immediately before dinner and supper, as
it is said in the Psalm, Early in the morning will I cry unto thee, early in
the morning shall thou hear me. Also Peter and John go up intoo the temple
the nynthe hour too pray, which answeereth too our three or four of the
clock in the after noone.

The second place.
COncerning the loving of our neybor there is spoke more Of Lou^.
largely of it upon the.iiij. Sunday after Epiphanie, and the first and second
days after Trinity. Therefore I give but this lesson concerning the Phrase,
Love hydeth the multitude of sins, it is not too be understood of hyding a
man's sins before God (of which is spoken in Psalm. xxxj. and Romans iiij.
Blissed are they whose sins are covered, that is too wit under the shadow of
the Son of God our mediator) but of other men's or of our neybors sins,
infirmities and blemishes, which are too be forgiven and covered with mutual
louingnesse, according to this saying: Love suffers all things, love bears
all things, love woorketh his neybor no harm. Also, forgive, and ye shall be
forgiven. Also know thy friends conditions, but hate them not. He that hates
vices, hatethmen. etc.

One spice of loving a man's neybor is of hospitality, Hospitality.
which he will have too be used without grudging, that is too say, willingly,
and with a cheerful mind, according too this saying, God loves the cheerful
giver. And the Greeks have given the three graces their names of
cheerfulness: that is too wit Pleasantness
Aglaia* Gladsomues.
Euphrosyne, and Merinesse.
Thalia, meening thereby that good turns are too be done unto others with a
glad heart and cheerful countenance.

The third place.
GOd framed man in such wise, and distinguished man's Doing of good ^urnes.
life intoo sundry degrees, duties and gifts, that every one has need of
others help, and each one too show his louingnesse and liberality toward
other by frank and free imparting his gifts among them. And in deed, the
best of all labors is too help a man by such means as he has and can. And
therefore in this place Peter wills all men too employ the gifts which they
have, not too vainglory and pride, but too this end that they may serve our
neybors turn, and set forth the glory of God: Like as Paul. j. Corinthians.
xij. and xiiij. wills all gifts too be employed too edefying* and too the
profit of the church. If any man speak, let him speak as the answers of God.
That is too say, he that is a Preacher, let him teach faithfully, and let him
handle the word of God aryght, and not teach Philosophy nor the traditions of
men. If any man ministers, let him do it according to the ability that God
lends him. That is too say, let every one that serves in any other service
or office, abide within the bounds of his vocation, which God furthereth, and
let him acknowledge God to be the efficient cause and end of al wholesome
doings: Let him do all things too the glory of God.

Upon Whitson Sunday.
The Epistle. Acts. ij.
ANd when the fifty days were come to an end, they were all with one accord
together in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as it had
bin the coming of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they sat.
And there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as they had bin of fire, and
it sat upon each one of them: and they were al filled with the holy ghost, and
began to speak with other tongues, even as the same spirit gave the^
utterance. Then were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout me^ out of every
nation of them that are under heaven. When this was noysed about, the multitude
came together and were astonished, because that every man heard them speak with
his own language: They wondered all and marvelled, saying among the^ selves:
Behold, are not all these, which speak, of Galile? And how hear we every man
his own tongue, wherein we were borne? Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites,
and the inhabiters of Mesopotamia, and of Iewrie, and of Capadocia, of Pontus
and Asia, Phrigia and Pamphilia, of Egypt, and of the parties of Libia, which
is beside Siren, and strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselites, Greeks and
Arrabians, we have heard them speak in our own tongues the great works of
God.

The Doctrine concerning the feast of Pentecost or Whitsuntide, may be included
in four places.
1 Of the word Pentecost, and the stories of Gods showing of himself, which
were done in the Church upon Whitsun Sunday. 2 The Doctrine concerning the
person of the holy Ghost. 3 Of the office and benefits of the holy Ghost. 4
Too whom the holy Ghost is given, and how he is received or forgone.
The first place.
PEntecost is a Greek word and signifies the fiftith day, Pentecost.
that is too wit from Easter day. For the fiftith day after the first passover
and passage of the children of Israel out of Egypt, the law of God was
published upon Mount Sinai. And the same day a thousand five hundred forty
and two years after, (being the fiftith day after that our passover Christ
was offered in sacrifise upon the altar of the cross) the holy Ghost was
poured out upon the Apostles. Now, from the creation of the world unto the
first Pentecost (in which the ten commandments were delivered upon Mount
Sinai,) there passed two thousand four hundred and three and fifty years.
From the first Pentecost or deliverance of the ten commandments, unto the
Pentecost of the new Testament, in which the holy Ghost in the visible shape of
fire was shed upon the Apostles, are. 1542. years. And from the first
Pentecost in which the ten commandments were given by God, unto the Pentecost
or Whitsuntide of this year from Christ's birth. 1570. are passed. 3079.
years. Why Easter, Whitsontyde, and other feasts were ordained of God.


God ordained among the people of Israel the feasts of Easter, Pentecost,
Tabernacles. etc. that they might maintain the memory of the benefits that
he had bestowed upon the Israelites in conueying them out of Egypt, and in
publishing the law, and in defending them in the wilderness: And too the
intent the people might be instructed concerning the benefits of the son of
God our Lord Jesus Christ, for whose sake they being delivered out of the
thraldom of sin and endless damnation, were governed by the holy Ghost,
and made heirs of the everlasting and heavenly Tabernacle. Therefore it was
Gods will that the people also should keep the Feast of Pentecost cheefely for
three causes.

First that the marvelous publishing of Gods law which Why Whitson tide was
ordained too be continually kept.
he had set forth that day upon the top of mount Sinai with notable
tokens, might the more certainly be spread abroad. For although he had sowed
intoo men's hearts a perceiuerance of his law before from their first
creation: yet notwithstanding he repeated it ageine upon mount Sinai, least
being darkened in this sorrowful mistiness which followed man's fall, it might
have bin utterly quenched in us: and too the intent we should know that this
natural perceiuerance of the law, was spread intoo our hearts by God himself:
and specially that the dreadful judgment of God against sin might be
manifested too mankind by the law shooting forth the thunderbolts and
lightenings of Gods wrath.

Another cause was, for that God would have new loaves of bread made of the
corn that grew the same year, offered too him at the feast of Whitsuntyde,
too the intent his presentnesse and goodness in cherishing and mainteining
this bodily life, might be acknowledged also.

Thirdly, God would that the people should be put in mind of the Whitsuntyde of
the new Testament which was too come, and of the shedding forth of the holy
Ghost intoo the hearts of the believers, by whose help the law of God (which
otherwise were utterly impossible too man's nature) is bego^, and new
righteousness, comfort, and life everlasting kindled in our hearts. Of
wonderful purpose would God have the times or days in which the law was
delivered, and which the holy Ghost was shed forth, and the manner of the
manifestation of both, too agree. For look on what day the law of God was
published with flames of thunder and lightning upon mount Sinai, the sameday
was the holy Ghost also sheaded forth upon the Apostles in the likeness of
flames of fiery tunges. For the holy Ghost by fiery tunges, (that is too say by
preachinge the word of the law and the Gospel,) gathered a Church too God
out of nations of sundry tunges, and is effectual in it. And he kindles in
men's hearts, first a fire or a beholding of Gods dreadful wrath, which is a
consuming fire: and secondly the light of faith, comfort, joy, and life,
promised for Christ's sake, and the fire of burning love toward God, and of al
other virtues. Heerby also is somewhat meant concerning the person of the holy
ghost, namely that he is the flame of that mutual love wherewith the eternal
father and the son embrace each other, and wherewith they afterward join the
Church too them.

But in especially, in the story of this feastfull day, let the comparison of
either of the Pentecostes be considered. Of which the first does with darting
the thunderboltes and lightning of Gods law, so fray the multitude of folk
standing by, that with quaking and astonyed minds they flee from the sight and
speech of God. But at this other Pentecost, the holy Ghost is poured out upon
the Saints, and he moves their hearts not too flee from God, but too approach
unto God upon trust of his son, and too cry Abba Father. Romans the eight.

The second place: Of the person of the holy Ghost.
THe holy Ghost began not then first too be, nor was then The holy Ghost.
first shed intoo the hearts of the Saints, when he sat upon the Apostles in
shape of fiery tu^gs y^ fiftith day after Christ's Resurrection: but he was with
GOD the Father and the son from everlasting, and created all other things of
naught, and imparted life and power too thryue and increase too all things
growing in their first creation. And afterward at al times in the Church, he
kindled the light of faith or true acknowledgement of God, and spiritual
righteousness, and eternal life in all the elect, as is said in Genesis j. The
Spirit of the Lord cherished the waters. Psalm. xxxiij. By the word of the
Lord the heavens were stablished, and all the host of them by the breath of his
mouth. j. Pet. j. The spirit of Christ in the Prophets, foretold the passion
of Christ. Acts xxviij. As the holy Ghost has spoken by the Prophet Esai.
Now there are an eight hundred years or there abouts from Esai too the
sheading forth of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles. Neither may we surmyse
that the Apostles did then first receive the holy Ghost, when (the tenth day
after Christ's ascension) he was shed out upon them in the visible shape of
fiery tungs, for in the.xx. of John it is said expressly: Take ye the holy
Ghost. And this general rule is well known. Romans viij. They that are led by
the spirit of GOD, are the sons of GOD. If any man have not the spirit of
Christ, he is none of his.

But there are two manner of gifts of the holy Ghost. Two sorts of giving the
holy Ghost.
One sort is common too all the godly, of which is spoken Gal. v. The fruits
of the spirit are faith, joy, peace, and love etc. An other sort are singular
and as it were peculiar privileges of some certain persons, as the sodeine
knowledge of diverse tungs, unappalled courage of mind in professing and
spreading abroad the Gospel, the gift of healing, and of woorking other
miracles.

Now upon Whitson Su^day there were poured out upon the Apostles, not only
those common and ordinary things, (which were also begone in them before,)
but also these wonderful gifts of the holy ghost and such as were granted
too few by special privilege of God. And this marvelous and visible sheading
forth of the gifts of the holy ghost, was then done at that time, too the
intent it might be an assured witness, that the holy Ghost is at all times
afterward by the preaching of the gospel, (without fail) sheaded inuisibly
into the hearts of the believers, and that he kindles in them true invocation,
ioyfulnesse, hope, and other motions pleasing God, and transformeth them to the
image of God. Now let this ensewing (such as it is) suffyse for a description
of the person of the holy Ghost.

The holy Ghost is the third person of the Godhead proceeding A description of
the holy ghost
from the Father and the son of one substance and of one euerlastingnesse
with the father and the son, which in the first creation together with the
father and the son did cherish and quicken all things that breed, and
afterward at all times is sent intoo the hearts of those that believe the
gospel, too kindle in them light too the true knowing of God, and too be their
Advocate, cherishiug, comforting, and quickening their hearts with spiritual
righteousness and everlasting life.

This description is builded out of the Textes following. Proofs of the godhead
of the holy Ghost.
For, that the holy ghost is a person of the Godhead, or verily and in nature
God, of one substance with the father and the son: the institution of our
Baptim does evidently confirm. Mat. xxviij. Baptizing them in the name of the
father and the son, and of the holy ghost. For in Baptim the true and
almighty God is called upon, and a record is uttered, that the baptized
person is received intoo Gods favor, and washed from his sins, and endewed
with righteousness and everlasting salvation. And that on the other side he
ought too acknowledge this only true God, and too call upon him and woorship
him.

Now seeing that in Baptim the father, the son, and the holy ghost are called
upon toogither, and joined in one selfsame fellowship of honor: the Godhead,
might, majesty, and substance of all the three persons must needs be all
one: like as also it is said. j. John. v. There are three that bear witness
in heaven, the father, the word, and the holy ghost, and these three are one:
that is too say, they are of one selfsame being or substance. Basil: We must
be baptized according Basil.
as we have received of Christ, and we must believe as we were baptized, and
confess as we believe, the father, the son, and the holy Ghost. Eusebius
Palestinus: We call upon Eusebius Palestinus.
the holy God the fountain of light, by our Savior Jesus, toogither with the
holy Ghost, etc. And there be many Arguments avouched else where, which
confirm that the holy Ghost is verily and by nature God.

Act. xxviij. The holy Ghost spoke by the Prophet Esai: Go and speak too this
people and say to them, Harken, etc. But Esai in his. vj. chapter says, he
heard the voice of the Lord God saying, Go and tell this people, etc. Ergo, the
holy ghost is the Lord God, or verily and by nature God.

Act. v. Peter says that Ananias made a lie too the holy ghost: and anon
after he says, Thou have not lied to me^ but to God. Hereuppon it follows
that the holy ghost is God.

Also, the holy ghost is every where, yea and he dwells substa^ciallyin the
hearts of the godly, and fills all the saints by imparting his being unto them,
and he teaches, regenerateth, and sancti^ieth them: all which things are the
properties of the Godhead too do.

That ye holy ghost proceeds fru^ ye father and ye son, and yet is Proofs
that the holy Ghost is a distinct person from the father and the son.
a distinct person from ye father and ye son, there be many proofs.

Ioh. xv. When the co^forter shalbeco^me who^ I will send you from ye father, ye
spirit of truth which proceeds from ye father.

John. xv^. When that spirit of truth shall be come, he shall take of mine,
because al things which the father has are mine: that is too say, I am of the
same substance with the father, I have ye same power, majesty, glory and
being, that the father has And this my being do I communicate to the holy
ghost, who though he take of mine, that is too say, of my substance: yet is he
a distinct person from me, according as it is said a little erst, If he come,
not I, etc.

Roma. viij. And often elsewhere he is named the Spirit of Christ and the spirit
of the Son. Therefore he is in very deed the spirit of the son, and
proceeds from the son as well as from the father, as in John. xx. Christ
breathing upon his Disciples, meeneth that he will impart too the Apostles the
spirit proceeding out of his own bres^.

That in the first creation, the holy ghost cherished things growing, and ever
since has bin present too the Church and governed all the godly: it is evident
by the Textes cited in the beginning of this second place. And the rest of the
members of this definition, which rehearse the operations and benefits of the
holy Ghost, shall be declared forthwith.

The third place.
THe office and cheef benefits of the holy Ghost are comprehended The office
and benefits of the holy Ghost.
by Christ in two terms, when he names him the spirit of Truth, and the
Comforter: And therefore we will unfold these two Terms shortly.

He is termed the spirit of truth, first because he is not The spirit of
Truth.
only soothfast and void of untruth, but also is the author and preserver of
the true doctrine concerning God, in the public ministry, and the shewer of
the true interpretation and discernement of all sects and opinions. John.
xiiij. The holy Ghost shall teach you al things. j. Ioh. ij. These things have
I written concerning them that seduce you. And the anointing which you have
received of God, abides in you, and teaches you all things, and is true, and
there is no untruth with him.

Secondly, because that in the hearts of them that believe the Gospel, he
kindles the light of the true knowledge of Gods being and will and true
acknowledgement of sin, and true faith settled in the fatherly good will of
God, promised for Christ's sake sake. j. Corin. ij. None knows the things of
God, but the spirit of God. But God has opened them too us by his spirit. For
the spirit sercheth all things, yea even the bottom of Gods secrets,
concerning our redemption and salvation.

Thirdly, because he stirs up true in^o^ation in me^nes hearts. Zach. xij. I
will pour out the spirit of Thanks giving and prayer upon the house of
David. ^oma. viij. Ye have re^eyu^^ the spirit of adoption of sons, by which
we ^^ye ^bba father.

Fourthly, by cause that in the ha^^ ^^ of the godly he kindles the fire of
true love or louingnesse toward God and our neighbor, out of which flow all
other virtues. ^o^. v. The love of God is shed in our hearts by the holy
Ghost, which is given us. Gal. v. The fruits of the spirit are joy. peace,
louingnesse. etc.

The Greek word Paracletus signifies an Advocate or Paracletus.
co^forter. For like as an Advocate in court matters is at hand with his
clyent, cou^selling, hartening, and comforting him: so does the holy Ghost
play the same parts in the myads of the godly. For in so great darkness of
men's mynds, and so horrible falls even of the wise ^or^, the holy Ghost
had need too stand continually too the helm, in all the intentes and
doings of this life, according as David prays psalm. lj. A pure heart create
in me O God, and renew a right spirits in my bowels. Give m^^ the comfort of
thy help agein, and stablish me with thy free spirit. Let us har^e upon
these requests daily. For in so great confusion of doutfulnesse, in the
greefes of conscience, in the perilles of profession, in poverty, in contempt,
in most bitter hatreds, and in torments of body. It is impossible that faith
and godliness should stand stedye and unmoved, if men's mynds were not
strengthened by the holy Ghost. That Steue^ went with joyful mind too his
punishment, and eased his harms with hope. That Laurence lay upon the
gredyron broyling on the coals that were underneath him, with glad and
cheerful heart, and scorned the Tyrant both in countenance and voice. That
Agatha, Agnes, and such other ^^^ie Wenches laughed in the mids of most bitter
torments, and were not overcome with any terrors or tortures, too renounce
the profession of the truth. All these things are the benefits and gifts of
the holy Ghost.

And this benefit of the holy Ghost in erecuting the office of an Advocate in
the mynds of men that are afflicted, is with most singular and sweet
lightsomnesse both of words and figures expressed in the ancient prayer
directed too the holy Ghost, which I would wish young men too write, yea and
daily too use it in their prayers.

Come holy Ghost and God of might,
Send down from heaven on every wight
The beams of thy eternal light.
Come Father of the poor in smart,
Come thou that all good gifts do part,
Come only light of lyghtlesse heart.
Of comforters thou art the best,
Of humane soul the gentle guest
And sweet refresher of the oppressed.
In labor, rest and quietness:
In swelting heat, cool tempratnesse:
In moorning, comfortablenesse.
O light most blissed too behold
Fulfill with grace most manifold
The hearts of all thy faithful fold.
Unless thy woorking it begin,
Man has not aught at all within:
Man has not aught but only sin.
Wash clean what ever filth is found,
And moist agein each droughty ground,
And heal each thing that is not sound.
Subdue the sturdy stiff and hold,
Relieve the things fernoo^^d with cold,
And on the strayes lay steadfast hold.
On such as by their fruits do show
The trust and faith which they thee ^we*
Thy sacred namber seven bestow.
Give them the hyre of righteousness,
Give them the end of blissfulness,
And ever lasting ioyfulnesse.
Now whereas in this Hymn is said, Thy sacred number seven bestow. And in
another Hymn, Thou seuenfold giver of thy gift* etc. These words allude to y^
place of Esai. x^. out of which they commonly reckon up seven gifts of the
holy Ghost.

Esai. xj. A rod shall spring out of the stock of Iesse, and a The seven gift^
of the holy ^host.
branch shall grow out of his root. The spirit of the Lord shall rest upon
him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and
strength, the spirit of knowledge and godliness, and the spirit of the fear
of the Lord shall fill him.

This place of Esai is a prophecy concerning Christ's kingdom, whom he
foretells to come of the stock of Esai or Iesse, or of the lineage of Daui^
now sore decayed and in manner past hope: and that this kingdom shall be
spiritual, in which Christ the king and head of the Church, shall bestow
spiritual and everlasting gifts upon his body or church, not by worldly force,
but by his spirit and woor^.

First, the spirit or gift of wisdom, is the true knowledge The gift of
^isdome.
of God and of his s^n^e ^ur Lo^d Jesus Christ, and a faith understanding and
embracing all the whole doctrine concerning God, which is set forth and is
necessary too be known for the health of the soul.

Secondly, the spirit of Vnderst^ding is that whereby w^^ discern opinions,
and find out the true doctrine from the false and from that which is shadowed
with the sleightes of Sophistry.

Thirdly, the spirit of Counsel is that which in the labors The spirit of
Counsel.
of a man's vocation, in dangers, in sorrows, and adversities, governs the
godly with counsel, and susteyneth them with comfort, and plays all the other
parts and duties of an Advocate.

Fourthly, the spirit of Strength or Ma^lynesse, harteneth The spirit of
Strength, or Manlynesse.
and strengthens men's minds, and fenceth the godly with those weapons that
are described, Ephe. vj. least being vanquished either with entycements of
pleasure, or with ye traynes of the Devil* or with adversity, they may fall
away from true godliness.

Fifthly, the spirit of Knowledge does in our co^^on conversation The spirit of
Kno^ledge.
so mark the differences of persons, times, and places, and so rule a man's
deuyses and doings too the reason of the circumstances or incidentes, that he
neither offends others, nor withdraws them from the true doctrine.

Sixthly, the spirit of Godliness kindles in our will^s ^ The spirit of
Godliness.
freeharted willingness too obey God, or ^n universal obedience according too
the commandments of God, and dryneth all our doings too this end, that GOD*
may be rightly worshipped, gl^ri^^ed* and magnified at ^^^hands.

Seventhly, the spirit of the Fear of GOD, rules our The spirit of the Fear
of God.
ha^^es that they may reverently (...) themselves to god, and stand in awe of
the Lord God as of a kyndharted father, not with slavish fear, but with
chyldly affection, being loath with all our hearts too ^ffend this hea^enly
Father, or too be cast o^^ of his f^uou^. ^^d although there be mo^enefites
attribu^^^ ^^^ the holy Gho^^ in the Seriptures, and these self se^en gift^^ of
the holy Ghost ^ay be drawn ^^ fewe^ kynds* yet notwithstanding in as much as
this distribution is accustomed in the church, I thought good ^^ repete a short
(...) ^^ it in this place.

The fourth place how the holy ghost is received, and how he is forgone.
THe holy ghost imparteth unto us both himself and his gifts by two means
which he has ordained and stablished: yt is too wit, by ye word of the gospel,
herd, red, or thought upon: and by the Sacraments of Baptim, and the Lords
supper: as is said in the Epistle of to morrow. Act. x. The holy ghost fell upon
all that herd the word. And in the sermon of Peter which he made as upon this
day at Jerusalem, when his heerers asked him: What shall we do yt we may
obteyn the holy ghost? Peter answered: Repent, and be baptized every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost.
There is no man that can obteyn the holy ghost, by his own power or desert:
but the spirit of God of his own infinite goodness preuenteth us, and
offreth himself too us by the word of the Gospel, and kindles the true
knowledge of God and faith in our breasts, and regenerateth and renueth our mind
and will. Therefore being helped of the holy ghost, we both can and must stir
up, norish and increase in our selves the kindled sparks of faith, and the
beginnings of al other virtues: And also must desire of God, that this spirit
may be the directer of al our devises and doings. Hereunto pertains that most
sweet promis. Luke. xj. How much more shall the heavenly father give the holy
ghost to those ye ask him. Therefore let this most large promise stir us up to
sue daily unto God with most hearty and ernest entreatance that this gouerner
the holy ghost may be sent into our hearts, and his gifts be incresed in us. And
let us with so much the more heed, circumspectnesse, and modesty rule our
behauior, least through our offenses committed against conscience, the holy
ghost be grieved, and so taking displeasure, depart out of the temple of our
heart, and utterly forsake us. Finally let us continually recite this prayer of
David's. A clean heart create in me O God, and renew a steadfast spirit in my
bowels. Cast me not away from thy face, and take not thy holy spirit from me.
Restore to me the gladness of thy saluatino, and strengthen me with thy free
spirit.

Upon Whitson Monday.
The Epistle. Act. ij.
But Peter stepped forth with the eleven, and lift up his voice, and said unto
them: Ye men of lewry, and all ye that inhabit Jerusalem, be this known
unto you, and with your ears hear my words: These are not drunke^ as ye
suppose: for it is yet but the third hour of the day. But this is that which
was spoken by the prophet Ioell: It shall be in the last days says God, of my
spirit I will pour out upon all flesh. And your sons and your daughters
shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream
dreams. And on my servants and on my handmaydens I will pour out my spirit in
those days, and they shall prophecy. And I will show woonders in heaven above,
and tokens in the earth beneath, blood and fire and the vapor of smoke. The
Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before that great
and notable day of the Lord come. And it shall be that whosoever shall call on
the name of the Lord, shall be saved. Ye men of Israel, hear these words:
Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you with miracles, woonders and
signs, which God did by him in the mids of you (as ye your selves know) him
have ye taken by the hands of unrighteous persons, after he was delivered by
the determinate counsel and fore knowledge of God, and have crucified and
slain: whom God has raised up, and loused the sorrows of death, by cause it
was impossible that he should be holden of it. For David speaks of him. A
fore hand I saw God always before me, for he is on my right hand, that I
should not be moved. Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad.
More over also, my flesh shall rest in hope, because thou will not leave my
soul in Hell, neither will suffer thine holy too see corruption. Thou haste
showed me the ways of life and shall make me full of joy with thy
countenance. Men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the patriark
David. For he is both dead and buried, and his sepulcher remains with us
unto this day. Therefore seeing he was a Prophet, and knew that God had sworn
with an oath to him, that Christ (as concerning the flesh) should come of the
fruit of his loins, and sit on his seat: he knowing this before, spoke of the
resurrection of Christ, that his soul should not be left in hell neither his
flesh should see corruption. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we al are
witnesses. Since now that he by the right hand of God is exalted, and has
received of the father the promise of the holy ghost, he has shed forth that
which, ye now see and hear. For David is not ascended into heaven but he said:
The lord said to my Lord, sit on my right hand until I make thy foes thy
footestoole. So therefore, let all the house of Israel know for a surety that
God has made that same Jesus (whom ye have crucified) Lord and Christ. When
they heard this they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and
unto the other Apostles: Ye men and brethren, what shall we do? Peter said
unto them: repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ,
for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost.

The disposement of Peter's Sermon taken out of the redings upon the second
chapter of the Acts of the Apostles.
THe state of Peter's first Sermon which he made upon Whitson Sunday, is a
doctrine concerning the holy ghost and of the manner how to obtein everlasting
salvation.

The parts of this Sermon are chiefly three.
FIrst of the principal efficient cause of our conversion and salvation, that
is to wit of the holy ghost, by whom the eternal father kindles in men's hearts
the true knowledge of himself, and true faith and Invocation.

Secondly of the forcing cause or the deserving of our salvation: that is too
wit, of the death and Resurrection of our lord Jesus Christ, by whom and for
whom only, forgiveness of sins, the holy ghost, rightnousnesse and salvation
everlasting are given to them that bel^eue.

Thirdly of the means by which the holy ghost works and by which he offreth
and applies unto us, Chrysts benefits or everlasting salvation.

Which are the Word Of the law, Repentance. Of the Gospel, Faith.
Sacraments Of Baptim. Of the Lords supper.



THe entrance of his oracion though it b^e short, has nevertheless the two
places of Benevolence and attentiveness.

He seeks benevolence or the favor and good will of Beneuole^ce*
his heerers, by a most honorable title, and such a one as was well liked of
among the^. Ye men of Jury and ye that dwell at Jerusalem, For like as
Demosthenes does oftentimes speak to his cou^trime^ by these words, Ye men of
Athens because they thought themselves far to excel the inhabiters of all
other cities of Greece for many gifts: so it liked well the people of Jerusalem
too be termed by the name of Jews, as whereby was mente, that they were the
professers of the true God, and of the true doctrine and woorshipping of God,
and that they were better than all other nations.

And he procures attentiveness in these words: Let this be known unto you,
and give ear unto my words. This done, like as Cicero in his oration for
Milo, before ^e entreat of the matter, does dispatch certain doutes out of
the Judges minds, and preuenteth certain foredeemings. So Peter first of all
displaceth out of ye minds of his hearers, that brute which wandered far
abroad, and that opinion y^ the Apostles were drunk with wine.

Afterward be steppeth too the case it self, and that it may be of the more
authority, he uses the saying and witness of the Prophet Joel, which in
singular lightesomnesse of words comprehends the doctrine, concerning the
person and benefits of the holy Ghost. Of which doctrine for as much as the
cheef points are touched in the story of Whitsun Sunday, I will now breefly
declare the weight and pithinesse of the words.

I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh. First and foremost must be
considered the person of him that speaks, which is the son of God our Lord
Jesus Christ, for, so do the words going next before, evidently declare. And
ye shall know that in the mids of Israel, I, even I the Lord your God, and
none other. etc. By which words may be gathered notable proofs of the two
natures in Christ.

For seeing he shall dwell in the mids of Israel, after Proofs of Christ's
Godhead.
a far other n^erer sort, than be dwelt in the Tabernacle: he must needs be
very man, (...)is ^ayde John. ^. The word became flesh and dwelt among us.
Also, he is in the mids of you, who though ^e were before me, yet came he
after me. Agein, in as much as he is called Iehoua, he must needs be very God
by nature, which thing is also gathered manifestely by this, that he pours
out the holy Ghost upon all that call upon the name of the Lord. For to give
the holy Ghost, is the property of the only true God the Lord. Christ gives
the holy Ghost* Ioh. xx. Receive ye the holy Ghost, John. xv. whom I will send
you from my Father: Ergo etc.

Secondly the poynting of the time must be understood aright. And it shall be in
the later days not in the end of the world, but at the last cast of the Jewish
common weal, and of the law given by Moses. Now there are from the
publishing of Moses law unto the pouring out of the holy ghost upon the
apostles, a thousand five hundred and two and forty years.

Thirdly is to be considered the pithinesse of this word Power by which God
meant to betoken great abundance and large plentuousnesse of a most bounteous
gift. For whereas before that time, the gifts of the holy ghost flourished
only among the Jews: in the latter days, not only these gifts of the holy
ghost which are common too the godly, but also those peculiar and wonderful
gifts shall be poured by heaps upon all flesh, and upon all nations that
believe the gospel. And here withal the Prophet alludeth too the custom of
anointing the priests, which was a foreshadow of the giving of the holy ghost,
as appears in. j. John. ij.

Fourthly the testimony concerning the person of the holy ghost in the pronoun
My is to be observed. For there Proofs of the Godhead of the holy ghost.
is nothing in the godhead of the father and the son, which is not divine,
everlasting and almighty.

This spirit which is powered out upon all flesh, is the spirit of the Lord
God, and is poured out of the being of the father and the Son. Ergo he is very
God by nature, of one selfsame substance with the father and the son.

Although that in the Hebrew it be written Ruhi, my spirit, yet
notwithstanding the same thing altogether is in the word of Peter, I will power
out my spirit, which things agree with the manner of speech that Christ
uses in John. xvj. The spirit of truth shall take of mine. All things that
my father has, are mine. Therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and show
unto you.

For as the father has a being everlasting, almighty, incomprehensible, true,
good of it self, and standing by it self: So also has the Son the self same
things taken of the Father. And the holy Ghost is said to take the same being
of the father and the son, that in the trinity we may believe the nature of
the holy ghost too be the same that the nature of the father and the son is.

Fifthly is to be observed the most sweet comfort set forth in this
universal piece upon al flesh, which teaches that God is not an accepter of
persons, but upright to all men that behave themselves uprightly. For as it is
his will to have al men saved: so also pours he out his spirit vpall that
repent and believe the Gospel.

Sixthly there is also set forth a sweet comfort in this word Flesh.
flesh to be set against the te^ptatio^ of unworthiness. Whereby the prophet
meeneth that this heavenly gift of the holy ghost is poured out, not only upon
angels or holy men, and such as excelled in virtue, but also upon the weak and
wretched, y^ are subject unto death, and defiled with sins, how be it repenting
and fleing unto Christ by faith and prayer.

Seventhly in these words following: And your sons and No accepting of persons
with Christ.
daughters, your young men and your old men, your bondmen and your ha^dmayds
shall prophesy, is declared by a distribution, y^ universal parcel al flesh, for
the differences of sexes, ages and estates are taken away: for in Christ Jesus
there is no male or female, no bondma^ or freeman, no Jew or Greek Gal. iij.
but all are one in Christ, all become partakers a like of the benefits of
Chrystand the holy Ghost.

Eighthly, these speeches, Your sons shall prophesy, see visio^s and dream
dremes, ar as much to say in this place, as they shall know god aright, and also
his son our lord Jesus Christ, they shall rightly understand, and in their room
and calling teach the gospel: they shall direct al their devises and doings by
the word of God: and they shall be heirs of eternal salvation.

Joel speaking of the benefits of the new testament, uses the words that
were best known in his time, like as in an other place, the true knowledge of
God, faith, prayer, and praising of God, are termed by Malachie, a pure incense
and a clean sacrifise.

And this phrase of Ioels is taken out of Moses the Prophesying in the old
Testament.
schoolmaster of all Prophets. Number. xij. If there be any prophet of the Lord
among you, too him will I appear in vision, or else I will speak unto him by
dream. And prophesying in the old Testament, signifies revelation or
foretelling of things to come, or of Christ's kingdom, or of Empires, or of
other things.

These revelations did God disclose to the Prophets, Diversities of appeerings.
either by the ministry of his word, and the promises written before by
Moses, kindlyng a cleerer light in their minds: or else by showing himself
in the shape of man's nature, which afterward was too be taken upon him, and
by talkyng with Moses and the fathers, as Jacob says, I have seen God face
too face.

Or else he cast shapes, pictures, and images of things Dreams.
before the eyes of the prophets being awake: as Esai saw the glory of Christ.
Daniel in his. vij. chapter sees four beasts, which painted out the four
monarchies of the world. Dan. vij. being awake he sees a Ram and a got, by
which were signified the Monarchies of the Persians and of Alexander.
Hereafter in the.x. of the Acts, Peter sees a linen sheet let down from
heaven. Heereto perteyne the visions of Ezechiell in his. j. x. and.xl.
chapters, and the Apocalips of John.

Or else in dreams, (either by himself, or by his good Angels) he
imprinteth in men's minds evident and notable betokenings or images of things
to come, whereunto he added assured records (as the gifts of interpretation
and other things, which confirmed that those dreams were sent from God. Such
were the dreams of Joseph. Genesis xxxj. Of Pharao. Genesis xlj. Of Nabuchodonosor,
Dan. ij. and.iiij. Of Joseph the husband of Mary. Math. j. and.ij. etc.

These were the chief ways by which God reveled to his prophets the things
that were to come. But in this saying of Ioels, these words prophecy,
visions, and dreams, betoken the very gift of the holy ghost, whereby he with
a new light cleereth the mynds of those that believe the Gospel, and governs
them.

And in the new Testament, prophecy oftentimes signifies Prophesying in the
new testament.
nothing else but a light ryghtly understanding the doctrine of the Gospel,
and the gift of expounding or opening the prophetical Scriptures, as may be
gathered by the texts. Romans xij. j. Cor. xiij. and. xiiij. and in other places.

And if any man now a days will surmise himself to have Prophetical dreams, or
visions, let them be compared with the word delivered by God. For if things
stryuing with the doctrine of the law or the Gospel be commanded in those
dreams: no doubt but they be fantastical and accursed. And in general let
the saying of Solomon concerning dreams be always had in sight. Where as be
many dreams there be many vanities. But fear thou God.

Ninthly the woonders which Ioell writes shall go before the great day of the
Lord, dreadful too the wicked, (that is to say, the day of Christ's
Resurrection or of the Revelation of the holy ghost,) are thought of the
learned sort too be utterly the self same, which are reported by the
Evangelists too have happened at the time of Christ's passion: when the son
in the firmament was over cast with darkness from above, as with the lay of a
smoke: and the earth quaked, and the stones claue in sunder. And it is a
likelyhod that in the moon also appeared sorrowful and bloody spots. The fire
is expounded by Hierom, of the fyry tungs that sat upon the heads of the
apostles. Other some are of opinion that in the time of the Eclips which
happened at the passion of Christ, the heaven also flashed fire, and flames
lept out of the clyued stones.

Tenthly, let this last sentence in especially be fastened The only way too
salvation.
in the innermost bowelles of the heart, Every one that calls upon the name
of the Lord shall be saved. This is the only way and means of obteyning
remission of sins, the holy Ghost, and eternal salvation, namely, too ask
these benefits at Gods hand for Christ's sake, and too apply them too a man's
self by faith.

This place does Paul cite. Romans x. and adds a most learned exposition, in
these words: There is but one Lord of all, rich to all that call upon him,
for every one that calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. But how
shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed? how shall they
believe on whom they have not heard? how shall they hear without a preacher.
etc.

Therefore with this place, let the studiouse sort confer all that Sermon of
Paul, which comprehends a most large doctrine, concerning the manner of
atteinyng too everlasting saluacion^ of invocation: of the ministry of the
word by preaching, through which faith and invocation are kindled in the
hearts of the faithful: of the workfulnesse of the word: of Apostles: of the
universal calling of all nations, and of the cause of the rejecting of the
wicked.

The second part of Peter's Sermon.
WHich conteyneth y^ doctrine, concerning the cause The cause of our eternal
salvation.
of eternal salvation, that is to wit y^ death and resurrection of our Lord
Jesus Christ, for whom and by whom alone, remission of sins, righteousness,
the holy Ghost, and everlasting salvation are bestowed upon us men. Afterward
Peter in a short abridgement co^prehendeth the cheef articles of our faith,
concerning the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ. Whereas in our Creed we say:
I believe in Jesus Christ the only son of God our lord, who suffered under
Ponce Pylate, was crucified, dead and buried, he descended into hell and rose
agein the third day from the dead, he ascended into Heaven, and sits on the
right hand of God y^ Father almighty, from thence he shall come to judge the
quick and the dead, I believe in the holy ghost: Al these articles of our
belefe does S. Peter set forth with singular light somnes of words in this
part of his sermon.

Repent.
THe third part of Peter's Sermon conteyneth the doctrine Justification.
concerning the manner of Justification, or of the means whereby God offreth and
applies unto us the benefits of Christ. that is to say, forgiveness of
sins and everlasting salvation. For like as Christ in the last chapter of
Luke, commands the Apostles to preach repentance and forgiveness of sins
in his name: so in this place Peter (when his hearers demanded of him, by what
means they might obtain forgiveness of sins and everlasting salvation)
wills them to repent and to believe that for and by Christ, their sins are
released, the seal of which releasement is Baptime. Assuring them that they
also shall be partakers of the gift of the holy Ghost, who purging away the
dregs of their sins, shall begin a new light, righteousness, and life in
the hearts of the believers. And it is not to be douted, but that Peter did in
this place set out with many mo words, the doctrine of faith which receives
forgiveness of sins for Christ's sake, who was crucified for us, according
as he says hereafter in the.x. Chapter. Vnt^^ this man do all the Prophets
bear witness, that every one which believes in him, receives forgiveness
of sins by his name.

Upon Whitson Tuysday.
The Epistle. ^^^. x.
ANd he comaded us to preach unto the people, and testify that it is he that is
ordained of god, a judge of quick and dead. To him give all the prophets
witness, that through his name, all that believe in him, shall receue remission
of sins.

While Peter yet spoke these words, the holy Ghost fell on all them which
hard the preaching. And they of the circumcision which believed, were
astonished, as many as came with Peter, because that on the Gentiles also, was
shed out the gift of the holy Ghost. For they hard them speak with tongues,
and magnify God. Then answered Peter, can any man forbid water, that these
should not be baptized, which have received the holy Ghost as well as we? And
he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Then prayed they
him to tarry a few days.

The places are four.
1 A notable saying, containing the sum of the doctrine of man's
Justification before God. 2 Of the holy Ghost, what he is, why and too whom he
is given, that is too wit, those that hear the word. 3 Of the calling of the
Heathen. 4 Of Baptim.
At this time I will speak of no more but the first place and that breefly.

The first place.
THere have been great disputacions and controversies Diversity of opinions
concerning Justification.
at all times, both in the Church and among the Heathen, concerning this
question, which of al others is of greatest weight: how men may be justified
before God, or by what means men may atteyne forgiveness of sins, and
everlasting salvation. Diverse have dreamed that they might pacify Gods
displeasure, and obtain his favor, and endless bliss by certain Ceremonies
and sacrifises. Many have believed that they should be rightuouse and blissed
before God, by their honest behavior in outward conversation, or by shunning
outward offenses, and by doing good works. Some again have imagined that
they should become righteouse by virtues poured intoo them, and some by
rauishements and inspirations, and other some by other means. But Peter in
short sentence compriseth a most learned discusseme^t of this controversy,
and a sum of all the whole doctrine concerning justification, in this place
when he says: All the Prophets bear witness unto Christ, that every one
which believes in him, receives remission of sins by his name.

Now, that the largeness of the doctrine, contained in this short sentence,
may in some sort be considered and understood, I will expound the words in
order.

First of all therefore, least any man might doubt of the certeintie of this
doctrine, Peter alleged the authority of the Synod, or general
determination of all the Prophets and Apostles, and the consent of the
universal Church, which now also may be set against our adversaries, when
they yell out that they are the church of God, and that they follow the consent
of the Church. And we may know that one self same doctrine concerning
righteousness or remission of sins, too be given freely for Christ our
mediators sake, was always preached in the church of the Fathers and the
Prophets, and that for the same cause chiefly, God raised up Prophets, that
they should be witnesses and interpreters of the promise, according as the
testimonies of Moses and the rest of the Prophets did show. John. v. If ye
believed Moses, ye would believe me, for he has written of me. Ge. iiij. and
xxij. and Heb. xj. By faith Abel offered a better sacrifice than Cain, by
which he was pronounced rightuouse by the witness of God. Genesis xij. and xxij.
and Gal. iij. In thy seed shall all nations be blissed, not in seeds as in
many, but in thy seed, as in one, which is Christ. Genesis. xv. Abraham
beleeeued God, and he was accounted rightuous. Deuteronomy. xviij. The Lord shall raise
you up a prophet, hear him. Psa. xxxij. Blissed ar they whose sins are
forgiven. Esa. xliij. I am he that wipeth out thine iniquities, for mine own
sake, and I will not remember thy sins any more. Ier. xxxij. and xxxiij. The
Lord is our righteousness. Dan. ix. Hear us for the lords sake. Also,
everlasting righteousness shall be brought in. etc. Romans j. The Gospel which
the Lord promised by his Prophets. etc.

Secondly, he defines man's righteousness before God, Ryghtuousnesse what it
is.
to be forgiveness of sins, given freely for Christ's sake: and that too be
justified is the same thing that to receive remission of sins, or too be
acquit and set free from sin, as Paul says. Act. xiij. Through Christ is
remission of sins preched unto us, and by him is every one that believes,
justified from al things, from which ye could not be justified by ye law of
Moses. Also, Ps. xxxj. Blissed are they whose iniquities are released, and
whose sins are covered. Blissed is ye man to whom y^ Lord imputes not sin.
Then is not ye righteousness (whereby ye sinful man is reputed just before god)
a quality or virtue in our selves, nor ye esse^tial righteousness of god: but a
relation or imputacio^, wherthrough we are acquit and reputed rightuous for
Christ's sake. Now let us consider how great a benefit is ye remission of sins,
which Christ brings. For what should it profit a man, though he wan the
whole world, if he lost his own soul. The efficie^t forcing cause of
iustificacation.


Thirdly he expresses the efficient forcing cause of Justification, when he
says, yt we receive forgiveness of sins by his name, that is to say, not
for our own sorowfulnesse, for our own virtues, for moonkish merits, for
Masses or other works. This Antithesis or matching of contraries, and this
exclusive or disbarring, is to be fastened in men's minds with great heed, to
the intent the honorable title of redeemer and Iustifier (which is due only to
ye son of God our Lord Jesus Christ) may be given unto him, and that the
consciences which are thrown down, may have assured and stedy comfort too
hold by.

Fourthly let the universal part of speech which teaches yt God in is very
deed, upright to all men, be set against ye te^ptacion of particularitie. And
let such like sayings be joined with it, as show y^ al which repent not, ar
rejected of God together: and yt on y^ contrary side, all yt resort unto
Christ, do assuredly obtein remission of sins. j. Ti. ij. God will have al me^
saved. Io. 3. So god loved ye world, yt he gave his only begotten son, to ye
intent yt every one which believes in him should not perish, but have life
everlasting. He yt believes not in ye son, the wrath of God shall abide upon
him. The mean or Instrument of our salvation.


Fifthly, the instrument or mean whereby we may acknowledge Christ's person and
benefits, and both receive and apply to our selves ye forgiveness of sins
offered to us by him, is only faith, according as Peter says here, yt every
what it is to believe.
one which believes in him. Now, to believe on ye son of God, is, first to
acknowledge aright the person and benefits of Christ crucified, and raised
agein for us, yt he is verily and by nature God, and the savior promised by
the Prophets, pacifying God, and giving peace, righteousness and salvation
everlasting to those yt believe. Secondly, to assent to all the whole doctrine
delivered us by Christ, or with a stedy assent to embrace all the articles of
the Christen faith, and among the rest, this also: I believe remission of sins
to be given me freely for Christ's sake. Thirdly, it is to rest upon Christ the
Mediator, with steadfast trust, and to assure a ma^s self for a certeintie, yt
his sins are forgiven him for Christ's sake, and yt he is in Gods favor, and
that God accepts him, heereth him, and receives him to everlasting life for
Christ's sake, who has suffered and is risen ageine for us, and not for our
own virtues or good works.

Sixthly, let ye object of faith and y^ sum of y^ whole Gospel (which is
lernedly and breefly comprehended in this sermon of Peter's) be considered. For
he says yt God by his word has brought tidings of peace through Christ, who
is lord of al.

First therefore he comprehends the doctrine concerning the person of Christ,
in the word Lord, namely that he is Iehoua in very deed, and by nature God,
the maker and Lord of Heaven and earth, and of all things that are in them, as
it is said, I am the Lord, and this is my name, I will not give my glory too
an other. Now the name of Iehoua is attributed too Christ in Iere. xxiij, and
xxxiij. Dan. ix. Number. xxj. Therefore Christ is verily, and by nature God.

Again he co^prehendeth a sum of the doctrine concerning these two words:
Remission of sins, and peace purchased by Christ, Wherein he meeneth not
bodyly and worldly peace, but the appeasement of Gods wrath against our sins,
atonement with God, quietness and joy of conscience in all adversities and in
death, and lastly desire too mainteyne outward concord and peace.

Thirdly, that faith is not only a bare knowledge of the person and benefits
of Christ, but also a trust settled in Christ, it appears openly be this
phrase, All that believe in him. For it is well done in the schools, that
they make this distinction in the manner of speeches following, that too believe
of God, is to believe him too be, to believe God, is to give credit too him
and to believe his word, and to believe in God, is to trust in him, too stay
upon him, and too repose the whole hope of our salvation in him.

These six places contained in this notable sentence of Peter: To him do all
the Prophets bear witness. etc. Let the studiouse sort consider, and join
thereuntoo a sum of the doctrine, concerning the Justifying of man before
God, out of the writings that comprehended the substance of the Christen
doctrine.

Upon Trinity Sunday.
The Epistle. Romans xj.
O The deepenesse of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? for who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has bin of counsel with him? Either who
has given unto him first, and he shall be recompensed ageine? For of him,
and through him, and in him are all things. Too him be glory for ever.

Amen.
The disposement of this Sermon concerning the Trinity.
THe first and chief care of all men ought too be too know What ought too
be the chief care of men.
God aryght, too call upon him, and too set forth his praise. For too that end
chiefly were they created and redeemed by the son. Neither is there any other
higher or greater wisdom than the true knowledge and woorshipping of God, which
brings most assured comfort in all tribulations, and government of life in
greatest affairs, and salvation and glory everlasting both of body and soul.
Now forasmuch as upon this day, the Doctrine concerning the unity of the
being of the Godhead, and the Trinity of the persons, is wont too be set
forth in the Churches, we will distribute this days doctrine intoo three
places.

1 What God is. 2 That there is but one God only. 3 That there are three
persons in the one being or in the one substance of the Godhead, the father,
the son, and the holy ghost, and of either of their properties and
differences.
First, what God is.
GOd will have his being and will known too me^ this only How God will have his
being known.
one way, according as he has manifested himself in his church by the certain
word, that is to wit, by the law and the gospel, and the notable records
delivered by Christ, ye prophets and Apostles. And there is very great ods in
the difference beetween the heathenish knowing of God, and the christen. For
although the heathen by ye natural light shed into their minds, and by this
most beautiful Theater of natural things, do after a sort know God too be a
mind everlasting, wise, well doing, just, the beholder of things, and the
iudger of men's doings, too whom (according too that light ingraffed in men's
minds which discerns honest and dishonest things a sunder,) obedience is too
be performed: yet have they not known, either the difference of the three
persons, or the will of God reveled in his gospel. Yea and contrary too this
knowledge ingraffed in them by nature, they allow the Idolatrous woorshipping
of the monstrous multitude of Gods: and because in the confusion of this
present life they see the good often times in ill case, and the ill in good
case, they are overwhelmed either with Epicurish or with Academish doutfulnesse,
wherthrough al yt religion of theirs is appalled and falls too the ground.

But the sum of the Doctrine concerning the being of the Godhead which the
usual description of God compriseth, is this.

God is a being or substance spiritual, understanding, everlasting, What God
is.
soothfast, good, ryghtuous, merciful, chaste, most free, of infinite power and
wisdom, and another from the bodies of the world. The everlasting Father, who
begat the Son his image from before all worlds: and the Son the coeternall
image of the Father and the holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the
Son: According as the Godhead has disclosed it self: which toogither has
created and mainteyneth heaven and earth, and all creatures: and in mankind
gathers too it self a Church, too the intent that by the same, this one and
true Godhed (which is manifested by assured testimonies and by the word
delivered too the Prophets and Apostles,) may be acknowledged and called
upon, and glorified in the eternal life.

This definition is compacted out of many records of Gods word, which may be
plenteously enlarged. And it consists of four members. First it reckeneth up
in order the twelve properties peculiar too the being of God. Secondly, it
recites the three persons and the differences of them. Thirdly it declares
the operations of God and his creation, and preservation of all things. And
fourthly it shows the choosing of his eternal church, by which he will be
known and magnified.

The second place.
THat there is but one God, even the sou^der sort of the heathen (being
convicted by demonstrations taken of the orderlynesse of causes in nature,)
have taught. And worthy of remembrance are these sentences. There is one God
only, and there is none other God. Also, there is but one God, wise, mighty,
and there withal blissful. And ageine: there must needs be some one thing,
and that immortal, whoo was the first mouer of all things, and which
preserves them now in good governance. The rule of many is not good, let
there be but one governor.

Notwithstanding, contrary too this opinion known too The Gods of the Heathen.
nature, the Heathen men admitted an abominable sort of Gods, which (as Paul
says truly, an idol is nothing in the world) are not everlasting Gods, but
either surmysed and vain names, or very feendes, or else other things created
by God. Agein in the very church also the Manichees imagined two Gods, both
of them myghtie and eternal: the one good and the cause of good in nature: the
other the cause of evil. Against these madnesses let this doctrine be most
firmly held, that there is but one God, almighty, everlasting, good,
ryghtuous, the judge, the maker, and the preserver of all things, manifested in
the Church by the son our Lord Jesus Christ sent among us, and by his Gospel
delivered too us, according too the sayings of Esaias. xliij. xliiij. and xlv.
Before me there is no God creator, neither shall there be after me. I am the
first and I am the last, and beesides me there is no God: Am not I the Lord,
and there is none other God save I? Turn unto me and ye shall be safe, all the
coasts of the earth. For I am God and none other. j. Cor. viij. There is none
other God but one. Deuteronomy. 4. Harken O Israel, the Lord thy God is but one god.
And this one true God the Scripture names the father, the son, and the holy
Ghost. Math. xxviij. Baptize them in the name of the father and of the son,
and of the holy ghost. These three being in very deed of one substance, fully
and perfectly endued all with one Godhed, power, glory, and majesty, and yet
verily and really distinct one from another, are named in the Church the three
persons.

The third place, concerning the three persons in the one, being or substance
of the Godhead.
NOw although man's reason be offended, and cannot understand The unity and
trinity of the Godhead.
how the three distinct or several persons the father, the son, and the holy
ghost, are but only one God: yet notwithstanding we must so think and speak
of God, as he has manifested himself in his word, which openly witnesses
that there be three several persons of one substance, and of one continuance,
as they are called upon toogither in baptim, and equal power and honor is
attributed to the father, the son, and the holy ghost. And.j. John.v. it is
said. There are three yt hear witness in heaven, the father, the son, and
the holy ghost, and these three are one. John.x. I and the father are one. But
the cheifest confirmation of this article that the son of God our Lord Jesus
Christ is verily and by nature God, equal with God the father, is written in the
first and fifth chapters of John, where there be.x. proofs recited in order.
Now let the godly in their prayers and in all their thoughts upon God, have
before their eyes the descriptions and differences of the three persons.

The father is the first person of the Godhead, which from The first person.
everlasting begat the coeternall son, the image of himself, and toogither
with the son and the holy Ghost, made all things of nothing, and preserves
them.

The Son is the second person of the Godhed, begotten The second person.
of the eternal father, and is the substanciall and full image of the
everlasting father, which son became afterward ye spokesma^ between God and
the first men when they were fallen, and being ordained mediator, took man's
nature of the virgin Marie, and became a sacrifyse for us, and by him and for
him only, the father gives remission of sins, ryghtuousnesse and everlasting
salvation.

The holy Ghost is the third person of the Godhed, everlastingly The third
person.
proceeding from the father and the son, and is sent intoo the hearts of the
believers, too kindle in them the light of knowing God aryght, and true
motions, love, life, and ioyfulnesse settled in God, and too repair all the
powers, that they may be conformable with God himself.

The differences of the persons which God has disclosed in his word, are of
three sorts.

The first is taken of the properties of the peculiar marks of the persons, or
of their works inwardly, or their inward operations.

The father is the welspring of the Godhead, having his The mark of the Father.
being, not of any other person but of himself, and communicating his being
unto the son his image, begotten of him, and too the holy Ghost proceeding
from him. John.v. Like as the father has life in himself: So also has he
given too the son, too have life in himself.

But the son has his being communicated too him of The mark of the Son.
the father, and is the image of the father, begotten without beginning. Psalm.
ij. Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. Heb.j. He is the
bryghtnesse and express image of the fathers substance.

And the holy Ghost has his being communicated of the The mark of the holy
ghost*
father and the son, and proceeds everlastingly from the father and the
son. John.xv. He shall take of mine.

The second difference is of the outward manifestation of them, made in the
Baptim of Christ and at other times.

The eternal father disclosed himself and made a difference between himself
and the son by this saying: This is my beloved son in whom Idelyght.

The Son took upon him man's nature, and dwelt among us, and beecame a
Sacrifyse, and rose again from Death.

The holy Ghost appeered in the shape of a Dooue, and in the likeness of fiery
tungs. Act. ij.

The third is of the office of each person.

The father sends the son and the holy Ghost, and woorketh The office of
the father.
effectually by their ministry, to the salvation of every one that believes.
Romans j.

The son is sent by the father, too bring abroad the gospel The office of the
son.
out of the secret bosom of the father, too make intercession for mankind fallen
into sin, to be made a sacrifise for men's sins, and by his obedience and
bludshed too redeem the church, and in this life too rule it and defend it,
and afterward too raise it up ageine, and too deck it with life and glory
everlasting.

The holy Ghost is sent of the father and the son, that The office of the
holy ghost
by the gospel he may kindle in men's hearts the light of the true
acknowledgement of the father, of the son and of himself, and true
righteousness and life, and that he may comfort and strengthen the godly in
all adversities and sorrows. Ioh. xv. Whom I will send you from the father.

But forasmuch as the whole doctrine of this feastful day concerning the unity
of being, and the trinity of persons in the Godhead all of one substance and
one euerlastingnesse, is comprehended and set out with singular lyghtsomnesse
of words, in the Creed which is used in the Church under the name of
Athanasius: I exhort my heerers too learn that whole Creed by heart, and too
set it continually before their eyes, as the rule of the true meening and of
the Faith of this Article.

The Creed of Athanasius.
Whosoever will be saved* before all things it is necessary that he hold the
catholic Faith.

Which faith except every one do keep holy and undefiled: without doubt he
shall perish everlastingly.

And the catholic faith is this: that we woorship one God in Trinity, and
Trinity in unity.

Neither confounding the persons: nor deuyding the substance.

For there is one person of the father, another of the son: and another of the
holy ghost.

But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost is all
one: the glory equal, the Majesty coeternall.

Such as the father is, such is the son: and such is the holy ghost.

The father uncreate, the son uncreate: and the holy ghost uncreate.

The father incomprehensible, the son incomprehe^sible: and the holy ghost
incomprehensible.

The father eternal, the son eternal: and the holy ghost eternal.

And yet they are not three eternals: but one eternal.

As also there be not three incomprehe^sibles, nor three uncreated: but one
uncreated, and one incomprehensible.

So likewise is the father almighty, the son almighty: and the holy ghost
almighty.

And yet they are not three almighties: but one almighty.

So the father is God, the son is God: and the holy ghost is God.

And yet are they not three Gods: but one God.

So likewise is the father Lord, the son Lord: and the holy ghost Lord.

And yet not three Lords: but one Lord.

For like as we be compelled by the Christian verity: too acknowledge every
person by himself, too be God and Lord.

So are we forbidden by the Catholic religion: too say there be three Gods
or three Lords.

The father is made of none: neither created nor begotten.

The son is of the father alone: not made nor created, but begotten.

The holy ghost is of the father and of the son: neither made, nor created,
nor begotten, but proceeding.

So there is one father, not three fathers, one son, not three sons: one
holy Ghost, not three holy Ghostes.

And in this Trinity, none is before or after other: none is greater nor less
than an other.

But the whole three persons: be coeternall together and coequall.

So that in all things as is aforsayd: the unity in Trinity, and the Trinity
in unity, is too be woorshypped.

He therefore that will be saved: must thus think of the Trinity.

Furthermore, it is necessary too everlasting salvation: that he also beeleeue
ryghtly in the Incarnacion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

For the right Faith is, that we beeleeue and confess: that our Lord Jesus
Christ, the son of God, is God and man.

God of the substance of the father, beegotten before the worlds: and man of
the substance of his mother, borne in the world.

Perfect God, and perfect man: of a reasonable soul: and human flesh
subsisting.

Equal too the father, as touching his Godhead: and inferior too the father,
touching his manhood.

Who although he be God and man: yet he is not two, but one Christ.

One, not by conversion of the Godhead intoo flesh: but by taking of the
manhood intoo God.

One altoogither, not by confusion of substance: but by unity of person.

For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man: so God and man is one Christ.

Who suffered for our salvation: descended intoo hell, rose ageyn the third day
from the dead.

He ascended intoo heaven, he sits on the right hand of the father, God
almighty: from whence he shall come too judge the quick and the dead.

At whose coming all men shall rise ageyn with their bodies: and shall give
account for their own works.

And they that have done good, shall go intoo life everlasting: and they that
have done evil, intoo everlasting fire.

This is the Catholic faith: which except a man believe faithfully, he can not
be saved.

Upon the first Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. j. John. iiij.
Dearly beloved, let us love one another: for love comes of God. And every
one that loves, is borne of God, and knows God. He that loves not, knows
not God: for God is love. In this appears the love of god too us ward,
because that God sent his only begotten son intoo the world, that we might
live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us,
and sent his son too be the agreement for our sins. Dearly beloved, if
God so loved us, we ought also one to love another. No man has seen God at any
time. If we love one another, GOD dwells in us, and his love is perfect in
us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him and he in us, because he has given
us of his spirit. And we have seen, and do testifye that the Father sent the
son too be the Savior of the world: whosoever confesses that Jesus is the
son of God, in him dwells God, and he in God. And we have known and
believed the love that God has too us. God is love, and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God* and God in him. Herein is the love perfect in us, that
we should trust in the day of judgment. For as he is, even so are we in
this world. There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear: for
fear has paynefulnesse. He that fears, is not perfect in love. We love
him, for he loved us first. If a man say: I love God, and yet hate his
brother, he is a liar. For how can he that loves not his brother whom he has
seen, love GOD whom he has not seen? And this commandment have we of him:
that he which loves God, should love his brother also.

The disposement.
THe state of this Epistle is a doctrine concerning the love of God and of our
neighbor.

The greatest part of John's whole Epistle is employed upon two places: In
exhorting too faith which is settled in the louingnesse or mercy of GOD, who
forgiueth sins for his son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and escheweth
corruptions of the true doctrine concerning the son of god: And unto new
obedience or love toward GOD and our neighbor. For too this purpose chiefly
did John write this Epistle, too root out this common error out of men's
minds, who (when they here that we are justified by faith alone for Christ's
sake) do gather thereuppon, that good works are not needful, and that it
skilles not after what sort we live, John therefore teaches that we attain
remission of sins and are clenzed from our sins, not for our own good
works, but by faith through the free love and mercy of God, and the only
blud of the son of God: howbeit that this faith must of necessity work
effectually by love toward God and our neighbor, as is said more at large in
the doctrine of justification and good works.

Now there are in the Epistle of this Su^day, three places too be chiefly
considered.

1 Of Gods love toowardes us, which is the foundation of our righteousness and
everlasting salvation* 2 Of our love toward God and our neighbor. 3 Of the
childly awe and the slavish fear.
The first place.
MOst grave and most worthy too be imprinted in the iunermost bowels of our
hearts, is the first sentence of this Epistle, which sets forth a sum of
the whole Gospel, and a most sweet comfort in all troubles and sorrows. God
is love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and God is love.
God in him.

But first and foremost let the Readers consider, that this saying of John's
agrees fully with Christ's sermon, Ioh. iij. God so loved the world that he
gave his only begotten son, too the intent that al which believe in him
should not perish, but have life everlasting.

God is love, that is too say, God loves mankind in very deed and earnestly,
and has uttered his infinite and unspeakable love toowardes us, by this
notable token, that he has not spared his only begotten son, but has given
him for us all. Like as a little before the words of this days Epistle, it
is said, Herein is the love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his only begotten son too make agreement for our sins. This exceeding
great goodness Our only haue^ and fortress.
and mercy or love of God toowardes us, is the only fortress of our
ryghtuousnesse, and haven of our welfare. Too which, who soever flee with
stedie faith, are reconcyled too God, or have Gods favor, and dwell in God,
and God dwells in the^, bestowing upon them al benefits, comfort,
righteousness, life, joy, and heavenly light. These are verily and earnestly
or perfectly beloved of GOD, and at the day of judgment have a stedie trust
settled in his fatherly good will, and fear not that they shall be condemned,
but know themselves too be clothed with the righteousness of the son of
God, and that they are reputed and become as rightuouse and holy as if they
themselves had performed the perfect love and obedience due too the Law.

This trust settled in the love or good will of God embracing The phisike of
our souls.
us for his sons sake, is the phisike of the mind, taking away fond
thoughtfulness, ridding us of lusts, driving away fear, and making the heart
quiet and peaceable. It is not full of thought and anguishe, or it does not
tremble or despair in dangers which are bent against it, but is subject too
God, and persuading it self too be verily beloved of God, it craves and
wayteth for help at his hand, and obeys him, and is not discouraged with the
hugeness of miseries, that it should fall from God: according as S. Paul
says* Roma. viij. Who shall separate us from the love of God, shall
affliction, or anguish, or persecution, or hunger, etc? I am well assured, that
neither death, nor life, nor any creature can pluck us from the love of God,
wherewith he loves us for his son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake.

So Moses standing at the red Sea, so Ezechias and Esaias Examples who loves
God.
being beseeged by Sennacherib, so Steven when he was going too execution,
through faith assuring them that God loved them for his sons sake, did put
away the fearfulness, anguish, and torment of conscience, under which Saul,
Judas, and innumerable others did sink, of which sort is said in the
Epistle. But he that fears, is not perfect in love, that is too say: he that
yields too distrust, too fearfulness, and anguish, and despayreth in sorrow
and tribulation, he believes not that God loves him in deed, neither dwells
he in God, nor God in him.

The second place, Of loving God and our neighbor.
LEt us love him, because he has loved us first. By wonderful Sparks of
knowledge in nature, and why they were given*
providence has God so framed man's nature, that in his mind there should
shine certain sparks of knowledge too be as gouerners of all his devises and
doings, and in his will and heart there should be both the rest of affections,
and also charity or love, whereby the heart does with a certain gladness
long for, and draw unto it, and endeavor to knit unto itself the good thing
which it likes, that it may enjoy it, and that as it were one thing may be
made of two. Like as the son of God being led with exceeding great love,
united man's nature too himself. Too this end then is nature created in this
wise, that men should before all things, long after God as the souerein good
thing, and settle themselves upon him, and joy in him: and that men being
cuppled in God, should also be linked one unto another, and being joined
toogither, should be all one, teaching all one thing, and professing all one
thing. For there is no bond of man's fellowship more strong, than the flames
of love* sown in men's hearts by the operation of God, and afterward kindled
and strengthened by the likeness of natures and conditions, and by consent as
touching God and other matters.

Love toward God, is a burning fire of longing, wherewith Love toward God.
men's hearts (upon knowledge of Gods hearty love toward us, which he has
showed by sending his son) do on their behalf ageine embrace God, and with a
certain gladness settled upon him, submit themselves too him, and obey him
according too all his commandments, as is said in the chapter following: This
is the loving of God, that we keep his commandments.

And there be three causes recited in this Epistle, where Causes of loving God
and* our neighbor*
by all the godly ought too be stirred and inflamed too the true and earnest
love of God and our neighbor.

The first is the true, earnest, and infinite love of God toward Gods love
toward us.
us, which he has showed by sending his only begotten son, who dyed and
rose ageine for our salvation. Wherefore the order of right, and the eternal
and unchangeable necessity of det requires at our hands, that we should not
be thanklesse too God that loves us so heartily, but that we should render
love for love, and be obedient too him, according as it is said in the Text,
let us love him, because he has loved us first.

The second is the most streigth commandment of God Commandment.
as it is said in the Text: This commandment have we of God, that he which
loves god should also love his neighbor.

The third is the most ample dignity and profitablenesse. Worthiness and
profit.
For this is the highest and cheifest worshipping of GOD, wherein God is most
specially delighted, who dwells in the hearts of those that love one another
and agree toogither, as in a house or temple that he likes well of, as is
said in this chapter. If we love one another, God dwells in us. On the
contrary part, he shakes of God from governing him, whatsoever he is that
sows discord, or nourishes and confirms hatred, yrefulnesse, desire of
revenge, discord, and wars.

The love of a man's brother or neighbor comprehends What is comprehended
in the love of our neighbor.
in a manner all the virtues of the second table: as in the fourth
commandment, brotherly love, kindhartednesse, duetifulnesse toward a man's
parents and teachers, love of man's children, and kinsfolk, of the
magistrates, etc. In the fifth commandment, endeuer too keep concord,
friendship, meekness, mercy, uprightness which hurts not another man's
body or good name, but does good unto others. In the sixth commandment,
the love of married folks, eschewing whoredom and aduoutrie, etc. In the
seventh commandment ryghtfulnesse which impeacheth not another man's goods
nor defraudeth another man in bargayning, and liberality toward the poor.
In the eight commandment, freendlynesse, faythfulnesse, soothfastnesse which
hurts not another man by slanders, bakbytings, raylings, etc.

Of all these virtues which are apparent too be parts of neyghbourly love, a
man might speak in order, if this place were appointed for the full opening of
them. But as now it suffyseth too have poynted out the cheef points of this
most large doctrine, as they are applied too the Text of this present Epistle.

Upon the second Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. j. John. iij.
Marvel not my brethren, though the world hate you. We know that we are
translated from death unto life, because we love the brethren. He that loves
not his brother, abides in death. Whosoever hates his brother, is a manslear.
And ye know, that no manslear has eternal life abiding in him. Hereby
perceive we love, because he gave his life for us, and we ought too give our
lives for the brethren. But who so has this worlds good, and sees his
brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the
love of God in him* My babes, let us not love in word, neither in tongue: but
in deed and in verity.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is of those sort that persuade.

For first, there is a comfort too be set against the hatreds of the world.

Secondly, there is an Exhortation too louingnesse and liberality toward a
man's neighbor.

The first place.
Marvel not my brethren though the world hate you. The hatred of the world
against the godly.
Man's reason judges of the tooyles and troubles of the godly, and specially
of the contentions among ye teachers, even for all the world after the same
manner, as Salust says in his preface too the wars of Iugurth: Too labor
in vain, and too preach nothing else by ouertooyling a man's self, but
hatred and slander, is a point of utter madness. For all the godly, and
specially the Ministers of the Gospel, who perform the deeds of most singular
louingnesse, and most earnestly seek the everlasting welfare of their heerers,
and execute their duty most faithfully: do reap in manner none other reward,
than most bitter hatred, and utter unthankfulness at the hands of those upon
whom they have bestowed greatest benefits. Against this temptation and the
bitter fordoomes, spyghts, and hatreds of the wyseme^ of the world, whereby
many are wont too be withdrawn from the ministry, John comfort us in
these words: Marvel not my brethren though the world hate you, as if he had
said, the judgment of God and of the godly is far of another sort, than is
the judgment of the wicked world. The greater that any man is before God, the
more contemned and abject is he before the world.

And seeing that at many men's hands there is no token of a thankful mind
rendered too God for his exceeding great benefits which he pours out by
heaps upon all men, but all kind of spyght: Let not us wonder if the world
hate us also. For the Devil envying us this so great felicity, that we are
conveyed from death too everlasting life, stirs up his instruments, and
inflameth men's hatreds against us. Therefore against the most bitter hatred
of the world and of the ungodly, let us set Gods good will and fatherly love
toward us, which the son of God has showed by this notable token, that he
has spent his life for us, and delivering us from death by the death of him
self, has restored us to the possession of eternal life. Wherefore let each
of us be so disposed in mind, that they may with a true heart say thus: It is
sufficient for me having my full delyght in Christ, too do those things which
are godly, and to speak such as are godly.

The second place.
AN exhortation too louingnesse and liberality toward a man's neybour: and
the arguments of this exhortation are three.

Of the honestnesse of it.
Of the profitablenesse of it.
And of the example of Christ.
FIrst of the honestnesse or the necessary couplyng of the This following is
worth the beating away.
cause and the effects. I know that we are translated from death too life,
because we love the brethren, or because our faith is effectual by love. For
too this end are we washed from our sins by the blood of Christ, and
translated from death intoo life: that we should hereafter eschew sin, and
earnestly execute love toward God and our neybour, which is the fountayn of
all virtues. Now like as moving in a man's body is an undoubted token and
effect of life yet left in the body: even so louingnesse is the next effect and
an infallible sign of faith shyning in the heart, whereby we are translated
from death unto life. And like as in this Euthymeme, I know there is life
still in him, because there is stirring yet left in his body: it follows not
that stirring is the efficient cause of life, but by the effect I gather
according too reason, that the cause is present: so in this place of John's, we
know we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren, this
part of speech because, betokens not the efficient cause (of which is
spoken in the fifth of John's Gospel in this wise, He that believes in the
son, is passed from death unto life,) but it betokens the effect, whereupon
the argument is gathered that we are verily translated from death unto life,
like as Luke in his. vij. Chapter reasons upon the effect, that many sins
are forgiven too the sinful woman, because she loved much. Likewise as if I
should say, I know for a certeintie that the Sun is up, because I see the
sun beams glaring in my chamber. And in this selfsame Epistle is said, In
this have we known his love because he has spent his life for us.

The second argument of the profitablenesse, or of the Necessity.
necessity of holding fast Faith, life, and everlasting salvation.

For he that loves not, has not life everlasting abiding in him, but he
continues in death, according also as Paul says. j. Cor. vj. No
whoremongers, Idolaters, abusers of themselves with the mankind, pillars, etc.
shall inherit the kingdom of God. Therefore too the intent we lose not the
remission of sins received, the deliverance from Death, the grace of GOD,
and the everlasting life: we must of necessity fall to louingnesse and new
obedience agreeable with Gods will. And yet it follows not therevppon that
our louingnesse or new obedience deserves forgiveness of sins, and
eternal life. For this louingnesse cannot so much as be begone, neither
pleases it God, except remission of sins be first freely given for Christ's
sake, and that faith shine in the heart. Breefly, even altoogyther after the
manner of Logic has John included this argument in the form of reasonyng
agreeing to the mood Celarent. But in the first place he has put the
conclusion, in the second the minor, and in the last the mayor.

Ce Every murderer, has not life everlasting abiding in him: or abides in
death.

la Every one that hates or loves not his brother is a murderer before God.
Math. v.

rent Ergo he that loves not his brother, abides in Death, or has not
eternal life abiding in him.

The third Argument.
OF the example of Christ, who spent his soul or his Example of love.
life for us, as he says in John. xv. Greater love than this can no man have,
than that a man should give his life for his friends. Paul Romans v. GOD
commends his own love toward us, in that when we were his enemies Christ
dyed for us.

Unto these three arguments John adds a warnyng, Hypocrysie to be eschued.
that our love should not be hypocritish or colored, Neither must our
bowels, that is too say, our true and hearty good will, and mercy, and well
doing which proceeds from a true heart, be shut up against our neighbor that
has need, as the rich man did forclose the fountain of his courtesy
against Lazarus whom he lothed. And let us show our louingnesse toward our
needy neybor, not in words and tongue only, but in very deed, with our
counsel, our money, our travel, and our true seruisablenesse. I do not in
words show goodness, and in deeds noughtynesse (as says Sophocles) but I
show deeds like unto my words.

For (that I may use the words of Plautus) he is a friend, that at the
pinch helps me in deed when I have need of his deed.

In this place may be set forth a sum of the doctrine concerning
Almesdeedes and Liberality toward the poor, out of the Exposition of
the.vij. commandment, and also concerning the other parts or duties of
neybourly love, the chief points whereof are declared already upon the
Sunday called Quinquagesima, and an eight days ago.

The third Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. j. Peter. v.
SVbmit your selves every man one to an other: knitte your selves together in
lowlynesse of mind. For God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble. Submit your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may
exalt you when the time is come. Cast all your care upon him: for he cares for
you. Be sober, and watch: for your aduersery the devil, as a roaring Lion
walks about, seeking whom he may devour, whom resist steadfast in the
faith: knowing that the same afflictions are appointed unto your brethren,
that are in the world. But the God of all grace which has called us unto
his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, shall his own self (after that ye have
suffered a little affliction) make you perfect, settle, strength, and
stablishe you. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever.

Amen.
The disposement.
THis Epistle perteyneth to the kind of cases that persuade or dissuade. For
it is an exhortation to practice lowlynesse, and to beware of the devils snares.

The arguments are taken of the honestnesse, of the profytablenesse, and of
the easynesse or possiblenesse of the matter.

The cheef places of doctrine are two.
1 Of lowlynesse whereof a part is Faith settled upon God, and believing that
God has care of a man in his troubles. 2 Of the crafts of the devil, which
are too be kept often by sobriety and watchfulness, and driven away by
steadfast faith and prayer.
The first place. An exhortation too Lowlynesse.
THe pride which the devil breathed into our first parents Self love and
selfvveening.
in saying too them, ye shall be as Gods, sticks hard too our ribs, and is
as it were tied or fastened with nails too the bottom of men's hearts. For all of
us by nature do love our selves and make much of our selves, coveting to
excel others, and to be preferred before others, and that other should be
counted inferiors and underlings too us. And we trust much to our own wisdom
and strength, and when God casts us down, and pincheth us with miseries and
calamities, we are angry and we fret against God as if we were put too wrong
at his hand. This pride comprehends a great sink of vices. For all proud
folks Vices accompaning pride. Careless. Stately.
are first blind, not perceiving their own infirmity and filthynesse, nor
considering that God is the author of those gifts. They are careless without
fear of Gods displeasure or judgment. They are stately, ambitious, enuyers,
buzy bodies, skornfull, impacient in trouble, quarellers, malicious, makebates,
stirrers of sedition and wars in the church and in realms. Lovvlynesse.


Against this vice is set the virtue Lowlynesse, or humility, which Peter in
this place wills us to pitch down into the very bottom of our hearts, and too
keep it in our mind as it were fast tide with a sure knot. And humility or
lowlynesse is a virtue whereby we acknowledging our own infirmity in the fear
of God, are not proud: but with a true heart do submit our selves too God,
both in executing the duties of our vocation upon confidence of Gods help, and
in performing obedience in punishments and tribulatio^s, and also in yielding
due honor unto others. Virtues contained in lovvlynesse.


By this definition it is evident, that in this one word humility or
lowlynesse are contained many virtues: that is to wit. j. The fear of God. ij.
Modesty or myldnesse. iij. Faith settled upon the good will and help of god.
iiij. Diligence. v. Patience obeying God mekely and with a quiet mind in
bearing out adversities. vj. Reverence. Of every one of which let ye methodical
or orderly expositio^s be fetched out of y^ declaration of the ten
co^mau^deme^ts. From thence also to the setting forth of this sermon of Peter's,
let there be fetched the eight causes or arguments which ought to move and
inflame every man to the earnest embracing of true lowlynesse, and too the
utter eschuing of pride. Peter uses in this place three arguments.

First, of honestnesse, or the commandment of god. Have Causes that should
mo^e to Lowlynesse.
lowlynesse fastened in you, humble your selves under the mighty hand of God.
For seeing that God through his wisdom and righteousness has stablished this
order in ma^s life, ye one should serve an others turn and be subject one to an
other, as Peter said a little before, submit your selves al of you one to
another, and seeing y^ of determinate purpose according to his fatherly
goodness, he either punishes us instly for our deserts, or else exercises us
with tribulations for our trial: It is our duty, not to strive against God, but
patiently and with a willing and quiet heart to submit our selves to his
fatherly good will, and to obey his almighty power. For Gods hand is strong
enough, not only to beat down the proud, but also too lift up the lowly and
afflicted, like as he overthrew the proud and stifnecked Pharao, and raised the
lowly Joseph out of prison to the height of ye kingdom of Egypt.

Of the profitablenesse. For God gives grace to the lowly, The profit of
Lowlynesse.
y^ is to say, he favors the^, and bestows his gifts upon them, furthering
the^, helping the^ and exalting the^ in time convenient, like as he adua^ced y^
lowly Mary to this most high honor y^ she was ye mother of god. He called David
from yt shepherds fold to y^ kingdom of Jury. When he had humbled Manasses,
Nabuchodonosor, and the deposed David, he restored them to their kingdoms from
which they were cast.

On y^ contrary side, God resists the proud, and tu^bling the^ God resists
the proud.
down from the highest top of their power, riches and glory, overthrows them
quite, like as the dredful falls of Pharao, Sennacherib, Ajax, Apryes, Pompey,
Caesar, Antonie, and others without number, show. For as Christ says in Luke.
xvj. It is abomination before God what soever is lofty in this world. And God
delyghtes to overthrow all clymbers up on hye.

Of the easynesse or possiblenesse. For whereas in troubles and miseries men's
hearts tremble, and through thoughtfulness for their deliverance and getting
out agein, and for other things y^ may befall them afterward, are tormented with
fearfulnes and sorrow: It is a very hard thing to be humbled under ye mighty
hand of God with a peaceable and quiet mind, and to obey gods will without
grudging or repining. Peter therefore wills us to cast out of our mynds this
thoughtfulness and tre^bling of heart distrusting in God, and with steadfast
assurance of heart to settle our selves upon gods mercifulness and favor, and
without trembling or fearfulnes in perils to lean unto ye sound rock Christ with
a quiet and gladsom heart: and not to step aside from gods co^ma^deme^t, and the
needful duties of our calling for uncertain hope or fear of ye falling out of
things: like as Moises standing at ye red sea, Daniel when he should be cast to
the lions, the Apostles preaching the gospel, Luther in the time of the
assembly at Auspurge and in the whole course of his cause, did cast their care
upon ye Lord, and went manfully through with ye works of their vocation.
The Same thing does Christ command. Math. vj. First seek y^ kingdom of God, and
be not thoughtful for to morrow, sufficient for the day is the travel thereof. Of
present things have thou regard, Let God alone with afterward.

The second part of the Epistle.
YOur adversary the devil goth about like a roaring lion seeking The Devil.
who^ he may devour, whom resist you sound in faith. The devil keeps continual
vnproclaimed, and vnreco^cilable war against ye church, and every godly person,
whose destruction he practices both of body and soul by most traytrous crafts
and unmeasurable cruelty, like a hungerstaruen Lion. Therefore every godly man
must (like a good soldier) stand continually in battle ray, armed with the
complet harness of God, the description whereof must be borrowed out of the
sixth chapter of the Ephesians to set out this place of Peter. There are five
special kinds of policy wherewith Satan goes about to assault men unawares,
and too drive them intoo sin and fallyngs, and intoo eternal destruction,
and so too devour them.

First, he puts intoo their mynds ungodly thoughts, as Sna^es wherewith the
dyuel intangleth folks.
Epicurish or Academicall doutes concerning the providence, the certeintie of
the doctrine, and the soothfastnesse of the promises, or threatenings of God: or
else he stirs false opinions and errors in conceit, whereby men are driven to
meddle with unnecessary or unrighteous matters in which they perysh. Like as
into the head of Julian the renegate, and of many other worldly wise men, he
dropped in Epicurishe doutes and contempt of religion. And he prompted
Samosetanns, Arius and Fotinus, with colorable and false opinions concerning
the Son of God.

Secondly, in men's wills and hearts he nourishes and confirms the sinful
inclinations and affections of corrupted nature, as carelessness and neglecting
of Gods wrath and judgment, distrust in God, pride, enuyousnesse, lewd love,
hatred, slothfulness. etc. Like as in Cain and Saul he increased
spytefulnesse and malice: In Judas covetousness: In Paris the heats of
lechery: In Tyberius dissimulation and cruelnesse: In a scholar, loytering and
lazynesse. etc.

Thirdly he trumpeth in their ways with enticementes and occasions of fallings,
that is too wit, agreeableness of persons, and fitness of times and places,
which stir up the sinful inclinations of Nature, and minister easy and
speedy way too offend: as unto scholars he offers lewd company, whereby
they are often led away from applying and continuing their studies into
vitteling houses, too feasts, games, gaddings too and froo a nights, and
other foul disorders. When David was idle, he set before him Bethsabee washing
hirselfe. And he egged ambitious Absolon foreward, with hope of obteyning his
Fathers kingdom.

Fourthly, he endeeuereth to quench the faith of most men by adversities, as by
poverty, contempt, diffamacions, diseases, banishmentes, torments of body,
and all the persecutions that Tyrauntes and the world can devise. Of these
kinds of policies chiefly, does Peter make mention in this place, and he
comfort ye godly, both by the example of all the brotherhood in the world,
or of all the Church and the godly: and also with the short continuance of
their troubles: and specially with the help of God who vndershoreth, hartneth
and strengthens men's minds, that they should not faint, as it is said, j. Cor.
x. God is faithful, who suffers us not too be tempted above our power, but
with the temptacion makes a way out, that we may endure it.

Fifthly, the Devil weakeneth and overthrows many mo with prosperity,
favor of Noble men, wealthynesse, proinotion, idleness, pleasures. etc. For
in prosperity by little and little the regard of Gods displeasure, and the
fear of his judgment ware faint and are quenched. Wherefore when the fear of
God (which is as it were the keeper of all the other virtues) is removed,
men's minds do easly give bridle too their sinful lusts, and yield to the
Devil who plyeth them with occasions of fallings, as David, Solomon, and
others without number have fallen in idleness and prosperity. And these
sayings are well known: prosperity weakeneth the minds even of the wise.
Also idleness breeds sin. Moreover, The sin of sloth has many a snare,
to snarle in those that careless are. And again. When men be void of greef,
and set upon the merry pin. Their hearts open, and the feend with pleasant crafts
creepesin.

Hitherto we have spoken of the manners of the temptacions Fortification
against the Diuelles traynes.
or policies of Satan, as shortly as might be. Now let the godly think upon
the fortifications and armor wherewith too furnish our selves that we may be
able to beware of the force, and crafts of Satan, and to disapoint the^.

The first of these is watchfulnesie which must rid a Watchfulness
man's mind of carfulness, dullness, and drouzynesse in neglecting the
policies and power of Satan, and persuade it self that the name of Devil or
feende, is not a vain scarbug, or a painted viser, but must advisedly and
earnestly look too the sleyghtes of him as of a most subtle and cruel enemy,
and endeuer to withstand, and cut of ye beginnings of his temptacions, like as
Joseph with singular watchfulness had an eye to the devil, when he laid the
bayt for his chastity, and so withstoode the beginnings of his allurementes.

So in the first kind of temptacions, when the Devil Remedyageynst the
entrance of despair.
puts into men's heads heavy and blasphemons thoughts, which tend either to
the confirmation of Epicurish carelenesse or to the stablishmet of despair:
the safest way is, by and by at the beginning, either by reading the word of
God, or by some manner of communication or play with a man's friends, whatsoever
it be, to drive those troublesome thoughts out of his mind, as much as may be
possible, before they be strengthened and take root.

The second. Many slyghtes of yt Devil, and many sins Sobriety and
stayedensle.
and backeslidings, specially in the third kind of temptacions, may be
eschued by sobriety and stayednesse. For dru^ken folks do soon slip unawares
into great offenses, and by quenching their faith and earnestness in prayer
and in their studies and affairs are even laid like naked and unarmed folk in
danger of their most cruel enemy the Devil.

The third and cheef defense against ye slights of satan, (and Faith.
specially against the first kind of temptacions which are most perilous of
all) is sound faith, not giving way to the thoughts which ye devil or our own
flesh puts in our heads, but fastening most steadfastly the eyes both of body
and mind, upon the only word which god has delivered us: which is the only
Ancor of our life and welfare: from which it must not suffer it self to be
pulled by any thoughts, by any prosperity, or by adversity.

The fourth is, the example of brotherhoode, or of all the Example.
brethren and godly men in the world, who sustain the same temptations and
sleyghts of the Devil as well as we, and yet overcome them, and put them to
flight by the help of Gods son, and by faith staying upon the word of God,
and by the comfort of the godly brethren.

The fifth is, the God of all grace, who has called us to Gods grace.
his everlasting glory by Jesus Christ, who suffers us not to be tempted
above our power, but rayseth and settleth, and strengthens, and stablisheth
the buylding of our faith, that it sink not, but continue and stand stedy and
vnmonable against all the storms of temptacions, that the very true God may be
truly honored.

Upon the fourth Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. Romans viij.
IF we be sons, we are also heirs, the heirs I mean of God, and heirs
annexed with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be
glorified with him. For I suppose that the afflictions of this life, are not
worthy of the glory which shall be showed upon us. For the fervent desire of the
creature, abides loking when the sons of God shall appear, because the
creature is subdued to vanity against the will thereof: but for his will which
has subdued it in hope. For the same creature, shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. For we
know that every creature groneth with us also, and trauayleth in pain even
unto this time. Not only it, but even we also which have the first fruits
of the spirit mourn in our selves, and wait for (the adoption) even the
deliverance of our bodies. For we are saved by hope. But hope that is seen,
is no hope. For how can a man hope for that which he sees? But and if we hope
for that we see not: then do we with patience abide for it. Likewise the
spirit also helps our infirmities. For we know not what to desire as we
ought: but the sprite makes intercession mightily for us with gronings, which
can not be expressed with tongue. And he that searches the hearts, knows
what is the meaning of the sprite: for he makes intercession for the Saints,
according too the pleasure of God.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is persuasiue. For it is a comfort of the Church under the
Cross in this life. The proposition or ground of it, is. The godly must bear
the cross or suffer tribulation patiently and quietly.

The arguments of comfort are six.
THe first is upon the efficient cause or the order established by God, and
also upon the example of Gods son.

All godly men are bound to obey Gods wisdom, and Justice meekely and
reverently.

But Gods wisdom has appointed this order, that al Gods order to be followed.
the children of God and heirs annexed with Christ should be made conformable
too their pattern the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, who suffered
exceeding great miseries, persecution, and death before he was glorified: Ergo
all the godly must reuerentely obey this order of Gods wisdom, and become
like their pattern the Son of God, in persecution, and patiently abide the
small troubles of this life, which are the wicket to life and glory
everlasting.

Now this conditional phrase, If we suffer with him, signifies not a cause
or desert, but the order stablished by God, that he which desires to come to
the mark of life and glory everlasting, should patiently endure ye peynes and
troubles of so short and needful a journey. For eternal life is given freely
for the son of Gods sake, as it is said in To. vj. John. iij. and.vj. etc.
And in this place he says expressly, that our afflictions are not worthy or
deserve not the glory to come.

The second and cheef argument is grounded upon the end This argument holds
of right and equity.
of persecution, or upon our most gladsome riddance out of all miseries. Light
discommodities, which shall fall out in the end to our welfare, and be
recompensed with exceeding great and endless glory, are to be endured with a
manly and a quiet mind.

After the cross and tribulacions of the godly, there shall assuredly ensue to
them a most joyful end, and eternal gladness and glory, wherewith we shall be
crowned after we have wrestled out of all miseries: and enjoying the sight and
company of God and his Church, we shall be filled we the light and wisdom of
God everlastingly: For to al those that exercise godliness, the end shall be
most sweet.

Ergo we must in this very short race of our life, patiently and with willing
minds, endure some troubles of so needful a journey.

Paul enlarges the minor by a comparison of things A comparison of
inequality.
that are not matches, that is too wit, of the miseries of this life, and the
glory to come. For as there is no comparison of one little waterdrop, to the
whole huge Sea, or of one small grain of duste to the mountain Imaus: even so
the light and short troubles of this most short race, are not worthy to be
compared with the great and eternal glory of the life to come, as is said.
ij. Cor. iiij. The small continuance and lightness of our afflictions
procures an exceeding and eternal weight of glory unto us, while we consider
not the things that are seen, but the things that are not seen. So fayeth he
here, that the glory of the godly which is to come, is not seen with eyes,
but that the reuelement thereof is to be waited for, by faith and hope.

The 3. argument is grounded upon an example of the whole nature of all things,
or of the frame of the whole world.

The harms that are common to many are to be borne Common harms ought too
grieve the less.
the more quietly, because it is ageinste right to covet odds, and to refuse
such burdens as other men that are much better than our selves, are compelled
to bear.

All the whole world is subject to the fondness or abuse of the ungodly, and
to the thraldom of corruption, and carefully wayteth for deliverance, to the
intent it may serve to the glory of Gods children, for whom it was made.

Therefore let us also suffer the common miseries the quietlyer, and bear with
the delay. For afterward no doubt but the reuelacion of the glory of Gods
children shall follow, though it be put off for a while. Have patience then a
while and stay: great profits springs of small delay.

He enlarges this minor by ye figure Expolition, and by ^eyning a person, in
y^ he says, yt al creatures do groan and endure throws like women laboring
of child, which creatures notwtsta^ding do want sense. But the feeling of the
pain comes to ye church and ye godly, which groan for the sorrow of Joseph,
and are sorry that ye ungodly abuse ye creatures, and yt the godly are afflicted
and murdered, as if I should say, that the very walls of the church bewail
Luther, it were as much to say, as the godly men in the Church lament that
Luther preaches no more in that place.

The. 4. is grounded upon ye example of the Apostles. The Example of the
Apostles.
sorrows and miseries common to men with ye cheifest lights of the Church
(that is to wit the Apostles, who had ye first fruits of the spirit, or the
more excellent gifts of the holy Ghost,) are to be borne patiently. The
miseries and greefes of the godly y^ moorne in themselves and with earnest
longing look for the glory that shall be showed openly upon Godschildren,
are but the same yt the Apostles suffered.

Ergo they are too be endured patiently.

The fifth argument is grounded upon the manner of The manner of salvation.
salvation, or of the full deliverance of all troubles. The manner of salvation
appointed by God is this, that in this present life, we should for Christ the
mediators sake receive forgiveness of sins, imputacion of righteousness,
inheritance of the glory to come, and the holy Ghost the comforter the
earnest penny thereof: and that in the mean season we should in this life be
subject too the Cross and to death, and patiently by hope look for our full
salvation or deliverance from the present miseries.

We are saved by hope, that is to wit, the full deliverance How we be saved
by hope.
from sin, death, and all miseries is yet too be hoped for and looked for,
but the hope that is seen, (that is to say, of things present that are seen
with the eyes,) is no hope. Or the object which is seen before us, is not
hoped for. But the full deliverance or glorification of the godly is hoped
for, Ergo it is too be waited for by patience. And whereas the Papists argue in
this wise* Salvation is Justification:

We are saved by hope, Ergo we are justified by hope, and not by faith only: I
answer: I deny the consequent: because there is a guyle in the double meening
of ye word Salvation. For in the mayor or first proposition it signifies
remission of sins, or reco^cileme^t to God, and the heritage of eternal life.
And in ye minor or second proposition, it signifies full deliverance from all
evils or everlasting glorification, as with ye mouth is acknowledgme^t of
salvation, ye is to say, he that will be glorified, must needs persevere.
Argument of possibility.


The vj. argument is grounded upon ye efficient, or furthering cause or upon
possibility. For men's minds can not of their own strength only yield quiet,
or by any means willing obedience too God, specially in great troubles. And
therefore the holy Ghost the comforter aydeth us wretches and weakelings, and
as it were stretches out his hand to us as we are falling, and holds us up,
and stays us, and strengthens us, that we may be able to bear out the
burden laid upon us, like as he strengthened Steven, John Husle, Laurence,
and others. He kindles our minds to true prayer, and rules the sighs and
gronings of our hearts that desire too be soon dispatched out of these
miseries, inclining them to their obedience due to God, that we may pray too
be delivered according too Gods fatherly good will, and not after our own
devises. For we know not what to pray as we ought to do. But he takes pity
of our ignorance, (as Bernard says) and accepting our prayer gently, gives
not that thing which either is utterly unprofitable for us, or not needful to
be granted so soon. But as for the prayer, it shall not be unfruitful. For
either it shall obtain that which we demand, or else that which shall be more
for our profit: like as a Father or Phisician do gently grant, not all
things that the child or the sick person desire, but such things as they
know be meet for them.

Upon the fifth Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. j. Pet. iij.
BE you all of one mind, and of one heart, love as brethren, be pitiful, be
courteous (meek) not rendering evil for evil, or rebuke for rebuke: but
contrariwise bless, knowing that ye are thereunto called, even that ye should
be heirs of the blessing. For he that does long after life, and loves to
see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil and his lips that they
speak no guyle. Let him eschew evil and do good: let him seek peace and
ensue it. For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are
open unto their prayers. Again, the face of the Lord is over them that do
evil. Moreover, who is he that will harm you, if ye follow that which is good?
yea, happy are ye if any trouble happen unto you for righteousness sake. Be
ye not afraid for any terror of them, neither be ye troubled, but sanctify
the Lord God in your hearts.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is exhortatiue containing precepts of good woorks, or the
duties of many virtues, of which diverse perteyne too the fifth commandment.
From thence therefore may the orderly expositions of every of them be fetched
intoo this Epistle.

The first is of one myndednesse or desire of concord: to the One myndednesse.
mayntenance whereof there are three virtues chiefly necessary, of which is
spoken Ephesians. iiij. With all lowlynesse, meekness, longsufferance or patience,
endeuering to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. The vices
that encounter it, are quarellousnesse which sows discordes and debates, and
cowardnesse which fights not even for things needful, as in defense of the
truth of Gods doctrine, and the glory of god. etc.

The second is of like affectionednesse, which is touched Like affectionednesse.
with the feeling of other folks estates, rejoicing in the prosperity of good
men, and lamenting their adversities: Or as Paul says: which is merry with
them that be merry, and weepeth with them that weep. But (as Pindarus says)
the most part of me^ are grieved with their own affairs, and have no care for
others. Peter therefore commands like affectionednesse which consists of
two parts. First of freendlynesse which norisheth not maliciousness,
spitefulness, and enuiousnesse, but wills well too the good, and is glad of
their welfare. And secondly of pitifulness which is touched with the feling of
good men's miseries, and is sorry that they should fare amiss. The vices that
encounter it, are diuelishnesse, which is too rejoice at good men's harms,
and stonehartednesse, which is to be touched with no feeling of another man's
misery.

The third is of brotherly love or christian freendship, which Brotherly love
pertains too the.iiij. and.v. commandments. The vices yt encounter it, are
hatred or enmity, and counterfeit good will.

The fourth is mercyfulnesse or frankhartednesse, which Mercifulness.
with a willing heart or with a ready and cheerful mind endeuereth to his power,
to do good to others with his counsel, travel, money. etc. It pertains to
the.v. and.vij. commandments. The vices yt encounter it are churlishness,
which either does no good too others, or else does it not with a willing heart
and a cheerful countenance, and lavishness, which does above mesure.

The fifth is of gentleness or courtesy, which in familiar Gentleness.
meetings, in talking with men or in heering them, in answering them, and in
performing all other points of freendly behauior, shows a good will toward
them with a certain pleasantness in countenance and gesture, without
churlishness or disdein. It pertains too the.v. and. viij. commandments.
The vices that encounter it are churlishness and lightness.

The sixth is of meekness, which is a virtue yt executes no Meekness.
private reuengement, but suffers wrongs, reproaches, and other displeasures
for gods sake, and for the quietness of the church and the common weal. And
it pertains too the.v. commandment. And unto this part of his exhortacion
he adds arguments grounded upon honestnesse and profit. Ye know how you are
called to this purpose, that ye should be heirs of blissednesse: that is to say,
seeing that you are blissed of God for the blissed seeds sake, yt you may
enjoy the heritage of eternal bliss: It stands with honesty and right, or
it is good right and reason that you also on your behalf should bliss others,
and requite other men's slaunderings and wro^gs, not with railing and
hatefulness, but with courtesy and well doing* For in any wise it becomes
Christians too speak and do as Gelon king of Syracuse says to the ambassador
of Lacedemon in Herodotus. Gelons answer too a rayler.
Surely thy delight to rail thus in thy talk, shall not cause me to serve thy
turn in requiting thee with reproach. The other argument grounded upon the
profitablenesse is expounded with the most sweet words of the.xxxiiij. Psalm,
ye which I would wish yoongmen to learn whole without book, and to cun it by
heart. Now whereas the words of the Psalm do in general promise rewards to the
godly, who in religion and in their daily conversation, exercise truth, which
eschew lying, railing, slaundering, backbyting, deceites, sophistry. etc. and
practice ryghtfulnesse which does no man any evil, but al men good, and
endeuereth too maintain peace and concord: Peter in this place restreyneth
them too a certain peculiar kind of folk, and behighteth quietness of life,
success of welfare, and Gods care and defense in all perils, too the meek and
mild which bear wrongs and reproaches patiently. And unto the unrighteous and
such as are desirous of revenge, he threatens the countenance (that is too say
the wrath) of God and horrible punishments.

The seventh is of patience or peaceable manliness or co^sta^cie, Patience.
which shunneth not the profession of the truth, nor the defense of a rightful
case, nor any doings that be honest and helpful unto others, for any fear,
reuilings, threats, slanders, or reproaches: but with a stout courage
suffers for the right, and awayteth for the rewards that are behyght the
patient in heaven: according too this saying. Math. v. Blissed are they that
suffer persecution for ryghtuousnesse sake, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven. Blissed are you when men reuyle you. etc. It perteyneth too the first
and fifth commandment. And the vices that encounter it, are faint
hartednesse, Faint hartednesse.
which is so discouraged with fearfulness or with reproach, that he forsakes
the profession of the truth, and rightful cases, or the duties of his vocation
that are necessary and behouefull unto others: but (as Ierom says) the fear
of God must work this in us, namely too set light by all other fears: And
wilfulness or stiffenesse in defending untrue, needless, Wilfulness or
stiffness of opinion.
or wrongful cases. etc. The words are taken out of Esaias the eight Chapter.

The eight is of noble and steadfast profession of the true Steadfast profession
of the true doctrine.
doctrine concerning God. Sanctify ye Lord god in your hearts and be ready at
all times too render a reason too every one that asks you of your faith. It
perteyneth too the second precept of the.x. commandments. The vices that
encounter it, are utter renouncing of God, or hyding of a man's profession
when it is needful too be showed: And ungodly rashness or wilfulness in
maynteining errors. These places of this days Epistle have I divided as
shortly as I could, the full setting out of which at large may be fetched out
of my declarations of the virtues.

First concerning endeuer too exercise concord, courtesy, and liberality
toward others. Secondly of meekness which restreyneth desire of private
reuengement. And thirdly of constancy in profession, and in enduring the
troubles that accompany the profession.

Upon the sixth Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. Romans vj.
WHat shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that there may be
abundance of grace? God forbid: How shall we that are dead as touching sin,
live any longer therein? Remember ye not, that all we which are baptized in
the name of Jesus Christ, are baptized too dye with him? We are buried then
with him by baptim, for too die, that likewise as Christ was raised up from
death by the glory of the father: even so we also should walk in a new life.
For if we be graft in death like unto him: even so shall we be (partakers)
in the resurrection: knowing this that our old man is crucified with him also,
that the body of sin might utterly be destroyed, that hencefoorthe we
should not be servant unto sin. For he that is dead, is justified from
sin. Wherefore, if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall live
also with him, remembering that Christ being raised from death, dies no more.
Death has no more power over him. For as touching that he died, he died
concerning sin, once. And as touching that he lyuteh, he lives unto God.
Likewise imagine ye also, that ye are dead concerning sin, but are alive
unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is of those kind of cases that instruct. And the state,
proposition, or matter whereof it entreats is this: New obedience is needful:
or, As many as are baptized Christians, and justified by faith for Christ's
sake, must all from henceforth eschew sin, and yield new obedience agreing
with Gods will, or else, Those that are regenerated must do good works. This
proposition confirms he with three arguments gathered out of the place of
causes: and he sets it forth with as many similitudes taken of the Baptim,
of death, and buryall of Christ.

The first argument is of the final cause of justification. The final cause
of justification.
For when wicked men objected unto Paul, if good works deserve not
forgiveness of sins, justification and salvation: there is no need why we
should regard too do well: or it needs not too do good woorks: Paul turns
this objection upon them, and raesoneth thus.

For this cause does grace surmount above sin, and for this cause are
forgiveness of sins and the holy Ghost given us through free mercy: that
sin and death should be taken from us, and new ryghtuousnesse and life be
kindled in us.

All Christians or as many of us as are baptized intoo Jesus Christ, have
obtained remission of sins through free mercy for Christ's sake: and sin is
dead and buried in us by baptim.

Ergo it is of necessity that all Christians, or all those that are baptized,
must no more sin hereafter: but must begin a new obedience and life agreeable
with the will of God.

The second argument is of the efficient cause. The efficient cause of
justification.


That which is dead does nothing, and so sins not.

We are dead too sin, that is too say, sin is dead or released and abolished:
yea and drowned and buried in baptim, that is to wit by the free remission of
the sin, and by the imputacion of Christ's righteousness, and by the beginning
of such mortificatio^ or abolishme^t of sin, yt he^cefoorth although sin be not
utterly suppressed, yet not wtsta^ding, it may not reign any more.

Ergo sin must not hereafter be effectual and woorkfull any more, in thse
that be baptized: or those that be baptized must not sin any more.

The third argument is of the efficient cause also.

That which lives and reigns is woorkfull and effectual, that is too say,
is always doing of somewhat.

Newness of life or righteousness is kindled by ye holy ghost in those that
be borne a new, or justified by faith.

Ergo the regenerate must needs from henceforth walk in newness of life,
that is too wit, in new light and knowledge of God, and in new ryghtuousnesse
and obedyence, according too all the commandments of God.

Then follow three similitudes or rather arguments grounded upon the
effectualnesse of the baptim, and of the death, burial, and resurrection of
Christ.

First of his Baptim. Like as in baptim a man is ducked A similitude of baptim.
intoo the water, and ducked out of the water ageine: so likewise sin or the
old man is by the effectualnesse of baptim drowned in us, and the new man or
new life and obedience ought too rise out, and fiorish ageine.

Secondly of the death and resurrection of Christ* Like as Of Christ's death
and resurrection.
Christ being raised from death lives unto God: so we also being set free
from sin in true repentance or mortifying of sin by Christ, or in the
effectual woorking of Christ's death and resurrection, must hereafter not sin
any more, but live unto God, that is too say, enter intoo a new life and
obedience acceptable too God.

Thirdly of Christ's burial. Of Christ's buryall.


Like as Christ being buried rose ageine: so we also being buried with
Christ, (or having killed and buried sin in our selves through Christ,) must
rise agein, and yield unto him the serviceableness of a new life acceptable
too God.

These arguments grounded upon the effectualnesse of baptim, and of Christ's
death, buryall, and resurrection, are repeted four times by Paul with
exchange of words in this Epistle.

As many of us as are baptized in Jesus Christ, are baptized Against Libertines
and carnal Gospellers.
too dye with him. Then are we buried with him by baptim for too dye, that
like as Christ was raised up from death: so we also should walk in newness
of life. That is to say, all that be borne ageine by baptim through faith, or
all Christen folk, are by the merit and operation of Christ's death dead and
buried unto sin, or set free from sin: and by the operation of Christ's
resurrection, new ryghtuousnesse and life is kindled in them. Therefore like as
Christ rose ageine from Death, and from his grave: So we also having death
killed and buried in us by Baptim and Faith, that leans upon the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, must walk in newness of life, that is too say, in new
light or knowledge of God, and in new ryghtuousnesse and obedience acceptable
too God.

He repeteth the same sentence with exchange of words in the next process
following. For if we be graffed in death, or be made partakers of death like
unto him, we shall be partakers of his resurrection also: knowing this that
our old man is crucified with him also, that the body of sin might be utterly
destroyed: that we should no more be feruaunts unto sin, for he that is dead,
is justified from sin. That is too say, like as Christ having bin dead is
risen ageine: So also our nature being dead in Baptim and by true conversion
from sin unto God, and set free from sin by the merit of Christ's death,
must rise ageine and not sin any more, but lead a new life, such a one as
pleases God. Our old man, or sin sticking in us, or our sinful nature, is
crucified, dead, and buried with Christ, (that is too say, is cleansed and set
free from sin by the merit and operation of Christ's death and resurrection)
and is mortifyed by true repentance, persecution and troubles, that the body of
u^nne (or our sinful nature) may be put away, not so as it should utterly
perish, but that it should no more be subject too sin. For he that is dead
too sin, is justified or set free from sin: or, sin which is dead and put
away, and buried with Christ, must not from henceforth work and be
effectual any more.

The third time he repeateth the same sentence in other exchange of words
thus:

For if we be dead with Christ, we beeleue that we shall live with him also.

And the fourth time he repeateth even the self same sentence in somewhat more
evident words. Knowing that Christ being raised from death, dies no more.
Death has no more power over him. For in that he dyed too sin, he dyed once,
and in that he lives, he lives too God. So think you also your selves too
be dead as touching sin, but too be alive unto God in Christ Jesus our
Lord: that is too say, like as Christ having died once for our sins and risen
ageine, dies no more, but lives too God: So we being dead unto sin, and
being set free from sin through the operation of Christ's death, by baptim
and faith: must not sin any more, nor live in subjection too sin, but unto
God in Christ Jesus, who kindles new life and righteousness in us, and makes
the same acceptable and pleasant unto God.

This is the disposement, and as it were a short enlargement of the text of this
Epistle, in which we see set forth the doctrine concerning the new obedience,
which of necessity is too be performed by those that are borne a new. And
therefore a sum of the whole place concerning good works may be opened too
the full unto the people.

Whither good works be needful. What they be. What kinds there be of
them. What are the efficie^t causes of them, or in what wise they may be
wrought. What is the formal cause, or, how they become good and acceptable
too God. Of the final causes, or, wherefore they are to be done: And of their
effects or rewards both in this life and in the life too come.
Upon the seventh Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. Romans vj.
I Speak grossly, because of the infirmity of your fleslie. As ye have given
your members servants too uncleanness and too iniquity, (from iniquity
unto iniquity) even so now give your members servants unto
righteousness, that ye may be sanctified. For when ye were the servants of
sin, ye were not under ryghtuousnesse. What fruit had ye then in those
things, whereof ye are now asshamed. For the end of those things is death.
But now are ye delivered from sin, and made the servants of God, and have
your fruit that ye should be sanctified, and the end everlasting life. For
the reward of sin is death: but eternal life is the gift of God through
JESUS Christ our Lord.

The disposement.
IT entreats all of one matter with the Epistle which we herd upon this day
seuennyght.

The ground thereof is this: All that be borne a new, or all that be set free
from sin by free given mercy thorough Christ, must not sin any more, but
must begin a new life or obedience agreeing with the will of God.

The principal reasons are grounded, First upon the honestnesse of the matter.
EVery man must obey him whose servant he is. You that be borne ageine have
renounced the service of sin, and are become the servants of righteousness.

Ergo, ye must no more yield yourselues too sin, but must begin new
righteousness or obedience agreeable to gods will.

A kin to this reason is the Argument of coincidents.
THe rightuouse man does ryghtuouse things. Christen folk are rightuouse.

Ergo, They must live rightuously and not sin any more.

The third is upon the profitablenesse.
ALl christen folks must with earnest endeuer seek eternal life, and by all
means strive too shun eternal death.

The reward of righteousness or of new obedience is eternal life, and the
hyre of sin is eternal death.

Ergo, rightuousenesse or new obedience toward al gods commandments, is by
all earnest endeuer too be followed of the godly, and disobedience or sin is
by all earnest endeuer too be eschued.

By these three Arguments does Paul confirm his proposition.

The cheef places of doctrine are three.
FIrst, of the the necessity of weldooing or of new obedience, Necessity of
weldooing.
which is a stedie and continual will (through a forelyght of the true
knowledge of Christ and faith,) too eschew all sins, and too obey GOD
according too all his commandments, too this end, that God may be honored.

This definition may be most plentuously enlarged, by declaring in order
thorough every of the ten commandments, the sins against which the godly
strive, and the good works or virtues in which they utter their obedience.
And also by reckening up the causes of this new obedience and of the effects
of the same.

Secondly, concerning Christen liberty, which is a setting Christen liberty.
free from sin, from death, from the curse of the moral Law, from the
obedience that was too be performed too the ceremonial and politic laws of
Moses, and from men's traditions out of the case of offense giving. And
christen liberty is not a looseness of lusts and wickedness, or an
exemption from the obedience that is due too the law of God or good manners.
But we are set free from sin and from the condemnation of the law by Christ,
too this end, that we should from hence forth serve righteousness, or God
and our neighbor: like as Paul says here: Now being set free from sin,
ye are made the servant of God. And Gal. v. Brethren, ye are called too
liberty, now see that ye turn not your liberty intoo an occasion of
fleshlynesse, but serve one another through mutual louingnesse. j. Pet. ij.
Not as making your liberty a cover of maliciousenesse, but as the servants of
God, honor ye all men, love the brethren, fear God, and honor the King.

Thirdly, of this saying which comprehends a sum of the whole Gospel.
Eternal life is the gift of God in Christ Eternal life is Gods free gift.
Jesus our Lord. For like as remission of sins and imputation of
ryghtuousnesse, and the holy Ghost, are of free mercy given too the believers
for Chrysts sake: so also everlasting life is not due too any deserts of our
works as a wages, but is the mere gift of GOD, which we obtain by only
faith for Christ's sake. John iij. and.vj. He that believes in the son has
life everlasting. Now, although eternal life be given freely for Christ's
sake: yet is it also ye wages of good works, not due by our deserts, but
promised of Gods free mercy. For godliness has promises of the life present
and too come. j. Tim. iiij.

The darker sort of phrases in the Text, may be understood in this wise: I
speak grossly for the weakness of your flesh, that is too say, I will use a
similitude which you of the ruder sort may understand, taken of the most
customable usage of man's life, by which servants are compelled too obey their
Masters.

Like as you have yielded your members, that is too wit, the powers of your
soul and the instruments of them, namely, your mind, your will, your hearts,
tungs, hands, feet, and the rest of your limbs unto vnryghtuousnesse, that
is, too the committing of it. For the Greek word Anomia, (which is as much
too say as lawlessenesse) signifies all affections and deeds that fight
against the law of God.

Servant of righteousness unto sanctification, that is too say, too the
doings of holy works and virtues that please God: or, that ye may live
holyly and purely, and serve god in all virtues or good works kindled in your
hearts by the holy Ghost.

Ye were free from righteousness, that is too say, ye obeyed not
righteousness.

The end of them, that is too say, the reward, payment, or uttermost wages of
sin, is death.

You have your fruit too holiness, that is too say, you have holy and
acceptable works unto God, and he will recompense them with most ample
rewards in the eternal life.

The wages of sin, is death. The Greek word Opson signifies properly al
kind of meat that is dressed with fire, saving bread, and specially fish. We
call it in some places of England Suwle. In old time there was given unto
soldiers for their pay, not only coin of brass or of silver, but also
vittels, as flesh, fish, horsecorne, etc. Hereuppon comes the latin word
Obsonium, which signifies, not only al kind of food and vittelles, but in
general, the same thing that the word Stipendium does: which is as much too
say, as a Pay.

Upon the eight Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. Romans viij.
BRethren, we are debtors, not too the flesh, too live after the flesh. For
if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye. But if ye through the spirit do
mortifye the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are led by the
spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For ye have not received the
spirit of bondage to fear any more, but ye have received the spirit of
adoption, whereby ye cry: Abba Father. The same spirit certifyeth our
spirit, that we are the sons of GOD. If we be sons, then are we also
heirs, I mean of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, if so be that we
suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together with him.

The disposement.
THis Epistle perteyneth too those kind of cases that are persuasiue. For it is
an exhortation too new obedience. The ground thereof is, We are detters, not
too live after the flesh, or new obedience is needful, or those that be
reconciled too God by faith, must needs from henceforth fight against sin,
and begin a new obedience agreeing with the will of God.

The arguments of his exhortation are seven, drawn out of the places that are
of the persuasiue kind. The first is of the impulsive cause.
THat which is due must of necessity be performed. New obedience is due unto
God.

Ergo, New obedience must needs be performed.

Or thus:
ALl reasoneble creatures must needs reverently obey the everlasting and
unchangeable order of Gods wisdom and justice.

But it is the everlasting and unchangeable order of Gods wisdom and
righteousness, that men who are created by God, and by the son of GOD
redeemed, should obey God their creator and redeemer, and eschew sins which
fight against the will of God.

Ergo, we must needs reuere^tly obey our creator and redemer, and no more live
after the flesh, or yield our selves too sin.

The second is of the effect of sin, or of the unprofitableness.
ALl that live according too the flesh, (that is too wit, which willingly and
wilfully follow sin or wicked inclinations and affections) become guilty of
Gods wrath and of endless death and damnation.

All those that be borne a new by faith, must not ageine procure themselves
Gods wrath and everlasting death.

Ergo, they must not live any more after the flesh, but must perform new
obedience agreeable with the will of God.

The third is of the profitablenesse or of the rewards of new obedience.
ALl that are borne a new by faith, must with all endeuer and diligence hold
fast and mayntein the everlasting life which is given them freely for Chrysts
sake.

All that mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, (that is too say,
which bridle and repress their sinful inclinations and affections, and
mortify them, not only by philosophical diligence, but also by the spirit,
or by true faith, prayer, and heedfulnesse stirred up and furthered by the holy
ghost, do hold fast Gods grace and everlasting life.

Ergo, all that be borne a new, must mortify or bridle and put away the deeds
of the flesh or the sinful inclinations, and affections of corrupt nature, or
must eschew sin.

The fourth is of the efficient cause.
THe holy Ghost woorketh such motions in them that be borne a new, as he
himself is.

The holy Ghost is not the spirit of bondage, sin, and death, but is the
spirit of the adoption of Gods children, the spirit of true invocation, of
virtue, of love, and of soberness, as is said, ij. Tim. j.

Ergo, in all that be borne ageine of the holy Ghost, there must needs be
kindled such motions as he himself is, that is too wit, childly obedience,
invocation, and love of God, eschewing all sins that displease GOD their
Father.

The fifth is of the honestnesse of the matter, or of the duty of sons.
CHildren do by Gods ordinance owe honor and obedience too their parents:
Christen folk or those that be received by Christ and borne a new by the holy
Ghost, are the children of God:

Ergo, they are bound by Gods ordinance too perform obedience too God their
father.

The sixth is, Of the possiblenesse of the matter.
THe holy Ghost confirms our mynds that we may persuade our selves for a
certeyntie that we are the children of GOD, and helps our weakness, that
we may be able too stand stedily against the sleyghts of the Diuill, the
assaults of our sinful nature, and the enticements of pleasures, and be able
too eschew sin, and exercise virtue.

The seventh.
HE repeteth the Argument of the profitablenesse or of the rewards by faith
and new obedience in eternal life, whereof although we be made heirs
freely for Christ's sake: yet is it there withal a recompense or wages, which
is yielded too our works, not of desert, but of promise. j. Timot. iiij.
Godliness has promises of the life present and too come.

These are the cheef Arguments wherewith Paul in this Epistle exhorts all
men too eschew sin warely, and too do good works. And there withal are
propounded many notable places of doctrine, which I will pick out as breefly as
may be.

The first is, of the necessity of new obedience and of the Necessity of
obedience.
endeuer too do good works, and of sinning no more after the receiving of
remission of sins, and the holy Ghost.

The second is, of the difference of deadly sin and venial Difference of
deadly sin and venial sin.
sin. There remain in all men, (yea even in the Saints that are borne a
new) many evils that fight against the law of God (against which sins they
that be borne a new of the spirit do notwithstanding strive, that is too
wit) great dimnesse, and doutes concerning God and gods promises and
thretnings, which doutes do from time to time break in upon the mind many evil
inclinations, fleshely carelessness, selfouer weening, sinful flames of
affections, and many defauts of ignorance and oversight. Paul himself
complains of the remaynder of these evils in him, even after he was borne a
new. Romans vij. The good that I would do, that do I not, but the evil that I
would not, that do I. I see another law in my members fyghting like an enemy
against the law of my mind, and subduing me unto sin. Eccl. vij. There is no
ryghtuous man upon ye earth ye does good, and sins not. Agein, it is certain
yt there be some kind of sins where withal if ye saints defile themselves, they
lose y^ holy ghost and eternal life, like as Saul forwent Grace: and it is said
of Aaron, yt the lord would beat him into powder. Therefore it is needful to
consider the difference between the sins or defaults and evil inclinations that
remayn in the saints, and other sins or offenses against conscience which make
of saints no saints, but thralles of Gods wrath and endless damnation: Which
thing is aduouched in this saying: If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye:
but if ye mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, ye shall live.

The third is an evident testimony concerning the holy Testimony concerning
the holy Ghost.
ghost and the office and benefits of the holy ghost, whereof there be reckened
three in the lesson of this Epistle. First the holy Ghost leads and rules
the mynds, wills, counsels, endeuers and doings of the godly, so as they may
plese God and become conformable to the will and law of God, as it is said. ij.
Cor. iij. We are transformed into the same likeness by the spirit of the
Lord. Secondly he is the spirit of the children of adoption witnessing in our
mynds that we are the children of God, and that the everlasting father adopting
us for his natural and only begotten son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, loves
us with a true and fatherly affection, and that we are heirs of al Gods good
benefits. Thirdly he kindles in our mynds faith and prayer, by means whereof we
do not any more shun God through slavish fear, as though he were an angry
judge, but approach unto him as to a kyndeharted father, and in all perils do
(through steadfast faith) look for succor and al good things at his hand. These
two benefits of the holy ghost does Zachary comprehend in two words in
his. xij. chapter. I will pour out the spirit of thanksgiving and prayer upon
the house of David.

The fourth place is a difference of slauishe fear, wherethrough Difference of
slavish fear and childly awe.
men that are slaves of sin and death, being dismayde at the beholding of
Gods wrath and endless damnation, do dreadfully shun God, and specially in
trouble freat at him and hate him as a cruel tormenter, as it appears in
Saul, Judas, and innumerable others. And of the chyldly fear, wherethrough
men's wills and hearts submit them selves to God with a childely awe love,
preaching unto God by faith, and obeying him, and resting upon his fatherly
good will promised for his sons sake.

The fifth place, concerns the true calling upon God.

The sixth place is of the everlasting life.

Upon the ix. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. j. Cor. x.
THese are ensamples to us, that we should not lust after evil things as they
lusted. Neither be ye worshippers of images as were some of them, according as
it is written: The people sat down to eat and drink and rose up agein too
play. Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed fornication,
and were destroyed in one day xxiij. thousand. Neither let us tempt Christ as
some of the^ tempted and were destroyed of serpents. Nether murmur ye as some of
the^ murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. All these things happened
unto them for ensamples, and were written too put us in remembrance whom the
ends of the world are come upon. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands,
take heed lest he fall. There has none other temptation taken you, but such as
follows the nature of man. But God is faithful, which shall not suffer you to
be tempted above your strength: but shall in the mids of temptation, make a
way that ye may be able too bear it.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is of those sort that are persuasiue. For it is a dehortation.
The proposition of this Epistle and of the whole. viij. and.ix. and.x. chapters
to the Corinthians is this: Flee from idolatry and things dedicated too Idols.
And there withal is set forth a general exhortation to shun backeslydings
against conscience. The arguments of his dehortation are taken of four places.

First of the examples of the Isralits in the wilderness who by defi^ing
themselves with worshipping the golden calfe, and Baal Peor, and by tempting
God with grudging against him, or with impacience in their troubles, were
horribly plucked from god, and overwhelmed with dredful punishments. These
punishments (says Paul) are set before us as figures and examples to warn us
of Gods wrath, and to shun like sins, for fear of eternal punishments.

The second is of ye effects or punishments which light on those yt defile them
selves with idols, and such like fallings.

The third is of possiblenesse, or of gods help, who suffers not those yt are
newly entered into true godliness, and ye exercises of repe^ta^ce and faith, to
be tempted beyond their strength, but withholdeth from them the greater
dangers, that is to wit, the temptations of the devil, and aydeth them in
their encounters that they may be able to withstand the allurements of falling,
and avoid the snares of the devil.

The.iiij. is of ye honestnes of ye matter, or of Gods co^ma^dement, who gives
most straight charge to eschew with all diligence the infections of worshipping
idols, and of other fallings against conscience.

The cheef places of doctrine are these.
THe first and cheifest is a dehortation from the infection Against abuse of
liberty.
of woorshipping Idols, and specially from eating meats offered unto idols. The
occasion whereof is this: It was a custom in sacrifises too burn part of the
offering upon the Altar, and to set part of it too eat before them that
bestowed the offering. Unto these feasts resorted certain of the Corinthians
that were converted to the true knowledge of Christ: who vaunting of their
lerning and wisdom, reasoned that Idols were nothing, and that it was laufull
too use indifferent things as men listed: and that it is a thing indifferent to
eat flesh offered too idolles, or not to eat it.

That this is the occasion of all this whole discourse and the mark whereat it
shoots, it appears by the beginning of the.viij. chapter, and by the latter
part of this tenth chapter. For Paul answers that the godly ought in no wise
to be present at such feasts where flesh sacrifised to idols is set upon the
table, because that by their example the worshipping of Idols might be
confirmed, and the consciences of the weak might be offended and wounded. For
it is the most straight commandment of God which wills men to eschew
idolatry and all the infectio^s of idol service. But in this Epistle, Paul
reasons chiefly upon the disco^moditie, or ye examples of punishment, which
lighted upon the Israelites for lusting to eat of Idoloffrings and for eating
and drinking at the feast of the Idolatrous offerings to ye golden Calf. Exo.
xxxij. and when they were bidden by ye Moabits to ye sacrifises of Baal Peor.
Number. xxv.

Idolatry is not only the worshipping of images, or of Idolatry what it is.
the heathen Gods: but also of man's own brayn and wilfulnes without gods
words, either to imagine some thing to be a God which yet is no God: or too
yield to any creature which is not God, the honor and seruites due too the
only true God, as Invocation and other sacrifices: or to worship God with the
woorks of men's hands, as Paul speaks in Act. xvij. that is to say, with
images and pictures, and to bind God too those images: or to choose and set up
services and ceremonies at a man's own pleasure, and to imagine that God is
thereby appeased and made favorable too us: or to confirm other idolaters by
his example, and by observation of outward ceremonies. A larger opening of this
description may be taken out of the exposition of the virtues of the first
commandment, and out of the.xxxv. chapter of Exodus. The virtue that
encou^treth Idolatry True godliness.
is true Godliness, or, the true worshipping of God, or christian religion,
which is to acknowledge the one true God, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, the maker of heaven and earth, aryght: and to call upon him, and to
worship him with true faith and obedience, according as he has showed himself
in his own word of the law and the Gospel.

The second place.
OF whoordom, which always is joined with miswoorshipping, Whordome.
and oftentimes in the prophets is put for idolatry it self. The virtue
contrary too whoordom, is chastity, the orderly exposition whereof may be
repeted out of the sixth commandment. Now Paul alludeth to the story of the
Israelites, who being called to the sacrifises and feasts of the Idol Peor,
did eat of the Idolofferings, and committed fornication with the Idol Peor,
and with the daughters of Moab. Number. xxv.

The third place.
OF tempting God, which is, not to obey God patiently Of tempting God.
in suffering calamities and troubles, like as the Israelites grudged at the
trouble somnesse of their journey, and were therefore slain by fyry serpents,
Number. xxj. and not to stay a man's self upon gods word and ordinance, but either
to deny God and his works, which notwithstanding we know to be done by God. As
the Pharisees Luke. xj. attributed unto Beelzebub the miracles wrought by
Christ, and the Israelites Exodus xvij. deny that the Lord God brought them out
of Egypt: or to correct Gods co^maundments and ordinances, upon a man's own
rashness and upon trust of his own wisdom and strength, as if a man would go
over a great river a foot, whereas god has appointed this order, that it
should be passed by bridge or by bote. The Enthusiastes leaving Gods word by
which only he imparteth his light and benefits unto us, seek new
enlightnings. The Isralites in Number. xiiij. and xxj. despising Gods ordinance
and commandment determine too make them selves a new Captain too convey
them again intoo Aegipte. When Christ was willed to cast himself down from
the pinnacle of the Temple, he aunswerd that God was not too be tempted, who
appointed this order that men should go down by greeces. The whole exposition
of the story concerning the fiery serpents, and the brazen serpent set up by
Moses in the wilderness (which Paul cites in this place,) may be fetched out
of my exposition of the one and twentieth chapter of Number. and of this saying,
John iij. Like as Moses lifted up the serpent in ye wilderness.

The fourth place.
OF grudging or repining which is a fretting and chafing Murmuring or grudging
and a disobedience against God in troubles and punishments, as the Isralites
in Number. xj. and xiiij. murmured and grudged, taking the labor and paynfulnesse
of their journey impaciently, and like thanklesse persons forgetting all ye
benefits and promises of God, distrusting him, and as it were reproving him of
untruth for not performing ye food and defense which he had promised, nothing
his present benefits, and lusting after flesh and other ^iner fare. Of which
lusting Paul but eue^ a little before, said: Lust not after evil things as they
did. And in general, the doctrine concerning lust and concupiscence, or the
hedynesse of al our inclinatio^s, affections and powers, to which right well
agrees this verse of Crates, Foul lustfulnesse is even the ground, of evils
all that may be found. And also the doctrine of patience and ryghtfulnesse
which lotheth not good things present, and bears discommodities incident: may
be repeted in this place. Concerning which, these sayings are usual.
Sufficient for the day is the travel thereof. Also, content thy self with things
that come too hand. And agein, An Ass is he in deed whom hard mischaunce can
make an Ass: But wise is he that patiently hard storms can ouerpasse. But
proprely Grudgyng fights against the first commandment, and the
countervertue unto it is patience.

The fifth place.
IT is a general lesson concerning punishments or miseries, Punishments and
miseries.
that they be examples which warn men to shun Gods displesure and such other
penalties. For whereas the Israelits were destroyed in the wilderness by the
destroying Angel, or by the minister and executer of Gods wrath and
punishments: all these things befell them, that they might be as patterns and
examples unto us, upon whom the ends of the world are come, too put us in
mind of Gods dreadful wrath against sin, and of eschuing such like
fallings which procure Gods displeasure and of the endless punnisheme^ts that
shall ensue without dout. Therefore who so thinks himself too stand, (and
specially which deemeth it lawful for him to eat of Idolofferings,) let him
look to it, that he fall not into Idolatry and dreadful punnishments, like as
the children of Israel and Aaron himself and Solomon also did. Therefore we had
need to use singular wakernesse and heed, and earnest prayer, least through
fond persuasion of our own knowledge, through the craft of the devil laying
snares for us in our own infirmity, we be throwneheadlong intoo Idolatry
and other horrible calamities. For even This place would be red with discretion.
those that be borne a new and are in very deed godly, may slide, and by
losing grace and the holy ghost, may fall intoo everlasting destruction, like
as Saul, Judas, and others perished.

The sixth place
COncerning temptations, and the manner how to put them away, and overcome
them, I have given some incling upon the.iiij. chapter of Matthew.

Temptation is a provocation or motion to sin and Temptation what it is.
wretchedness, rising of man's infirmity, that is to wit, of doutings and
misweenings of the mind, and of sinful inclinatio^s and affections of the
heart, or of outward inticements and occasions, which stir up those sinful
inclinations, as, David by lighting upon ye beautiful shape of Bersabee, is
tempted of his own concupiscence, and yet is not driven by the devil utterly
to despise and hate God, as Nero, Saul and Judas were. But unto those that have
the first beginnings of true godliness, true fear of God, and true faith,
there is a most sweet comfort set forth in this saying: God is faithful who
suffers us not to be tempted above our strength, as if he should say, God
loving us heartily, and with steadfast good will embracing all such as have the
beginning of true godliness, suffers us not too be overcome and too sink
under the allurementes of sin, neither will he lay greater burdens upon us,
than we be able to bear through, but distributeth troubles by geometrical
proportion. Upon the stout and manly saints, (such as Jacob and David were) he
lays a sorer weight: and upon them that be weaker he lays a lighter weight
and strengthens and confirms our hearts with the holy ghost, that they may be
able to endure out the pain.

And he rules the fallings out, that they may be too the welfare both of our
selves and of others: according as it is said, to the godly all things work
too the best. Also, To those that follow godliness, The end brings always
sweet success.

Upon the tenth Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. j. Cor. xij.
COncerning spiritual things (Brethren) I would not have you ignorant. Ye
know that ye were Gentiles, and went your ways unto dumb images, even as ye
were led. Wherefore, I declare unto you, that no man speaking in the spirit of
God, defieth Jesus. Also no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
holy Ghost. There are diversities of gifts verily, yet but one spirit. And
there are differences of administrations, and yet but one Lord. And there are
diverse manners of operations, and yet but one God, which works all in all. The
gift of the spirit is given to every man to edify withal. For to one is
given through the spirit, the vtteraunce of wisdom. To an other is given the
vtteraunce of knowledge by the same spirit. To another the gift of healing,
by the same spirit. To another power to do miracles. To another prophecy. To
another judgment to discern spirits. To another diverse tongues. To another
the interpretation of tongues. But these all works the self same spirit,
dividing to every man a several gift even as he will.

The disposement.
THe Epistle is of those sort of caces that instruct. For it is a doctrine
concerning the gifts of the holy Ghost in the Church.

The chief places are four.
1 A definition of the gifts of the holy Ghost, consisling of a reckening up
of ten sorts of them. 2 Of the efficient cause of the gifts, all which are
distributed by one self same spirit, who divides them to every man according
as he lists. 3 Of the final cause, or of the use of gifts, which must be
employed not too boasting, or to nourishment of drawings aside, and of sects,
but too the common profit of the whole Church. 4 A testimony concerning the
three persons of the Godhead, and in especially concerning the person, office,
and benefits of the holy Ghost.
The first place.
THere is one first and principal gift of the holy Ghost, True godliness, or
true Religion.
which must needs shine forth in all the saints without fail, namely true
acknowledgement and profession of our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God, or
true faith believing that Jesus is the Lord, or in very deed, and by nature,
God, and that he is Christ our only redeemer and Savior, and disliking and
eschewing the worshipping of Idols. Of this first and principal gift, which
is common to all saints, speaks Paul in this place: No man speaking by the
spirit of God, says that Jesus is accursed, that is to say, all that curse
Christ as a mischeuous plage condemned of God, and as a thing too be taken out
of the world, (as the Jews in these days, the Turks, and the Heathen men
do,) or which blasphemously slander and corrupt the true doctrine concerning
the person and benefits of Christ, (as the Arians and Papists do) are no
members of the true Church, or are not governed by the holy Ghost. And no man
can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, that is too say, no
man can rightly acknowledge and with stedye faith embrace, and constantly (even
to the last gasp of his life) confess Jesus Christ too be the only and true
redeemer, and giver of eternal life, except he be governed and stayed by the
holy Ghost. For he meeneth not of the bare profession of the name Jesus, but of
the whole doctrine and the continual sticking too the faith of Christ, which
John expounds in his. x. Chapter, these things are written too the intent you
should believe that Jesus is that Christ the son of God, and that by believing
you may have life in his name. This faith is the first and principal gift of
the holy Ghost, which must shine forth and appear in all the godly.

Besides this, there be several gifts of the holy Ghost, Diversity of the
gifts of the holy Ghost.
which are not distributed too all the members of the church together, nor are
behouefull too be in all a like, but are given to some several persons by
the free will of God, that they may use them, not to vaunting or too stir up
debate and envying. But to the common edifying and welfare of the church. And
therefore Paul says here. There are diversities of gifts, that is to say,
the gifts are diverse or sundry, which be distributed freely by the holy
Ghost. And there be differences of administrations, like as the duties of the
members of a man's body are diverse and several one from another. And there be
diverse manners of operacions of the holy Ghost in us, or diverse executing of
administracions. And yet there is but one Ghost the holy Ghost, who
distributeth the gifts not to each man all, but to every man some. But unto
every man is given a manifestacion of the spirit, that is to say, the gifts
of the holy Ghost do utter and show themselves apparently in every man,
according as is to the behoof, both of the party him self, and of the whole
Church and of the common weal.

Homer in his vij. book of Ulysses. God gives not all good gifts too all men.

And in the xij. book of his Iliades. To some God gives warlike works, to
other he gives a wise mind, which gift many men enjoy: and he saves Cities.

Paul in this place reckeneth up nine kinds of seueuall Vtteraunce of
vvisdome.
gifts of the holy Ghost. Of which the first is, the vtraunce of wisdom, or
wisdom, that is to say, a perceyueraunce of all the Articles of the Christian
doctrine, joined with true and earneste godliness, or with the true fear of
God and faith, and with the framing of all a man's devises and doings agreeably
to the will of God. For all man's wisdom (as says Lactantius) consists in
this one point, that he acknowledge God aright and worship him aright, now
besides the true knowledge of God, and honest behavior, which be common to
all the members of the Church, VVisdome, in this place comprehends also a
peculiar and more perfect light, which not only understands the true
doctrine aright, but also knows and cunningly discerns errors and false
opinions. And such a kind of spiritual wisdom shone forth in Paul, Austin
and Luther, kindled by the holy Ghost, and confirmed by exercise of
temptacions, and encounters, and terrors and comfortes.

ij. The vtteraunce of knowledge, or cunning too understand Vtteraunce of
knowledge.
and discern what thing, what time, before whom and in what wise, is too be
chiefly done and followed, what is meet and behouefull too be done in
consideracion of the place, time, and other circumstances: where consideracion
is too be had of ye weak in bearing with things indifferent, and where a man
may use liberty. etc.

iij. Faith or an assured trust settled in God, and Faith.
woorking great and wonderful things, with a mighty and invincible courage,
and obteyning deliverance out of great dangers, which too put away, seems
no less difficulte to man's reason, than to remove mountains out of their
places. Of this faith he speaks thus in the chapter following: If I have never
so great faith, yea that I can remove mountains out of their places. Such
faith was in the Apostles, and in our days with Luther, who with a stout and
vnabashed courage of heart did spread abroad the doctrine of the Gospel when
all the world was against him.

iiij. The gift of healing, as the Apostles healed the The gift of healing.
diseased, and S. Pantaleon restored health to many that were sick in
Maximilians Court.

v. Operations, of power or mighty operacions, or Working of miracles.
working of miracles and wonderful deliueraunces, as Esaias delivered Jerusalem
from beseeging: or of the duties of a man's own calling, like as Paul is
paynfull and laboursome in his vocation, and spreedeth the Gospel further
abroad, than the rest of the Apostles.

vj. Prophesying, that is to wit, the gift of foretelling Prophesying
things too come, such as was in Agabus, Act. xj. and.xxj. and in the
daughters of Philip the Gospeller. Act. xxj. or else a singular aptness and
fitness in expounding the prophesies of the scriptures, and such a singular
aptness was there in Luther, even by the witness of Erasmus.

vij. Judgment to discern spirits, or discernement of Judgment to discern
spirits.
opinions which are decked with a counterfeit color of truth, like as Malchion
was the first that discovered the slightes of Samosetane, Alexander spyed out,
that Arius taught false doctrine, and Hilarious found fault with the crafty
conueyaunce of Auxentius.

viij. Diversity of tongues, as Jerome was seen in diverse Tongues.
tongues, as in the Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Slauonish, and the Chaldey tongues.

ix. The interpretacion of tongues, or the ableness too Interpretation of
tongues.
translate forreyne languages, properly, and expressly intoo a man's own
tongue, as Luther with a singular cleernesse turned the Psalms and the
Prophets intoo the Dutch tongue: or generally it is an eloquence, or gift of
vtteraunce, and handsome expounding of entangled opinions in controversy,
whereof many rise only of the ignorance of the tongue and of the phrases of
the same. Hitherto I have reckened up a beadroll of the cheef gifts of the
holy Ghost.

The second place.
THe efficient cause or author and giver of all spiritual The efficient cause
of all gifts.
gifts, is the one and self same holy Ghost, which distributeth severally to
each man according as he lists. Then it is the greatest folly in the world too
be proud of an other man's goods, which neither are in our power, nor can be
gotten by our own cunning, and too vaunt ones self above other men for them,
and too kindle harteburning, and cherish hatred for them, as it happened in the
Church of Corinth, and in other places at all times.

The third place.
IF God of his goodness have bestowed any gifts upon us, How Gods gifts are
too be used.
they are to be used reverently, not to boasting, or to the disdeyne and
contempt of other folks, and the nurrishment of such like fond affections, but
too the common profit and welfare of the whole Church: like the members of
man's body, which though they be one unlike another, and some have more
excellent offices than the rest, yet strive they not ambitiously among
themselves, but employ all their workings to the common welfare of the whole
body. And hereuntoo may this most honest sentence of Euripides be referred. If
every man taking the benefit or good gift of God bestowed upon him, would
regard it and employ it too the common profit of his country, then should
Cities be afflicted with fewer inconveniences, and become happy hereafter.

The fourth place.
LEt the notable testimony concerning the person and benefits of the holy
Ghost set forth in this Epistle be considered. For by express words the
title of Lord and God, and the peculiar works of the divine and almighty
nature are attributed unto him, which do convince that the holy Ghost is God in
very deed and by nature, and that he is of one substance and of one
continuance with God the Father and the son. But a more plenteous and full
declaracion of this doctrine, may be fetched out of the place that concerns
the holy Ghost.

Upon the.xj. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. j. Cor. xv.
BRethren, as perteyning to the Gospel which I preached unto you, which ye
have also accepted, and in the which ye continue, by the which ye are also
saved: I do you to wit after what manner I preached unto you, if ye keep it,
except ye have believed in vain. For first of all I delivered unto you that
which I received, how that Christ died for our sins, agreeing to the
scriptures: and that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day
according to the scriptures: And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the
twelve. After that he was seen of more than five hundredth brethren at once, of
which many remain unto this day, and many are fallen a sleep. After that
appeared he too James, then to all the Apostles. And last of all he was seen
of me, as of one that was borne out of due time. For I am the least of the
Apostles, which am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I have
persecuted the congregation of God. But by the grace of God, I am that I am.
And his grace which is in me, was not in vain. But I labored more abundantly
than they all: yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me. Therefore,
whether it were I or they, so we preached, and so ye have believed.

The disposement.
ALl the whole xv. Chapter of the first Epistle too the Corinthians,
perteyneth too those kind of cases that instruct. For it is a doctrine
concerning the resurrection of the dead. And the parts of the whole discourse
are three.

1. Whither there shall be any rising ageyn of the dead. 2. What manner of
rising that shall be, or what manner a bodies they shall rise withal. 3. What
is the cause of the rising again of our bodies, that is to wit, the death and
resurrection of Christ, whereby he has swalowed up our sin and death, and
restored life and glory everlasting to his Church.
The first part of this discourse, (namely that there shall be a rising
ageyn of the dead) is confirmed by Paul with four reasons, of the which the
first in this days Epistle is taken of the efficient cause.

Christ having bin dead is risen ageyn,
Ergo we also shall rise ageyn.
He proves the antecedent, first by the holy scripture, Textes that prove
Christ's resurrection.
as Psalm. xv. Esa. liij. Ose. vj. and also by the story of Jonas. And secondly
by the record of many that with their eyes saw Christ risen from death.

For Christ the same day that he rose again to life, appeared first too Marie
Mawdline alone. John. xx. Mar. xvj. Secondly to the rest of ye women together.
Mat. xxviij. Thirdly too the two men that were going intoo the feeldes, whom
the Apostles believed not. Mar. xvj. Fourthly too Simon Peter or Cephas. Luke
xxiiij. j. Cor. xv. And sixthly to all the Apostles at once as they were
gathered toogither saving Thomas. John. xx. Luke xxiiij. and.j. Corinthians.
xv. And all these discoueries were made in one day, on which day Ierom
supposes that Christ showed himself to James the less also.

Afterward he showed himself certain times too the Apostles when Thomas was
with them, and at the sea of Tyberias, John. xx. and.xxj. Also in Galilee too
mo than five hundred brethren at once. Mat. xxviij. j. Cor. xv. Also he
appeered too all the Apostles or Disciples. And this is the proof of the
Antecedent.

And the consequent of this argument is evidently confirmed by this Syllogism.

Whatsoever Christ both will and can bring too pass, shall out of all dout
take effect. Christ both will call the dead too life ageine as the sayings of
John do witness. John. v. vj. and.xj. And also he can restore life too the
dead: for by his death he has swalowed death intoo victory, and by his
Resurrection be restores life everlasting too us when we be dead. Ergo we
also shall out of all dout be called too life ageine.
The chief places.
THe first and most principal place is the doctrine concerning The chief
comfort of Christians in all cases.
the rising agein of the dead, which perteyneth to the Article of our Creed, I
believe the resurrection of this flesh, and the life everlasting. This is the
end and mark of the whole life and faith of christen folk, and the cheifest
and most stayed comfort in all the tribulations of this most miserable and
flyghtfull life, yea and in death also: that we for a certeintie persuade our
selves and believe, that we are not created too the miseries of this
troublesome and mortal life only, but that after the death of this body,
there remains assuredly a blissed and everlasting life, in which receiving
ageine the same bodies, (howbeeit renewed) and the same flesh which we now
bear about us, and that being set utterly free from all sin, labor, and
sorrow, we shall face to face enjoy the sight of the whole Godhead, and so
being filled with heavenly light, righteousness, life and gladness, shall
praise God for evermore.

The doctrine of this Article is most evidently confirmed by many Sermons of
Christ, of the Prophets, and of the Apostles, and most bryghtly set forth in
this fiftene Chapter Textes confirming the said comfort.
of the first too the Corinthians. Too the intent therefore that we may surely
fasten in the inward bowels of our hearts this wholesome and most effectual
comfort in all miseryes: Let the cheifest textes be always in our sight. As
these Job. xix. I know that my redeemer lives, and I shall rise out of the
earth in the latter day, and shall be compassed agein with my skin, and in my
flesh shall I see my God: whom I shall beehold, even I my self, and mine eyes
shall behold him, and none other for me. This hope is laid up in my bosom.
John. v. The hour shall come that all which are in their graves. etc. John.
vj. This is the will of the father yt sent me, that every one which sees the
son, and believes in him, should not perish but have life everlasting, and I
will raise him up at the last day. Ioh. xj. I know that he shall rise agein at
the last day.

The foundation and cause of the rising ageine of our bodies, The cause of our
resurrection.
and of life and salvation everlasting, is the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus
Christ the son of God, whereby he has swallowed up sin, death, hell, and
the devil intoo victory, and conueyeth all those that flee unto him, from
death, unto a blissed and endless life. And this is the cause why Paul in
this Epistle confirms this sentence with so many words: that Christ is
risen from death in deed. I do you too wit of the Gospel.

The second place.
THe entrance intoo this Epistle does us too understand, Good things cannot
be repeted to often.
that the true, wholesome, and necessary Doctrine concerning the cheef Articles
of the christen faith, ought oftentimes and continually too be repeated, yea
and the self same things too be beaten intoo the heerers ears in the self
same words, that they may deeply sink and steadfastly stick in their minds,
as Paul says. Phil. iij. It is no pain unto me, but it is for your welfare
that I write one thing oftentimes: beeware of dogs which change and mar
the doctrine of the Gospel which I delivered you. Therefore let those that
teach faithfully, repete often times one doctrine that is profitable and
necessary, as that wise man said, that he speaks the self same things too
the self same persons. And this most profitable rule of studyes, given by
Epictetus is well known. Know thou that it is not easy for a man too be
learned, unless yt he do every day either hear or read such things as he
would be grounded in, and likewise use them in this life. So Paul in this
place says: that he delivers not a new Doctrine too them, but that he
puts them in mind of the Gospel by the same words that he had preached it
too them before.

The third place.
OF the effectualnesse of the Gospel, or of the lively word The
effectualnesse of preaching.
sounding in the mouth of the ministers, by which word only and not otherwise,
God imparteth the true knowledge of himself, true faith, the holy Ghost, and
everlasting welfare too those that believe. Therefore says Paul in this
place, by the Gospel which I have preached unto you, which you have embraced,
and by which you are saved, if ye hold it fast by faith, unless perchance
(which God forbid) ye have now shaken of the faith, and believed heeretoofore
in vain. And it agrees fully with this sentence. Romans j. The Gospel is the
power of God too the salvation of every one yt believes, and Act. xj. Peter
shall speak words too thee, by which thou and thy house shall be saved. Such
other texts as these, we shall here in the Epistle of the next Sunday which
are too be set against the Enthusiastes, who embrace the woorking of the word
and sacraments, and look for new enlightenings and heavenly traunces without
the word.

The fourth place.
OF the passion, death, and resurrection of Christ, and of the witnessings of
the Prophets in the scripture, as Esa. liij. Dan. ix. Psalm. xxij. Zach. xiij.
in which places Christ's death and passion is foretold: and of the causes and
benefits of Christ's death, which things we have made mention of already
upon good Friday last.

The fifth place.
OF Paul's modesty in boasting, who terms himself the least of the
Apostles, and unworthy the name of an Apostle, and yet declares of himself
that he has labored more than the rest of the Apostles. Modesty or mildness,
and true glory, are cousin virtues, like as sparingnesse and liberality,
uprightness and straightness true, dealing and straight justice.

Modesty acknowledging a man's own weakness and What modesty or mildness is
filthiness, is not proud, ne exalts himself either in conceit, or in talk,
or in doings above that he is able too perform: but upon trust of Gods help,
diligently executes the necessary duties of his vocation, and rules all his
sayings and behauiours by grave judgment.

True glorying or boasting, is (as Paul defines it) the True bosting.
witness of our own conscience, too acknowledge and maintain the
righteousness of a good conscience, and Gods gifts, and the virtues and well
doings and successes given us of God, and too set our selves against the
lesings of slaunderers, that God may be glorified, and other folks may not
be withdrawn from the ministry by our misreport and dishonestie, but
rather, may be allured too the knowledge of the gospel, and too true
godliness by the auouchment of our good name and our good examples. Paul
therefore says that he is unworthy the name of an Apostle, that is too wit,
as in respect of his own desert, or as perteyning too his own infirmity and
sins: And agein he gloryeth that he has labored more than they all, that is
too wit, as in respect of the gifts and good success of his vocation, given
unto him by the free favor and aid of God.

The sixth place.
COncerning the free favor and help of God needful too the right and
prosperous performance of all the works of our vocation. And also concerning
the difference of Gods grace woorking in us and with us, (which the schools
have taken out of this place of Paul's) is spoken in the.xxv. and xxvj.
distinctions of the second book of sentences.

Upon the twelfth Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. ij. Cor. iij.
SVch trust have we through Christ too Godward, not that we are sufficient of
our selves to think any thing as it were of our selves, but our ableness
comes of God, which has made us able too minister the new Testament, not of
the letter but of the sprite. For the letter kills, but the sprite gives
life. If the ministration of death through the letters figured in stones was
glorious, so that the children of Israel could not behold the face of Moses
for the glory of his countenance (which glory is done away) why shall not the
ministration of the sprite be much more glorious? For if the ministering of
condemnation be glorious: much more does the ministration of righteousness
exceed in glory. For no dout that which was there glorified, is not once
glorified in respect of this exceedyng glory. For if that which is destroyed
was glorious: much more shall that which remains be glorious. Seeing then
that we have such trust, we use great boldness, and do not as Moises, which
put a veil over his face, that the children of Israel should not see for what
purpose that served which is put away. But their minds were blinded. For until
this day remains the same covering untaken away in the old testament when
they read it, which veil in Chrystis put away. But even unto this day when
Moses is read, that veil hangs before their hearts. Nevertheless, when they
turn to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away. The Lord no doubt is a
spryte. And where the sprite of the Lord is, there is liberty. But we all
beehold in a myrror the glory of the Lord, with his face open, and are changed
unto the same similitude, from glory to glory, even of the sprite of the Lord.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is of those kind that instruct, for it is a Doctrine concerning
the ministry of the Gospel.

The chief places are three.
1 Of the effectualnesse of the ministration of the gospel, by which there is
a new light or knowledge of God, new ryghtuousnesse, and life kindled in the
hearts of the heerers. 2 Of the efficient cause of conversion or quickening, and
of all spiritual doings, that are stirred up in us by the Gospel. 3 Of the
letter and the spirit, or the difference of the ministracion of the old
testament and the new, or of the law and the gospel.
Now forasmuch as the manner of speech and phrase in this whole third Chapter
of the second Epistle too the Corinthians, is somewhat dark and uneasy: I will
(toogither with the exposition of the places) declare the full text of the
whole chapter in a brief paraphrasis.

The first place, concerning the effectualnesse of the ministration of the
Gospel.
THe most part of the second Epistle too the Corinthians is spent in this
auouchment which Paul sets against the slanders of the false Apostles. I
avouch that I Paul am not a deceyuer or a huckster, that corrupts the truth
for ambition or gains sake: but a faithful minister, and that I have
faithfully delivered too you the sincere and pure Doctrine of the Gospel
vvythout corrupting it. Concerning this auouchment, he appealeth too the
Corinthians themselves for record in the beeginning of this Chapter. You are
our Epistle written in our heart, which is known and red of all men, in that
ye are manifested too be the Epistle of Christ, ministered by us, and
written, not with ink, but with the spirit of the living God, not in
tables of stone, but in fleshly Tables of the heart. As if a man should say, I
confirm not mine auouchment with foreign and far fet testimonials or
letters of commendation in behalf of my ministry. But you your selves bear
witness with me in my heart, that I have delivered unto you the uncorrupted
word of ye Gospel faithfully, as long as all men know and see, that you
having forsaken ungodliness and heathenish Idolles, are turned too the true
knowledge of Christ by my ministration: and as long as you your selves show
that your hearts are Christ's Epistle or the tables wherein Christ himself is
imprinted, dwelling in you, and woorking in you, and that there is kindled in
you true knowledge of God, new ryghtuousnesse, and life, by the spirit of the
living God who is effectual by my ministry. And so the lively law and
obedience agreeing with Gods law, is not graue^ in tables of stone, or in the
tables of Moses, wherein were graven the letters or words of the law written
with the finger of God, but in your fleshly or obedient hearts, with the finger
or spirit of the living God: as is said Ier. xxxj. I will put my law in their
minds, and in their hearts will I write it. This effectualnesse of my
ministry is an evident token, that I am a faithful minister of the gospel:
and that the word of the gospel sounding in the mouth of me and of all
faithful ministers is not a fond tale, or empty words, and a fable as good
as a sick man's dream, but a thing effectual that works salvation in deed
too every one that believes, as is said Romans j. Let such like testimonies full
of comfort be always in sight, which auouche yt the church is verily gathered
too God by the voice of the gospel, and that by this ministry God woorketh in
deed, and imparteth the true knowledge of himself, ryghtuousnesse and life
everlasting too those that believe. j. These. ij. Ye have received, not the
word of man, but (as it was in deed) the word of God, which is woorkfull in
you that believe. ij. Cor. v. God has reconciled us too himself by Jesus
Christ, and has beetaken unto us the office of preaching the atonement.
Therefore are we messengers in the room of Christ, even as though God did
exhort you by us. j. Cor. j. It pleased GOD through foolishness of preaching,
too save them that believe. Act. xj. Peter shall speak words unto thee, by
which thou shall be saved, both thou and thy household. Esaias. lv. The word
that passes out of my mouth, shall not return empty unto me, but shall
work all things that I have sent it unto. Romans x. Faith comes by heering,
and heering by the word of God. Romans xv. Whatsoever things be written. etc.
John. xvij. I pray not for the Apostles. etc. John. xv. You are made clean by
the word.

The second place, Of the efficient cause of the woorkfulnesse of the
ministry and of all good and healthful deeds.
NOt by man's power does the preaching of the Gospel work salvation too
every one that believes: neither is true knowledge of God, and righteousness
and eternal life wrought in the hearts of the heerers by the word of the
Gospel, for the worthiness and virtues of the ministers or preachers: but by
the woorking of God himself who thorough the ministry and preaching of his
word kindles godly thoughts, or the light of the true knowledge of Christ
which is faith, and quickens or tra^sformeth our hearts and mynds intoo the
same likeness, that they may be made partakers of the light and life of GOD.
And therefore Paul says, Such trust have we through Christ to Godward, not
that we are sufficient of our selves too think any thing as of our selves, but
all our ableness comes of God: As though Paul should say, Whereas I auouche
that you Corinthians being converted by my preaching, do bear witness of my
faithfulness, and disprove the slau^ders of the false Apostles: I say so, not
trusting too mine own strength, but only unto God, who wrought mightily by
my preaching. And herewithall, this sentence of Paul's concerning the weakness
of free will or of man's own power, does us too understand, that it is so
poisoned, weakened, and fordoone with the venim of sin, that of it own
strength it can neither woork the righteousness that likes God, nor atteyne
forgiveness of sins and salvation, nor think any thing that pleases God or
may be helpful too it self in the conversion or justifying of it self: and
much less can woork toward it: like as also he says. j. Corin. ij. The
natural man perceyueth not the things that are of Gods spirit. For unto him
they are foolishness, and he can not understand them, because they are too be
weyed spiritually* Thirdly also he does us too wit in general, that nothing
can be done, either in the spiritual life to soul health, or in the civil
life rightly and fortunatly, but by the help and gift God: as it is said John
iij. A man can not take aught too himself, except it be given him from heaven.
And Nazianzene: Unless God give, labor avails nothing.

The third place, Of the Letter and the Spirit, or the difference between the
ministry of the old Testament and of the new, which is taken of the effects
or formal cause.
THe new Testament does most properly betoken the same The new Testament.
thing that does the Gospel or the promise that concerns the son of God,
our Lord and redeemer Jesus Christ, and Gods grace, remission of sins and
everlasting salvation too be given freely for Chrysts sake only, too those
that believe: by the ministry of which promise, the holy Ghost woorketh, and
kindles new light, new righteousness, and everlasting life in our hearts.

The Letter signifies the law of Moses both ceremonial The Letter.
and moral, written with letters in tables of stone: and all obedience or
indeuer of doing the ceremonial or moral woorks of the Law, without the holy
ghost or without true faith kindled by the holy Ghost.

The Spirit signifies Christ himself, or the holy spirit of The Spirit.
Christ, who by the preaching of ye gospel kindles true light of the
knowledge of God, true comfortablenesse, righteousness, and life in men's
hearts, as is said. j. John. v. This is the witness of the Gospel, that God
gives us eternal life of free gift, and this life is in his son. He that
has the son, has life, and he that has not the son of God, has not
life. Therefore the Spirit and life of the whole doctrine delivered by GOD in
each of the Testamentes, yea and of all good works, ceremonies, and good
intentes, is all only Christ. And therefore says Paul, that God made him a
Minister of the new Testament, or of the Gospel, and not of the Letter, or of
the Law only, or of figures and works what soever, etc. But of Christ's
Spirit which woorketh by the Gospel. For the Letter, that is too say, Gods
Law, and all manner of doctrine or imitation and obedience and good intent of
doing the Law without the holy Ghost, kills, that is too say, brings not
life and true comfort too men's minds. And in especial the moral Law by
showing, accusing, and condemning sin, and by reueling Gods displeasure,
does only kill and cast away all men intoo everlasting damnation. And
therefore it is called the ministration of death, as it is said. j. Corinthi.
xv. The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law. And Austin
expounds this saying lernedly and godlily in his book Of the spirit and the
letter, Cap. iiij. and in the chapters following. And Roma. vij. At the coming
of the commandment, sin revived, and I was dead. But Chrysts Spirit is
effectual by the Gospel, and lighteneth, and quickens men's hearts, and
stirs up in their minds, not only the shadows of outward works, or
imitations and gestures or vain conceytes and good intentes: but a true and
new light, righteousness, and life: and also kindles and inflameth them with
a burning faith and love toowardes GOD, and other motions conformable too the
will of Christ.

Unto this auouchement of the effectualnesse of the Gospel, A comparison
between the law of Moses and the Gospel.
Paul adds a comparison of the ministration of Moses Law, with the
ministry of the Gospel, and by the figure of Rhetorike called Expolition,
repeteth the selfsame sentence well near four times in exchange of words.
The pubishing of Moses Law was done with great miracles, and was exceeding
glorious: Ergo, much more shall the publishing of Christ's Gospel be glorious
and mighty in woorking, and in deed bring eternal life and light, considering
how all that ordinance of Moses ministration was appointed, and all the
figures, ceremonies, and laws of Moses were set out for Christ. Now if the
ministration of death through the letters written in stones was glorious, that
is too say, if the ministration of Moses Law written with letters in Tables
of stone, which kills all men and condemns them too endless death, were
glorious, beautiful, and clear, in so much as the majesty and brightness of
the countenance of Moses the Law giver was so great, that the children of
Israel, by reason of the glory or glistering cleernesse of his face, were not
able too hold their eyes against it. How should not the ministration of
Christ's spirit which gives life, or the ministration of the Gospel, be much
more glorious and effectual? For if the ministering of condemnation be
glorious, that is too say, if the ministering of the Law which condemns all
men, and sounds out this voice, Cursed is every one that abides not in all
the things that are written in the book of the Law, be glorious: how much
more does the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory? That is too
say, in how much greater glory excels the ministration of Christ's Gospel,
by which we are delivered from the condemnation of the Law, and made heirs
of righteousness and everlasting life? For no dout, that which was there
glorified, is not once glorified in respect of this exceeding glory, that is
too say, the ministration of Moses or of the Law, which was instituted and
glorified with so many signs and woonders, is not too be counted glorious, in
respect of the excellent glory of the ministration of ye Gospel. For if that
which is put away was glorious, much more shall that which continues be
glorious, that is too say, If the ministration of Moses Law which was too
be done away, and the ordinance of a state of government which afterward
should decay, was set up with so glorious miracles: how much more shall the
ministration of the Gospel, (which brings not the decaying and flightfull
benefits of this life, nor vain shadows: but the true everlasting and
continual benefits of righteousness, life, and light in heaven) be glorious
and mighty of operation in all those that embrace the Gospel. Therefore
having such hope, that is too wit, of the true and everlasting life and glory
set forth in the Gospel, we use great assurance and liberty in our
ministration, and neglecting the figures and shadows of Moses law, preach
Christ's Gospel openly, boldly, and freely. And not as Moses did put a veyle
before his face, that is too say, we do not hyde, ouerwrap, or darken Christ's
Gospel, so as Christ's face can not be known and seen, like as Moses when
he put the veyle before his face, meant that he should keep many from looking
intoo the end of the law which is abolished, that is too say, from looking
unto Christ who is the end of the law which was too be abolished. For the
end of the law is Christ too iustifye every one that believes. Romans x. And
Christ him self says: If ye believed Moses, ye would also believe me: for
of me Christ has Moses written peinting out Christ's sacrifise and
redemption in the promises of the seed that was too come, and in the figure of
the Easter Lamb, and in all the sacrifises. But their senses are blinded, Esai.
vj. For unto this present day, the same veyle, that is too say, the same mist
and blindness of heart in not acknowledging Christ the end and spirit of the
law, continues in the reading of the old Testament, neither is this veyle
taken away, which is abolished by Christ's spirit. For Christ has reveled him
self too us by his spirit. j Cor. ij. But as soon as the Israelites shall be
converted unto the Lord, that is too wit unto Christ, the veyle shall be
taken away, that is too wit, ye blindness of mind which keeps them from
knowing Christ: and they shall rightly acknowledge Christ the end of the law,
whom only GOD has made our wisdom, righteousness, holiness, and redemption,
that he which glories may glory in the Lord. The Lord is that quickening
spirit, or Christ is the spirit and life of the Law, too whom those that be
converted do understand that the ceremonies and figures of Moses Law were
but shadows of the good things too come, and that the body of them was
Christ. Colos. ij. Ebr. x. and that the moral law is the letter that kills,
or which pronounces the sentence of death and eternal damnation against this
corrupt nature: and that we be not able too begin obedience of the law so as
it may please God, but if Christ's spirit or God himself shine in us, and
make our hearts comfortable too him. Now where soever the spirit of the Lord,
that is too say, of Christ dwells and woorketh, there is freedom, from the
Law, from sin, from Gods wrath, and from everlasting cursednesse: and there
is kindled new ryghtuousnesse and life acceptable too God, which shall continue
world without end. But all we, (that is too wit, as many as are converted
unto Christ, and embrace his Gospel by faith,) beholding (and in our hearts as
it were in a myrrour receiving by faith) do rightly acknowledge, the glory of
the Lord, that is too say, Christ, (for so is Christ named Exo. xxxiij. Esai.
lx. Ebr. j. John. j. and in other places) or the true light and glory of
Christ, with his face open, that is too say, clearly, and manifestly without
any veyle, without any mistiness, and without any comberance: and being set
free by the spirit of the Lord, or by Christ himself, are changed intoo the
same likeness, that the like new light or true knowledge of God, true
righteousness, holiness, and life, as shyneth in Christ, may be kindled and
framed in us also, from glory too glory, that is too say, with encreasement
and augmentation of new light, righteousness and life from time to time, by
the light of the Lords spirit shyning in us. The term of glory or
glorification, which Paul uses in this Sermon, is taken out of Exodus
xxxiiij. where it is written of Moses departing from communication with the
Lord, Cicaran or panau, that is too say, that his face glistered like unto a
horn. This have the threescore and ten interpreters translated thus, that the
beauty of the skin of his face was glorified, that is too say, that the skin
of his face was become clear, glistering, and bright, like the shyning Sun.
Of this translation of the threescore and ten Interpreters, did Paul borow the
word glory, in this comparison of his: which thing it is good for the reader
too bear in mind.

Upon the.xiij. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. Gal. iij.
BRethren, I will speak after the manner of men. Though it be but a man's
Testament, yet no man despises it, or adds any thing thereto, when it is
once allowed. To Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He says not in
the seeds, as many: but in thy seed, as in one, which is Christ. This I say,
that the law which began afterward, beyond four hundred and thirty years,
does not disanull the testament that was confirmed before of God unto
Christward, to make the promise of none effect. For if the inheritance come of
the law, it comes not then of promise. But God gave it unto Abraham by
promise. Wherefore then serves the Law? The law was added because of
transgression (till the seed came too which the promise was made) and it was
ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator. A Mediator is not a mediator
of one But GOD is one. Is the Law then against the promise of God? God forbid.
Howbeit, if there had bin a Law given which could have given life: the^ no
dout righteousness should have come by the law. But the Scripture concluded all
things under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ, should be
given too them that believe.

The disposement.
THe Epistle is of those sort that instruct. For the doctrine thereof concerns
man's justification before God. The proposition that conteyneth the sum of
the Epistle is: We are justified before God for Chrysts sake only, freely by
faith, and not for our own good works.

The Arguments wherewith he confirms this proposition are three.
FIrst, of the weightynesse of the words. The Testament or promise of God, is
out of all dout, true, certain, unchangeable, and too be understood simply as
the words sound.

Gods Testament or promise delivered unto Abraham, In thy seed shall all
nations be blissed, affirms by express words, that Blissing, that is too
wit, remission of sins and everlasting salvation is given, not in seeds as
in many, that is too wit, not partly for Christ's sake and partly for our own
good works: but only for the one seed, which is Christ.

Ergo, it is a true, certain and unchangeable ground, that we are justified
or accepted as rightuouse before GOD, for Christ's sake only, by faith only,
and not partly by faith for Christ's sake, and partly for our own good works.

Paul amplifieth the first proposition, by a matter of less likelyhod, or
force, thus:

If it be not lawful too alter the Testament or last will of a man: much
less is it lawful too alter the Testament or will of God.

The second argument is of things that hang not together.
FOr if the inheritance come by the law, then is it not by promis, but God
granted it to Abraham by promis.

This argument may be included in this Syllogism.

Whatsoever is given by the law as a wages, either for our own obedience to the
law, or for our own works and deserts, is not given freely by the promis
taken hold upon by faith only. The heritage of righteousness and eternal
life, is given freely unto Abraham by promis. Ergo the inheritance of
righteousness and eternal life befalls not by the law, or is not given for
our own works or our obedience toward the law.
This argument does Paul amplifye with two preuentions. Objection against
Justification by faith only.
Of which the first is this: The Testament or promis that was made to Abraham
concerning Christ, was ratified and approved by God four hundred and. xxx.
years before the publishing of the law. Ergo after the deliverance of the law
our obedience toward the law, or our good works also, must needs mete to
justification.

To this objection Paul answers thus: that the testament Answer to the
said objection.
which was ratified before by God through Christ or the promis of free
reconcilement, is not made void or disanulled by the law, but that it
continues always steadfast and immovable, without putting any thing to it, or
taking aught away from it by the publishing of the law.

Hereuppon rises the second objection. To what purpose An other objection.
is the law then? why was it made by God if it justify not, ne be needful to
salvation? Paul answers: it was added because of transgression, that is to
say, for this cause was the law made that it should show, accuse, and condemn
the sin that sticks in us, and drive us too seek the seed Christ, who was
made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Out
of this answer is builded the third argument, of the effects hanging upon it.

If the law could deliver from death, and restore life Answer of the said
objection.
and effectual comfort, then might we be justified also by the law.

But the law can not deliver men from sin and death, and restore life.

Ergo it is impossible for us too be justified by the law.

He proves the minor or second proposition thus. The law promises or gives
eternal life to all those that yield perfect obedience without any sin.

But the scripture has closed all things under sin, that is to say, the
word or law of God, conuinceth, accuses, and condemns all men, that they
are defiled with sin, and guilty of Gods wrath and endless damnacion.

Ergo the law delivers no man from eternal death, neither can it give life:
but the promised righteousness and life is given freely through faith in Jesus
Christ, too them that believe.

This is the disposement of this Epistle, in which there appear chiefly two
places of doctrine, which are also the cheef places throughout all the Christen
doctrine.

The one is the glad tidings, or promis of remission of The Gospel.
sins, righteousness, and life everlasting, too be freely bestowed upon
them that believe for the only one seed of Abraham our Lord Jesus Christ.

The other is, the law given of God, to show, accuse, and The Law.
condemn sin, and to drive men to true repentance or sorynesse for their
sins committed, and the seeking of help at the son of God the Mediator
showed in the promis.

Therefore the definitions of the law and the Gospel, and the four differences
of the law and of the Gospel, taken of the form of understanding, of the
form of the promises, of the effects, and of the obiectes, and also a
declaracion of the causes and effects of the law and the Gospel, may be
repeted in this place out of the Catechism.

The promis concerning Christ made unto Abraham What things are contained in
the promis made to Abraham, concerning Christ.
in these words, In thy seed shall all nations be blissed. Genesis xij. is
breefly declared already, where we have hard that the cheef places of the
Gospel are contained in it. First concerning Christ's person, in which the
two natures of man (borne of the seed of Abraham and David, as touching the
flesh,) and of God (enduing the church with heavenly blissing and taking away
sin and death, are verily and personally united together. Secondly of
Christ's office and benefits, which are comprised in that one word blissing.
For blissing signifies deliverance from curse, Blissing.
from Gods wrath, from sin, and from eternal death: and the free giving of
life and righteousness everlasting. For so does Paul himself interpret the
word. Galat. iij. and Ephe. j. and Peter also. Act. iij. Thirdly of the
difference of the law and the Gospel. The law is a doctrine that curses, The
Law.
as it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all the things
that are written in the book of the law. But the Gospel brings heavenly and
everlasting The Gospel. Justification.
blissing, promised freely for Christ's sake. Fourthly of Justification or
remission of sins and eternal salvation which may befall us for the one
only seed of Abraham, which is Christ, or by faith only: and not in many
seeds, that is to say, partly for Christ's sake through faith, and partly for
our own good works. Fifthly Paul in expounding Faith.
the promis made to Abraham, shows in this chapter, the applyment of Christ's
benefits in these words. They that are of faith, y^ is to say, they y^ believe,
are blissed, as The ealling of the Gentiles. Original sin.
faithful Abraham was. Sixthly of the calling of y^ Gentiles. Seventhly, of
original sin. For all y^ promises and commandments of God are to be
understood with a certain contrariety, as thus: God promises his blessing
too all men for Christ's sake: Ergo all men are cursed for sin before. And
eyghtly, the Article of our Creed concerning Christ's incarnation.
Christ's conception and birth of the virgin Marie may be builded out of this
promis. For seeing it was of necessity that the promised deliverer, who being
blissed himself should bliss others, must be void of al sin: and that al
which are conceived of man's seed, are borne defiled with sin: It follows that
Christ was not conceived and borne of man's seed.

Concerning the law there be four admonishments or lessons in this Epistle.
THe first is of the time of the publishing of the law upon The time of the
publishing of the law.
mount Sinay, that is to wit, the four hundred and thirtith year after that
the seed Christ was promised to Abraham. Now, the first promis concerning the
seed was reveled to Abraham. Genesis xij. in the thousand and. xxiij. year of
the world, the three hundred threescore and seventh year after the flood, the
threescore and fifteenth year of Abraham's age, and a thousand nine hundred and
fortye years before Christ was borne. Now from the deliverance of the promis
concerning the seed, which was the.lxxx. year of Abraham's age. Genesis xij. unto
the birth of Isaac, were xxv. years. Genesis xxj. from Isaac to the birth of
Jacob, threescore years. Genesis xxv. from the birth of Jacob, unto the going
down into Egypt (which was the.xxxix. year of the age of Joseph,) are a
hundred and thirty years. Genesis xlvij. From the going down into Egypt, to the
death of Joseph are threescore and eleven years. Genesis l. From the death of
Joseph, to the birth of Moses, are threescore and four years. From the birth
of Moses, to the departure out of Egypt, and the publishing of the law, are.
lxxx. years. And so the whole number is four hundred and thirty years. The
use and effect of the moral Law.


The second admonishement, is concerning the propre. use and effect of the
moral law, which was added, because of transgression, and not to justify men*
and bring them to life and salvation everlasting: neither alonly to restreyne
men's misdooings and offenses, and to repress them and hold them short with
commandments and penalties, nor too be a chastisement of wilful and
vnwilfull offenses, as Demosthenes defines it: but to augmente men's
transgressions or sins, and to make them greater, by showing us the hugeness
and horriblenesse of our sins, and of Gods wrath against sin, which things
we knew not of before, and by horrible accusing, fraying* and condemning men
for sin, and to work most sorrowful dismayednesse and despair in our hearts,
until the promised seed do come, and that the comfort of faith be kindled in
the heart. As for example, the voice of Gods law bewrayed, accused, and
increased the transgression of Adam and Eve, and struck them with horrible
dreadfulnesse and fear, until the promis of the seed that should come, was
uttered, by trust whereof they were delivered out of the dread of sin, death,
and the curse of the law. Of this spiritual and cheef use of Gods law, Paul
speaks in this Epistle, and he enlighteneth it with many words in the
Epistle to the Romans the v. vij. and. viij. chapters. The law entered in, y^
sin might abound. Also, what shall we say? Is the law sin. God forbid. But I
had not known what sinment, if it had not bin for y^ law* For I wist not that
lust was sin, if the law had not said. Thou shall not lust. For without the
law, sin is dead. Also, by the law sin becomes out of measure sinful.
And ageyn, the law is the power of sin.

The third admonishment is of the efficient cause or The Author of the law.
the author of the law that is published. The law was ordained by Angels, or
delivered by the ministry of Angels upon mount Sinay, as it is said. Act.
vij. Moses was in the church in the wilderness, with the Angel speaking too
him upon mount Sinay, who received the word of life that was too be given to
us, but your fathers would not obey him. Also* Ebr. ij. For if the word that
was spoken by Angels was steadfast, and that all transgression and
disobedience has received just reward, how shall we escape, if we neglect
so great salvation uttered by ye lord the very son of God: The same setting
together of contraries does Paul use in this place.

The promis was spoken unto Abraham immediately from God himself: but the law
was uttered by his servant the angels, and that, in the hand of a mediator,
which was Moses, who in Deuteronomy. v. says thus: I was a mean and went betwixt
you and God at that time, and brought you word what he said: for you were
afraid of the fire, and went not up into the mount. Now seeing that the people
was not able to abide so much as to hear the voice of the law, and much less
the thunder and lightning of Gods wrath darted forth by the law: It is an
evident matter that they The Mediator of the law.
are not justified by the law: but that they have need of the true Mediator
(of whom Moses was a figure) too go between the two parties, that is to wit
between God, who being wroth with sin, beats men's hearts a pieces with the
curse of the law as it were with a pestle or with thunder, and men, (who are
guilty of sin and subject to Gods displeasure: to the intent yt he participating
both ye natures of Godhead and manhood, may undertake Gods displeasure for us,
and by his intreatance and merit satisfy Gods justice, and set us in his good
favor and grace. For a mediator is not of one, but goes betwixt two parties,
(namely God and man) that were at debate, which debate the law discovers,
nourishes, increases and confirms by be wraying, accusing, and conde^ning
sin. But God is one, who of his exceeding great and free goodness has made a
promis of the seed, and sent his beloved son, that he by taking man's nature
upon him, should take away ye debate, and the curse of ye law, and give to ye
believers ye blissing or righteousness and life that was promised to Abraham.
Here may the whole doctrine concerning the mediator* and concerning the office
and benefits of the Mediator Christ, and of the causes why it behooued the
two natures too be united in the Mediator, be repeted.

Fourthly, Paul answers to this question, whither The law a leader to the
Gospel.
the law strive against ye promis of ye Gospel, because we are justified not
by ye law, but by ye promis. And he aduoucheth, yt the law is not only nothing
against ye testament or promis concerning Christ: but also that it confirms
it, yea and most manifestly proves, that men must of necessity be justified
by ye free mercy of God, only for Christ's sake. For in as much as gods law and
the whole scripture conuinceth all men to be unrighteous, and defiled with sin,
and subject to Gods wrath and endless damnacion: It is evident that ye law it
self bears witness, that no man can be justified before God, for his own
worthiness and clennesse. Therefore let no man upon trust of his own strength,
his own virtues, or his own deseruings, hope to obtain righteousness and
everlasting life, in any other thing than in the only free promis, or in
Christ only.

Upon the.xiiij. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. Galat. v.
I Say, walk in the spirit, and fulfill not the lust of the flesh. For the
flesh lusts contrary to the spirit, and the spirit contrary to the flesh:
these are contrary one to the other, so that ye can not do whatsoever ye
would. But and if ye be led of the spirit, then are ye not under the
law. The deeds of the flesh are manifest, which are these: adultrye,
fornicacion, uncleanness, wantonness, worshipping of Images, witchcraft,
hatred, variaunce, zele, wrath, strife, sedicions, sects, envying, murder,
drunkenness, gluttonye, and such like. Of the which I tell you before, as I
have told you in times past, that they which commit such things, shall not
be inheritors of the kingdom of God. Contrarily, the fruit of the spirit is
love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentilnesse, goodness, faythfulnesse,
meekness, temperaunce. Against such there is no law. They truly that are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is of those sorts of cases that persuade. For it is an
exhortacion to good works or new obedience agreeing with Gods will: amplyfied
with two figures, Antithesis and Distribution. And the state or proposition of
the Epistle enlightened with the Antithesis, is this sentence. Walk in the
spirit, and fulfill not the lusts of the flesh, that is to say, obey the holy
Ghost, which rules your intentes, endeuers and doings, that they may agree
with the will or law of God, and welter not in sin, or the lewd
inclinacions and affections of nature corrupted and unrenewed by the holy
Ghost, or too speak shortly, do good works and eschew sin.

Either member of this proposition, Paul declares and enlarges with a
distribution of the generality into his particulars. Now let the terms be
understood aright.

The spirit signifies God the holy Ghost, and all new The spirit.
motions of true fear, faith, and love of God, and of all other virtues
stirred up by the holy Ghost. For to this end is the holy Ghost poured out
into the hearts of the believers, that he should do away sin, and kindle new
righteousness and conversation agreeing with Gods will. To walk, is the same
thing that to live, or to rule the purposes To walk. Flesh
and deeds of the whole life. Flesh signifies the whole nature of man
unrenewed by faith and the holy Ghost. Lust of the flesh, signifies not only
the inordinate desires of the senses or of the affections in the heart, Lust of
the flesh.
as unlawful loves, hatredes, yrefulnesse, and the flames of sensuality: but
also it signifies in the will, the turning from God, distrust, carelessness in
neglecting the displeasure and judgment of god, and standing in a ma^s own
conceyt: and in the mind, ignorance, and doutfulnesse concerning the being and
will of God etc. All this whole confused heap of original and inward actual
mischeeues, the Scripture comprehends under the term of lust or
concupiscence, of which the verse of Crates may most truly be verified: Of
evils all that may be found, Concupiscence or lust is ground. But to good
purpose and meening says Paul, fulfill not the lusts of the flesh, For even
in all the Saints there remains concupiscence of the flesh, that is too wit,
many sinful inclinations and desires: darkness in the mind: and doutfulnesse,
distrust, carnal carelessness, and standing in a man's own conceyte, in the
will, and a great ^able of sinful pangs and affections in the heart. These
mischeefs like deadly foes keep war in our minds against the spirit and
against the good motions that are stirred up by the holy Ghost, as in Romans vij.
Paul describes this fight of the flesh against the spirit, with many words:
and also they provoke and enforce us to outward sins. Howbeit these workings
of the flesh must not be fulfilled, but must be kept down and mortified by
the holy Ghost (who rules the mind, will, and heart) that they may willingly
and with a true intent exercise the deeds or virtues agreeing with the will or
law of God. For they that are led by the spirit, are no longer under the law,
or under sin, which is accused and condemned by the law, neither perform
they their obedience too God by compulsion and constraynt of the law, but of a
frank and freeharted willingness of their own.

Paul distributeth the woorks of the flesh and of the spirit, or sins and
good works into certain particulars, which may be referred too agreeable
precepts of the Ten commandments. The manifest deeds of the flesh he names
The deeds of the flesh.
sins or wickednesses which men commit wittingly and willingly, or which the
dooer knows to be sin, and sins wilfully. For he puts a difference
between their sins that are done against conscience (which dwell not in the
saints) and the sins of ignorance, natural infirmity, darkness, and the
sinful heates which oftentimes happen against men's wills. The first four
kinds Whordome.
Aduoutry, fornication, vnclenenesse, and wantonness, do fight against the
sixth commandment, and the virtue contrary to them is chastity. The fifth kind
of the works of the flesh Idolatry, comprehends all sins against the
Idolatry.
first table, as false opinions concerning God, heresies, superstitions, and al
worshippings and seruings of God chosen without the warrant of Gods word, as
Masses, Moonkishe toys. etc. The contrary virtue is true godliness, or faith
and true woorshipping of God. The ten terms or Ten other sins or deeds of
the flesh and their co^traries.
sins following. 1. Witchcraft, 2. hatred, 3. variance, 4. spitefulness, 5.
wrath, 6. strife, 7. seditions, 8. sects, 9. envying, 10. and murder, fight
all against the fyfth commaundment. And the contrary virtues are,
Ryghtfulnesse, which hurts not an other man's life, body, or good name:
freendship, desire of concord and meekness. The exposition of every of these
words and their differences may be taken out of the exposition of the ten
commandments or out of my rules of life. The last two kinds, Drunkenness and
gluttony, may in Drunkenness and gluttony.
likewise be referred to the sixth commandment, and the contrary virtue is
Stayednesse or sobriety.

In the end he adds an argument of discommoditie or of everlasting pains.
They that give themselves too these sins shall not receive the heritage of
Gods kingdom, but shall be cast into endless torments.

The fruits of the spirit, or the virtues that please God, The fruits of the
spirit
which are kindled in the godly by the holyghost, are Love.
1. The love of God and our neighbor, which comprehends most of the virtues
of the first and second table. For Love is the fulfilling of the law. Romans
xiij. and j. Cor. xiij. 2. and. 3. Joy and peace, or quietness and gladness
of the heart settled in Joy and peace.
God, and persuading a man assuredly, that God is at one with him, and at hand
with him, helping him, and giving him life and gladness everlasting for
Christ's sake. 4. Long sufferaunce.
Long sufferance or patience, bears with other folks infirmities, and with
wrongs done, and is not discouraged with mysdealings or other ouerthwarte
things, that it should do against any of Gods commandments, and it
perteyneth too the first and the fifth commandment. 5. Gentleness.
Gentleness or courtesy yielding it self willingly to other folks to use, and
willingly doing good to others, perteyneth to the seventh and fifth
commandments. 6. Goodness Goodness or uprightness.
or uprightness, hurting no man and endeuering too do good and to profit all
men, is of as great force as universal ryghtuousnesse, whereof men are called
good. And it comprehends chiefly liberality and courtesy. 7. Faith or Faith.
true knowledge of god and trust settled in Christ the mediator, or
faythfulnesse performing co^sta^cie in word and deed, and in true mutual good
will and all dutiful points of Freendshyp, and deemyng freendly of other
men's wills and meenyngs, perteyneth to the fifth commandment. 8.
Meekness, bryd^yng wrath and desire of revenge Meekness.
perteyneth likewise too the fyfth commandment. 9. discretenesse, soberness,
stayednesse, temperaunce or chastity, Discreetnesse.
perteyneth to the sixth commandment. From thence therefore may a more
plentyfull exposition of the virtues be fetched.

Ageinste such there is no law, that is too say, the Law Who be under the
law, and who be not.
prohibiteth not these works, or there is no Law appaynted for the
ryghtuous, which are guyded by the holy Ghost: That is too say, the Law
does not accuse or condemn the ryghtuous, neither does it hold short or
constreyne those that are obediente. But as for those that fulfill the lusts
of the flesh, or forbear outward offenses against their wills, those does
the Law restreyne, accuse, and condemn.

They truly that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts thereof, that is too say, those that be godly in deed or that believe
in Christ, fulfill not the lusts of the flesh or their sinful inclinations and
affections, but do keep them under and restreine them, and mortify the^ with
the spirit as is said Romans viij. If ye mortify the deeds of the flesh by the
spirit, ye shall live.

Upon the.xv. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. Gal. v.
IF ye live in the spirit, let us walk in the spirit. Let us not be
vaineglorious, provoking one another, and envying one another. Brethren, if any
man be fallen by chance into any fault, ye which are spiritual, help to amend
him in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self lest thou also be
tempted. Bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ. For if
any man seem to himself that he is somewhat, when he in deed is nothing: the
same deceives himself in his imagination. Let every man prove his own work,
and then shall he have rejoicing in his own self, and not in another. For
every man shall bear his own burden. Let him that is taught in the word,
mynister unto him that teaches him in all good things. Be not deceived, God is
not mocked. For whatsoever a man sows that shall he reap. For he that sows
in the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption. But he that sows in the
spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

The disposement.
THis Epistle pertains to the kind of cases that is persuasiue. For it
conteyneth precepts and exhortations too good works, and namely too modesty
and new obedience.

The parts or cheef places are two.
1 Of modesty and lowlynesse which restreineth pride, and bears with the
infirmities and blemishes of the brethren, and performs faythfulnesse and
diligence in executing aryght the duties of a man's calling, which true glory
(that is too say, the witness or allowment of a man's own conscience judging
aryght) does always accompany of it own accord. 2 Of thankfulness and
courtesy too be used toward all the godly, and specially toward
schoolemasters, and ministers of the Gospel.
IN the beginning of the Epistle is set a general exhortation unto new
obedience, If we live in the spirit, let us walk in the spirit, that is too
say, seeing we be delivered from everlasting death by the son of God and the
holy ghost, and that new life is kindled in our hearts, let us also reverently
obey the holy ghost dwelling in our hearts, and directing our intentes and the
doings of our life according to the rule of Gods law.

Let us not be desirous of vaynglorie provoking one an other, and envying one
an other.

Of lowlynesse or modesty.
Modesty or lowlynesse, and the desire of true praise Modesty or myldnesse,
and how glory is to be coueted and obtained.
fight not one against an other, but are neybour virtues, like as are
liberality and sparyngnesse, Gravity and courtesy or gentleness, justice
and mercy or pitifulness. For the desire of true glory and of a good name, is
a virtue commanded by God, which liking well of a man's own work, (that is too
say, faithfully executing the duties of a man's vocation, and endeuering to
do well too the church and the common weal in their place) obteyneth the
allowment of God and his own conscience deemyng aright: which is continually
accompanied with the commendation of other good men, judging aright also: as
Ionathas. j. Reg. xviij. Joseph. Genesis xxxix. and Paul, who though they be
mylde and lowly, do not withstanding like well of their own work, and buzyly
and faithfully execute the labors of their vocation. And therefore they obtained
the allowment of God and their own conscience, and the commendation of all
godly men, and of the whole church. This virtue does God command. Philip.
iiij. What soeuerthings are of honest report, if there be any virtuous thing,
if there be any commendable thing, those same have ye in mind which ye have
both learned and seen in me, those things do ye. Also Math. ^. Let your light
so shine before men, that they may see your good works and glorify your father
which is in heaven. Good name therefore Good name is to be sought.
must of necessity be sought, even for this cause, that others may by good
examples be allured to the true acknowledgement of God and the fellowship of
the Church. But good name cannot be sought, unless we also earnestly seek
after virtue or true godliness to Godwarde, and all good works and labors
whereby we may in our vocation deserve well of the church and the common weal.
For the foundation of true glory, is excellent virtue: The foundation of true
glory.
which is always accompanied with the glory or commendation of good men, and
with the envy of evil men according as one says: Glory accompanies virtue
as the shadow does the body, wherefore too seek glory, is too seek virtue.
And contrariwise, by the contempt of good report or glory, virtue must needs
be contemned also. And therefore Paul in this place forbids not simply the
desire of Glory, but the desire of vayneglorie. For many do seek after the
naked commendation, and the empty shadow of glory and prerogative, without
true virtue. Secondly Facers and braggers.
either they challenge and face their betters, or else deface them, to the
intent too seem greater themselves, by fyndyng fault with them: like as Zoilus
defaced Homere, the Tribunes Scipio, and Minutius the master of the horsemen
defaced the dictator Fabius. Thirdly they repyne Fighters or enuiers.
and are sorry that any other excel them, or are counted better than
themselves, and thereuppon endeavor too put them too a foil or to rid them
out of the way, that they themselves only may be a flote: as Saul enuyed
David's glory, and Pompey enuyed Julius Cesars preferment. Precisians.
4. Or they be too streyghtlased and unappeasable toward such as be fallen
or disteyned with some blemishes of doctrine or manners, to the intent they
themselves may be counted the better and the holier: as the Nouatians, who
utterly denied forgiveness too such as fell after baptim. Selfeweners.
5. Or otherwise being puffed up with an ouerweening of their own wisdom,
righteousness and strength, stand highly in their own conceyt, and set great
brags or commendations upon themselves: as the Pharisie Luke xviij. And
Pyrgopolinices in Plautus, and Thraso in Terence. 6. Or Buzybodies.
else not trying their own work, they take in hand unnecessary and vnrightful
doings out of their vocation, upon trust of their own strength, like as
Antonie, Pompey, Antiochus the great, and others have moved needelesse wars:
And in the Church Valentine, Arius, and others have sowed strange opinyons.
These six sorts of vain and false glory doothe Saint Paul forbydde in
this place, and wills men too try their intentes and doings, and diligently
too wey and examine them that they may agree with the squire and rule of Gods
will and commandment: So shall we have true glory in our selves, that is the
record and allowment of God and our own conscience judging aright: and we
shall not hang upon the reprofe of other* men, or upon the liking or disliking
of the unskillful multitude. For as Plutark says in the life of Plutarkes
saying.
Tmoleon, The action must not only be good and just, but the glory which is
sought thereby must be sure and stable, that in doing we may be allowed.

And Cicero in the same meening says: Thou must use Ciceros saying concerning
glory.
thine own judgment. If thou like thy self in allowing of right things, then
shall thou not only ouercom, but thou shall overcome all men and all things.
Therefore determine upon this point, that honesty and nobleness of mind is
alone the beautifullest of all things, and so much more beautiful, if it pass
not for the multitude, nor hunt foropen praise, but delyght only in it self.
Yea and in mine opinion, all things seem the more commednable, that are done
without vaunting, and without calling of the people too witness. Not for that
it is utterly to be eschued, (for all weldooings desire too be showed in the
open light) but for that there is no stage more noble for virtue than a man's
own conscience.

This is the chief place of the first part of this Epistle. And herewithall
let consideracion be had of notable sentences that concern the loving and
soft admonishment of such as err or fall in doctrine or misbehauior of
manners, (according too the process. Math. xviij.) and the gentle instructing
and receiving them ageine: and which concern mildness in bearing with y^
blemishes and infirmities of other folks, for Gods sake and the common
quietness: and finally which concern the brydling of statelynesse and pride,
which fight against the first commandment. Let him which is instructed,
communicate all good things to him that instructs.

Of thankfulness and well doing toward all the godly, and specially toward the
techers. The exposition of this word Catachisme.

THe Greek word Catecheim, signifies proprely too teach or instruct by
word of mouth, so as ye things given out may be required agein of the lerners.
Of echeo to sound* comes Catecheo too harken, or too receive the sound of any
man. Thereof comes Catechesis which is such a manner of instruction, wherein
the Doctrine is delivered too the heerers by word of mouth, and the heerers
on the other side are made too recite and render what they have herd. Now
forasmuch as this trade of teaching which is done by examination, is the best
and most profitable: In old time the sum of the Christen doctrine was wont
too be taught after this manner in the Church too nouices before they were
baptized. And heereuppon remains yet the name of Cathechisme which is used
for a breef sum of the christen doctrine comprehended in a certain order.

Paul in this place wills his scholar or heerer that learneth What the
lerners ought to render to their teachers.
the true Doctrine concerning God, too communicate all good things too his
teacher, that is too wit, too render too him ageine true reverence, food,
cloth, and all duetifulnesse of a thankful mind. And he adds arguments of
honesty and profit, amplyfied with a similitude taken of seed time and
harvest. God commands thankfulness toward scholemasters, and looks upon
our hearts and abilities, and dreadfully punishes the choorles, but
recompenseth the liberality and other good deeds of the godly, with bounteous
rewards. And like as husbandmen, the more seed they sow, the greater increase
of corn they receive at harvest time: Even so the bountifuller stypend the
scholars give too their teachers, so much the greater rewards (both Ghostly
and bodily) shall they be adorned withal agein at Gods hand. Also Paul adds a
general sentence concerning the rewards of liberality and other good
works. He that sows in the flesh, Sowing in the flesh. Reping of
corruption.
that is too say, he that doothe the deeds of the flesh, or he that gives
himself too sinful lusts and wickedness, shall reap corruption, that is
too say, he shall perish, and be cast intoo everlasting Death. But he that
sows in spirit, or obeys Sowing in the spirit.
the holy Ghost, shall be rewarded with everlasting rewards. And therefore
even in this respect, let us endeuer too benefit others with more foreward
minds, and not suffer our selves too be discouraged with some men's
unthankfulness, slanders, and other overthwart matters. Here may be repeted
the whole Doctrine concerning benefiting, out of the seventh of the ten
commandments, and concerning thankfulness out of the exposition of the
fourth commandment.

Upon the.xvj. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. Ephesians. iij.
I Desire that you faint not because of my tribulatio^s that I suffer for your
sakes, which is your praise. For this cause I bow my knees unto the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which is father of all that is called father in heaven
and in earth, that he would grant you, according too the riches of his glory,
that ye may be strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man, that
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in
love, might be able too comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth,
length, depth, and height, and too know the excellent love of the knowledge of
Christ, that ye might be fulfilled with all fullness, which comes of God.
Unto him that is able too do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think, according too the power that woorketh in us, be praise in the
congregation by Christ Jesus, throughout all generations from time too time.

Amen.
The disposement.
THis Epistle is of that sort that is persuasiue. For it is an encouragement
that they should steadfastly retain the Doctrine of the Gospel that they had
received, and not faint for offense of persecution. And it is a prayer that God
will preserve, confirm, and stre^gthen true faith and steadfast love among them.

The chief places of Doctrine therefore are these.
1 Of constancy or continuance. 2 Of true Invocation. 3 Of faith which
embraces Christ, (that he may dwell in our hearts,) and acknowledges the
largeness of Christ's mercy and exceeding great love toward us. 4 Of thanks
giving or praising God, concerning whose almyghtinesse not tied too second
causes, here is put in a notable testimony, meet too be set against Stoicall
madness.
Of the first place.
I Beseech you that you faint not in my tribulations for you, The judgment of
the world concerning such as are afflicted.
which is your glory.

Like as Cicero in his Oration for Flaccus, gives his opinion concerning the
miseries of the Jews, saying: this nation has well showed how dear it was
too the God immortal, in that it is subdued, in that it is let out too ferme,
in that it is reserved too bondage: So also do the wise men in the world judge
of the Church and of every godly member of the same that are oppressed with the
houge heap of miseries. Namely that God regards not, and much less loves
and receives too the fellowship of eternal life and joy, men so miserable,
needy, few in number, drawn asunder with inward debates, and laid open to
the most bitter hatred of the world, and too most cruel torments, such as in
Paul's time he himself and the rest of the Apostles were, and such as our
congregations are in these days, and the wretched souls that are put too
death for the pure Doctrine of the Gospel in France, in Spain, and in the
kingdom of Naples, like as now of late at Montola in the kingdom of Naples,
four score godly men like sheep in a slaughterhouse had their throtes cut
by the hangman at the commandment of the Romish Bishop. In this sorrowful
show of the fewness, miseries, and infirmities of the professers of the
gospel, all men perceive this encouragement and entreatance of Paul's too be
needful, least the weaker sort taking offense at the miseries, imprisonments,
and tortures of themselves and of other godly folk, should reject Christ's
true doctrine. But let them turn away their eyes from the prosperity, power,
What is to be looked upon in adversity.
authority and multitude of the persecutors, and from the fewness and the
miseries of the godly, and let them settle themselves only upon the word and
the truth delivered by God: Like as Noe in time of the flud, Loath in Sodom,
the Machabees in the time of Antiochus, and Paul and the rest of the Apostles
in the time of Nero, held fast the profession of the true doctrine, though they
had never so many wise men and mighty enemies against them.

Constancy or continuance is a virtue which abides firm Constancy.
and stable in the true knowledge of Christ, and in faith, and in profession of
the true doctrine, and cannot be quailed with any prosperities or adversities,
that it should faint from the truth and give over. Now forasmuch as this
stoutnesse of courage and strength that yields not too terrors and torments
far surmounteth the power of man: Paul beseeches God with most earnest
desire, too strengthen the minds of the Ephesians with his holy spirit, and
too stablish and uphold their inward man or their faith in Christ. Like as he
armed the Apostles at that time, and now in our days Luther with stoutnesse
and strength of haultie and invincible heart, so as no threainings and terrors
could make them faint, but that they spread abroad the true doctrine of the
gospel, though the wisdom and power of the whole world fretted and fought
against it never so much.

Now Paul in this Epistle adds two reasons why they Reasons why we should
not take offense at persecution or troubles.
should not take offense at his troubles and afflictions, or be moved too fall
away from the true Doctrine. For first, I suffer these afflictions for you or
for your sake: not for any offense of mine, but because I have (by preaching
the Gospel) called you Gentyles too the fellowship of the Church, and eternal
salvation too be given freely for Christ's sake. And by these my troubles and
bands, I bear record that I do in very deed and in good earnest think,
that the Doctrine of the Gospel is not a fond fable, but true, assured, and
taught by God, in the behalf whereof I endure so great miseries, emprisonment,
yea and death also. And so by mine example I confirm your faith.

Ageine, my afflictions are your glory. That is too say, they are not
slanderous and shameful too me or you, they are not signs of Gods wrath
and casting of me away: But they are things that be good, healthful,
honorable, and too the glory of Gods Church, as in the fifth of the Acts,
the Apostles rejoice that they were counted worthy too be put too rebuke for
the name of Christ. And Romans the fifth, Paul says, we glory in
afflictions, because affliction breeds patience: patience breeds trial:
trial hope: and hope of eternal life makes not a man ashamed, or
disappointeth not him that hops. And the lyghtnesse of afflictions for the
turning of a hand, procures an inestimable weight of glory for ever and ever.
j. Cor. iiij.

The second place.
I Bow my knees, much more weak and feeble is man's Prayer the refuge in
trouble.
nature, than that it can of it own power continue steadfastly in the true
acknowledgement of God and in Faith, and despise and overcome the terroures,
hatred, imprisonments, and other perils that accompany the profession of the
Gospel. Therefore let every one of us daily make our hearty and earnest Prayer
unto God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he will stablish and
strengthen our hearts with his holy spirit, that we may hold fast the true
acknowment of Christ and true faith, even too our last gasp, according as he
has promised: I have prayed for thee that thy faith may not fail. And, my
sheep here my voice, and I give them eternal life, and no man shall pull them
out of my hands. Also, God is faithful who suffers us not to be tempted above
our power, but with the temptation makes a way out, y^ we may be able too
endure it. And here withal let the whole doctrine concerning Too whom and how
we ought to pray.
the true calling upon God be repeted in this place, which must not roue
douting too what God a man speaks, (as Hecuba prays in Euripides, O Jupiter
who so ever thou art, right hard too be known:) nor be directed too surmysed
Gods, or dead men: but must speak unto the one true God the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has disclosed himself in his Church by his assured
word, by record of miracles, and by sending his son our Lord Jesus Christ,
which was crucified and raised ageine for us, that he might set us at one with
the eternal father, and make our requests and prayers welcome and acceptable
too him. Of this true God What we ought to pray for
the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of us all, (of whom as of their
father and creator all Angels and men, and all things visible and invisible in
heaven and in earth have their being and preseruacion:) let us request not
only the ordinary and flyghtfull commodities of this present life: but in
especially the souereine and most needful gifts, that according too his rich
glory, and exceeding great goodness, he will give us his holy spirit, too
strengthen us with faith and steadfastness in the true acknowledgement of Jesus
Christ as touching the inward man, which being borne a new by the word of the
Gospel, and the woorking of the holy Ghost, may no more live after the flesh,
but after the sprite, that Christ may dwell and be effectual in us, in such
wise that through the fervent and incomprehensible kyndnesse or love of God
toward us, (which he has showed by sending his son. j. John. iiij. Romans
v.) we being grounded in steadie faith, and fastened with deep roots, may
be able to comprehend what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of
gods exceeding great goodness and mercy toward us, which he has showed by
sending his son, whereof is spoken in Psalm. Cij. As far as the East is from
the West, so far has he set our iniquities from us. As high as the heaven is
above the earth, so hyghly is the Lords mercy stablished upon them that fear
him. That we may after some sort know the great and wonderful love of
Christ toward us, which is far more excellent and greater than that man
can attain too it and understand it. And that we may be filled with all
fullness of God. That is too say, that we may be filled too the full with
heavenly light, wisdom, ryghtuousnesse and life, by God, who shall be all in
all, and that God himself dwelling in us everlastingly, may evermore shine in
us, and lyghten and fulfill our hearts with the flames of all virtues.

The fourth place.
IN thanks giving wherewith he closes up this Epistle, Against Stoical
destiny.
there is a notable text too be considered for men too set against Stoicall
destiny. For the Stoikes surmyse, that God is bound too second causes, or too
the order of nature, so as he cannot do otherwise tha^ as the second causes
do suffer. This imagination which is slanderous to God and hinders the true
calling upon God in dangers that are unavoidable by man's wit, is clearly
confuted by this sentence of Paul's, God is able above all things and
abundantly too help, beyond all that we can ask or conceive. Like as he
helped Moses standing at the red sea, Ezechias beseeged of Sennacherib, and
the three Israelites in the burning Oven at Babylon, what time they were
destitute of all man's aid and counsel, and of all second causes,) altering
the usual and accustomed order of nature. And this is the peculiar and cheese
wisdom of Gods Church, too settle our selves in God and his word by faith,
and with quiet minds steadfastly too wait for the promised deliverance, even
when we were utterly destitute of all second causes.

Upon the.xvij. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. Ephe. iiij.
I Which am a prisoner of the Lords, exhort you, that ye walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meekness, with
humbleness of mind, forbearing one another through love, and be diligent too
keep the unity of the spirit, through the bond of peace, being one body and
one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling. Let there be
but one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, which is
above all, and through all, and in you all.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is of that sort of cases that persuade. And the state of it is
this. Be ye one minded. It pertains to the fifth commandment of the ten.
Most weighty surely and necessary in all trades of life, is the doctrine that
concerns the cunning too maintain concord with ones companyons. Which thing
is set out more lernedly in this Epistle than any where else. I will therefore
tell

1 What virtues are chiefly needful too the maintenance of concord. 2 Of the
causes that ought too move and kindle every man too the endeuer of mainteining
concord.
First, Of the virtues that are needful to the mayntenance of concord.
Paul exhorts the Ephesians and all godly folk, too walk The ends of al
vocations or callings.
woorthye the vocation too which they are called, that is to say, too rule all
the intentes, endeuers, and doings of their life in such wise, as they may
agree with their calling and the word of GOD, whereby they are called too the
setting forth of Gods glory, and too mutual love and concord. For of all
men's deuyses and doings, these must be the two cheef ends. First, that
Gods glory and the true doctrine concerning God, may be spread far abroad:
and secondly, that the fellowship and concord of the Church may be cherished,
j. Corint. x. Do all things too the glory of God, and be not a stumbling
block too the Church.

But the foundation or head and welspring of all christen The welspring of
concord.
concord, is the agreement in doctrine concerning GOD, like as the son of God
prays John. xvij. Father, I pray that they may be one in us. And here Paul
counsels them to endeuer too keep the unity of the spirit, that is too
say, to keep a consent in the one true doctrine which the holy ghost has
delivered too the church. And he reherseth in order three virtues whereof we
have need to the mayntenance of concord with our fellows. The understanding
of which will be the cleerer, if we add notable examples.

The first is Lowlynesse which represseth pride that picketh Lowlynesse.
quarelles without a cause, whereof there are flames in every man by nature.
For each one coueteth by nature too seem better than others, and too be
reverenced as Gods among men, and too keep down and darken others, that are
thought too shadow their excellency. Out of this fountain spring most or
rather all debates in all kinds of life. Therefore such as be of our company
have need of such a lowlynesse of mind, that they may abase them selves
beneath others. Like as Abraham Genesis xiij. although he excelled Loath his
brothers son both in age, wisdom, virtue, and authority, yet gives he
place too him, adding this most sage saying, I pray thee let there be no
quarrel between thee and me: for we are brothers. Behold, the whole land is
before thee, If thou choose the right hand, I will take the left: or if thou
go to ye left hand, I will goo too the right. So Jacob humbled himself too his
brother Esau Genesis xxxiij. So Christ the welspring of unity and mutual love,
abased himself beneath all men. Phil. ij. Through humility or lowlynesse, let
each man think an other better than himself. And let the same mind be in you,
that was in Christ Jesus, etc. Oftentimes also there rise debats and quarrels
upon casting forth of reprochefull terms, of witlessenesse, foolishness,
beggerlinesse, and rascalnesse. But like as the obiecting of such words
springs of pride, so does the clearing of a man's self of them also.
Therefore they must be utterly unregarded, set light* by, and quietly put up
for the common peace sake.

The second is Meekness, which represseth yrefulnesse Meekness.
and desirousenesse of revenge, even when we are able too defend our selves
and too maynteyne suit: As for example, If thy companion have upon spyght
sought too diffame thee or too heave thee out of thy place, and gone about too
hurt thee, thou must pass it over, like as Moses for putting up the wrong
that Aaron and Marie did him, Numer. xij. is reported too have bin the meekest
man that ever was. And Christ says of himself: Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly of heart. David is not inflamed with wrathfulnesse against Saul,
least he should stir up greater troubles. Joseph is not desirous too be
avenged of his brothers. But Arius burns as whot as fire with anger and
desire of revenge against Alexander, who was preferred before him in suit for
the Bishoprike, so as he troubled the whole Church with his noisome doctrine
concerning the son of God.

The third is Longsufferance or Patience, whereby we Patience.
bear one with another through Charity. For there stick many blemishes in
all men: As for Example: Some man is more wayward and testye, some is more
desirous of vayn glory, some is more curiouse, some has less stay of
himself, an other is more given too ouerearnestnesse, and an other is more
yresome and hasty. These common fraylties of men must we hyde and bear with,
if we will have true concord too grow strong and continue. Paul therefore
like a most wise Governor, has put toogither the chief sinews and limbs of
Concord, and the virtues that are needful too the knitting of men's
fellowshippes in the band of peace. There might be made a larger discourse of
every of these virtues. And the laying of their contraries too them, and the
Examples of things that maynteyne society, will make the matter both more
pleasant, and more large.

The second place.
THe causes or reasons whereby the heerers are too be in Reasons moving to
concord
flamed too the desire of concord. Now, all men are too be inflamed too the
maintenance of concord with their fellow co^panyons and with other men: First,
by the most straight Gods commandment.
commandments of God, which enjoin mutual love. John. xiij. and.xv. My
commandment I give unto you, that you love one another. Philip ij. Be of
like affection one too an other, having one love, being of one mind and of one
opinion. j. Corinthians. j. Let there be no divisions among you. Secondly, by
the most large rewards which GOD Rewards that be promised.
has promised too such as maynteyne concord. Matthew. v. Blissed be the peace
makers, for they shall be called the children of GOD. Thirdly, by the great
commodities of The commodities and discommodities.
concord and the unmeasurable huge heap of miseries which discord brings,
both in the church, in the common weal, in householdes, in universities, and
in all the whole life. And fourthly before al things let the six reasons be
considered which Paul uses in this Epistle.

First, one body and one spirit. Like as in man's body Voitie of body and
spirit.
there be diverse members differing in dignity and offices, and yet agreeing
among them selves and too the common use of the whole body, which doutlesse
are governed and moved all by one spirit or soul: So in the Church there be
diverse members differing in gifts, and yet but one holy Ghost the author of
this doctrine set forth by the Prophets and Apostles. Therefore let there be
concord in your doctrine and wills. This comparison is handled at length in. j.
Cor. xij. 2 Likewise also as you be called in one hope. All are called One
hope.
too one hope of everlasting life. Therefore let there be unity of spirit and
doctrine and consent of wills. 3 There is one Lord. There is one Lord Christ,
whom One Lord.
only and alonly the eternal Father has commanded us too here. Therefore
let us all embrace this one doctrine taught by Christ, and let us be one
minded, like as the servants of one Master ought too agree in wills and
purposes. 4 One Faith. There is but one faith of all the godly in One Faith.
all times. Therefore let there be unity and consent in the doctrine of the
Gospel concerning Christ, whom faith embraces. Here may the whole doctrine
of faith be set out, and specially this warning, that the faith and manner of
justification and salvation of all the Saints from the beginning of the world
is evermore al one. Act. xv. We believe that we are saved by the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, like as our Fathers also were saved. 5 One Baptim. The
strength and effectualnesse of the One Baptim.
Sacraments in the Church of all ages, is always one, and we have all bound
our selves by one Baptim too yield faith and obedience too the one Christ.
Therefore let us all be but as one among our selves, let us teach all one
thing, and let us all profess one thing. 6 One God and Father of all.
Therefore let us all be as One God.
children of one father, of one mind, and loving one an other like brothers.
Who is above al. God, who is above all things, and whose being does
infinitely differ from the creatures, is present every where, loves, defends
and governs all godly folk and all such as are desirous of concord, and
dwells in them as in a temple or house that he likes well off.

Upon the.xviij. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. j. Cor. j.
I Thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God, which is given
you by Jesus Christ, that in all things ye are made rich by him, in all
vtteraunce, and in all knowledge: by the which things the testimony of Jesus
Christ was confirmed in you: so that ye are behynd in no gift, waiting for the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ which shall also strength you too the end,
that you may be blameless in the day of the coming of our Lord JESUS Christ.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is of those cases that are demonstratiue.

The state or proposition of it is. I am glad that it has bin your good luck
too have the full and rich knowledge of the Gospel, whereby you are made
parteners of salvation and everlasting life with Christ. It may be referred
too the first and second of the ten commandments.

The chief places are four.
1 Of man's souerein good, which is the true knowledge of GOD and of his son
our Lord Jesus Christ, according too the Gospel. 2 Of Perseverance. 3 Of the
last judgment. 4 Of freendlynesse which has a will too do other me^ good,
and rejoices always in their good successes.
First. Of the souerein good.
SOuerein good, Blissednesse, Bliss, or Blissfulness (which souerein good.
is the enjoying of the souerein good, and the end too which man tends) are
almost of one signification. Howbeeit, there is great disagreement not only
among the common and unskillful sort, but also even among the wise, What is the
souerein good of man, which man ought chiefly too seek after, and too the
atteynement whereof he ought too employe all his intentes, deuyses and doings,
and wherein he ought too settle.

The common sort, the Country folk, the Noble men, Citizens The souerein bliss
of worldlings.
and Merchant men, deem monye to be the souerein good, and though they now
and then speak somewhat discretly: yet most of them think in their hearts, as
the Cyclops did in Euripides. Riches are unto the wise men a god, O man, as for
other things, they are but fables and pleasant tales.

The Ambitiouse do chiefly covet honor and promotion. The Epicures (of whom
there is the greatest number among men,) employe all their endeuer too enjoy
the pleasures of the body.

The sounder sort of Philosophers, say that man's bliss Philosophical
blissednesse.
consists in virtue. But yet neither Aristotle in his Ethikes, nor Cicero in
his Offices, where they purposely make discourse of virtue, do make any
mention of God or of godliness too Godward, of the fear of God, of faith, of
the love of God, of prayer, or of thanksgiving.

Plato teaches somewhat more divinely, that all me^ ought Platos doctrine of
blissednesse.
too travel chiefly in this behalf, that they may speak things acceptable to
God, and do things acceptable too God. And he defines virtue too be a
framing of a man's self like unto God, as much as is possible. This is the
true end of man according too the Law, which teaches that man's souereine
good, is full agreeableness with Gods will, that is too wit, the true knowledge
and glorifying of God, and hartye love and perfect obedience, as is said in
this days Gospel, that the souerein commandment of the Law is, Thou shall
love thy Lord God with all thy heart. etc.

Now like as if a man should show a needye body a wedge The law points out
true bliss, but furthereth not the certainment of it.
of gold upon the top of a high Toure, and yet not lend him a ladder
wherwithal he might climb up to the top and fetch down the wedge. So does
Gods law only point men to the souerein good without showing us how we may
come by it, since that no man fulfilleth the Law.

But the Gospel sets before us both the end and the means whereby we may
attayn too it, namely Jesus Christ the mediator, who is the way, the truth,
and life, and the door at which we enter, and ye ladder by which we climb into
heaven.

Therefore the souerein good, is the true knowledge of god The true souerein
good.
and of his son our Lord Jesus Christ, according to the gospel. The knowledge
of God co^prehendeth (by the figure Synecdoche) all the effects following: that
is too wit, faith, love, prayer, praysegiuing, fruition of light, wisdom,
life, and joy everlasting. For all these things does. Christ comprehend,
John. xvij. This is eternal life, that they may acknowledge thee the true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

For this souerein good, does Paul rejoice on the behalf of the Corinthians
in this Epistle, and he affirms them too be enryched not with the
transitory riches of this life, but with the true and everlasting riches, that
is, with true and plentuous knowledge of the doctrine of the gospel, and with
steadfast faith, and with all good things necessary too salvation. The cheifest
richesse.
For in deed as it is said. j. Tim. vj. The cheifest riches that can be, is
Godliness joined with contentation. And in this place: He is true, by whom
you are called too the fellowship of Jesus Christ, that is too wit, that ye
might be the children of God by adoption, and brethren and coheires with
Christ, of all good things in heaven. Certainly therefore ye shall be
glorified with Christ and shall be like unto him.

The second, Of Perseverance.
Perseverance, is a steadfast and continual abiding in the Perseverance.
true acknowledgement of Christ and in faith even unto the last gasp. Now
whereas Christ says: He that holds out too the end shall be saved: and
we in so great weakness of nature, in so great perilles and through the
flyghtes of the Devil, may easly slide and fall away: The godly mynds that are
distressed, demand how they may continue in true knowledge of God and in faith
unto the end. Saul fell, whereas erst he had bin well liked of God, and had
bin the dwelling place of the holy Ghost. Judas the Apostle fell: Our first
parents who were created too the Image of God, fell: and finally, there be
examples innumerable in all our life. Therefore, that we may stand steadfast in
the faith, let us have these most sweet comfortes always before our eyes. j.
Cor. j. Christ shall strengthen you unto the end, that ye may be blameless
in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Luc. xxij. I have prayed for thee Peter,
that thy faith may not fail. But Christ prays, not only for Peter and the
Apostles, but for all that believe their preaching. j. Corint. x. God is
faithful who suffers us not too be tempted above our strength, but with the
temptation makes a way out, that we may be able too endure it. John. xvj. I
will pray my Father and he shall send you an other comforter, which shall fary
with you for ever. Let the minds of the godly (being strengthened with these
most sweet promises) fight against wavering and wanhope, and perform
diligence in hearty prayer, and be circumspect and watchful in eschuing
occasions of falling, and the devils snares and dangers. Let Faith be their
buckler, prayer their percing dart, and Gods word their swoorde, and let
Christ alone with the rest. He will strenghthen us too the end, that though
sin be still remaining in us, yet we may be blameless in the day of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who was made sin and curse for us, that we might be set
free from condemnation of the law, and be made the ryghtuousnesse of God in
him. Romans viij. There is no damnation too those that walk in Jesus Christ.

The third.
COncerning the last judgment, or the day of our Lord The last judgment.
Jesus Christ, there is a notable testimony in this Epistle, perteyning to
this article, From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Now
the doctrine concerning the last judgment may be comprised in these six
places. 1. Whither there shall come any last judgment. 2. who shall be the
judge, and how and when he shall come. 3. What shall be the manner and order
of the judgment. 4. Of the rewards of the ryghtuous. 5. Of the endless pains
of the wicked. 6. Of the time and of the rest of the circumstances of the
judgment.

The fourth. Of Freendlynesse.
LIke as Paul rejoiced unfeignedly, and from his heart, that the Corinthians were
brought to the true knowledge of God, and the fellowship of the everlasting and
blissed church. So must every man rejoice in the prosperity of other men
(specially of good men) and be sorry for their mischaunces, and wish them well
from the bottom of their heart. This virtue is called Freendlynesse. And the
vices that encounter it, are diuelishnesse, spyghtefulnesse, and
maliciousness, of which we have spoken already in the Exposition of the
virtues of the fifth commaundment.

Upon the.xix. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. Ephesians. iiij.
BE ye renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on that new man which after
God is shapen in rightuousenesse and true holiness. Wherefore put away lying,
and speak every man truth to his neighbor forasmuch as we are members one of
another. Be angrye and sin not. Let not the Sun go down upon your anger,
neither give place too the backbyter. Let him that stole, steal no more. But
let him rather labor with his hands the thing that is good that he may have to
give unto him that needs.

The disposement.
IT is of those sort of cases that are persuasiue or exhortatiue. For it is
wholly occupied in exhortation unto good woorks, concerning which the
customable doctrine included in six places may be recited. First, whither new
obedience be needful. Secondly, which are the works that be good in deed,
that is to wit, not Munkish ceremonies, or such like ceremonies devised by men:
but the works that be commanded of God, as truth, meekness, liberality, and
diligence. Thirdly, what are the efficient causes of good works or how they
may be performed by us, since we are so weak and the Devil so strong.
Fourthly, how good works please God, since they be imperfect and defiled with
many sins: that is to wit, not for our own worthynesse, but for Christ's
sake through faith. Fifthly, for what end good works are to be done, yt is too
wit, not too deserve forgiveness of sins by them, (which is given freely
only for Christ's merit:) but that we may yield too God our due obedience,
that we may glorify him, that we may eschew pains everlasting and present,
and that we may obtain the rewards that are promised. Sixthly, forasmuchas the
good woorks even of all the saints are disteined with many sins: we must
speak of the difference of the sins that remain in the saints, and of
those that remain not in the saints.

Howbeit because this Epistle conteyneth otherwise a most plentiful doctrine,
and that the phrase thereof has some hardenesse in it: we will interpret the
very text in order, dividing it into six common places, whereof two or three
may be stood upon somewhat longer, sermonlyke.

The first.
LAy away from you that old man according to your former conversation, which
is corrupt thorough the deceiuable lusts, and be ye renewed in the spirit of
your mind, and put on that new man which after God is shapen in holiness and
righteousness. The first part is a general exhortacion to new obedience
agreeable to Gods will, or comformable too Gods righteousness. This
exhortacion is enlarged with an Antithesis or setting together of contraries:
Lay away sin, and put on righteousness. Or cease too do evil, and do good
works.

The old man, by this name he meeneth all the defaults The old man.
in nature, all evil inclinations, affections, and doings, that agree not
with the will or law of GOD: that is too wit, in the mind, ignorance of God,
darkness and doubtefulnesse concerning GOD, concerning the providence, will,
and word of God, and concerning the promises and threatenings of God. In the
will, voydnesse of the fear and love toward God, and of al virtues which
ought to be perfect and earnest: and also evil inclinations standing in ones
own conceyt, pride, and fleshly carelesnes. And in the heart, a headynesse of al
affections, flames of unlawful love, of hatred, of desire of revenge, and of
covetousness. All this huge heap of sin that sticks in the nature of man
vnrenued, is betokened by the term old man, whom in other places he calls
sometimes the natural man, sometime the outward man, and sometimes flesh.

The lusts of error or deceyuable lusts, he names all evil Decieueable
lusts.
inclinations of corrupted nature, whereby we are carried headlong intoo error
and sin, as it is said: Concupiscence is the fountayn of all euyls, both of
the fault and of the punishment. For thorough concupiscence both the cleanness
and soundenesse of the soul is marred, and the body is made subject unto death.

To be renewed, and to put on the new man are in manner all one. The mind is
renewed when the darkness of sin is To put on the new man.
chaced out of the mind by the gospel and the holy ghost, and there is kindled
true knowledge of God, true faith, love, righteousness and obedience of al
virtues. For under the name of mind he comprehe^deth all the powers of the soul
which the Philosophers are wont to distinguish.

The new man he calls him that is renewed by the voice of the Gospel and by
the holy ghost, who kindles in men's The new man.
minds the light of the true knowledge of God, and al virtues agreeable to Gods
righteousness, such as were in the first man that was created after Gods
image, before his fall.

The second.
HE puts in a brief and most learned definition of Gods image after which
man was created, namely y^ it is true ryghtuousnesse and holiness: and Coloss.
iij. he writes that it is the true knowledge of God the creator. Upon these
two textes we build this true and learned definition of Gods image.

Gods image in the first man, was not only a being of What Gods image is.
mind and will, nor only a relation or acceptance of mankind before God:
but also a quality of the second special kind, that is too say a natural
ryghtnesse and excellent perfectness of all the powers of man, as of the
mind, the will, and the heart, agreeing with the first pattern or divine mind:
that is too wit, in the mind, light (that is a manifest knowledge of God the
Creator without any darkness or wavering:) In the will, hearty love of God and
all virtues stirred up and blazyng without any sinful inclinations, and without
concupiscence and fleshly carelessness: and too be short, true ryghtuousnesse
and holiness, that is too say, universal obedience agreeing with the will of
God, and directed truly too this end, that the pattern might be known abroad
and glorified. And in the heart, stayednesse and obedience of all the affections
and desires unto the mind with continual and earnest joy and gladness settled
in God.

The third.
WHerefore put away lying and speak every man truth to his neighbor, because
we are members one of another. The doctrine that concerns the following of
truth and the shu^ning of lies is very large, whereof an abridgement is set
forth in the exposition of the eighth commandment. He names here, a lie, not
only the ordinary speches What lying is.
in common conversation, which agree not with the things themselves: but
chiefly, false opinions concerning God, false doctrines and corruptions of the
true doctrine Also slanders in courts of plea, untruth, backbytings,
railings, missetalke, fondness, bragging, dissimulatio^s etc. Truth.
Al these vices does he will men to lay away, and contrariwise too embrace
truth, which in the doctrine concerning God, in trades necessary for man's
life, in judgments, and in all the whole state of life among men, diligently
hunteth after, embraces, loves, and holds fast true meenings, that is to
say, meenings that agree with the things themselves, such as they be in deed,
hating untruth and sophistry, and in all trades and conuersations of life,
continually saying and doing such things as are true, plainly uttered and
wholesome: and in manners so behauing himself as his speech and his gesturs may
be all one with his mind.

The fourth.
BE angry and sin not. It is meant of meekness which is a virtue that
represseth irefulnesse and desire of revenge, and which norisheth not hatred.
The eight causes which should move us to refrain irefulnesse, are reckned up
in the exposition of the fifth commandment.

The fifth.
Give no place to the backbyter. It is meant of freendlynesse Friendlynesse.
which is a part of truth, and conceiueth no mistrust of other folks wills
and meenings without a reasonable lykelyhod, ne nourishes ill will, rancoure,
suspicion, or hatred, nor gives credit to false reports which might have
withdrawn the mind, but makes trial of men's wills and meenings by reasonable
lykelyhode. Against this virtue there fyghteth maliciousness, suspicion,
distrust, and light credit. Of which is spoken in the fyfth and eight
commaundments.

The sixth.
HE that has stolen, let him steal no more, but rather let Paynfulnesse and
labor.
him labor with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to
them that need. It is meant of paynefulnesse and labor, which is therefore to
be endured, that we may obey god who enioyneth us labors agreeable to our
calling: and that we may eschew many sins and wickednesses whereof Idleness
is the norishement, and to get honestly things needful to the sustentation of
our selves and of ours, and too be bestowed in alms deeds upon the poor.
Against this virtue fight slothfulness, Idleness, theeuerie, sluttishnesse.
etc. Of which we have spoken in the.iiij. and.vij. commaundmentes.

In the end let two or three of the places that be expounded most at large,
be repeted and committed too the heerers to learn by heart.

Upon the.xx. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. j. Cor. x.
TAke heed therefore how ye walk circumspectly: not as unwise, but as wise
men, redeming the time, because the days are evil. Wherefore, be ye not
unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is, and be not drunken with
wine, wherein is excess. But be filled with the spirit, speaking unto your
selves in Psalms and Himnes, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody
to the Lord in your hearts, giving thanks always for althings unto God the
father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ: submitting your selves one to an
other in the fear of God.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is hortator^e, containing precepts of good works.

The chief places are three.
1 A general exhortation too good woorks, that rule all the deuyses and
doings of our life with singular heed and circumspectnesse, so as they may
agree with Gods will. 2 A precept of sobriety and of eschuing drunkenness. 3
Of songs and music too be used in Gods service. 4 Of thanks giving to be
yielded to God. 5 Of obedience, lowlynesse, and the fear of God.
The first place.
Walk warely, to walk signifies the same thing that To walk.
to lead a man's life or to rule the devises and doings of the life. Blissed
are they that walk in the law of the Lord: that is, which live according to
the doctrine delivered of GOD, or which order their devises and doings
according to Gods word all their life long. And Paul in this place
counsels us too walk according too the will of our Lord God warely and
heedfully, or with perfect warenesse and circumspectnesse. Therefore in this
place may be recited the doctrine that concerns new obedience, and a man
may entreat of the causes that ought to stir us up to the desire of weldoing,
which are Gods commandment, and necessity of duty and of holding fast the
faith. And moreover to the intent we may eschew pains present and eternal,
and obteyn the promised rewards. And in especially let men consider the
pithynesse of the commandment walk warely, be not careless, set not light
by the sleyghts of the devil, cocker not your own lusts, but order your
behavior and life with singular warynesse, heed, watchefulnesse, and
circumspectnesse, least either by the devils policies, or by your own
fraylenesse ye be thrown headlong again again intoo sin and death. Have
a special care to eschew occasions of falling, according to this saying: To
eschew occasions of synning is to eschew sin. Shun the leude companies of
ungodly and filthy persons. For it is most true that Theognis says: Thou
may learn good of the good, but if thou company with the wicked, thou
marrest thy self.

Fall to honest labors which of themselves are bridles of Honest labor.
concupiscence and furtherances of virtue. For Idleness yeldeth sinfulness.
And with your labors mingle calling upon God, and request him to assist you
and govern you. All these things does Paul comprehend in this one word,
walk warely. So Joseph walked warely when To walk warely.
he yielded not to the enticementes of the adultresse, and contrariwise David
being careless slydeth into horrible sins, which afterward were punished
with most horrible punishments. This commandment may be very abundantly
enlarged by a distribution, and by a setting together of the contraries, when
we entreat of every of the virtues of the ten Commandments in order, and
of their causes, and of the vices that encounter them. For to walk warely, is
the same thing ye to know God aright, to trust in God, to love God, to fear
God, to use patience in tribulacions, to call upon God heartily, to give him
thanks, to profess him, to spread abroad the true doctrine, to obey
Magistrates and civil ordinances, to be just, discrete and meeld, to apply
the duties of a man's vocation buzily, to be meek, treatable, merciful,
peaceable, chaste, sober, soothfast, and to eschew all sins that fight
ageinste these virtues. These being unfolded into their parts, and enlightened
with Antithesies and examples, will bring forth plenteousnesse of matter both
manifest and ample.

Not as unwise folk, men without the true knowledge of God, and without the
fear of God and faith.

Redeeming the time, neglecte not only occasion of walking Redeeming of the
time.
warely, or of living godlyly and honestly, or of deserving well at other men's
hands: or else purchase opportunity of atteyning the true knowledge of God, and
everlasting life, even with the loss of all that ye have.

Because the days are evil, by reason of the malice and Evil days.
misery of men. It is a figure called Synecdoche, wherein ye thing that
conteyneth, is put for the thing that is contained, For the days are good, but
men that live in those days are evil and wretched. Therefore let pass no
occasion of living godlily, and of doing things acceptable too God, and to the
welfare of men, neither suffer your selves to be plucked away from God by the
most corrupt maliciousness of this age. There happen many lettes, many
allurementes, and leude lusts, which hale men away from true godlinesie. But
redeem ye the time, fight against these impedimentes, and walk warely.

Not like fools, that is to say, as folk ignorant of God, and void of faith
and true godliness.

But as those that understand what is the will of the Lord, that is to wit,
which is reveled in Gods word, to whom as to a rule we must refer all the
devises and doings of our life. This is the will of the Father, that every one
that believes in the son should have life everlasting. This is Gods will,
even your holiness, that ye should not live like the Gentiles that know not
God.

The second place.
BE not drunken with wine, wherein is ryottousnesse. The Ageinste all riot and
excess.
The doctrine that concerns sobriety, and the eight causes for which
drunkenness is to be eschewed, and soberness followed, may be set out of
the exposition of the virtues of the sixth commandment.

The Greek word Asotia, ryottousnesse, comprehends excess of fare,
wastfulnesse, wantonness, unclean talk, chamberings, scoldings, braulings,
quarrelinges, manquellings, and to be short, a Cyclopish life ordinary to
dronken folk, such as was the excess or cyclopish life of Alexander the
great, described by Plutarche. page xlj. And Cicero in his book De finibus
says: I like not of these belly gods, tha^ shall spew into my dish, and
must be carried away from the table, and which fall to cramming them selves
fresh and fasting again the next morrow.

The third place.
Singing Psalms, Himnes, and spiritual songs unto the Lord.

Of songs and Musick^.
GOd has put intoo man the knowledge of numbers Music.
and tunes, and in all ages would have his doctrine and praises too be
comprehended in verses, and that music should be used in his holy service,
chiefly for this cause, that the true doctrine concerning God, and all the
exhortacions, comforts, praises, and thankesgeuing, being included in numbers
and verses or songs, might the easlyer be imprinted in men's minds, and sink
deeplyer into their hearts, and kindle more fervent motions of Godliness. For all folk do more desirously take, and with greater pleasure learn, and more
steadfastly keep in mind, verses than prose. Such an aliance have our souls
with harmony and number, even by nature. And since that for this commodity
chiefly, singing is wont to be used, that the holy words may sink the deeper
into the minds of the heerers, and kindle more earnest motions in their
hearts: It were good to reteyne Music in Churches, not over cunning and
curious, but Music in Churches.
simple and grave, so as the words that are knit in number might be hard and
understood of the common people. We see that both in the Church and also among
the Heathen (who conterfeyted the example of the first Fathers) the doctrine
concerning God and other good things, and thankesgiuings and praises of God,
were comprised in verses, to be sung in holy service and else where. The cheef
Poets of such Himnes and songs were Moses, David, Asaph, the sons of Chora,
Heman, Solomon, Esaias, Jeremy. etc.

And in our age God has raised up Luther, who (as our Luther the Germane
Orpheus.
Orpheus of Germany) has comprised in Dutch verse the sum of Christian
doctrine, and the holy stories, and the cheef of David's Psalms: and has added
to the^ so trim and fit notes and so apt to stir up men's affections, that not
only they be sung with exceeding pleasure and delight, but also perce
wondrously intoo the minds and hearts of the heerers: and kindle affections of
true godliness, faith, gladness, and earnest joy, in men's breasts, as by the
note of the Song, Christ lag in todes banden. etc. All the godly even though
they give but mean heed, may easly judge. And forasmuch as S. Basil in his
preface to the Psalter has spoken right gravely concerning this
profitablenesse of Music: I will translate the whole place, and write it
hereunto.

Psalms do with a certain weltuned delightfulness Basil concerning Psalms
and spiritual songs.
and pleasure, endue the mind with wholesome doctrine and wisdom. For in
as much as the holy Ghost saw, that mankind could hardly be bent to godliness
and virtue, because it neglects the manner of living well, and is carried
headlong unto pleasure: He mingled the delightfulness of melody with his
precepts of instruction: to the intent that with the sweetness of the delight,
the doctrine of God and profitable things might slip into men's minds,
according to the custom of wise Phisicians, who season the mouth of the cup
with a little honny when they minister any sour medicine to a sick body. For
this cause therefore was this fine writing of the Psalms in meeter devised,
that such as are youthful both in years and virtue, might in their own
opinion sing, and in very deed instruct their minds. For there is not any of
the frantike sort, that when he departs out of the church home to his house,
does easly bear away with sin any Apostolical or Prophetical precepte. But
as for the sayings of the Psalms, they both sing them at home with delight,
and bear them about with the^ to the market, and many being stark mad for
anger, as soon as they bear the tune of Psalms that delight them, return
home well at ease and quiet in themselves, and the feerce and heady motions of
their minds are assuaged with singing. Psalms bring calmnesse to the mind,
and alaying the troublesome waves of men's thoughts, settleth quietness in
their barts, meekeneth the sturdinesse of the mind, restreyneth headynesse,
boweth meant to myldenesse and sobernesie, procures freendship, sets folks
at one that were at variaunce, and reconcileth enemies. For who will take him
any longer for his foe, with whom he has with one voice spoken unto God?
therefore singing of Psalms yields a most souereyne benefit namely mutual
love, in yelding harmony as it were a certain band to knit men's minds
together, and the tune of one queere linketh together the whole Church. Psalms
chase a way feendes, procure the help of Angels, drive away fears of the
night, assuage the labors of the day, defend infantes, are an ornament too
men, give comfort to old folk, deck women with co^linesse, replenish deserts
with inhabiters, accustom men to modesty in their meetings, instruct young
beginners in their first principles, help those that have profited with
further advantage, and strengthen those that be perfect. The Psalms are the
common voice of the Church, they beautify the feastfull days, and they work
that sorowfulnesse which is according unto God: for they are able to wrest
tears even out of a stony heart. To sing Psalms is an Angelike office, a
heavenly ministracion, and a spiritual perfume. O wonderful device of a most
wise schoolmaster, who would have us learn profitable things by singing.
Therefore are his precepts fastened the surer in our minds. For nothing that
is learned by compulsion, continues long in memory. But y^ which enters
with some sweet kind of delectacion, does settle more steadfastly, and root
more deeply. For what is it that a man shall not learn out of ye Psalms?
From thence ye may fetch the assured stoutnesse of heart, from thence shall ye
draw true righteousness, modesty, and gravity: perfect wisdom, the true
manner of repentance, patience, and all kind of good things. Here is perfect
divinity, here is prophe^ying of Christ's coming in the flesh, threatuing of
the last judgment, hope of resurrection, fear of punishments, promises of
glory, and reuelacions of mysteries. All these things are laid up in the
treasury of the Psalmbooke as in a most large storehouse.

The fourth place.
IT entreats of thankesgeuing wherewithal God is too be magnified for all
his heavenly benefits with a true heart and a lively voice in loudsounded
songs and Hymns. Moreover concerning lowliness and the fear of* God, there
may be declaracions fet out of the rules of life, or out of the exposition of
the virtues of the first and second Commanndement.

Upon the.xxj. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. Ephesians. vj.
MY Brethren, be strong through the Lord, and through the power of his might:
Put on all the armor of God that ye may stand against all the assaults of
the Devil: for we wrestle not against blood and flesh, but against rule,
ageynste power, against worldly rulers, even governors of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual craftines in heavenly things. Wherefore, take unto
you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to resist in the evil day,
and stand perfect in all things. Stand therefore, and your loins gyrde with
the truth, having on the breast plate of righteousness, and having shoos on
your feet, that ye may be prepared for the Gospel of peace. Above all, take
to you the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is
the word of God. And pray always with all manner of prayer and supplication in
the spirit, and watch thereunto with all instance and supplication, for all
saints and for me: that vtteraunce may be given unto me, that I may open my
mouth f^eely, to utter the secrets of my Gospel (whereof I am a messanger in
bonds) that therein I may speak freely, as I ought to speak.

The di sposement.
IT is that kind of cases that are persuasiue. For it is an Man's life is a
warfare.
exhortacion to the godly to continue stedfastely in true godliness or in the
acknowledgement of God and in faith, and to fortify and strengthen their
hearts against the assaults of the Devil, of naughty nature, of Heretics,
and of Tyrauntes. And Paul enlarges and garnisheth his purposed exhortacion
with a lightsome similitude taken of warfare and worldly battles, out of Esaias.
lix. In which warfare it behooves first and formest, that the enemies be
known. Secondly that munition be gotten needful for a man's own defense. And
thirdly, artillery and weapon fit to put back and vanquishe the enemy. All
the whole Man's enemies. The Devil.
life of a Christian man is as it were a warfare against our most mischeeuous
enemies. Of whom y^ first is y^ Devil, a liar, and a murderer, who lies
continually in wait to anoy us in our souls, in our bodies, and in our goods,
spredding abroad false opinions concerning God, dropping into our minds
epicurish doutes, contempt of Gods word, carnal carfulness and pride, and
egging us wretched wights unto all kind of sins, with his blast and
allureme^ts which he tru^peth in our ways, to ye intent y^ having haled us
from God, he may draw us into everlasting destruction. Agein he empayreth our
bodies and goods, by fires, battles, robberies, slanders, diseases, and
deaths. The second enemy is The flesh.
our own flesh, y^ is to say, ye wandering and heady braydes of our own nature
corrupted with sin, darkness and doutfulnesse concerning God, fleshly
restynesse, the heates of hatred, lechery, desire of revenge of excellency
and money, and finally the whole huge heap of naughty inclinacions and sinful
affections cleaving in our hearts. Jacob. j. Every one that is tempted, is
tempted of his own concupisce^ce. The third enemy are Heretics, spreding
abroad Heretics.
false opinions, which are the very fiery weapons wherewith they kill the faith
and prayers of many. The fourth The world.
enemy is, the manaces and persecutions of tyraunts and of all ungodly
persons. For through the terrors and displeasures of great men, and the
cruelnesse of persecutions many renounce the profession of true godliness, and
many by reason of the contempt and needynesse of the godly ministers, are moved
to withhold the fat prebends linked with Idolatry. Against these four enemies
does Paul fortify and arm ye godly with armor, munition, and weapon needful
for ye defense of themselves and ye putting back of ye enemy.

The armor or apparel is this.
FIrst, the sword girdle wherewithal it behooves us too The sword girdle of
a Christian.
be girded and closed in, is truth, or the true doctrine of the Gospel, and
the true knowledge of God. They therefore that either be ignorant of the
doctrine, or have a delight in the corruptings of the Gospel, shall make but
an unlucky match. Secondly, the Brestplate wherewith the His brestplate.
breast is defended, is righteousness: that is to wit, the reconciliation of a
man into Gods favor for Christ's sake through faith. Thirdly his shoes are the
very profession His shoes.
of the Gospel, which directs the way or vocation of the godly, and boundeth
them about with listes, within which they must keep their standing.

The armor necessary to repulse the blows of our His Buckler or sheeld. The
fiery da^^^s of the Devil.
enemies, and to defend our selves are, first a Buckler or Sheeld, y^ is to
wit, faith, which quenches all ye fiery darts of the devil. And ye fiery and
most noisome darts of ye devil are these: Epicurish and Academical doutings
whither there be any God, whither God have care of us, whither the gospel be
true, whither God regard us in our troubles, and whither he will give us
eternal life. Also fleshly carelessenesse which neglects the wrath and
judgment of God, heresies, and false pleasurable opinions. etc. Secondly the
helmet which The helmet of a christian.
chiefly fenceth the head, is the assured hope of eternal salvation, wherewith
we being strengthened do bear out all the perils and miseries of this life
with the stouter stomach: with this helmet did Steven cover his head, what
time he went rejoicing in his heart, and through strong hope did ease his harm
and smart: with the like armor did Paul, Polycarpe, Laurence, and all the holy
Martyrs sustein most bitter torments of body, that they might atteine life and
bliss everlasting.

The weapons which he appoynteth us too repulse and too strike the enemy with
all, are two. First a sword, not of His sword.
steel, but spiritual, that is too wit Gods word, wherwithal both the
feendes are chased, (as Christ has taught us by his own example. Math. iiij.)
and the noisome opinions of heretics dispr^^ed and put away, like as the
herisies of the Manichees, and Arians in old time, and in our days the
herisies of the Papists, of the Anabaptists, of Swinkfeeld and of others are
chased by y^ word of God. Let all christen soldiers whet this sword with
earnestness in lerning, teaching, and continual minding it: and let them have
it always ready at hand.

The other kind of armor is continual and fervent prayer, Earnest prayer.
whereby we must seek and look for Gods help, and for luckie success in
our warfare, and for victory by the graundcapteine of our army our Lord Jesus
Christ the son of God. For without Gods assistence, even the heathen me^ saw
it was but vain too draw weapon in battle, or too take pains to fight.
Pindarus: love of contention, love of war, if God be not on thy side: O son
win with thy lance, but win always with God.

But more notable are the testimonies of Gods word which show us the true
calling upon God unknown too the heathen, and warrant the godly soldiers that
they may certainly Testimonles that God heereth our prayers.
believe, their prayers too be received and herd of God, and themselves too
be helped in deed in their calling by the son of God. Psalm. xx. Some trust
in chariots and some in horses, but we will call upon the name of the Lord our
God* Psalm. l. Call upon me in the day of trouble. Psalm. xc. He shall cry unto
me, and I will here him, I will deliver him and show him my saving health*
Ps. cxlvij. He shall not obtein his purpose in the strength of a horse.
Therefore let us use these weapons, when we are like too be anoyed by dangers
of the devil, by our own flesh, and by tyrannous bishops and kings. Let us
not cast down our courages, let us not quake* let us not move sedition, as
Muncer and the Anabaptists of Munster did. But let us strengthen our selves
with the promises of Gods word, and commit our dangers too God, and with
quiet minds look for an end too our welfare at the hand of Gods son the
captein and general of our wars: like as Ezechias and Esaias fought against
Sennacherib, and Moises against Pharao, only by prayer. So Luther with
unappalled courage sustained the assaults of the Romish Bishop, of the Emperor,
and of many Kings, Princes, and Bishops, and by continual prayer and earnest
faith vanquished them and pal them too flight. Take strong faith for a sheelde,
and for thy dart stedy prayer. Let Gods word be thy sword: Christ will alone
do the rest.

Hitherto I have breefly passed over the state of the Epistle and the chief
members of the same, too the intent that the sum of the matter being set out
severally in order, might with y^ more ease be carried away. And I would counsel
those that be well minded, too add too this brief distribution, Luthers most
lyghtsome Sermon, wherein he has enlyghtened this part of this. vj. chapter.
Now will I breefly expound certain of the harder words and phrases.

Be manly in the Lord* A needful virtue for all godly folk Manlynesse.
is manlynesse: I meene not that knightly and warlike valeantnesse that chaseth
enemies with worldly weapons, such as appeared in great Alexander and in Julius
Caesar: but the grown manlynesse as they term it, that is too wit
steadfastness of mind continuing throughout in true godliness and profession
of the heavenly doctrine, and by patience, faith, and prayer fighting against
al dangers and allurements that withdraw the mind from possession of true
godliness: As for example Daniel Examples of manlynesse.
is manly in the Lord when he starteth not from profession of the true doctrine
for fear of death which hung over his head by the Lions. The three yoongmen in
the burning Oven at Babylon were manly or valiant in the Lord, when they
forsook not the acknowledgement of the true God. All the Apostles and Martyrs
were manly in the Lord, because they chose rather too die, than too break
their faith due too Christ* and the profession of the gospel.

Put on the complet armor of God. The complet armor of the Romans is described
by Polybius (in his. vj. book. pa. 181.) too be a sword, a iaueling, a
buckler or a sheeld, a burganet, a pike, a brigand* etc. But this armor boteth
us nothing against the trains and assaults of the devil the enemy of our
souls. But the complet armor wherewith Paul apparelleth christen soldiers in
this place, does defend and guard the godly in such wise as they may be able
too stand safe and without danger against the policies and assaults of the
Devil, yea and also overcome them.

Against the crafty assaults of the Devil, There be chiefly five kinds or
ways and manners of crafty trains, wherwithall the Devil is wont too
assault the faith of the godly and too cast them headlong intoo eternal
destruction, by pulling their minds from God. Of these things we have given
an inkling heertoofore in the latter part of the Epistle upon the third Sunday
after Trinity.

We wrestle not against flesh and blud: that is to say against Flesh and blud*
bodily enemies, that may be seen with eyes, and stricken with swoords, or
driven away with gun shot. But against rule and power, and against the rulers
of the darkness of this world, The powers of darkness.
and against spiritual craftynesse in heavenly things, there be most puissant
and ghostly enemies wandering with the heavenly things or in the air Ephesians. ij.
Whose suttleties and strokes can neither be vewed nor forseene with bodily
eyesight, nor fensed and put back with bodily armor* And as among ma^kynd
there be degrees of kings, Princes, and other governors: So are there also
distinct orders and offices among Angels and devils, which are meant in this
place by the terms of rule and power. He names them worldly rulers of the
darkness of this world, because they bear rule in the minds of the ungodly,
or of those that want the light of the true knowledge of God, and of faith, and
hold their hearts so blinded: yea and the most part of mankind captive, as he
says before in the second chapter: after the Prince that has power in the
air, who is y^ spirit y^ works mightily in ye children of disobedience.

Upon the.xxij. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. Phil. j.
I Thank my God with all remembrance of you always in all my prayers for you,
and pray with gladness: Because ye are come intoo the fellowship of the
gospel, from the first day until now. And am surely certifyed of this, that
he which has begone a good work in you, shall perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ, as it becomes me, that I should so judge of you all* because
I have you in my heart: forasmuch as ye are all companions of grace with me,
even in my bonds, and in the defending and establishing of the gospel: for God
is my record how greatly I long after you all, from the very heart root in
Jesus Christ. And this I pray, that your love may increase yet more and more in
knowledge, and in understanding, that ye may accept the things that are most
excellent, that ye may be pure, and such as offend no man, until the day of
Christ, being filled with the fruit of rightcousnesse, which comes by Jesus
Christ, unto the glory and praise of God.

The state and chief places of this Epistle are all one with the Epistle upon
the xviij. Sunday after Trinity.
FIrst, man's souereine good, whereof we have most cause Our souereine or
cheef good.
too be glad and rejoice in the behalf both of our selves and of others, is
the true acknowledgeme^t of God and our Lord Jesus Christ according too the
gospel. Therefore he says: I make my prayers with joy, for that you take part
with the gospel: that is to say, for that you are come to the knowledge of the
gospel, or for that ye are made partakers of all Gods benefits which he
offers us by the gospel, or because you are become members of the Church.

Secondly, of yielding thanks unto God, partly for his other Thanksgiving*
innumerable benefits toward us, and chiefly for these souerein benefits that
he has disclosed his will by his gospel, too our reconciliation and eternal
life: that he voutsaued too make his son our Lord Jesus Christ a sacrifise
for us: and that by the gospel he offers and imparteth unto us remission of
sins, the holy Ghost, ryghtuousnesse and eternal life.

Thirdly concerning perseverance, too the other words before Perseverance.
rehearsed, let this most sweet comfort also be added, which is the chief
thing too be considered in this Epistle: He that has begone this good work
in you, shall accomplish it unto the day of Jesus Christ. That is too say, God
that has called you too the knowledge of the gospel, and kindled in you the
beeginnings of his light, faith, ryghtuousnesse and all good works: shall also
increase your faith, and defend and strengthen you, unto y^ day that Christ
shall call the soul out of your mortal bodies.

Fourthly, let the notable example of Paul's frendlinesse be Frendlynesse.
thought upon, who unfeignedly from his heart rejoices at the singular benefit
befalne too the Thessalonians, namely yt the true knowledge of God and
everlasting salvation was happened to the^: saying, I bear you in my heart, ye is,
I favor you with all my heart, and am glad with all my heart, yt you have sped
well. Also Christ is my witness, that I long after you in the bowels of Jesus
Christ. That is too say, I long after you with a pure christenlike affection,
not in hope of any gain, but because I see you love Christ sincerely and
constantly. And I wish this, that your love, that is too say, you, may
increase more and more in knowledge of God and all understanding: that is to
say, in all true judgment, that ye may like of things most excellent and
acceptable to God, that you may be pure in faith, void of false opinions,
errors, doutings, distrustes, and stumbling blocks, that is to say, that ye
stumble not, nor slip into wickedness, whereby you may forgo grace, and become
guilty of endless damnation, as Caine, Saul, and Judas fell.

Fifthly, this sentence fulfilled with the works of ryghtuousnesse, The
doctrine of good works.
by Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God, contains a sum of the
Doctrine concerning the true woorshipping of God, or good works.

First, what they be, that is to wit, the works commanded by God, which are
wrought by a person justified by faith for Christ's sake, who dwelling in the
believers, woorketh good woorks, which must shine forth among men, that God
may be glorified and praised of us.

Secondly, what are the efficie^t causes, namely, first Gods word and the true
knowledge of Christ. 2. Christ dwelling in us by his holy spirit, and filling
us with the fruits of righteousness, or ruling our members, yt they may be
the instruments of righteousness unto God. 3. The mind and will of man, and his
outward members serviceable to Christ that moves us.

Thirdly, how please they God? He answers, by Jesus Christ, and not by their
own woorthynesse or desert: as is said j. Peter. ij. Offer ye spiritual
sacrifyses acceptable too God through Christ.

Fourthly, too what end are they too be done? Too the glory and praise of God,
that is too wit, that due obedience and honor may be yielded unto God, that
God may be magnified, that the true knowledge of God may be spread further
abroad, and that mo may be allured too true godliness and woorshipping of
God. Good woorks are not to be done to the end they should justify us before
God. For works are the fruits of righteousness, as Austen says: Good woorks
follow him that is already justified, but go not before him that is too be
justified. Therefore the tree must first be good (that is too say, the person
must first be justified by Jesus Christ) before it bring forth good fruits.
And so thou see the whole sum of the doctrine of good woorks too be
lernedly comprised in this short sentence of Paul. Let the heerers bear away
chiefly these two sentences out of this Epistle, that is too wit. God who has
begone this good work in you, shall accomplish it, even too the day of Jesus
Christ. And: Fulfilled with the fruits of ryghtuousnesse through Jesus Christ,
to the glory and praise of god.

Upon the.xxiij. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. Phil. iij.
BRethren, be folowers together of me, and look on them which walk even so as
ye have us for an ensample. For many walk (of whom I have told you often, and
now tell you weeping) that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ, whose
end is damnation, whose belly is their God, and glory to their shame, which
are worldly minded. But our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for
the savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall change our vile body, that
he may make it like unto his glorious body: according to the working, whereby he
is able also to subdue al things unto him self.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is of the kind of cases that debate matters. For it is an
exhortation that they should beware of false teachers, and be steadfast, and
set folks at one that are at ods.

The chief places are four.
FIrst the teachers of the church must be as patterns or examples for their
heerers too look upon, that they may follow their behauior and doctrine, and
eschew such as differ and disagree from this sampler.

Secondly, our conversation is in heaven: that is to say the ministration of
the gospel is not a civil government, but a spiritual: and all the whole
conversation and life of a christen man must be ghostly and heavenly, not
directed too the seeking of the commodities of this present life, but too the
atteinement of the glory and life that is in heaven.

Thirdly there is a testimony concerning the raising and glorification of our
bodies.

Fourthly, concerning the desire too maintein concord, and too knit toogither
the minds of those that be at odds.

The first place.
BRethren be ye folowers of me, and look on them that walk even so as ye
have seen us for an ensample.

Paul sets forth himself too the Philippians as an example Prechers must
be patterns too their flock.
for them too follow in Doctrine and manners, that they might beware of false
teachers, whose doctrine and manners differ from this pattern. And let the
studious bear in mind ye counsel of Paul's which he sets forth too
Timothy and all godly teachers, as a rule of al their life and of al their
devises and doings. Be a pattern of the faithful, in Doctrine, in
conversation, in louingnesse, in spirit, in faith and in chastity, and give
heed too reading. The first counsel of Paul is that we should be patterns:
that is too say that we should shine before others by our example of Doctrine
and conversation: For it is a common ordinary in this life, that we the
inferior sort do follow the examples of our governors and teachers: as
these verses admonish.

In sooth the examples of rulers flow too the people:

And as their Capteins demean the^, so do the whole Ca^p.

And Plato says that the best manner of instructing is, If the Teacher shine
before his heerers by his example, and be seen too do the same things
himself which he exhorts other men unto. Therefore must teachers use much
more warynesse, heed, and diligence in ruling their behauior, than other men
must, because the people must look upon their examples, according as Paul
commands here, that the Philippians should be followers of him, that is
too wit, in doctrine, faith, and other virtues: And that they should have an
eye too such as walk so, that is too say, as live so, teach so, believe so,
and profess so, namely that we obtain remission of sins and everlasting
life, only for Christ's passion and death, and not for the works of the Law
and for our own virtues. But if the teachers either spread abroad any false
doctrine, or be defiled with heinous offenses: their heerers are easly
infected with their opinions and examples. And concerning the faulty behavior
of the teachers, it is a common said saw, he that teaches well, and lives
amiss, reaches forth with his one hand, and pulls back with the other.
Afterward he peynteth out as it were in a table, the cheef virtues wherein the
Teachers must shine before their heerers.

1 In talk and doctrine. For the true doctrine concerning In doctrine.
GOD, is the ground woork of Gods Church and of every man's welfare.
Therefore let the teachers take heed, that first they themselves learn a
right, and then teach a right, orderly, properly, and plainly too their
heerers, the true and full doctrine of the Gospel concerning the true
knowledge of Gods being and will, concerning the person and benefits of
Christ, concerning Justification, faith, invocation, good woorks, affliction,
and all other articles: and also that they learnedly and aptly confute the
corruptings of them. They must not be dull in lerning the doctrine, and in
framing themselves too an apt and learned trade in teaching. They must not be
ambitiouse in devising new opinions and forms of speaking. They must not
rashly alter the accustomed and profitable manner of teaching, but must endeuer
that one true and agreeable sum of doctrine may be delivered over too those
that come after: like as Paul in this place wills the Philippians too keep
the doctrine that he had delivered them concerning justification, as a pattern,
and so too convey it over to their posterity.

2 In conversation, or in directing all the outward deuyses In conversation.
and doings of the life according too all the commandments of GOD. Their
manners must not be defiled with ambition, covetousness, and lusts, least
either mislibertie might be confirmed in some, or occasion ministered the
ungodly too slander the doctrine. Mat. v. Let your light so shine before men,
etc.

3 In Louingnesse. There must be in you, a hartye good In louingnesse.
will toward God, toward your fellowministers, and toward your heerers*
Ye must be just, soft, beneficial, treatable, and seekers of the common
concord and quietness. Ye must not nourish spyte, malice, hatred, quarrels,
backebytings, or privy mischeeues. Ye must not trouble the quietness of the
Church. But ye must be the sinews and bands of louingnesse and
fellowshippe, or of the glewing toogyther of the rest of the congregation in
the Church.

4 In Spirit. Unto your Louingnesse, ye must mingle In spirit or zelousnesse.
sharpness of Spirit, not winking at the falsifying of doctrine, at Heresies,
Blasphemies, and wicked behauiours, but endeuering too hold short both false
opinions and blasphemies, and also dishonest demeanours, through earnest zele
of the Spirit.

5 In Faith, which is stayed upon GOD, looking for In faith or faythfulnesse.
help and defense at Gods hand in all perilles, and continuing firm and
steadfast in teaching and professing the true doctrine, without wresting the
doctrine too the wills of great men, or without starting from the true
profession, for fear of forgoing office, glory, riches, or pleasures, as do
the false Teachers whom Paul describes in this place too be,

The enemies of Christ's Cross, because that too the intent Enemies of
Christ's cross.
they might escape trouble and persecutions at the Jews hands, they taught
that we are justified, not for Christ's sake only who was crucified for us,
but also that the works of the Law are needful too salvation. The end of
these men is destruction, that is too say: Although they flourish a while in
life, yet shall they at length be overwhelmed with endless torments. Whose
belly is their Belly gods.
God, that is too say, they prefer the belly and the pleasures of the belly
before God and all other things, and imploye all the deeds of their life too
the atteynement thereof. And therefore they be Idolaters. For look what thing
every man loves and woorshippeth above al other things, the same is his God,
who only ought too be loved and woorshipped above all things.

Now, the greatest part of men being Epicures, make a God of their belly, and
though that all of them be wray not the meening of their mind in so gross
words: yet in the inward bowelles of their hearts they think so, as did
that Cyclops in Euripides, who says that he acknowledges no other God, nor
offers sacrifises too any other than too him self and too his belly, which
is the greatest of all Gods.

And their glory is in their shame. Although false teachers be a while in
glory and estimation among Noble men, and with the common sort, yet does
this reputation turn too their own shame. Which are worldly minded, Worldly
minded.
that is too say, have an eye only too ease, promotion and riches, and too the
intent they may live at ease, and not be persecuted by the Jews, they urge
earthly things or worldly pelf upon men, as ceremonies, differences of meats,
and such like Jewish observations.

Our conversation is in heaven, or is heavenly. First he The difference of the
governments of Moses, of the world, and of Christ.
shows the difference between the ministration of the gospel and the Law,
and the civil government. The ministration of Moses Law was partly heavenly
or spiritual, and partly earthly or ceremonial, which being bound too a
certain policy, consisted for the most part in ceremonies, sacrifises,
circumcision, differences of days and meats* etc. But the ministration of the
Gospel is altogether heavenly or spiritual, neither does it appoint any
certain state of government, or kingdom in this mortal life, according too
this saying, John. xix. My kingdom is not of this world* ij. Cor. iij. The
Gospel is the ministration of the Spirit, whereby the true knowledge of God,
faith, righteousness, and eternal life is begone in the godly, who after
this life shall live in heaven as it were in one City with God, and enjoy his
wisdom and goodness. This heavenly conversation does Paul will us too seek
after, and too look for, and not too dream of any worldly kingdom such as
the Jews look for, and such as the Anabaptists in West phalye, and the
seditious Bouers would have had.

Secondly, the life or conversation of a Christian is heavenly, that is too
say, it is not employed about earthly things too the atteynement of authority,
riches, and pleasures: but too the compassing of heavenly benefits, as
remission of sins, righteousness, and everlasting welfare.

The third place.
COncerning the resurrection and glorification of our bodies, let the whole
doctrine be taken out of. j. Corin. xv. ^. Thessalonians. iiij. Mat. xxij. Daniel* xij.

The fourth place.
COncerning the desire of concord, let the declaration thereof be taken out of
the Exposition of the fifth commandment.

Upon the.xxiiij. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. Colos. j.
FOr this cause we also, since the day we herd of it, have not ceased praying
for you, and desiring that ye might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his
will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that ye might walk worthy
of the Lord in all things that please, being fruitful in all good works, and
increasing in the knowledge of GOD, strengthed with all might, through his
glorious power, unto all patience, and long suffering, with ioyfulnesse,
gyuing thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet too be partakers of
the inheritance of saints in light. Which has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and has translated us intoo the kingdom of his dear son, in
whom we have redemption through his blood, that is too say, the forgiveness
of sins.

THe proposition of this Epistle is this: I beseech the son of GOD too
increase in you faith and all other virtues kindled by his Gospel.

The cheef places of doctrine are three.
1 Of the true knowledge of God and of faith. 2 Of good woorks or the fruits of
faith. 3 Of the benefits of the soune of God, or of forgiveness of sins and
justification.
Paul speaks of faith when he says: We pray unto What Faith is.
God that ye may be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding. Now let us always have in sight the learned
definition of faith, builded upon the words of this Epistle. Faith is a
knowledge of Gods being and will reveled in the Law and the Gospel, kindied
by the holy Ghost, who boweth the hearts of the godly, too assure them selves
that it is the immovable will of the everlasting Father, that all which believe
in the son, should not perish, but have forgiveness of sins and eternal
life by the bludshed of the son of God.

The parts of Faith are two, Knowledge or perseverance, The parts of Faith.
and confidence certeynly assuring a man that his sins are forgiven him, and
he delivered out of the power of darkness, by the blud of Gods son. And the
knowledge is either of the being of the eternal GOD, which is soothfast, just,
merciful, and chaste, in which there be three several persons, the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost: or else it is of Gods will uttered both in his
Law (which says thus, Cursed is every one that continues not in all the
things that are written in the book of the Law,) and also in the Gospel
concerning Christ, who says him self John. vj. This is the will of the
eternal Father* that every one which sees the son and believes in him,
should not perish but have life everlasting. This will of GOD reveled in his
Gospel is it with knowledge whereof Paul in this place wishes us too be
fulfilled, that is too wit, that we might fully know the fatherly good will
and exceeding great mercy of God promised in his son. This knowledge True
knovvlegde.
of GOD is the true wisdom and understanding that discerns true or false
opinions or doctrines (concerning GOD) asunder, and it springs not either of
men's imaginations or of Philosophical or Pharisaicall wisdom, which
understands the Law of outward Discipline, and the promise made unto
Abraham, too be meant of a civil government and worldly kingdom. But it is a
spiritual wisdom kindled and strengthened by the holy Ghost, which
understands that the Law is the spiritual judgment of GOD against sin,
and the Gospel behyghteth not a worldly kingdom, but spiritual and
everlasting good things, true and effectual comfort, ryghtuousnesse, life, and
joy. In this place may be recited the whole doctrine concerning the knowledge
of God and concerning faith which is an assurance of Gods mercy, or of
forgiveness of sins promised for Christ's sake.

The second place.
COncerning the fruits of faith, or good works, Paul says: That ye may
walk woorthye of the Lord, so as ye may please him, being fruitful in all
good works, and increasing in the knowledge of GOD strengthened with all
might, through his glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering, with
ioyfulnesse giving thanks too God the Father.

By the way, let the phrase be considered: That ye may Too Walk.
walk, that is too say, that ye may live, or that ye may govern your
intentes, devises and doings, as is woorthye the Lord, or as agrees with the
will and word of the Lord. For woorthynesse, in this place signifies not a
deserving or recompensing, or a perfect fulfilling of the Law, but according as
he says in another place, bring forth fruits worthy repentance, that is too
say, agreeing too repentance, that you may please him in all things, or that
you may please him thoroughly. Here is too be told, how good works please
God. Which thing is declared in these four Articles.

First, the person that brings forth the fruits of good How good woorks
please God.
works must be Gods favor, for Christ the Mediators sake by faith. For
without Faith, it is impossible too please God. Ebr. xj. And all that is not of
faith is sin. Romans xiiij. 2 We must acknowledge that many inward sins
stick still in us, which are a let that our good works are not perfect, ne
please God of their own woorthynesse. For there is no rightuouse man upon the
earth, that does good and sins not. 3 Yet notwithstanding we must be
fully persuaded that it is Gods will, that we should walk agreeably too his
will, and yield fruit in all kynds of goods woorks. 4 These good works or new
begoonne obedience please God, not of their own woorthynesse, but for Christ
the Mediators sake, through faith, out of which as out of the tree of all good
works spring all good fruits. This then is the true worthiness of good
woorks, that they be Gods services and sacrifises acceptable too God through
Christ. j. Pet. y. Offer ye spiritual sacrifises acceptable too GOD through
Jesus Christ. Paul in this place reckeneth up six good woorks of which may be
spoken in order.
The first is the true acknowledging of GOD, or faith Six good woorks. First
Faith. 2. Manlynesse.
which is the pillar and foundation of all the rest of the virtues.

The second is Manlynesse or Constancy and Perseverance, which continues in
the true knowledge of God and in faith unto the hour of death, and (by the
almighty power of God) valiantly overcomes the Devils crafts, the assaults
of corrupted nature, and the outrages of Tyrants.

The third and fourth are Patience and Longsufferance, 3. and. 4. Patience and
Long sufferance.
which calmly outweareth the miseries that accompany the profession of the
Gospel, and is not discouraged with continuance of long delay, so as it should
fret and repyne at God, or seek for other unlawful helps.

Concerning these virtues is spoken already in the first and fifth commandment.

The fifth is Ioyfulnesse of conscience settling and delighting 5. Joy of
conscience,
in God, which perteyneth to the first commandment.

The sixth is thanksgiving whereof I have spoken in the 6. Thanksgiving.
second commandment.

The third place. Of Christ's benefits or of remission of sins and
Justification.
Paul says: Which has made us mete to be partakers Of justification.
of the lot of saints in light, that is too say, who of his own free
goodness and mercy and not thorough our power, or for our deseruings, has
made us meet to become partakers of the light or true knowledge of his Gospel
and of the lot of the saints, or of the inheritance of life and glory
everlasting* such shall be bestowed upon al saints, who has delivered us out of
the power of darkness, that is to say of sin and death, wherthrough the
devil kept all mankind oppressed in most miserable thraldom, and translated
us into the kingdom of his dear son, that is to say, has adopted us to be the
sons of God, for his dear beloved sons sake, by whom we have redemption
through his blood, that is to wit, forgiveness of sins. This sentence
comprehends in singular lyghtsomnesse of works, a sum of the doctrine of
the Justification of a christen man, and in especially these two places.

First, what it is* Justification is a riddance of a man What justification is.
out of the power of darkness, sin, and death: or it is the forgiveness of
sins and the adopting us to be the sons of God, and a partnershyp with the
saints in light, that is to say, the inheriting of eternal life, light,
ryghtuousnesse, and all good things, which are given too the Saints for the
price which our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God has paid for us by sheading
his own blood.

Secondly, what is the enforcing cause or the desert, for The desert of
justification.
which we are delivered and redeemed, and made partakers of this light and lot
of the godly, y^ is to wit the only blud or passion and death of our Lord Jesus
Christ the son of God. It was not the blood of Abell, it was not the blood
of the lamb and of all the sacrifises, it was not the blood of all the martirs,
and much less is it the ceremonies and rites of Moses, or of the munks, or of
the mass, or our own virtues and good deeds that do it, as is said more at
large Romans iij. we are justified freely by the grace of god, through the
redemption made by Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth a mercy feate
through faith in his blood.

Upon the.xxv. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle, ij. Pet. j.
NOt with standing I think it mete (as long as I am in this tabernacle) to
stir you up by putting you in remembrance, forasmuch as I am sure how that
the time is at hand that I must put of my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus
Christ has showed me, I wilenforce therefore that on every side ye might have
wherewith to stir up the remembrance of these things after my departing. For
we followed not deceiuable fables, when we opened unto you the power and coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, but with our eyes we saw his majesty: even then
verily, when he received of god the father honor and glory, and when there came
such a voice to him from the excellent glory. This is my dear beloved son, in
whom I have delight. This voice we hard when it came from heaven, being with
him in the holy mount. We have also a right sure word of prophesy, whereunto
if ye take heed, as vnto^ a light that shyneth in a dark place, ye do
well, until the day dawne, and the day starte arise in your hearts. See that
ye first know this, that no prophecy in the Scripture has any private
interpretation. For the Scripture came neuet by the will of man^ but holy men
of God spoke as they were moved by the holy ghost.

The disposement.
THis epistle is partly persuasiue, and partly in structiue. The proposition
and sum of it is this: I counsel you to reteyne steadfastly the true doctrine
concerning Christ delivered by the Prophets and Apostles, which is the only
fountayn and rule of the true religion and of our everlasting salvation.

The cheef places of doctrine are these.
FIrst it belongs to the duty of a faithful Bishop too repete often, and to
beat into the heads of his heerers, the sum of the true doctrine: and to
admonish and exhort them continually, that they keep it pure and un corrupt
unto the last gasp of theirly ^^, and that they eschew false teachers.

The second and principal is, that there is but one true religion and doctrine
concerning GOD, which is uttered in the writings of the prophets and Apostles,
which all the Godly are bound diligently to learn thoroughly to bear away,
and sted fastly to reteyne.

The third concerns the interpretation of the propheticult scriptures.

The fourth place.
IN reaching, it is very (...) repete often and in the In teaching thiogs must be
repeted often.
same words to beat into (...) heads the, sum of the true doctr ^^al^^ the
matters that are profitable and need, full, that they may stick the faster and
take, the deeper rootein the hearts of the heerers. Therefore Paul says to the
Philipians: I am not weery too write the selfsame things too you, and for you
it is he b^uefull. And the wise counsel o^ Socrates is known (...) in Xenophon
says, that the selfsame things are to he spoken to the selfsame persons. And
the saying of Epictetus conteyneth a most large rule of our demeanoure. He
spoke always one thing. This you must know, that it is not possible for a man
too be learned, unless that every day he read or hear such things as he
has learned, and also use them in his life. Wherefore Saint Peter also says
in this place, that as long as he lives, he will never cease from admonishing
and stirring up his heerers to embrace and hold fast with a firm and steadfast
faith the true doctrine concerning Christ delivered by himself and approved by
the records of the prophets. And there is a notable metaphor in the term
Tabernacle, whereby we are done to understand, Tabernacle or tent.
that a man has no certain and continual seat of life in this body, nor any
everlasting city allotted him in this world, but that we must fleet out of
this life within a while. Therefore seeing that life is short, and cunning long
in getting, we had need too use continual warnings and puttings in mind, that
the cunning of all cunnings (that is too wit, the true doctrine concerning God
and our everlasting welfare) may be learned by us aright and too the full, and
kept faithfully.

The first and principal place.
THe foundation of the whole religion and faith of a'christen The foundation of
religion.
man is this meening or opinion, that there is in deed among mankind y^
doctrine delivered by god himself, which discloseth unto us the being of God,
and also this secret will of his, concerning remission of sins and
everlasting life assuredly to be given for Christ's sake: and that this
doctrine comprehended in the wrytings of saint Peter, Paul, and the prophets,
is in deed that only one certain and immovable wisdom concerning God and the
very true religion: And that all other opinions concerning God, all the
religions and woorshippings of the heathen, and others disagreeing with this
doctrine, are rejected of God and dam^^s.

Although this sentence be unto christians a most sure and infallible principle
of principles, yet not with standing, it is wont commonly to be confirmed with
too elue arguments, to y^ intent y^ heathen men and others y^ gayn say it and
deny it, may the easlyer be persuaded. Some such degrees of testimonies are
cited in the preface upon the.iiij. tome of Luthers works, and in an oration
of the life of Ambrose. And in the.xij. chapter of the Arguments concerning the
authority and certeyntie of the Christen doctrine, they are set forth in a
book by themselves, and are to be seen breefly noted in the beginning of my
commentary upon Matthew. Unto which also may be joined these reasons
following: yt the Church only has always possessed whole and sound the doctrine
not only of the Gospel, but also of the Law concerning the one true God, and
concerning wedlock and chastity, against which doctrine all the heathen have
admitted an innumerable and monstrous multitude of Gods, even clean contrary
to the judgment of nature, and also rouing and outrageous kinds of lecheries.
And the church only has kept the continual account of the years of the world
even from the creation thereof.

Unto these fifteen testimonies concerning the certentie of the christen
doctrine, may also be referred these four arguments which Peter uses in this
Epistle, when he exhorts and stirs up his heerers to reteyne and keep
steadfastly the present truth, that is to say, the true doctrine which he had
taught them concerning Christ.

1 Of the matter or the kind of doctrine it self, which is The matter or
substance of the christian doctrine.
not a tale or a flimflawe, nor a sophistical, painted, and vain Fable, as
the Epicures deem: but a true declaration of the power and might of the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in very deed the power of God, to the
salvation of every one that believes. For he distributeth the whole doctrine
concerning Christ, into the coming of Christ (who for us men and for our
salvation came down from heaven, and becam flesh, or was made man for us, and
came to us by his doctrine, miracles, passion, death and resurrection, that he
might offer and yield unto us him self and all his benefits:) and secondly in
too the almightinesse and effectual operation of the doctrine, passion and death
of Christ, whereby he has wrought remission of sins, and soulhelth unto us,
which he imparteth to us by his word.

2 Of the testimony of Peter and the rest of the Apostles Witness by sight.
that behild with their eyes Christ's majesty, glory, and heavenly miracles.
For one witness that sees a thing is worth ten that do but here of it.

3 Of ye record of ye everlasting father vttred by this voice The record of god
the father.
sent down from heaven upon mount Tabor. This is my beloved son in whom I am
well pleased, hear ye him.

Now out of this wonderful story of Christ's transfiguration, which the
Evangelists have set forth Math. xvy. Luke. ix. Mark. ix. and specially out
of the eternal fathers saying: This is my beloved Son, there are seven notable
places noted in ye. xvy. and third chapters of Matthew, which places the
studiouse sort may allege for the enlightening of this Sermon of Peter's.

4 Of the record of the Prophets who have plainly The record of the prophets.
taught the self same doctrine concerning God, and the person, office, and
benefits of Christ, which saint Peter and the rest of the Apostles have
spread abroad through the whole world, like as our Lord Jesus Christ, the
son of god testifies himself, saying John. ^. Search the scriptures for it is
they y^ bear witness of me. If ye believed Moses ye would also believe
me, for he has written of me. Also Act. x. All the prophets bear record
unto Christ, how every one that believes in him receives forgiveness of
sins through his name. Therefore in this place Peter wills us to take heed,
that is to say, he defully and To take heed.
continually to read, to think upon, with steadfast faith to embrace, and
constantly to follow the doctrine of the prophets as a lamp shining in a dark
place. For Gods word Gods word the lantern of light.
is the candell that puts away the mist and darkness of not knowing God, of
sin, and of death out of our minds, and kindles in the^ the day or light of
true knowledge of God, and true life and comfort in all greefs and
tribulations. For like as those that journey through rough and unknown grounds
in the deep and dark night, do long for the rising of the morning star and for
the breaking of the day with great desire: So the miserable mynds of men and
their blind hearts that walk in the sorrowful and great dangers of this life,
can neither know God aright nor rule the deuyses and doings of this life,
stedyly, nor have steadfast comfort in tribulatio^s, but if the lamp of Gods
word shine before them, and the son of God the son of righteousness direct and
govern their hearts. And therefore they long most ernestly to see that clear
light in ye everlasting company of the Son of God. But concerning the effects
and profitablenesse of the prophetical and Apostolical doctrine, whereby each man
may be enflamed with more ernest desirousnesse of it, I shall speak more at
large an on after in the second Sunday of Aduent.

The third place.
OF the interpretation of prophetical scripture. Peter commends The
commendation of scripture.
the doctrine of the prophets to the church by two arguments. 1. Of the
efficient cause: because it is delivered by the instinct and insp^ration of the
holy ghost. 2. Of the final cause or the effects: because it is a burning
cresset lygheny^ng our minds with the true knowledge of God, true
ryghteonsnesse and life, putting away the mist and darkness of not knowing
God, of sin, and of death, that the very day, or the clear and bright light
of knowing God, and the very light of the world or the morning star our Lord
Jesus Christ may arise in our hearts.

For the common ground and the very drift of all the Prophets, The mark when
at the prophets shoot.
or the mark that they shoot at is the promised Redeemer our Lord Jesus
Christ, as it is said. Act. x. All the Prophets bear record unto Christ.
Romans j. Put a part for the Gospel of God, which he promised before by his
prophets in the holy scriptures concerning ye son. And Peter adds, That no
prophecy in the scripture has any How scripture is to be interpreted.
private interpretation, that is too say, it is not too be expounded according
to every man's fancy, nor according to the judgments and lykely persuasions of
man's reason, nor as every man lists: but according as the very holy ghost
(the best interpreter of himself) has opened it in the clear and lyghtsome
testimonies of the word by him delivered. As Christ says. John. xvj. The
holy ghost shall teach ye al things, and shall bring you in remembrance of those
things that I have said unto you. j. Cor. u. He has reveled these things to
us by his spirit. For the natural man perceyueth not the things which are of
Gods spirit. For they are foolishness too him, and he is not able to
understand them because they must be weyed spiritually.

Of interpretation.
IN the good writings and authors of other arts in general, Interpretation,
what it is in general.
Interpretation is, to show the proposition, state or ground of the matter
written, and the order of the parts and Arguments, and aptly to bring the
cheef points into the common places of the same art of which the writing
entreats, and too enlyghten them by putting them intoo their definitions,
divisions, sentences, and examples: and to open the manner of handling it, with
the phrases and figures of the words according to the precepts of the arts
after the order of Rhetorike. But in the right understanding and expounding
Interpretation of sc^^pture.
of the prophetical Scripture, beside these ordinary tricks of all good
interpreters, it behooves that a light be kindled by the holy ghost in the
minds of the godly, by the foreshinyng whereof they may handsomely receive and
understand the doctrine of the Gospel concerning Christ which is set above and
beyond the sight of man's reason, and discern it aryght from man's wisdom.
This light does the holy ghost kindle by the word which himself teaches,
while it is herd, red, and thought upon, and when the textes are conferred by
the godly, who are more skillful too learn than to presume, and more earnest
to believe than to strive, and more in love with Gods wisdom than in liking
with their own, as Tertullian says.

The best manner of interpreting the Prophets is, Best interpretacion of the
scripture by conference of textes.
(which we see Luther has followed in his third and fourth Tome) that first
a man do thoroughly consider and wey the na^^ue signification of the words and
weyghtinesse of the phrases: and then reducing the matters to the places of the
Gospel, enlighten them by comparing them with the textes of the new Testament.
For it is as true as commonly said, y^ there is no better way to interpret
scriptures, than to expound one text by another: and that the old Testament or
the Prophets is the fountain of the new Testament, and the new Testament
ageyn the light of the old Testament. We see all of us that there comes a
wonderful light to the sayings of the Prophets, by laying to them the like
textes, which are in the wrytings of y^ Apostles: like as Paul expounds
very lightsomly the promis made to Abraham concerning the seed. Galat. iij.
and. Romans iiij. And the whole doctrine touching the passover mentioned in.
Exodus xij. is expounded in this short saying of Paul. Christ our Easterlambe
is offered up for us. All the whole Prophecy of Esaias is enlightened in ye
sayings cited by christ and the Apostles, through whose forelight, the true and
native meening of the whole Prophet may be the easlyer and rightlier
understood.

Now whereas the Papists prate that the holy scripture The prating of the
Papists.
is dark and doutfull, and therefore there is need of some other more certain
rule, to interpret it by: they are manifestly convinced by this place of
Peter's, which compares the scripture to a cresset or a light: like as the
Psalm also says. Thy word is a lantern to my feet. Also, the
commandment of the Lord is bright, and gives light to the eyes. And it is
manifest that the cheef points of the Christian doctrine, the ten
Commandments, and the promis of the Gospel, are not written darkely or
doutfully, but in evident and propre terms. And because the ruder sort in
some places understand not the kinds of speech, phrase, and figures of
words, and the matters them selves set above the reach of man's reason: It is
Gods will that the voice of interpreters should sound in his Church, and he
has given moreover the gifts of tongues, of eloquence, and of other arts
which are helps of learned interpretacion. But concerning the whole manner of
interpreting scripture, there is more said in another place. And certain rules
of the manner of interpreting sayings that are contrary in Rhetorical order
one to another, are recited in the case of co^trarietie of laws.

Upon the.xxvj. Sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. j. These. iiij.
I Would not Brethren have you ignorant concerning them which are fallen a
sleep, that ye sorrow not as other do, which have no hope. For if we believe
that Jesus dyed and rose again: even so them also which sleep by Jesus will
God bring again with him. For this say we unto you in the word of the Lord,
that we which live, and are remaining in the coming of the Lord, shall not
come ere they which sleep. For the Lord him self shall descend from heaven
with a shout, and the voice of the Archaungell and trompe of God. And the dead
in Christ shall arise first, then shall we which live and remain, be caught
up with them also in the cloud, to meet the Lord in the air. And so shall we
ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort your selves one another with these
words.

The disposementes.
IT is of that sort that is persuasiue. For it is a comfort to be set against
death, or against the moorning and heaviness that we take for the death of
our selves or of some others that are dear unto us. And in the end of the
Epistle there is showed this bound and use of this present discourse concerning
the resurrection of the dead. Comfort your selves one another with these
words. For the most effectual and most stedy comfort in all ye tribulacions of
this most short and miserable life (which in very deed is nothing else but
Dust, shadow, deaw, but a Ghost, but a steam, but a puff, f^ther, air, blast,
cinder, a dream, froth, a storm, but a stadge, but a span, but a footstep.

Yea and in death it self, is the assured hope of the The comfort of all
persecutions troubles and greefes.
resurrection and of the blissed life and everlasting company which we shall
have with God: verily because we are thoroughly persuaded, that we which
embrace Christ's doctrine by fatyh, are not created to the miseries of this
troublesome and mortal life only: ne that he means the soul, which was
created of nothing, the thing which was sometime nothing, does utterly perish
and decay so as it should utterly return to nothing ageyn: but y^ our souls
do in deed remain alive after death, and ye as soon as they are loosed from
ye bond of their bodies, they are out of hand with the Lord, and enjoy ye sight
of God in quiet peace and joy: and that our bodies also which sleep in death,
shall assuredly revive, and become agein ye dwelling places of their souls, so
as we having received ye same bodies ageyn* (which shall be glorified and have a
lively beauty) and the same flesh which we now carry about us, and being
utterly free from all sin, labor and greef, shall live for evermore with the
Lord, enjoying the sight, wisdom, light, righteousness, and blissfulness of
the whole Godhead, and glorify God again on our behalf for ever and ever.

Of this hope which is peculiar to the Christians, and Testimonies of the
resurrection.
the very helmet of our salvation, holy Job says: this hope is laid up in my
bosom. I know that my redeemer lives, and I shall rise out of the earth in
the last day, and shall be compassed ageine with my skin, and in my flesh
shall I see God, whom I shall see and none other for me, and with these eyes
shall I behold him and with none other. Apoc. vj. and. xxj. The souls of the
saints are before ye throne of God, and serve him day and night. And God shall
wipe all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no death, nor moorning,
nor crying, nor labor. etc. Apo. xiiij. Blissed are the dead that dye in the
Lord from henceforth.

The Philosophical consolations that are to be set against Philosophical
consolatious against death and all grief.
death, and which bury a man with somewhat less sorrow, are gathered by
Cicero in his first Tusculane question, and by Plutarche in his book to
Apollonius. And the sum thereof is comprehended in this oration of Socrates in
Plato: I am in great hope (O ye Judges) that it falls well on my behalf that
I am sent to death. For one of these two things must needs be, either that
death takes utterly away all feeling, or else that we fleet out of this place
into some other. Therefore whither all feeling perish, and that death be like
that kind of sleep, which oftentimes without sight of dreams yeldeth most
quiet rest, good God what a gain is it to dye? Or if the things be true which
are reported, that death is a removing into such coasts as they inhabit which
are passed out of this life: that is now a far greater bliss, that when a
man has escaped from these that will needs be counted for Judges, he shall
come to those that deserve the name of Judges in deed, (I mean Minos,
Rhadamanthus, Aeacus and Triptolemus,) and be conuersaunt with those that lived
rightuously and faithfully. Now to have communication with Orpheus, Musaeus,
Homer, and Hesiodus, what esteem you it too be worth? Truly I could find
in my heart to dye often entimes (if it were possible) so that the things which
I speak of might befall me, what a pleasure would it be too me (think you)
when I should talk with Palamedes, with A^ax, and with others that were
entrapped by the judgment of unrighteous men? neither would I wish you, ye
Judges to fear y^ death, where by ye have set me at liberty. For there can
no manner of evil befall unto a good man either alive or dead, neither shall
his case be at any time neglected of the Gods immortal, neither is this thing
happened to me by chance.

Now forasmuch as (according as Basilius right gravely It behooves Christians
to read the Philosophers and P^^^es.
counsels) it is for the behoof of Christian folk to read the writings of
Philosophers and Poets: because either they say the same that we do, and so
their consent is profitable: or else they speak diverse things, and so it
avails to confer them: we will in this place recite in form of logic,
the cheef arguments of Ciceros first Tusculane question, wherein he has
comprehended the comfortes and remedies too be used against death, to the
intent that the laying of them together may enlighten both the kinds of
doctrine, and that we considering the doutes and darkness of the Philosophers
about this article, may be the more in love with the doctrine of ye Church
delivered by God, and warranted of God, by raising ageyn of dead men, and other
notable miracles.

The proposition of the first Tusculane question is The proposition or ground
of Ciceros first Tusculane question and his arguments upon the same.
this: Death is not evil, or death is not to be feared. For either men's
souls are not quenched by death, but remain alive, and depart into those
places which the blissed sort do inhabit, or else they perish utterly with the
bodies, so as there remains in them no feeling, sense, or perceyueraunce of
any harm.

The first part of this Dilemna, that men's souls are immortal, Cicero
proves by six arguments, which we have recited heretofore in the
disposement of the.j. Cor. xv. upon the second holy day in Easter.

The latter part, that though the souls dye with their bodies, yet there is no
harm in death. Cicero likewise goes about to prove by six arguments also.

The first Argument.
IF there be any evil in death, either it is to the soul or to the body.

But neither in the body nor in the soul that are quite dead, can remain any
sense of evil.

Ergo in death which utterly quenches a man and brings him to nothing,
there is no evil at all.

The second.
THat which riddeth men from the troubles and miseries that hang over them,
and is the end of all mischeeues and harms, is not to be counted among evil
things.

Death riddeth men from the troubles that hang over them, and is the end and
uttermost refuge from all miseries.

Ergo death is not evil.

The third.
THat which many excellent men have of their own accord or certainly with a
stout and quiet mind undertaken, is not to be feared.

Many valiant and good men have with stout courage undertaken to dye for their
country and for other causes, as the Decians, the Scipios, Theramenes,
Socrates, Leonides. etc.

Ergo death is not to be feared as the cheef evil.

The fourth.
In sleep there is none evil.

Death is like to sleep:

Ergo there is none evil in death.

The fifth.
No natural things are evil.

Death is due unto nature, who has lent us the occupying of life, as it were
of money, without setting any day of payment.

Ergo death is not evil.

The sixth.
No commendable thing is evil.

The deaths of such as excelled in virtue (and specially of those that
undertook them for their country sake) purchase everlasting commendation.

Ergo they be not evil.

These arguments have I breefly set down, not only to the intent the reading
of the first Tusculane question may be the playner to the younger sort, by
showing too them the framing and order of the arguments, but also to the intent
the difference between the Christian doctrine and the doctrine of the
Philosophers might be seen the more evidently. For Philosophy knows
utterly nothing The blindness of man's reason in the cheef points of knowledge.
at all of the restitution of our dead bodies, and the resurrection of our
flesh, but deemeth that the same are resolved into their first matter whereof
they were made, and there utterly perish for ever, even as the bodies of
beasts do. Neither has it any certain, stable and stedy belief of the
immortality of the soul, and of the everlasting fellowship with God and the
blissed sort: but floting, ^o^^ing, gazing about, sticking, and making many
backeturnings like a ship y^ is wether driven on the huge sea, and like images
ye waver in a troubled water: weout bringing any certeins and sound comfort too
the minds that are encountering and wrestling with death. Therefore let us with
most thankful minds embrace Gods voice avouched with the resurrection of his
own son, which alonly shows both the causes of death and all miseries,
and the true and effectual remedies of the same, that is to wit, the most
joyful resurrection and life and glory everlasting with God.

Upon the first Sunday in Aduent.
The Epistle. Romans xiij.
THis also we know (I mean the season,) how that it is time that we should now
awake out of sleep. For now is our salvation nearer, than when we believed.
The night is passed, and the day is come nigh. Let us therefore cast away the
deeds of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light. Let us wake
honestly as it were in the day light: not in eating and drinking, neither in
chambering and wantonness, neither in strife and envying: but put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ. And make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
of it.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is of that kind that is persuasiue. For it is an exhortacion to
watchfulness or diligence in learning the doctrine of the Gospel, and in
framing the whole life after ye rule of Gods word. The state or sum of it is
this: I exhort you to embrace earnestly the Gospel, wherein is offe^^d you
everlasting salvation by Jesus Christ, and to worshi(...) with true faith and
dutyfulnesse of all virtues.

The cheef places are three.
THe doctrine of the Gospel concerning Christ's delight of the world, by whom
life and everlasting salvation are offered and given to us, must earnestly and
with singular heedfulnesse and diligence be of all the godly sort, learned,
kept, and spread abroad. ij Of the faith of the Fathers, and that all holy men
of all ages obtained eternal salvation by one self same way, that is to wit
by the voice of the gospel, for the only mediator Christ's sake, through faith.
iij An exhortation too new obedience or a life agreeable with the Gospel, or
too good works, of which he reckeneth five kinds in order.
1 Diligence and watchfulness in learning the Doctrine, Watchfulness.
and following true godliness according too the light showed in the Gospel. 2
Sobriety which eschueth drunkenness and gluttony. Soberness. Chastity.
3 Chastity or stayednesse which eschueth forbidden lusts and wantonness. 4
Meekness and desire of concord, which represseth wilfulness Meekness.
and enuiousnesse. 5 Government or brideling of all the affections.
Government.

Concerning these virtues, sobriety, chastity, meekness, and desire of
concord, and concerning the vices that encounter them, there be orderly
expositions set forth in the declaration of the ten commandments, and in my
rules of life. Which I would wish too be matched with this book containing
the disposements of the Epistles, in the end thereof, for this cause, that
there should not need too tedious turning and returning too the moral
precepts or places of virtues and vices in every several Epistle. Now therefore
will I add certain aduertisements to the first two places of this days
Epistle, which are propre too the gospel, and will expound certain of the
darker terms and speeches.

THE ENTRANCE.
FIrst and foremost in this place, the preacher may make some Of the institution
of Aduent.
short preface concerning the time. For our aunceters of old time termed the
four Sundays next before Christmas, the Sundays in Aduent. And their meening
was, that their heerers should be put in remembrance, and prepared too
discharge their minds from all other cares and desires, and with greater care,
watchfulness, sobretie, reverence, and heedfulnesse, too settle them selves
too consider this wonderful purpose of God concerning the redemption of
mankind by the coming of his son in the flesh. And our forefathers made
four commings of Christ. First in the flesh. Secondly in the ministry.
Thirdly too his Passion, whereof is spoken in the gospel of this day. And
fourthly too the last judgment, whereof we shall here more this day
seuennight.

Therefore too the intent that men might be stirred up too the more heedfull
consideration of so great matters, at this Take time when it comes, for time
will away.
time which goes next before the coming or birthe of our Savior Jesus Christ,
the Epistle that is red this day, was appointed very fit for the time. For in
it Paul making mention of the time also, exhorts all the godly too wake out
of their sleep and darkness of sins, ignorance of God, and carelessenesse
which neglects GOD, and lets loose the reins too all misdeedes and
lusts: and not too let slip the occasion of atteyning eternal salvation by
the Gospel: but too learn the doctrine of it with singular endeuer,
watchfulness and heed, and by all means too embrace and hold fast the
benefits that are offered in the same. For the light of the gospel shyneth
not at all times among the Jews and the Gentyles: But sometimes the blind and
sorrowful darkness of not knowing the Gospel, ouerdreepeth the greatest part
of mankind, as before the coming of Christ many hundred years the Gentyles
were left in ignorance of the Gospel. Yea and among the Jews also the light of
the true Doctrine was for the more part quenched quite out. And now also the
wickedness and unthankfulness of men is punished with the blindness and
outrages of Mahomet and the Pope. Therefore let us acknowledge the exceeding
great benefit of God, that in this our time (when the world is at the last
cast) he has kindled agein so clear and notable a light of his gospel,
concerning the office and benefits of Christ, and our everlasting salvation.
And let us not like thanklesse persons hold skorne of gods so great gift, but
let us with singular watchfulness, diligence and heed, endeuer too embrace
it, hold it fast and spread it abroad. For doutlesse as Plato says of another
kind of Doctrine. There came never, neither shall there come a greater gift.
And if the present opportunity be neglected and despised, within a while after
there will follow new darkness and confusions of opinions. Wherefore seeing
that the light of the true Doctrine shyneth now among us, and that the Gospel
of salvation is nearer or better known too us, than too our fathers: let us
with all heed and watchfulness keep it. For by the Gospel are such
benefits offered unto us, as no other Doctrine is able too give us.

Admit that Philosophy be the guide of life, admit it be the sercher of
truth, the expulser of vice, the fou^der of laws, and the mistress of manners
and discipline, as Cicero says: Admit that Eloquence be the Queen of al
worldly things: Be it that a Trojan is comparable too many other. Yet do all
these Arts serve only for the dark night of this mortal life, neither can
they bring true light and eternal salvation. The Gospel only is the power of
God that woorketh salvation too every one that believes. For by the Gospel
and The gospel is the cheef of all doctrines.
none otherwise does God show his mighty operation in us, kindling in our
minds the day or light of the true knowledge of God, and of true faith and
prayer, giving us eternal salvation, (that is too say deliverance from sin,
from Gods wrath, and from everlasting death) and new righteousness, life, joy,
and glory everlasting. These heavenly and perpetual benefits are offered too
us by the Gospel, according as we shall speak more at large of the
profitablenesse of the Gospel in the Epistle of the next Sunday.

The second place.
AFter one and the self same manner do all the Saints All folk of all ages
have but one way too salvation.
of all ages, the Fathers, the Prophets, the Jews and the Gentyles obtain
eternal salvation: that is too wit, for the only son of Gods sake our Lord
Jesus Christ through faith, as it is plainly said. Act. iiij. There is not any
other name given unto men under heaven, wherein we must be saved. Act. xv.
We believe our selves to be saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
our fathers were. And of Abraham it is expressly said, Abraham saw my day. And
agein, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed too him for ryghtuousnesse.

Why then does Paul say that salvation is nearer too us now, than when we
believed? I answer, for three causes. First because Christ the author and
giver of everlasting life whom the fathers looked for too come, is now come in
the sight of the world. Secondly, because a greater and bryghter light of the
Gospel is kindled and spread further abroad now, than before Christ's coming.
And we see that the very Apostles did not clearly perceive before Christ's
resurrection, what manner of kingdom Christ's kingdom should be. And
thirdly, because the Gentyles also were called too the fellowship of
everlasting salvation, by the universal preaching of the Gospel.

The third place.
Paul enlyghteneth his exhortation too new obedyence or a life agreeable too
the Gospel, by an Allegory of the light or of the day, and of darkness, which
Allegory he unfolds somewhat at large. j. These. v. Ephesians. iiij. and.v.
Concerning the causes that should move us too follow good works earnestly, and
concerning the several sins which Paul warns us too shun in this place, an
exposition may be fetched out of the place that entreats of good works,
and out of the exposition of the ten commandments. I will but show the harder
phrases at this time.

Let us lay aside the works of darkness: that is too say ignorance The
works of darkness.
of God, carelessenesse which neglects the doctrine of the Gospel, and
everlasting salvation,) all sinful lusts, and all outward offenses fighting
against the law of God.

And let us put on the armor of light: that is too wit, true The armor of light.
knowledge of God, true faith, invocation, study, and profession of the true
Doctrine, patience, lowlynesse, hope, and the rest of the weapons that are
needful for the mayntenance of the honor of true godliness, for the
disappoynting of the devils policies, and for the repressing of the headiness
of sinful nature: all which, Paul describes. Ephesians. vj.

As in the day: that is too say, in the clear knowledge of The day light.
the Doctrine of the Gospel, and in true faith grounded upon Christ. VValking
after a comely sort: That is too say, let us frame the purposes and doings of
our life, or let us live as it becomes us, or as agrees with the will and
word of God.

Not in feasting. The Greek word Comois signifies dru^ken Feasting.
feasts, ribaudly songs, and wanton daunsings, such as are wont too be used
by wildheaded and wanton yoongmen. The contrary virtue is sobriety or
stayednesse, and shamefastness, which perteyneth too the sixth commandment.

Neither in chambering and wantonness. The latin word Chambering and
wantonness.
Lasciuia wantonness, signifies a forewardnesse too iolitie, gamings, and
diversity of pleasures, (which notwithstanding is not matched with craftynesse
and desire to do harm,) like horses which (waring lusty through ouermuche
rest and feeding,) become coltish and fall too kicking and winsing. And Appius
in Liuie says, that the common people do rather ware wanton than cruel. But
the Greek word Aselgia signifies somewhat more, namely a more leaud and
ruffianly sausinesse, and reproach offered in the way of dishonestie. It
appears that Paul in this place speaks of the filthiness and uncleanness,
whereuntoo the contrary virtue is chastity, perteyning too the sixth
commandment.

Neither in strife and envying, or spytefulnesse. The contrary Strife and
envying.
virtues are, meekness, desire of concord and modesty or mildness, of which
is spoken in the fourth and fifth commandments.

Put on the Lord Jesus, that is to wit, in receiving (by faith) Too put on
Christ.
the imputation of Christ's ryghtuousnesse, where withal our sins be
covered as with a clean garment. And agein by following Christ's example in
earnestness of learning and teaching the doctrine, in profession, patience,
meekness, chastity, temperance. etc.

And make not provision for the flesh, too fulfill the lusts Provision for the
flesh.
thereof. Rule and express all straggling lusts, but yet forpine not your
bodies, neither neglect the welfare thereof, so far as shall be needful too
the going through with all things aryght, according too your vocations: but have
a care or regard of the flesh or of ye body, like as Coloss. ij. He wills us
too honor the body, that it may be kept in health, after a rightful order and
manner. Yet must it not wax wanton and run headlong intoo vice, nor too the
nourishing or fulfilling of the inordinate desires and lusts thereof.

Upon the second Sunday in Aduent.
The Epistle. Romans xv.
Whatsoever things are written before time, are written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scryptures, might have hope. The God of
patience, and consolation, give you that ye be like minded one toward one
another, after the ensample of Christ Jesus: that ye all agreeing together, may
with one mouth praise God the father of our Lord Jesus. Wherefore receive ye
one another, as Christ received us, too the praise of God. And I say, that
Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, too
confirm the promises made unto the fathers. And let the gentiles praise God
for his mercy, as it is written: For this cause I will praise thee among the
Gentiles, and sing unto thy name. And agein he says: rejoice ye Gentiles with
his people. And ageine, praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and laud ye him all
nations together. And again Esayas says: there shall be the root of Iesse,
and he that shall rise too reign over the Gentyles: in him shall the Gentyles
trust. The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing: that ye may
be rich in hope through the power of the holy Ghost.

THis Epistle is partly instructiue, and partly perswasiue.

The chief places are three.
1 Of the ends or use of holy scripture. 2 An exhortation too maintain
concord in the true Doctrine of Christ, which is often times distroubled either
with newness of orders, or with unseasonable omit ting of them, which thing
offends the weak. 3 A Doctrine concerning the gathering of the Church of
Jews and Gentyles, and specially of the calling of the Gentyles.
ALl this whole Epistle, in the continuance of Paul's discourse Of bearing
with the vveake.
is directed too this point: That the weak which are willing to be taught, are
to be born with, and not to be estranged from the gospel by the sodein laying
away of the ceremonies of Moses. This thing does Paul show in the beginning of
the.xv. chap. by the example of Christ, and by the saying of the Ps. 68. which
he cites. And by y^ occasion he adds a general saying of ye use of holy
scripture, and forth with returns to his pur posed exhortation taken at the
example of Christ: whereof the sum is this. Let there be agreement between
the Jews that use the Ceremonies of Moses, and the Gentiles that use them
not. Let none of them offend or condemn other for the keeping or nonkeeping of
the Ceremonies of Moses: but let each bear with others weakness, and uphold
one another like as Christ received and redeemed both the Jews and the
Gentiles. For he became the minister of the Circumcision, or of the Circumcised
Jews, too the intent he might confirm the promyses too be true, which were
made too the fathers, of his coming: and that the Gentyles being called too
the partnership of Christ's benefits, should glorify God, not with the
Ceremonies of Moses, but with true and earnest profession and giving of
thanks. Upon this occasion does Paul wynd in the things that are spoken of
the calling of the Gentyles, and of offering the Sacrifises of praise too God
in this place. And this is the sum of all Paul's discourse in his xiiij.
and.xv. chapters.

Nevertheless as at this time, I will somewhat at large unfold but one saying
of this Epistle, which concerns the ends and profitablenesse of holy
scripture.

Whatsoever things are written aforetime, are written for The profit of holy
scripture.
our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures, might
have hope. God has made men that they should be reasonable creatures, to who^
when they acknowledge him and glorify him) he might communicate his own
wisdom, life, ioyfulnesse, and glory for evermore. Wherefore too the intent
men might acknowledge God, he of his exceeding great goodness has disclosed
himself, not only by perceyuerances graffed in man's mind at his first
creation, but also by auouchement of miracles, wrought above the accustomed
order of Nature, and by deliverance of the certain Doctrine of the law and
the Gospel, which it was his will too have enrolled in the books of the
Prophets and Apostles, and too be acknowledged, woorshipped and served
according to ye same and none otherwise. And by these wrytings of ye Prophets
red, herd, and thought upon by us, God is effectual in us in deed, teaching
us, comforting us, and kindling in us the beginnings of life and glory
everlasting.

First then in this saying, let us consider it too be Gods exceeding great
benefit, that he has come forth of his secret dwelling place, and uttered
himself too us, and delivered us a certain doctrine concerning him self
comprysed in writing. And let us assure our selves, that in all thoughts
concerning God, Gods being and will, and our own eternal salvation, it
behooves our minds too be tied too these wrytings of the Prophets and
Apostles, and that we may not otherwise deem or speak of God and our own
eternal salvation, than as he has appointed in the word reveled to us by his
son. Esai. viij. for a Law and a witness: that if they speak not according
too this word, they shall not see the morning light. And Hilarious very
discreetly says: Of God is it too be learned, what is too be thought of GOD,
because he can not otherwise be known than by his own authority. And Ireneus
says: Because it was impossible too The uncertainty of men's lerning.
know God without God, God by his word teaches men too know God. Now let us
consider how great is the darkness of men's minds, and how foul be the
errors and outrages of the Heathen wandering without this word and doctrine
written by the Prophets and Apostles, of whom some dout whither there be any
God at all, others know not what and of what manner GOD is, others surmyse an
innumerable number of Gods, others estraunge the Gods from all meddling with
worldly matters, others hold opinion that men's souls perish together with
their bodies, and other some that they remain still alive. And universally al
of them being uncertain and doutfull of Gods will toward them, and of their
own salvation, do fall either intoo Epicurish contempt of God, or else intoo
perpetual despair. The same thing befalls in the Church too al such as
leaving the word, look for new enlyghtmentes and revelations, or traunces,
and judge of Gods election, not by the universal promise written, but by
imaginatio^s of man's reason.

With most thankful mind therefore is this exceeding great benefit of God too
be embraced, that he has delivered us the doctrine written, whereby he will
have our faith and all our thoughts concerning him and our own salvation ruled.
And therefore let us read these writings diligently and heedfully, let us be
in hand with them night and day, as Christ commands, Search ye scriptures.
And Paul bids us take heed too reading and doctrine. And for this purpose
chiefly are the first traynements of learning in schools, and the whole manner
of spelling and reading, too be learned, that we may read and understand the
book heretofore written too the church by the prophets and Apostles.

Secondly, let us consider that by these writings or by this word of God which
we here, read, and think upon, God in very deed woorketh mightily in us, and
that by this only mean and not otherwise, he teaches, comforts, draws,
begets a new, and saves men, and kindles in us the faith whereby we
receive these benefits, as it is plainly said Roman. x. How shall they believe
unless they here? How shall they here without a preacher? Faith is by
heering, and heering by the word of God. Ro^. j. The Gospel is the power of
God too salvation to every one that believes. Act. xj. He shall speak words
too thee by which thou shall be saved, thou and all thy household. ij. Cor. v.
We are messangers in sted of Christ, as though God exhorts or comfort by
us. And in this place Paul expressly says, that we may have hope by comfort
of the Scripture. His meening is, that in all our troubles, banishments,
diseases, and death, we should seek comfort out of this word which is
written before time for us, and that we should by faith rest upon God known
by the word, and believe this word written, as well as if we should here
God declaring his will with his own lively voice from heaven. Let us set these
testimonies against Stinkfeeld, who cries out that GOD conuerteth,
sanctifyeth, and The error of the Enthusiastes.
comfort us, not by thinking upon the word written, but immediately by
himself without any means. Which fantastical imagination does utterly put
away all the exercyses of faith and Christen invocation.

Thirdly, Whereas Paul fayeth that these Books of wherefore scripture serves.
holy writ were written before for our learning, he the rewithall counsels
us too read the same diligently, continually, and heedfully. For he has not
set forth these holy Books, for myse too knibble in bencheholes, or for flies
too ray in the pulpit, or for mothes and bowds too consume in corners, but for
us too read, that we may suck wholesome instruction and comfort out of them.
Ageine, this selfesayd parcel does us too wit, that all the promises of
grace, help, deliverance, and of all Gods benefits, and that all the examples
of Gods wrath in punishing, and of his mercy in receiving those that be
fallen, perteyne too us also, and are also too be applied too us.

Fourthly, let us in this saying of Paul's consider the four The uses or
effects of holy writ.
cheef ends, uses, or profits and effects. Of which the first is the doctrine
of the most high matters, unknown too man's reason, and perteyning too the
eternal salvation of us all, concerning which things, all other books written
by men can utterly teach nothing at all that is sound and substantial, that is
to wit, concerning the true knowledge and calling upon the true God the father,
the son, and the holy Ghost everlasting: concerning the two natures in
Christ: the creation of all things and of Angels and men: of the cause of
sin, misery and death unto mankind: of the forgiveness of sins and
atonement of man with GOD for the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ sake, who
was crucified and rose agein for us: of true comfort too be set against death
and all tribulations: of the abolishement of sin and death: of the
restorement of our bodies: of the everlasting punishments of ye ungodly: and of
the eternal life and glory of the godly. Of these so great matters, and
specially of the person and benefits of our Lord Jesus Christ the son of
God, who has vanquished sin, death, and the Devil for us, there are none
other books either in heaven or earth, that instruct us.

The second is Patience, a virtue no less necessary too a Patience.
godly and right christen man, than meat and drink is needful too ye
mayntenance of the life of this body. For persecution and adversity are
inseperable companions of true godliness and christen profession, according
too Paul's saying: All that will live godlily in Christ, must suffer
persecution. Otherwise, all the whole life of man were nothing else but misery,
as Euripides has truly said, This life in good sooth is not life, but misery.
Now in these miseries there can no calmnesse and joy of mind be settled in
God without disobedience and repyning, nor yet continue without the comfort of
faith, which the holy scripture only shows. And therefore in this place,
unto patience is forthwith added, comfort of the Scriptures. But patience is
a virtue which in bearing adversities quietly and myldly, does reverently
submit it self too Gods will, and seeks not unlawful helps, but assures it
self by faith too be in Gods favor, seeking and looking for help,
assuagement, and deliverance at Gods hand, and by this faith and hope alayeth
the greef, and feels peace and gladness in heart. All the whole orderly
setting out of the doctrine of patience, and the difference of the
philosophical patience and the Christen patience, may be conveyed hither out
of the Exposition of the ten commandments.

The third end of holy writ is, true, certain and firm True and steadfast
comfort.
comfort, too be set not only against poverty, sickness, and adversities,
but also against Gods wrath, sin, and death: which comfort none other books
besides these wrytings of the Prophets and Apostles, do show. For only the
scripture teaches that our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God, did by his own
death ouercomme our death and the sting of death which is sin, and that all
the other troubles of this life are not tokens of Gods wrath, but of his
favor and fatherly good will toowards us: who doutlesse is at hand with us in
our troubles, mitigating and taking them away, and at the length will
recompense the lightness of affliction which continues but a while, with an
enco^parable weight of glory. By these comfortes written in Gods word, the
son of God woorketh mightily in us: and when we think upon them and embrace
them by faith, he kindles in our hearts peace, joy, and tranquillity,
quietly resting in the loving kindness of God the father.

Now the whole doctrine of the Gospel is in manner nothing The doctrine of
Gospel.
else but a comfort of the conscience that is afflicted with grief that ryseth
of the feeling of Gods wrath, sin, death, and other miseries: in which none
other refuge of quietness or haven of sauftie can be showed or found, save
the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, our life and resurrection, on whom who
soever does believe shall not see death for ever. Now although man's reason
prefers the comfort of worldly things before the comfort of the scriptures,
(like as too a needye or sick person, money, or medcines that restore health
are a more acceptable comfort, than wholesome words) yet notwithstanding it is
the peculiar wisdom of Gods Church too rest upon the word and fatherly good
will of God, and too hang upon him alone, who is able too help above al
things, and far more abundantly than we can either request or understand.
And although he rid us not out of our troubles out of hand, yet he assuageth
them, confirming and strengthening the powers of our heart, that they may be
able too endure out the burden that is laid upon them.

The fourth end is, assured hope of deliverance and of life Assured hope of
deliverance.
and glory everlasting, without the joining of which to the other comfortes,
patience it self will be turned intoo fury, and at the length the life in
despair ^leeth away intoo Hell. But y^ hope of life is as it were the Ancor
whereby our faith is chiefly uphold and maynteyned in so great miseries and
most sorrowful confusions of man's life. And therefore Paul terms it the
helmet of eternal salvation. j. These. v. But there is a difference too be put
between this hope which leans assuredly to Gods promise reveled in the
scriptures, and the uncertain and deceytfull hopes of men which Aristotle
terms the dreams of those that be awake. And the definition, causes, and
effects of christen hope are to be considered, which things the studiouse may
fetch out of the exposition of the first commandment.

Upon the third Sunday in Aduent.
The Epistle. j. Cor. iiij.
LEt a man this wise esteem us, even as the ministers of Christ, and stewardes
of the secrets of God. Furthermore it is required of the stewardes, that a man
be found faithful: with me it is but a very small thing that I should be
judged of you, either of man's judgment: no I judge not mine own self, for
I know naught by my self, yet am I not thereby justified. It is the Lord that
judges me. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come,
which will lighten things that are hyd in darkness, and open the counsayles of
the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God.

The disposement.
IN the first four Chapters of the first Epistle too the Corinthians, the
state or principal proposition is this: I counsel you too be at one among
your selves, and that you vau^t not your selves one above another, ne nourish
debate either for philosophy and man's wisdom, or for the authority and
mighty woorking of the Preachers at whosehands ye have received the doctrine.

Too this mark is the lesson of this days Epistle too be leueled, which
teaches that all Ministers of the Gospel which do their duty a right, are
equal in power and woorking as apperteyning too the ministry, and ought not
to be judged of men, but the judgment of them is too be left unto GOD, too
judge which ministers excel one another privately.

The cheef places.
1 A doctrine of the ministration of the Gospel and of the Ministers, what
they be, what be the degrees of them, what be their duties, and of the
difference between the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, and the civil
Magistrates. 2 A rule of life necessary for all the godly in the execution of
any manner of vocation, which is, This is required in the executer of it, that
he be found faithful. 3 Of manlynesse and constancy of courage which
abandoneth not the duties of a man's calling, for rash judgment and venomous
opinions of other men, according as Paul says here: It is a small thing for
me too be judged of you, that is too say: Seeing that I have the record of
a good Conscience, and execute my office faithfully, I nothing regard the
venomous and untrue misdeemings of other men toward me. For (as great
Alexander said) it is a princely matter too be ill reported off for weldooing.
And every man must be so framed and settled in mind in his own vocation, as
Dion writes, that the Emperor Seuerus was: He was (says Dion) dilligent and
earnest in the things that were too be done, and as for the tales and
reports that were spread abroad of him among the commons, he passed not for
them. 4 Of mainteyning the uprightness of a good conscience, and of the
difference between the righteousness of faith, and the righteousness of a
good conscience or of good works. 5 A commandment of not judging, that is
too wit, things unknown, things secret, and things doutful. 6 Records of the
last judgment.
These places show the chief matters, whereof the records appear in this
short Epistle. At this time we will expound but the two first places, which
are the cheef in this Epistle. Of the rest we will speak an other time.

The first place.
OF the ministration of the Gospel. God gathers too him The ministry of
the Gospel.
self out of mankind, an everlasting church by the preaching of his word, in
which he has showed him self, and by which alone and not otherwise he
conuerteth men unto him, and endueth them with true knowledge,
rightuousenesse, and salvation everlasting: as it is said Act. xj. He shall
speak words unto thee by which thou shall be saved, thou and all thy
house. For this cause has he of his wonderful goodness and wisdom, even
forth on from the beginning of the world, sent and ordained certain persons
too preach and spread abroad the Gospel by pubike ministration. The first
preacher was the very son of GOD in Paradise. After him followed the
Fathers, Prophets, Apostles, and other Ministers.

Now, a Minister of the Gospel, is a person called of The definition of a
Minister.
God, either mediatly or immediately, too teach Chrysts gospel faithfully, and
too distribute his Sacraments, and too perform diligence, faithfulness and
constancy, in executing all other points belonging too the ministration of
the Gospel. By which ministration Christ himself works myghtily, and
imparteth true knowledge of God, ryghtuousnesse and eternal salvation too all
men.

The points of the ministry, or the cheef duties of ministers, are six.
1 FAithfully to teach the true doctrine of the Gospel in every Faithfulness
in teaching.
Article, concerning God, concerning the three persons, concerning the
creation of things, concerning Gods law, concerning the worthiness, the
falling, and the receiving ageine of the first man and woman for the promised
seeds sake: concerning sin, forgiveness of sins for Christ's sake, good
works, repentance, the last judgment, everlasting life. etc.

This doctrine which is set beyond the sight of man's The mysteries of God.
reason, and offers Gods benefits and eternal saluativnto men, Paul in this
place terms the mystery of god. Which kind of speech he uses in an other
place also. Ephesians. iij. and Romans xvj. Where he calls the Gospel a mystery
hidden from the beginning of the world. For it was not known to any creature,
Angel or man, that God would deliver mankind from sin and death, and
garnish him with everlasting salvation, by the death of his own son. This
mystery or hidden word of the Gospel, unknown too man's reason, does
Paul and all other ministers distribute and spread abroad among mankind. ij.
Corin. v. God has put intoo us the word of atonement. Therefore we come of
message in Christ's stead, as if God exhorted by us.

2 The second point of the ministration of the Gospel Ministration of the
sacraments.
is to minister the sacraments instituted by Christ, that is too wit, Baptim
and the Lords Supper, which Sacraments, reason gives too be comprehended
toogither in this place under the name of mysteries. For like as Gods secret
will concerning Reconciliation, Remission of sins, ryghtuousenesse, and
everlasting Salvation, is disclosed and exhibited unto us by the word of the
Gospel received at our ears: So are the same secret and wonderful
benefits of Gods Son, offered and applied unto us by the use of the
Sacraments enteryng in at our eyes. For the use, strength and efficacy of
the word and of the Sacraments is all one. Therefore doothe Austine
learnedly and wittyly define a Sacrament Austin.
to be a visible word. Of these two duties of the minister is spoken Math.
xxviij. Go and teach all nations, baptising etc.

3 The third point is. The preaching of remission of sins, The authority of
bynding and losing.
or the assoyling of those that repent, which is applied either in the publik
ministration to all in general, or else privately to each person several in
confession, in sicknesses, or in other greefs. Math. xvj. I will give thee the
keys of the kingdom of heaven. And Christ privately pronounces forgiveness
of sins to the palsyman and to Mary Mawdlin. Math. ix. Luke vij.

4 The fourth point is, too bynd sins or to excommunicate Excommunication.
such as are defiled with manifest wickedness which will not amend when they
are warned.

5 The fifth is, to shine before their heerers in example of Good example.
all virtues, like as Paul wills Tymothie to be a pattern of the faithful.

6 The sixthe is, too ordeyne necessary Ceremonies Ordering of ceremonies or
orderlynesse.
by the consent of the Church, or to appoint the order of times of readinges,
of examinations, of persons, and of places, that all things may be done after
a comely and orderly fashion.

The ministers that perform these duties rightly and All ministers equal.
faithfully, are all equal and peers as apperteining to the efficacy and
power of the ministration: neither is there any greater or more superior than
an other. For they are altogether not controllers of the doctrine nor Lords of
the church, but Christ's Handseruants (by whose service Christ himself
works) and Stewardes not of their own propre goods, but of the Gospel and
benifits of Christ. Therefore let no man vaunt himself above others in the
church, or stir debate and strife, for the authority and power of the
teacher or minister of whom he received the doctrine. Let such speeches as
these are be banished the Church and congregation, I hold of Paul, I of
Peter, I of Apollo: and let al men esteem them selves as the members of one
Christ, and ministers equal among themselves. Who if they do their duty
aryght, let the matter be put over to God to judge which of them excels
other privately. And the minister that doothe the parts of his duty aryght,
let him not pass for man's day, that is too say, for man's judgment, or for
the rash and venomous verdytes of other men, whereby he is deemed either
inferior or superior too others: but let him content him self with the
witness of all good conscience.

Now where as afterward the degrees of Mynisters Degrees of ministers.
are set forth one from an other, that is done by man's device for orders
sake: concerning which matter let Hieromes Epistie too Euagrius be read,
wherein he avouches at length, that Priests and Bishops are all one thing.
And where as afterward one was chosen to be set above the rest, that was
done for the auoydyng of Schism. But wheresoever a Bishop be, whether it be
at Rome, or at Eugubium, or at Constantinople, or at Rhegium, or at Alexandria,
or at Thanis, he is all of one woorthynesse, and all of one preesthode. The
abundaunce of Riches or Lowlynesse of poverty, makes not a Bishop higher or
lower, but are all alike the successors of the Apostles.

The differences between the minister of the Gospel Difference of the
minister and civil magistrate. 1. Outward discipline.
and the civil magistrate are chiefly four. First, the civil magistrate has
to do with the mayntenance of outward discipline and peace, or keeps the
outward members in awe, that they break not the politic laws, or trouble the
common peace. The ministration of the Gospel rules men's hearts or
consciences, and offers and gives remission of sins and the heritage of
eternal life, to those that believe, and kindles true knowledge of God in
their hearts, and the inward and spiritual righteousness and life. And yet it
leaves men free to use any manner of honest laws and politic co^stitutions in
the outward conversation of life. As for example, it gives men leave too use
diversity of meats, or unlike spaces of days. Secondly, the civil
magistrate punishes the disobedient The temporal svvoord.
with the swoorde, or with bodyly punishementes. But the mynistration of the
Gospel punysheth not the stubburne with the swoorde, or with bodyly rigor,
but with the only word of GOD. Thirdly, the Civil Magistrate prohibiteth
and punysheth only outward offenses. But the Ministry of the Gospel
forbyddeth the inward uncleanness of the heart, and the sinful affections of
the whole nature, and exacteth a full conformity of the whole nature too the
will of GOD. Fourthly, the civil Magistrate has worldely defenses, treasure,
armor, and degrees of persons and judgments, and power too make new laws,
and to execute them. The Ministry of the Gospel has no certain visible
defenses, no degrees of gouernoures that may have superior power or
lordeshippe over others: but altogyther are the hand servants of Christ,
and of his Church. Whereupon no man must exalte him self above others, nor
pass for the judgments of others, whereby he is deemed higher or lower, but
must content him self with the judgment of a good conscience, that he
executes his duty faithfully, and yet justifies not himself before God for
so doing: but thinks upon this that all men must abide the judgment of God,
who at the last judgment shall judge, which of the ministers do privately
excel others.

The second place.
ALl modest and wise men which measure themselves Of taking office or charge
upon a man.
by their own ability and by their own foot, and consider their own great
weakness in no wise answerable to the most difficult vocations of teaching
and governing other folks: are wont to debate carefully and thoughtfully with
them selves, whither they may with good conscience take upon them and execute
the ministry of the Gospel or other offices, for which they find
themselves far insufficient. For it is most true which Paul says: We are
not able to think a good thought of our selves, as of our selves. And so is
also this of Ieremies: I know Lord, y^ it is not in man's power to direct his
own way. Against this temptation which often times vexes the hearts of us
al, let us set Gods commandment, who bids us obey his calling upon trust of
his help: and the promises of God assuring us of his help, and of success to
the welfare of all those that bring faithfulness with them to the executing of
all the duties of their vocation. And this word Faithfulness comprehends
in the ministry of teaching the congregation or a school, these four
virtues.

1. First a convenient good skill in the Christen doctrine, Conueniene skill.
and a continual endeuer to learn and increase his knowledge. For like as a
practitioner that is ignorant of lechcrafte is not a faithful Physician but a
deceyuer: even so he that has not learned the chief points of the doctrine
that concerns God, is not a faithful steward or minister of Christ. 2
Secondly Heedfulnesse and diligence, too be performed Heed and diligence.
in all the points of ministration before mentioned, and chiefly in teaching,
after this manner: First that having a Catechism or sum of the christen
doctrine lernedly distributed intoo certain places, he beat it continually
and busily intoo his heerers heads, and requires an account of them what they
have carried away. Secondly, that in expounding the Gospels or Epistles, he
apply all his expositions to such places of the Catechism, as make up the
body of the doctrine. And afterward let him imploye the doctrine too the
kindelyng of some effects in the minds of the godly, as too Faith,
Invocation, repentance, patience. etc. 3 Constantnesse in professing the true
doctrine and in Constancy.
the mystery. 4 Fourthely, continual and earnest requesting and Earnest
prayer.
craving of Gods help.
Upon the.iiij. Sunday in Aduent.
The Epistle. Philip. iiij.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and agein I say rejoice. Let your softness be
known too all men: the Lord is even at hand. Be careful for nothing, but in
all prayer and supplication let your petitions be manifest unto God with
giving of thanks. And the peace of God (which passes all understanding) keep
your hearts and minds, through Christ Jesus.

The disposement.
AS short as this Epistle is, it conteyneth many notable places and of very
large compass.

1 Of peace and joy of conscience settled in God. 2 Of meekness. 3 Of faith
assuring us that God is with us, and eschuing thought which ryseth upon
distrust. 4 Of true Prayer and Thanksgiving unto God.
The first place.
GOd has created man's nature after such a sort, that All men by nature covet
contentation of mind.
when the good which the heart coueteth is granted, it settleth, and is glad.
For it was his will that men's hearts should before al things settle upon the
souerayn good (that is to wit God) and to joy in the same.

Now the Christen joy of which Paul speaks here, Christen joy.
is not a rising of the mind upon trust of his own goods, as Seneca
defines it, but it is a calmness and gladness of the heart rising upon Gods
most certain promyses and comforts, wherewith the heart being assured,
believes certainly that he is in Gods favor for Christ's sake, and that God is
with us, helps us, and will imparte joy and life everlasting unto us. This
definition will be the cleerlyer understood, by laying toogither examples of
men's joys, which Virgile, decketh with a special title, in the sixth book
of his Aeneas. For thou know how we spent the last night in false joys.
Every one of us do lead this life (as long as it is) in exceedyng Why men run
in darkness.
great darkness and danger. And the ungodly are ignorant of the true good
things, and of the true comfortes, because they do despise the light of the
Gospel. One ioyeth in pleasures, as the Epicures, of whom The felicity of
worldlings.
there is most now adays. The Niga^^ seeks money as the true joy. The
Ambitious man gapeth after honor. The witty sort hunt for learning and glory.
Other some with great travel seek the defense of friends and riches. And when
any of these things are forgone, all the joy is gone. As long as Pompey ruled
the roast and was lord of all men, he was merry at the heart. But as soon as he
was vanquithed by Caesar, he found that al worldly things were but deceivable
joys. As long as Cicero has luckie success, and governs the common weal
with singular commendation, he is glad and joyful. But when Augustus is made
friend with Antonie, whom he would have dispatched out of the way, and that he
sees he must needs dye: he has no more joy, but cries out: O unwise man
that I am, and nothing less than that which I was sometime falsely thought to
he: O the madness of my doting old age.

But Christen folk in the very extremity of trouble, Christen joy.
and in the mids of death are able to rejoice in the Lord with a true heart,
because they know they stand in Gods favor: they know that God is to be obeyed
in tribulation: they know for a certentie that a joyful issue shall ensue. And
therefore Steven went to his death with a glad heart, and eased his harms with
hope. Laurence lying upon the greedyron, laugheth at the tirant Decius, and
skorneth him to his head. And Simeon says: Lord now let thou thy servant
depart in peace according to thy word. This is the true and substantial joy,
settled in the Lord, and rising upon Gods promise, which refreshes and
strengthens men's hearts in all perils.

The second place.
Whereas the latin interpreter has translated it Modestia vestra not a sit
omnibus, Let your modesty or softness be known to all men: the greek word
is Epiceia, a virtue of the fifth commandment, and comprehends, patience,
meekness, pity, myldenesse, mercy, treatablenesse, and such other neighbor
virtues. And therefore the definitions, causes, effects, and examples of these
virtues and the vices that encounter them, may be conveyed from the exposition
of the fifth Commandment unto this place.

The third place.
Faith is a perceyueraunce of all the Articles of the doctrine delivered by
God, and an assent to the same, whereby we embrace the whole doctrine. And it
is a trust certainly assuring us, that the Lord is at hand, and that
although sorrows, dangers, persecutions, and other calamities hang over us:
yet it persuadeth a man for a certeintie that God is with him, and helps him,
and will bring them to a quiet end. Therefore it quayleth not through thought
and distruste, that it should either gad after worldly helps, or yet despair
like as Moses standing at the red sea, although he saw no mean of
deliueueraunce, yet believes he that God is at hand, and so he is not
discouraged with pensiveness. So says ye Psalm, though thousands of men
compass me about, yet will I not be afraid, because thou Lord art with me.
Esaias and Ezechias although the City was beseeged by Sennacherib, yet faint
they not for pensiveness, but flee unto God by earnest prayer, and wayt for
deliverance.

Hereafter ensue the disposements of of certain Epistles which are usually
read to the people upon the feast days of Saints.
Upon the feast of the Annunciation of our blyssed Lady Saint Marie, or upon
the feast of the conception of Christ.
The Epistle. Esaias. vij.
GOd spoke once ageyn unto Ahaz, saying: require a token of the Lord thy God,
whether it be toward the depth beneath, or toward the hevghte above. Then
said Ahaz: I will require none, neither will I tempte the Lord. And he said:
hearken to, ye of the house of David: is it not enough for you, that ye be
grievous unto men, but ye must grieve my God also? And therefore the Lord
shall give you a token: Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son,
and thou his mother shall call his name Emanuell. Butter and honey shall he
eat, that he may know to refuse evil, and chose the good. Therefore before
the child may know good or evil, malice shall dissuade from choosing the good.

THe first feast of the new Testament, and the beginning and welspring of our
redemption and everlasting The first feast of the new Testament.
welfare, is ye wonderful co^ception or cuppling of the two natures of the
Godhead and manhood of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, the memorial
whereof the Church celebrateth as this day. And of singular purpose was it
Gods will, that the times of his wonderful works and of his reuelementes should
agree. For upon this day being the.xxv. day of March, was the Son of God
conceived in the womb of the Uirgin Marie, or as this day he cuppled too
himself man's nature by eternal alyaunce, a thousand five hundred threescore
and ten years ago. The year after the first promis making of the woman's seed
in Paradise. 3962. After the renewing of the same promis unto Abraham, that
all nations should be blissed in the same seed, 1938. After the prophesiyng
of Jacob concerning Syloh, or the Uirgins issue, a thousand seven hundred and
six years, and the same day being the xxv. of March now full, a thousand five
hundred and. xxxvij. was our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God made a
sacrifise for us upon the Altar of the Cr^sse. The same day also is Adam the
first man reported to have bin created, 5532. years ago. And afterward about
the same time it is thought that Abell was slain, and Isaac laid upon the
Altar. to have bin sacrifised. Therefore inasmuch as the day it self puts
us in mind of most weyghty matters, as of the son of God the founder and
redeemer of the Church, of the creation of our selves, of the wonderful
alyaunce of the Godhead and manhood made in the Uirgins womb, and of the
causes and benefits of this wonderful union, let us with all godliness and
reverence cast our selves down before God, and yield him thanks for his so
excellent works and benefits, and by devout and earnest musing upon so great
things, kindle and confirm in us faith, prayer, and most assured hope of
everlasting salvation. And to the intent our hearts may be the more fit and
earnest to the reverent minding of them, and to thanksgiving for the same: Let
us also celebrate this feast with greater modesty and soberness of behavior.

The doctrine of this holy day concerning the causes and benefits of the
wonderful Incarnacion of Gods son, is all one with the doctrine that is set
forth upon the byrthday of the same son of God. And therefore the disposement
of that matter may be borrowed out of that place into this day.

Now will I breefly entreat of the prophecy of this Emmanuell.
days Epistle. Behold a virgin shall co^ceyue and bring forth a child, and
thou shall call him Emmanuell, which was uttered by the Prophet Esaias, seven
hundred and lvij. years before that the Angel Gabriell brought word of the
fulfilling of it too the virgin Marie, and conteyneth the doctrine of the
conception of the son of God, which is the foundation of our redemption and
salvation. I will therefore in few words set out the cheef points of this
doctrine, comprised in accustomed questions or orderly instruction.

The conception or incarnation of the Son of God, is What incarnation is.
the wonderful cuppling or personal union of the two natures (that is to say,
of the Godhead begotten of the substance of the everlasting Father, and of the
manhood taken in the womb and of the substance of the virgin Marie) wrought
in Christ our Mediator, that he may be Emmanuell (y^ is to say, God with us;
of one substance both with God the eternal Father and with us, reconciling
God unto us:) and by paying the full ransom for us, appease Gods most just
wrath against sin, and restore to us men righteousness and eternal life.

The parts of the Emmanuell conceived in the virgin Marie may be said to be
two: the Godhead, or the son of God, the word, and the manhood taken of
Mary's substance and of the offspring of David. Hither may all the whole
doctrine concerning the person of Gods son, the differences of the persons
of the Godhead, and of the two natures in Christ, etc. be referred.

The causes.
THe efficient cause of the conception or incarnacion of The efficie^t cause of
Christ's incarnation.
the son of God, is the whole Godhead. For although that the person of the
son cuppled to it self man's flesh by personal union: yet is it the work
of all the three persons together, which also go jointly together in this
saying, the holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest
shall ouershadowe thee. The highest is God the Father. The power of the highest
is the son of God, who ouershadoweth the virgin Marie and the whole Church,
making intercession for us too the everlasting Father, cuppling our nature to
him self, and covering us as a shadow against the heat of Gods wrath. The
holy Ghost halloweth the flesh taken of the virgin Mary's substance, and
thereof shapeth in the virgins womb, the body of the Messiah redye too be
borne, which body together with a reasonable soul, the word the son of God
by taking united, and by uniting took unto him. And therefore it is said in
our Creed, which was conceived by the holy Ghost.

The inward forcing cause of the conception, birth, The inward forcing cause of
Christ's incarnation.
passion, and death of Christ is al one, that is to wit, the infinite goodness
and mercy of God, toward manhood, tempered with his heavenly Justice, for the
full satisfiyng whereof with sufficient amends, the very son of God taking
our nature upon him, became both man, and a sacrifise for us.

The outward forcing cause, was the fall of our first The outward forcing
cause.
parents, and the sin that soked from thence into all men, with death and
most sorrowful damnacion of all mankind, which the son of God was Loath
should perish utterly. Why it behooves Christ to be both God and man.


Now the causes why it behooves our redeemer too be both God and man, are
twelve, which I have gathered out of the book of Athanasius concerning the
incarnation, and recited them in another place. First it behooued him too be
man. For like as the impe that is graffed into a tree, is borne by the tree and
takes sap and life of it: even so our humane nature should have utterly
perished and bin brought to nothing (like as the body perishes that is
forsaken of the soul,) if the mass of our nature were not vphild and
mainteyned by the son of God the word. Secondly, forasmuch as man had
sinned, the order of Justice required, that man should aby the penalty. On the
other side it behooued him to be God, that he might be able to pay the full
price, and to vanquish sin and death, and to restore righteousness and life
everlasting.

The matter whereof the son of God our Immanuell The matter whereof Christ
took flesh.
took man's nature, is the virgin Marie according as Esaias interpreting the
first promis of the seed, and the prophecy of Jacob concerning Siloh, (that
is to say) the Virgins issue, says in this place, behold a Virgin shall
conceive and bring forth a Son.

For in as much as of the mixture of the seed of man and woman is engendered a
nature defiled with sin, according as it is said: In sin has my Mother
conceived me: it was the will of Christ our Immanuell, (whom it behooued to be
undefiled and faultlesse) to be borne, not of the seed of man, but only of
the Virgins seed hallowed and clenzed by the holy Ghost.

The manner of this wonderful cuppling or union of the two natures, is
expressed with lightsome and most weyghtie words in the Creed of Athanasius.
The right faith therefore is that we believe and confess that our Lord Jesus
Christ is very God and very man. God of the substance of the Father begotten
before all worlds, and The ends and effects of Christ's incarnation.
man of the substance of his mother borne in the world. etc.

The ends and effects of Christ's conception are described in the two names
of Immanuell and Jesus. For Christ is called Immanuell (that is to say God with
us,) not only for the taking upon him of our nature, but also because he is
our patron and advocate, not accusing and conde^ning us any more, but standing
on our side, covering, excusing, and defending us, embracing us with brotherly
good will, and receiving us to the fellowship of al heavenly good things,
according as is said in these verses.

Christ is aright our Immanuell not only because he is blood of our blood now
and flesh of our flesh alike.
But for that to the Father in heaven for us al he beco^ming our Priest and
patron offreth a sweet sacrifise,
And for that with an earnest zeal of love he receives all that long for his
help or covet health at his hand.
The other name which the Angel Gabriell, (interpreting Jesus.
this place of Esaias) attributes too Christ, is Jesus, which is as much to say
as a savior or deliverer. And in deed the highest benefit of all that
redound to us by Christ's incarnacion or conception, is deliverance from
sin, from Gods wrath, and from curse of the law: and the giving of
righteousness salvation, and life everlasting. Too the setting forth of this
benefit may all the sayings of the Gospel be referred out of the whole
scripture.

Of kin to this wonderfulll union of the two natures Aliaunces of natural
things to Christ's incarnation.
in Christ, may these things be named: namely the similitudes and shadows of
that wonderful alyance which are settled in nature. That is to wit, the union
of the reasonable soul and of the body in man. The conjunction of the
Crystal humor and the spirit of sight, which is as it were a little fire in
the apple of ones eye. And also a piece of iron or steel red whot.

The things that fight against it are the cheef errors wherewith the doctrine
concerning the conception or incarnacion of the son of God is corrupted by
the heretics, Valentine, Apelles, Marcion, Nestorius, Eutyches, Apollinarius,
and other.

The Antheme upon the day of the Annunciation of our Lady saint Marie.
THis is the day which the Lord has made. This day has the Lord looked
upon the affliction of his people, and sent redemption. This day has the
seed of a woman chased away the death which a woman first brought in. This
day is God become man, continuing still the same thing that he was, and taking
upon him that which he was not. Therefore let us devoutly hallow the beginning
of our redemption, and let us leap for joy, saying: Glory be to thee O Lord.
This day is God become man. This day is God become man. etc.

Upon the feastday of John Baptist. The song of Zachary.
The Epistle. Luc. j. BLessed be the Lord God of Israel: for he has visited
and redeemed his people.

And has raised up an horn of salvation unto us, in the house of his servant
David.

Even as he promised by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which were since the
world began.

That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hands of all that
hate us.

To fulfill the mercy promised to our Fathers, and to remember his holy
covenant.

And to perform the oath which he swear to our Father Abraham, for to give us.

That we delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without
fear all the days of our life, in holiness and righteousness before him.

And thou child shall be called the Prophet of the highest, for thou shall go
before the face of the Lord too prepare his ways.

And too give knowledge of salvation unto his people, for the remission of
sins.

Through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the day spring from an hie has
visited us.

To give light to them that sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and
to guide our fete into the way of peace.

The disposement.
THis song of Zachary perteyneth too the demonstratiue kind. For it is a
thanks giving whereby Zachary sets out this exceeding great benefit of God,
for that according too his promises made too David and Abraham he sends
Christ the redeemer too deliver men from sin, from death, and from the Devils
tyranny, and too give them light, life, and soul health everlasting.

The parts of this song are two. In the first. viij. verses be sets out the
benefit of the sending of Christ. And in the last four verses he entreats
of the office of John Baptist, and therwithall of Christ's benefits also.

Blissed be the Lord God of Israel, who has visited and redeemed his people.

The proposition: I thank the Lord the only true GOD, (who has discovered
himself among the people of Israel, by his word and by assured witness of
miracles) that he has exhibited Christ the redeemer according too the promises
made too ye fathers. The word bliss signifies ere whiles What blissing is.
too wish good too one, and ere whiles too praise or glorify. As in the Psalm.
xxxiij. I will bliss the Lord continually: that is too say, I will thank, I
will praise, I will glorify the Lord at all times. Psalm. Ciij. Bliss thou
the Lord O my soul: that is too say, give him thanks. So also in this place.
Blissed be the Lord, is as much too say, as I thank the Lord, or I praise
and glorify the Lord God of Israel, for sending Christ our redeemer according
too the promises made to the fathers. For he has visited and redeemed his
people. The chief benefit Redemption.
of the son of God is the redemption and delivering of man from the Devils
tyranny, from sin, from Gods wrath, from Death. etc. And the restoring of
ryghtuousnesse and life everlasting. Therefore too y^ more enlyghtening of this
place, let the sayings of Paul concerning redemption, be added out of Romans
iij. j. Cor. j. Ephesians. j. Coloss. j. j. Timoth. ij. Heb. ix. Gal. iij. Tit. ij.
Esaias. xliij. xliiij. lij. lxiij. etc.

Too visit signifies not only too look upon, or too see how Too visit.
one does: but also too aid and succor such as we love, as in Exo. iiij.
The Lord has visited his people: that is too say, has helped and deliver his
people from the tyranny of Pharao. Psalm. viij. What is the son of man that
thou visitest him? that is too say, that thou love and defendest miserable
men, rewarding those with eternal life and glory y^ flee unto thy son? Lu.
ix. He knew not the time of his visitation: namely in which God by his gospel
offered remission of sins and everlasting salvation. And so speaks Zachary
in this place, god has visited his people: that is too say, not only has
looked upon them, but also redeemed his church, and set it free from all evils,
by his son which was promised too the fathers, and now performed.

In the Greek it is, has made redemption: that is too say, Redemption.
has redeemed. And the Greek word Lutrosis (which comes of the verb Luo
too pay,) signifies a redemption or deliverance which is made by paying the
price of one, that is too say a raunsoming. And thereof comes the word Lutron
which is the ransom that is paid for the deliverance or setting one free
from captivity. Christ uses this word now and then, as Math. xx. The son
of man came too give his life for the ransom of many.

2 And has raised up a horn of salvation too us in the house of his servant
David. He terms the kingdom of salvation or Christ the savior Horn of
salvation.
by the name of a horn of salvation. And these words are taken out of the
Psalm. cxxxiiij. There will I bring forth the horn of David, I have prepared a
light too mine anointed. The word Horn being borrowed by a Metaphor of Oxen,
does after the manner of the Hebrew speech betoken strength, power, and
plenteousnesse: as Thren 2. He has broken all y^ horn of Israel: that is too
say all the strength of the kingdom of Israel. ij. Reg. xxij. and Psalm. xxij.
My defender and the horn of my welfare. Psa. lxxxviij. In my name shall his
horn be exalted: that is too say the strength and power of Christ's kingdom.
So also in this place: he has raised up a horn of salvation, that is too say
a Savior, who by his power shall help us, and give us plenteous and eternal
salvation. In The house of David.
the house of my servant David, that is too say, borne of the stock of David,
according to the promise. ij. Reg. vij. j. Paralip. xvij. I will raise up thy
seed after thee, which shall issue out of thy loins, and I will stablish his
throne for evermore. I will be his father and he shall be my son. etc. This
promise is uttered out at large. Psalm. lxxxviij. I have found David my
servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him. Also Psalm. Cxxxj. for David
thy servant sake turn not away the face of thine anointed.

These places may be added for the enlyghtening of this song of Zacharies.

3 As he has spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets since the world began.
He has sent Christ the sauyor as he promised by the prophets. Promises
concerning Christ.
Genes. 3. 12. 49. 2. Reg. 7. Esaias. 9. 7. 11. 42. and elsewhere. Ierem. 2^. 31.
33. Dan. 9. Mich. v. etc. Of these promises speaks Peter. 1. Peter. 1. Of
this salvation have the Prophets made inquiry and search, which have
Prophesied of the grace that should come upon us: serching when or at what time
the spirit of Christ which was in them should signify. etc. And Paul Romans j.
put a part for the Gospel which God had promised before by his Prophets,
concerning his son, which was borne of the seed of David, as perteining too
the flesh. etc. In general also this verse gives us too understand that the
doctrine which is comprehended in the wrytings of the Prophets and Apostles, is
not delivered by the authority of man, but by God himself: and therefore that
credit ought too be given too this Doctrine as too the voice of God himself
sounding from heaven.

4 That we should be saved from our enemies, and Salvation.
from the hands of all that hate us. God has promised us salvation, he has
promised for a certeintie too deliver us from sin, Gods wrath, death, the
tyranny of the Devil and of all the enemies of his church. This
interpretation must be taken out of the conference of like sayings, as. j.
Corinth. xv. He must reign, till he have brought all his enemies under his
feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. etc. Colos. ij. He
has forgiven us all our trespasses, and has put out the hand writing that was
against us in the law written. etc.

5 Too perform the mercy promised too our fathers, Mercy.
and too remember his holy covenant. The four verses next following are a
garnishment, repeting and enlyghtening the meening of the third and fourth
verses.

The causes that moved God too send his son the Redeemer, are two: that is
too wit, mercy, and soothfastnesse in keeping promise. Of his own free
goodness and mercy is God led too perform the benefit promised too the
fathers, and too exhibit Christ the author of eternal salvation.

These words Testament, Promise, Covenant, Agreement, Testament, promise,
covenant, leage, agreement.
or Leagues, are in manner all of one signification. The old Testament was a
promise of a certain politic state and defense made too the people of
Israel, under condition y^ they should keep the law that was delivered by
Moises. The new Testament is a promise of Christ, or a promise of remission
of sins, of Gods favor, of ryghtuousnesse and everlasting salvation too be
given freely for Christ the mediators sake. Of this new Testament or of this
promise of Christ's made too Adam, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David and others,
does Zachary sing in this place, and he avouches that God is myndfull of
this holy Testament, that is too say, that his promises stand steadfast, or that
he keeps sure and unviolable this heavenly promise of his, concerning the
sending of Christ.

6 The oath which he swear too our father Abraham that he would give us.

7 That we being delivered from the hand of our enemies, might serve him
without fear.

8 In holiness and ryghtuousnesse before him all the days of our life.

The construction of the sixth verse is clipped, for there wants too keep or
too perform the oath which he swear too our father Abraham.

The promise concerning Christ, made unto Abraham and confirmed by God with
an oath, is too be seen in Genes. xxij. By my self have I sworn says the
Lord, thy seed shall possess the gates of their enemies and all nations of the
earth shall be blissed in thy seed. This oath of Gods is set out with many
words by Paul. Heb. vj. For God delivering the promise too Abraham, because
he had no greater by whom he might swear, swear by himself. For God meening
too show his unchangeable purpose more at the full too the heirs of promise,
assured it with an oath, that by two unchangeable things in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have steadfast comfort. etc. Galath. iij.
No man breaks a man's Testament, or adds any thing too it. Unto Abraham
and too his seed were the promises given. He says not in thy seeds as in
many, but in thy seed as in one, which is Christ. etc. But if the inheritance
come by the law, then is it not by promise. But God gave it too Abraham by
promise. That he would give us, that we being delivered. etc. Deliverance from
the hand of our enimyes.
Too be delivered out of the hands of our enemies, is too be set free from
sin, Death, the Devils tyranny and everlasting damnation, and too obtain
the forgiveness of sins, too be received intoo Gods favor, too be endued
with the holy Ghost, and too be accepted too everlasting life. Therefore too
be delivered from the hands of our enemies, is in this place, the same thing
that too be justified. John. viij. He that woorketh sin is the bondslaue of
sin. If the son make you free, you shall be free in deed. Romans viij. The
law of the spirit of life has set me free from the law of sin and death.
Also let like sayings be laid too them, out of. j. Corinth. xv. Romans vj. And
let us know that the deliverances out of the hand of Pharao, or out of Egypt,
and out of the Captivity of Babylon, were figures of this deliverance by
Christ. These words without fear, may be expounded by the saying of
Without fear.
Paul. Hebr. ij. Christ by Death destroyed him that has power of Death,
that is too wit the Devil, and delivered those which through fear of Death
were held in bondage all their life.

We might serve him in holiness. etc. Therefore are Holiness and
ryghtuousnesse
we set free from sin and Death, that hereafter we should no more serve
sin, but God in holiness and righteousness imputed and begone. Holiness
and ryghtuousnesse are words almost of one signification. For Holy betokens
properly, one that is clean, pure, void of all sin and spot, and acceptable
too God. Now God is perfect holy. But we in this life are holy and ryghtuous,
by having imputed too us the holiness and ryghtuousnesse of Christ, through
Faith, and by entrance intoo new ryghtuousnesse or obedience toward Gods
law, which ryghtuousnesse pleases God, not for the self woorthynesse
thereof: but for Christ's sake only through faith.

Therefore too God in holiness and ryghtuousnesse, is nothing else but too
acknowledge God aryght, and through faith too believe that our sins are
forgiven us for Christ's sake, and in this Faith too begin a new obedience or
life that pleases God, according too all the commau^dements of God. In fine,
Zachary in these verses comprehends the whole Doctrine of Justification and
good works. Before him, as Before God.
in the third Chapter of the Romans. By the deeds of the law shall no man
be justified before him, or in his sight. Philippians the third Chapter. That
I may be found before him, not having mine own ryghtuousnesse which is of the
law, but the ryghtuousnesse which is through the faith of Christ, which is of
God. All the days of our life. All our life long, and not on certain days,
as in the law. Esaias. lxvj. There shall be Sabbath upon Sabbath, that is too
say a continual Sabbath.

The second part of the song of Zachary.
9 ANd thou child shall be called the Prophet of the highest. etc. The four
last verses entreat of the office of John Baptist Christ's benefits.
and of all ministers: and therewithal they contain the Doctrine of Christ's
benefits, or of our justification and eternal salvation. And he reckeneth up
three special benefits. First Christ is the Savior that releaseth sin.
Secondly he is the light that enlyghteneth all that sit in darkness. Esa.
ix. Thirdly he is the author of peace toward God and toward men.

Concerning these matters, a larger exposition is too be fetched out of the
sum of the christen Drctrine. Now will I a little expound the pitthynesse of
certain words, the considering of which will make the things themselves the
more lyghtsome.

Shall be called the Prophet of the highest. Of this word Significations of
this word Prophet.
Prophet, there be cheeflye four significations usually in the Scryptures.
First a Prophet among the people of Israel, is a person called immediately by
God, too rebuke sin, too set forth the Gospel concerning Christ, and too
rule the counsels and deuyses of civil government, as Elias, Esaias. etc.
Secondly a Prophet in general, signifies one that foretells things too
come: As Agabus foretold of the famine. Acts. xj. Thirdly, it signifies a
teacher raised up by God, and endued with singular gifts for the setting up
ageine of Gods doctrine and service decayed. Such a one was John Baptist who
purged the Doctrine concerning Christ, (which was defaced with the erroures of
the Pharisees,) sharply rebuked Idolatrous woorshippings, repaired the Church
of God, and with his finger poynted out Christ who was then exhibited. Such
Prophets also were Austine and Luther. Fourthly, a Prophet in general,
signifies an expou^der of Scripture, or a teacher of the Church. j. Corinth.
xiiij. Thou shall be called: that is too say, thou shall be, he shall be
called the son of the highest, that is too say, he shall be the son. etc.
Thou shall goo before the face of the Lord too prepare To go before the face
of the Lord.
his ways. Like as Princes when they are coming toward a City, or too
Churchward, have of their guard that go before them, and make them way through
the thick preace of men, against they come, that they be not stayed with the
thronging of the people: So did John Baptist go before Christ, too prepare his
way. First too show him openly too the Church of his time. And secondly too
prepare the hearts of men by his preaching, that they might by faith receive
and embrace Christ coming unto them, y^ Christ on the other side might be
woorkfull in them.

These words of Zacharies are taken out of the Prophet Malachie. iij.
Behold, I will send mine Angel or messenger, too prepare my way before my
face. And by and by after shall the mighty one come too his Temple, whom you
long for, and the messenger of the Testament whom you would have. Also Esaias
the.xl. Chapter. The voice of a crier in the wilderness, make ready the way for
the Lord. And this is the common duty of all ministers, too prepare the way of
the Lord, that is too say, too prepare the hearts of their heerers by their
preaching, that they may embrace Christ by faith. For when Christ is coming
toward us, and is offering us his benefits, there are lettes cast in his way,
either our own rechlesselesse, or our presumption, or trust of our own
works, etc. These must be rid away by the ministration, that Christ may be
received by faith, and woork effectually in our hearts.

10 To give knowledge of, etc. An other duty of John and To give knowledge of
salvation.
of all other Prophets is too teach the Church concerning the eternal
salvation of mankind. Zachary in the last three verses does lernedly
comprehend both the definition of our salvation or justification, and the cheef
causes and effects thereof, and also the mean whereby we may atteyne to it.
Our salvation or righteousness is the forgiveness of sins which is bestowed
upon them that believe, through the free mercy of God, for and by Jesus
Christ. The efficient cause of our salvation is Gods inco^prehensible mercy,
who being led of his own free goodness, forgiueth us our sins. The forcing
cause or the desert for which we are received, is Christ the son of
righteousness that ryseth from on high. The formal cause of our
righteousness is the forgiveness of sins. The effects are the light of the
true knowledge of God: deliverance from the darkness of sin and death: and
peace of conscience before God, as in Romans v. is written: Being justified by
faith, we have peace too Godwarde, thorough our Lord Jesus Christ. Now that
the sum of the doctrine which Zachary co^prehendeth in these last verses, is
considered and expounded after the manner of Logic: Let us also wey the
piththynesse and weight of the words.

11 Through the bowelles of the mercy of our GOD, in Bowels of mercy.
which the rising from on high has visited us. By the bowels of mercy he
meeneth true, earnest, unfeigned, and hearty mercy. For the Greek word
Splagchna signifies properly the inward members of flesh, such as the Heart,
the Liver, and the Lungs be. Therefore in as much as the Heart is the
instrument and seat of love, mercy, sadness, and the rest of the affections:
He meenes by the bowels of mercy, not a feigned and cold mercy, but a burning
mercy issewing even from the very heart, After the same manner speaks Paul
Colloss. iij. put on the bowelles of compassion. Also What mercy is
Philip. ij. and elsewhere. Mercy properly, is too be touched with the feeling
of an other bodies grief, and too succor even those that are fallen intoo
misery by their own default, of a frankharted kyndnesse which mitigateth
rightful punishments and releaseth somewhat of uttermost or extreme rigor:
with which he has visited us, with which free incomparable mercy Christ has
visited us, embraced us, helped us, received us intoo favor, and accepted us
too life and glory everlasting. Rising: This word is a nowne and Rising or
Dayspring
not a participle, and it signifies Christ the day sun of righteousness
rising or springing from everlasting out of the substance of the most high
Father, and shyning intoo ours hearts by his Gospel, whereby he kindles a new
light of the knowledge of GOD, of ryghtuousenesse, and of eternal life. This
exposition is taken out of Malach. iiij. And the sun of rightuousenesse shall
rise upon you that fear my name. Also Zacha. iij. I will bring forth my
servant the Rising Zach. vj. Behold the man whose name is the Rising. Esai.
lx. Up and be enlightened O Jerusalem, for thy light is come, and the glory
of the Lord is risen upon thee. For behold, darkness shall cover the earth,
and clouds shall cover the people. But the Lordryseth unto thee, and the
glory of the Lord shall be seen in thee.

12 Too give light to them, etc. Christ is the true light To give light.
which lighteneth men walking in the darkness of ignorance of GOD, of sin,
of death, and of endless damnation: that is too wit, by endewing them with the
true knowledge of God, true rightuousenesse, comfort, life, and glory
everlasting. For customably in the holy Scripture the word Light signifies
the true knowledge of GOD, comfort, Light.
life, deliverance from death and misery, and all things that be of the best
sort. And contrariwyse Darkness signifies Darkness.
ignorance of GOD, sin, death, and all most sorrowful euilles. Zachary took
these words of the last Verse, out of the nynth of Esaias: The people that
walks in darkness has seen a great light. Light is risen upon them that
dwell in the land of the shadow of death. Intoo The way of peace.
the way of peace. Roman. v. Being justified by faith, we have peace with GOD
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Philip. iiij. The peace of God which passes
all understanding, keep your hearts.

Upon the day of the Visitation of our Lady.
The song of Marie. Luke. j.
MY soul does magnify the Lord.

And my spirit has reioysed in GOD my Savior.

For he has regarded the lowlynesse of his handmayden.

For behold from henceforth, all generations shall call me blissed.

For he that is mighty, has magnifyed me: and holy is his name.

And his mercy is on them that fear him: throughout all generations.

He has showed strength with his arm: he has scatered the proud, in the
ymagination of their hearts.

He has put down the mighty from their seat: and has exalted the humble
and meek.

He has filled the hungrye with good things: and the rich he has sent empty
away.

He remembryng his mercy, has helped his servant Israel: as he promised too
our forefathers, Abraham and his seed for ever.

The disposement.
THis song of Mary's perteyneth too the kind of cases demonstratiue. For it is
a Thanksgiving where withal Marie in the person of the whole Church sets
out the benefits of God with praise unto God.

First, for that God loves, preserves, and defends Marie and the whole
Church being brought low, despised, and weak, against the wisdom and power
of feendes, tyrants and all enemies.

Secondly, for that he has sent his son Christ according too the promises
made too the Fathers.

There be of the whole Song ten verses: Whereof the first two conteyne the
proposition. The next six set out the first benefit, that is too wit, the
wonderful preservation of the lowly and weak Church against the wisdom and
power of the whole world. And the two last set out the second benefit, that
is too wit, the sending of Christ the Redeemer.

My soul does magnify the Lord. The proposition: I yield thanks unto God.
This does Marie garnish with singular lightsomnesse of words as it were with
an exposition. What it is too yield thanks.
For too yield thanks, is not only with wagging of the lips and with
words: but also with the mind and the whole heart too acknowledge, confess,
and publishe, that we have received a benefit at another man's hand: and in
respect thereof too submit our selves with our whole heart unto him, and on our
behalf too obey him and do him good agein. Thus therefore does Marie begin:
My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my
Savior, that is too say: with my whole heart do I publish this exceeding
great benefit of God, which he has bestowed in sending his son the Savior
of the Church. Neither do I thank God with my lips only, but with my
whole soul, and with all the motions of my soul quickened up by the haly
Ghost, covet I too show the exceeding great gladness and thankfulness of my
heart which triumphs for joy, and too set out God my Savior, that he may be
magnified, that is, that he may be bruted abroad too be great and to have
bestowed a singular benefit upon us, and be glorified for so doing: and
that many men which shall be borne of me his lowly handmayd, too the true
knowledge of GOD and of his son our Savior, may be allured too acknowledge
him, and set forth his praises.

For he has looked upon the lowlynesse of his handmayd. For behold, from
henceforth all Generations shall call me blissed.

It reckeneth up the benefits which God grants both too Marie privately and
too the whole Church. I yield thanks unto GOD, that out of all mankind he
has chosen me a wretched and despised Handmayd., too this high honor, too
be the mother of his own son our Lord Jesus Christ our Savior: and that
he loves and defends the whole humble and despised Church, voutsauing
eternal salvation upon it.

First and foremost let the Hebrew phrase be considered, The Hebrew Phrase*
wherein is an ordinary matter by exchange too put the preterperfecttence of
the Indicative mode for the presenttence which the Hebrews utterly want.
Therefore all these speeches of the preter perfecttence, he has regarded, the
lowlynesse, he has showed power with his arm, he has put down the mighty
from their seat, he has exalted the humble, etc. are too be understood of
the presenttence. GOD always regards his humble Church: he preserves his
Church mightily at all times: he puts down or casts down Tyrants: and he
exalts or lifts up the humble and meek.

Secondly, words of perceyuerance, or words expressing Words of se^ce or
perceuera^ce.
the senses, among the Hebrews, signify not only the perceyuerance in the
mind or sense, but also the very motions or affections of the heart, which
accompany such perceyuera^ce Gene. iiij. The Lord looked upon Abel and his
offerings, that is too say, he did not only behold Abel and his offerings, but
also loved them, allowed them, accepted them mercifully, liked well of him,
etc. So likewise in this place, he looked upon the lowlynesse of his
handmayde, is as much too say, as he not only beholds me with his eyes, but
also loves me, regards me, cherishes me, helps me, defends me, yea
and with exceeding great benefits decketh both me and also his humble and
despised Church.

Thirdly, the Hebrews are wont too utter the Adjective Turning of the proper
Adjective intoo a Substantive.
and the Substa^tiue in this wise, that they put the one of the^ in the
Genitive case and the other in any other case whatsoever the manner of speech
requires: as in this place, he has looked upon the lowlynesse of his
handmayd is as much too say, as he has looked upon his lowly handmayd: that
is too say, his handmayd that is brought down too the ground, vile, and
despised. For lowlynesse in this place imports not the virtue which otherwise
is called humbleness, but an abasing of state and a vileness of condition,
such as is the case of an abject or outcast among men.

For he that is mighty has done great things too Great things.
me, and holy is his name. There is no greater or more wonderful work, than
for GOD too be conceived and borne of a Virgin. Too bring this great and
unspeakable work of GOD too pass, Mary declares hirselfe too be chosen out
of all mankind, not for any merits, virtues, or holiness of her own, but
she acknowledges that GOD only is holy, that is too say, clean, pure and
void of all sin and blemish, perfectly ryghtuouse, soothfast and good, who
was induced of his own incomparable goodness and mercy, too send his own
well beeloued son.

He that is mighty, that is too say, Almyghtye GOD. Mighty.
For the Incarnation of the son of GOD, is one of the cheifest works of
Gods almightinesse, which jointly toogither with Gods truth, is the
foundation of all the Articles of our faith. And holy is his name, that is too
say, he him self is holy.

And his mercy is from generation too generation too Gods steadfast mercy.
them that fear him. That is too wit, his mercy promised for Christ the
Mediators sake, is perpetual and set open too all men, and stable and firm
at all times. GOD being led with singular goodness and love toward mankind,
receives all that resort too him, too favor and inheritance of eternal life:
And in this life decketh them with all benefits both bodily and ghostly.

Mercy properly signifies the virtue which is touched The definition of
Mercy.
with the feeling of another bodies greef, and is sorry that other folks fare
amiss, and upon probable reason succoureth those that be in distress,
either of free goodness releasing somewhat of extreme rigor (as when GOD
pityeth mankind): else for ryghtes sake, as when good and gitlesse men are
vexed or troubled with wrongful displeasures.

Now, where so ever mention is made of Gods mercy in the Psalms and the
Prophets, always the promise concerning Christ is too be added, for whose
sake GOD is merciful too us unworthy persons defiled with much loathsome
filthynesse: as in the Psalm. lj. Have mercy upon me O GOD according too thy
great mercy, namely which is promised freely for our Lord Jesus Christ the
Mediators sake. Psalm. Cij. The mercy of the Lord endures for ever and ever,
namely, which is promised for his son the mediators sake. Besides this
also, mercy is oftentimes used in the Prophets for benefiting or for the
duties of charity. For all the benefits or duties of charity that are done
too our neighbor, must proceed of true mercy and love, as in this ordinary
saying: I will have mercy and not sacrifise: that is too say, I require the
duties of charity and well doing more than sacrifise.

Too them that fear him, that is too say, which acknowledge Who they be that
fear God.
their own sins and flee unto Christ the Mediator by faith, and in the same
faith begin new obedience agreeing with the will and word of God. For the
fear of God by the figure Synecdoche comprehends the whole service of God.
Yet is not Gods mercy and forgiveness of sins promised for the woorthynesse
of our fear, faith, or new obedience: but is given freely for Christ's sake
only, too him that repe^teth and believes, as is said more at large in the
doctrine of Justification.

He has showed strength, etc. This is the sum of Too shevve strength.
the next three verses. GOD preserves and defends his Church against the
wisdom, power, and ability of the whole world. Has showed strength, that is
too say, does mightily preserve and defend his lowly and weak Church, like
as he defended the Israelites mightily at the red Sea, and repressed the
tyranny of Pharao. With his arm, that is too Gods arm.
say by his son. For so is the son named Exo. xv. Esai. liij. Who has
believed our saying, and too whom is the arm of the Lord reveled? Esai. xl.
His arm shall bear rule over all. He has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their The proud.
hearts, as the Pharaos who by their own wisdom went about too oppress the
people of Israel. Exodus j. ij. xiiij. etc. as the purposes of Diocletia^ a
most subtle and cruel Prince, who ente^ded too have destroyed the church, as he
disappoynted the counsel of Achitophel. ij. Reg. xv. So also now of late
years he has disapointed very many subtle practices of y^ Putting down of
the mighty.
Pope and his Prelates that endeuered to have wiped out the church. He puts
down the mighty from their seats, that is to say, Tyraunts which trust in
their own power and wealth, and specially which are persecuters of the Church,
them does God cast down headlong from the highest top of their souereintie
into dreadful calamities: As for example, Apries king of Egypt who boasted that
no body either of the Gods or of men was able to bereeue him of his kingdom,
was afterward strangled. Nabuchodonosor who hild the kingdom of Babylon, (ye
largest and mightiest empire of ye world,) when he waxed proud and stahis was
deprived not only of his kingdom, but also of his reason. Julian the
regenerate being wounded and casting up his blood with his own hand, cried
out, thou have over Exalting of the lowly.
come O Galilean. Has exalted the lowly, that is to say, such as were cast
down to the ground, miserable, and despised persons, like as he lifted up
Moses out of prison to the Lordship of the kingdom of Egypt. He removed David
out of his shepeheards cotage into ye throne of the kingdom of Israel. He
made Daniell and his fellows rulers of provinces in the kingdom of Persia,
and Chaldey. He married Hester the prisonner to ye most puissant King Assuerus.
So also God lifted up the base and wretched handmayde Marie to this most high
honor, that she became Filling of the hungry.
the Mother of the Son of God. He has filled the hungry with good things,
according to the saying of the xxxiij. Psalm, the rich have wanted and bin a
hungered, but they that fear the Lord shall want nothing. Or else let it be
applied too the consciences that are made afraid at the beholding of their
sins, and which thirst and hunger after the righteousness of Christ. These
shall be refreshed with healthful comfort, and filled with everlasting good
things. But the rich or such as trust in their own righteousness and
holiness shall be shaken of.

The.ix. and.x. verses.
HE remembering his mercy, has hild up Israel his child, as he spoke to our
forefathers Abraham and his seed for ever.

The second and cheef part of this song, in which she gives thanks for the
sending of Christ, according to the promises made to the fathers. Now, to the
enlightening of these two verses, may be referred all the promises and Sermons
concerning Christ which are written by Moses in Genesis iij. xij. xxij. xxvj.
xxviij. xlix. in Deuteronomy. xviij. and by the rest of the Prophets: and also all
the whole doctrine of the Gospel concerning the person and benefits of
Christ. At this time I will but open the words after the order of Grammar.

He remembering his mercy, namely which he promised To hold up.
for Christ the Mediators sake. For this is the whole sum of the gospel, that
God of his free mercy for Christ's sake, holds up men that are falling into
endless destruction: that is to say, delivers them from sin and death, and
gives them everlasting salvation.

Has hild up Israel his servant, It is a figure of grammar called
Apposition. God has hilde up Israel his servant, that is to say, God of his
exceeding goodness and free love, pitying his people Israel, that is to say
ye whole Church which was like to fall into everlasting destruction: sent his
son the redeemer to succor us, fallen into sin and death, and to deliver us
from the kingdom of Satan and death, and to restore us righteousness and
everlasting life Has hild up. In the Greek the word antilabeto is the Aorist
of the mean voice of the verb antilambanethos, which properly signifies, to
catch hold of one that is falling by thrusting out his hand, and to stay him,
and to succor him, and help him, that he may escape safe and harmless out of
the danger.

Israel is the propre name of the Patriarch Jacob, given Israel.
him by the son of God in wrestling with him. Genesis xxxij. It is an ordinary
thing among the Hebrews too term the offspring by the names of the stock or
aunceters from which they come. So he calls the people of Israel by the
name of their founder, yt is to wit of Israel or Jacob, from whom all the
Israelites or Jews issued. And because the promis concerning Christ was
betaken chiefly to the people of Israel, (among whom was always the seat of
the church) for the same cause, the name of Israel is oftentimes among the
Prophets taken for the whole Church gathered of the Jews and the Gentiles
together. And this phrase of the Prophets does Marie keep in this place.

His child, whom he embraces with fatherly love as Child.
his son, and which people is the child or son, and servant of God chosen
out of whole mankind, to serve God, and to say and do things acceptable to God.

As he spoke to our Fathers, Abraham and his seed for ever.

This last part for ever would be joined to the first part of the next verse
before, which is, he remembering his mercy for ever: that is to say, his
everlasting mercy, or his mercy which he has promised to perform evermore
toward all those that flee unto Christ, as it said Psalm. Ciij.

The mercy of the Lord is for ever and ever upon them that fear him.

The promises concerning Christ the defender and deliverer To whom the promises
were made.
of the people of Israel or of the Church, were delivered first to Ada^ and
Eve in Paradise. Genesis iij. Secondly to Abraham. Genesis xij. xxij. xv. xvij. etc.
Next to his seed or offspring Isaac. Genesis xxvj. Then to Jacob, Genesis xxviij. and
xlix. Afterward to Moses. Deuteronomy. xviij. And specially to king David. ij. Reg.
vy. and.xxiij. and.j. Paral. xvij.

I hope that this breef disposement of Mary's song, and the grammatical
exposition of the words thereof, will not be misliked of those that be well
minded.

The Epistle upon the feast day of Saint lames.
The Epistle. Romans viij.
FOr we know that all things work for the best unto them that love God,
which also are called of purpose. For those which he knew before, he also
ordained before that they should be like fashioned unto the shape of his son,
that he might be the first begotten son among many brethren. Moreover which
he appointed before, them also he called. And which he called, them also he
justified, and which he justified, them he also glorified. What shall we then
say to these things? if God be on our side, who can be against us? which
spared not his own son, but gave him for us all: how shall he not with him
give us all things also? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen?
it is God that justifies: who then shall condemn? it is Christ which is
dead, yea rather which is risen again, which is also on the right hand of God,
and makes intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of God?
shall tribulation? or anguish? or persecution? either hunger? either
nakedness? either peril? either sword? as it is written: For thy sake are we
killed all day long, and are counted as sheep appointed to be slain.
Nevertheless, in all these things we overcome strongly through his help that
loved us. For I am sure that neither death, neither life, neither Angels, nor
rule, neither power, neither things present, neither things to come, neither
high, neither low, neither any other creature shall be able to depart us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

The disposement.
THis Epistle is persuasiue. And the state or proposition principal thereof
is, a comfort of the Church subject to the cross in this life. The places of
the comfortings, or the cheef arguments are four.

1 Of the final cause or the end and issue of affictions. Afflictions are
healthful.


What things so ever are good, and healthful to the godly, ought to be
suffered with a quiet mind and with a certain gladness.

Afflictions and miseries are good and healthful to the godly, and there shall
assuredly follow deliverance and a most joyful issue in the everlasting life:
(for this is the meening of the said saying, all things work for the best too
the profit of them that love God, that is to say, all afflictions turn to the
profit of them that love God, or of the godly, as it is said Psalm. 119. It is
good for me O Lord that thou have afflicted me.

Ergo afflictions are to be suffered by the godly, patiently, and with a
certain gladness.

For the manifestation of the second part of this argument, Platos opinion
concerning afflictions.
let the ten ends or commodities of afflictious be borrowed hither, out of the
place that concerns the cross and calamities.

And let young men bear well in mind this saying of Plato, which doutelesse he
took out of the doctrine of the Church of the holy fathers. Thus must we
think of a godly man, that whither he live in poverty or be turmoyled with
death or other adversities: these things shall do him good either alive or
dead. For God never neglects him that has his heart full bent too live
rightuously, and earnestly follows virtue, that he may (as much as is
possible for man) become like and conformable unto God.

The second Argument is taken of the example of the son of God.
Whomsoever God has foreknowen and forechosen to life and glory everlasting,
must of necessitis become like to the Image of the son of God.

But the son was feign first to suffer and to be crucified, and afterward to
be glorified.

Ergo also the Church and all the godly shall be glorified by tribulation and
affliction.

The third argument is of the efficient cause, or of the will of God.
ALl godly persons must reverently obey the order of Gods wisdom and
righteousness.

But God by his wisdom has appointed this order, that all they that are chosen
to eternal life, should first be called, secondly justified, then distressed
with tribulacion and affliction, and lastly be adorned with joy and glory
everlasting.

Ergo it behooves us to obey this order reverently.

The fourth argument is of the forcing cause, and of Gods help.
THe louingnesse and fatherly good will of God toward us, is to be preferred
before all sorrows, miseries and temptacions.

God assuredly bears us good will, and is on our side, he loves, helps,
defends, and saves us for his sons sake.

Ergo the sorrows and miseries that are laid upon us by God our Father, are
to abidden patiently.

Now forasmuch as there be two terrible objections that assault the minor of
this argument: Paul disproueth them in few words.

First.
None that be defiled with sins are beloved of God. Objection.


We are defiled with sins, and guilty of Gods wrath and endless damnacion.

Ergo we are not beloved of God. Answer.


Paul answers first to the mayor or first proposition, thus: yt none which
are defiled with sin (that is to wit, whicherepent not, and flee not by faith
to the Son of God the Mediator, that was delivered for us,) are belo uedof
God.

And to the minor or second part of the argument, he answers thus.

We are in deed gilty of Gods wrath and everlasting damnation, as in respect
of our own uncleanness and unworthiness: but in as much as we acknowledge and
bewail our sins, and by faith do flee to the son of God the Mediator, who
dyed and rose ageyn for us, and makes intercession for us at the right hand of
God: we are beloved of God, and we are justified, defended and saved for the
sounes sake, who was put too death and raised again for us, upon this son
sitting at the right hand of the Father, and making intercession for us, and
not upon our own sins, let us fasten the eyes of our mind.

The second objection.
REason would that they should be well at ease, which Objection.
are beloved of God, for no man does harm to those whom he loves.

We Christians in this life are of all men most miserable, oppressed with
afflictions, anguish, hunger, and nakedness, and we are slain all the day
long etc.

Ergo we are not beloved of God. Answer.


I answer first to the mayor. The godly ought in deed to be well at ease,
howbeit after that order and manner which the wisdom of God has uttered in
the Gospel. The godly must be made like too the Image of Gods son. They must
suffer and dye, and so enter into glory as he did. ij. God minds not to
endue the godly with ye short and shadowish benefits of this life, but with
everlasting rewards. iij. These calamities are not a toke^ of gods wrath or
hatred toward us, but rather of his fatherly good will, according to this
saying: whom the Lord loves, him he chastises, and he skourgeth every son
whom he receives. Hither may the ten commodities of persecution and
afflictions be referred.

And to the minor I answer. We Christians are in deed most full of miseries
(but it is but the turning of a hand,) because sin sticks still in us,
which must be done away by affliction and death. Howbeit in the mean while,
(even in the very afflictions) we find Gods presence and help, and wonderful
deliueraunces, and we are strengthened by the holy Ghost, so as we may assure
our selves that no afflictions can pluck us away from Gods louingnesse,
wherewith he loves us for his Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake: according to
this saying. John x. No man shall pull my sheep out of myhandes.

Hither to I have showed the state of the Epistle, and set out the arguments
after the order of Logic.

And I dare auouche that there is no one part of the sermons of the Prophets
and Apostles, that in so few words conteyneth larger wisdom, me places of
Christian doctrine, more effectual comfort in sorrows and calamities, more
vehement motions, more force of persuasion per^ing into men's minds, and more
notable figures and ornaments of Rhetoric, than does this Epistle which is
wont to be read in the Church as this day. And therefore I will breefly pick
out the rest of the places of doctrine, whereof there be testimonies in this
Epistle.

j. Of the causes why the Church before the rest of Places of doctrine
contained in this, Epistle.
mankind should be under the cross, and of true comforts too be set against
it. ij. Of Gods predestination which is Gods eternal purpose or decree of
chosing his Church out of al mankind of such as are called into that company by
mercy for his sons sake: and so of every one severally that shall continue in
the faith to their departing out of this life. iij. Of the Church and of the
wonderful gathering, preservation, government, and Glorification of the
Church. iiij. This saying Whom he has chosen, them also has he called,
conteyneth a most sweet and comfortable doctrine, namely that there is no
where any election too everlasting Salvation but in the company of them that
be called, that is too say, which here Christ's Gospel. And that GOD in
deed works effectually in the visible congregation of this called church,
imparting righteousness, and glory everlasting unto men. Therefore let us not
seek for Gods chosen or for his church among Turks, Hethenfolks, and others
that are ignorant of the gospel. v. Of the benefits of the Son of God which
was given for us. vj. Of man's justification before God which is the absolution
of the sinful man from the accusation of the law and from endless damnation:
and the imputation of righteousness, wherthrough (for Christ the mediators
sake who dyed and is risen ageyn and makes intercession for us,) he is
accepted for rightuouse by the free mercy of god, and received to life and
glory everlasting. vij. Of the kingdom of Christ sitting at the right hand of
God, or reygning in equal power with the eternal Father. viij. Of the
preesthoode of Christ pacifying the Father with his sacrifise and
intercession. ix. Of the steadfastness of election and of the certeyntie of
faith that leans unto Gods louingnesse to us wards, and believes that both
the whole church is preserved by God against the furiousness of feends and
ungodly folk, and also that every godly person that continues in faith shall
be saved.
Concerning these nine places, let the full exposition be taken out of the
writings that conteyn the sum of the doctrine. Moreover let the studious
consider each several word, the vehemencies, the phrases, and the notable
ornaments of figures: as first the Gradation of four steps. 2. the
Homaeoteleuts. 3. the Homoioptots. 4. the rife interrogations. 5. the
subiections 6. the often Antithesies. 7. the streynes beginning all with one
word. 9. the heaping up of things. 10. the Iscolies and similitudes. etc.

Upon the feast day os S. Matthew the apostle and euangilist.
The Epistle. Ephesians. iiij.
Unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. Wherefore he says: He is gone up an hye, and has led captivity
captive, and has given gifts unto me^. That he ascended, what means it, but
that he also descended first into the lowest parts of the earth? He that
descended is even the same also that ascended up, even above al heuens, to
fulfill al things. And the very same, made some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Shepeherdes, and some teachers: that the Saints might have
al things necessary to work and minister withal, to the edifying of the body
of Christ, til we every one (in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the son
of God) grow up unto a perfect man, after the measure of age of the fullness
of Christ.

The disposement.
IT is of that kind that is instructiue. For it is a doctrine of the ministry
of the Gospel, and of the teachers or ministers of the Gospel. The cheef
parts thereof are three, applied to places of Instruction.

j. The efficient cause from whence springs the ministry The efficient
cause of the ministry.
of the Gospel, and by which it is preserved, is the son of God our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is ascenddd intoo heaven, and reigns at the right hand of
the father, that he may give gifts too men. ij. The special or particular
kinds or degrees of ministers Degrees of Ministers.
of the Gospel. 1. Apostles. 2. prophets. 3. Evangelists. 4. Shepherds. and.
5. Teachers or instructers of young beginners. iij. The final cause for which
the ministry of the gospel The final cause of the ministry.
is ordained, and for which it is maynteyned, is that the true knowledge of
God, and the true and incorrupt doctrine of the gospel might be continued
and spread abroad among men. And that there may from time to time be gathered a
church that rightly acknowledges, woorshippeth and glorifieth God
everlastingly. And these are the chief benefits of this epistle.
And here withal let other of the notabler places be observed.

j. Of the diversity of gifts in the church which Christ distributeth to each
several person, according as he thinks good, that they may be employed to
further the common profit of the whole church. ij. A description of the
triumph of Christ the conqueror, leading prisoner the prisonership of sin,
death and the devil, and ascending into heaven, and reigning at the right hand
of the father. iij. A witness of the two natures in Christ, cuppled by
personal union, to be set against Arius, Nestorius, and Eutyches. iii. j A
witness of the almightinesse and every where being of Christ. v. Of the
ministration of the gospel, and of the sending of teachers and renuers of the
doctrine.
I will at an other time speak more at large of ye other parts of the Epistle
which conteyn most ample doctrine. But at this time I will breefly ouerrun
only one place, concerning the ministry of the Gospel, which peculiarly
perteyneth to the story of this days feast.

God created men to the intent he may gather himself Why God gathers a
church and apoynteth ministers.
a church out of mankind too acknowledge him and set forth his praise: and
that God again on the other side may communicate himself too those that
acknowledge him. And too the intent he might be known, he has of his
exceeding great goodness disclosed himself to mankind, by delivering him a
certain doctrine of the Law and the Gospel, concerning his son our Lord
Jesus Christ whom he has set forth too be a mediator and redeemer, too the
end that men being received for his sake, might be endued with godly light,
wisdom, ryghtuousnesse, and eternal life. For although God could without
mean have converted men unto him, and could garnysh them with his light and
glory: yet notwithstanding, of his wonderful wisdom he has appointed this
order, to the intent that men in this life might thorough the doctrine of the
law be stirred up to acknowledge their sins, and too repent them earnestly
for the same: and by the Gospel conceive Faith, wherthrough they may in their
extreme greefes flee unto the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, who dyed
and rose again for us, and for his sake obtain forgiveness of sins,
ryghtuousnesse, and the inheritance of everlasting life. Wherefore too the
intent this doctrine of the law and the gospel, (by which only and not any
otherwise God has determined to convert men unto him, and too gather an
everlasting church too himself) might be continually known and spread
abroad among mankind: GOD of his unmeasurable goodness has ordained the
ministry of publik teaching and preaching his doctrine, and has appointed
certain persons to teach, partly by him self without means, and partly by
his Church. And the son of God himself The first preacher of the gospel.
was the first preacher or minister of the Gospel in Paradyse, uttering the
wonderful promis concerning the seed, by which our first parents were
received intoo favor. Afterward he raised up Patriarks and Prophets, and by
his power in them maynteined the ministration of his doctrine against the
furiousness of feendes and tyrants. At length taking man's nature upon him, he
him self preached visibly upon earth, and wrought miracles. And as soon as he
was risen from death, he sent his apostles saint Matthew and the rest, too
spread this doctrine abroad through the whole world. By these were others
called too be teachers and ministers of the Church, and so from thensfoorth
by continual succession, unto our times, the ministry of the Gospel has
bin preserved and maynteined by the infinite goodness and power of the son of
God. And therefore says Paul in this place: And the very Son of God our Lord
Iusus Christ, has given Apostles.
some apostles, that is too say, ministers called and sent immediately by Christ
him self, too teach the Gospel every where, having assuredness that they
do not err. To the doctrine of these must we certainly give credit, as too
the voice of God sounding from heaven.

Some prophets, that is to say, teachers or interpreters Prophets.
of the scriptures written by the prophets and Apostles furnished with
singular gifts for the setting up again of the doctrine heretofore darkened
and decayed, such as were Austin, Luther, and others.

Some Evangelists, that is to say, ministers that teach the Evangelists* or
gospeller^
Gospel received of the Apostles, and set up churches in mo places, as.
Timothy. ij. Tim. iiij.

Some shepherds, that is to say, ministers called, not immediately Shepherds.
of God, but by men, to teach the Gospel, to minister the Sacraments, and to
rule some one church, in some certain place. These doothe Paul call Elders
and Bishops, who when they step aside from the rule of the Apostles doctrine do
err and fall.

And some teachers, which in the church, in schools, or Teachers.
in men's houses do teach the true doctrine of God, but minister not the
Sacraments.

To the building up of the Saints intoo the work of the ministry, that is
to say, that the holy church may be builded up by the ministry of the Gospel,
and that me^ which are drawn away from God, may be lynked too GOD again.

To the building up of the body of Christ, that is too say, Christ's body.
that the Church which is Christ's body, may be builded, that is to say, that
out of mankind there may be gathered a congregation of men, that rightly
acknowledge and praise God, and his son our Lord Jesus Christ, and become
heirs of the everlasting life.

Till we come into the unity of faith and of the knowledge of Gods son,
that is too say, until we all come too one faith, which is the
acknowledgement of the Son of God.

Intoo a perfect man, after the measure of age of the fullness A perfect man.
of Christ, that is too say, until faith which at the beginning is small,
babish and weak, may by little and little grow and become strong, manly, and
fulsome, or perfect. For he takes a similitude of the age of men, whereunto he
compares the encreasments of Faith.

That we may be no longer children wavering and carried Children.
about with every wind of doctrine, that is too say, that the one true and
vncorrupt doctrine of the gospel may be preserved among men, the loss whereof
makes infinite errors to creep in, as it is to be seen among the Heathen
folk and the Papists. And Paul uses lyghtsome metaphors. 1. First of the
childish age which is unconstant and easy to be bowed and changed. 2. Of a
ship floting on the waves. and 3. of a reed, which yeldeth to every blast of
wind.

In the lewdness of men, and craftynesse whereby they hem Leavvdnesse and
craf^inesse.
us in with error, That is to say, by the sleights and wyles of men wherewith
they compass us to deceive us.

But let us follow the truth in love, and in all things let us Truth.
grow into him that is the head, even Christ, that is too say, We that be
godly teachers, let us with agreeable endeuer spread abroad the true doctrine
of the Gospel, and by our ministration knit ageyn unto our one head Christ all
men that be pulled away from God.

In whom all the body is coupled and knit together in every The knitting of
the head and the body together.
joint by the ministration, according too the operation as every part has his
measure and increases the body too the edifiyng of it self in love, that is
to say: Like as in ma^s body, the power or spirit of life spreads from the
head into the rest of the members, knitte together by joints, that they may
excecute their propre services or offices, according too the operation that is
given too each several limb, which serve too the increase, perfection and
welfare of the whole body: Even so in the church gathered together by the
ministry of the Gospel, all the members of the church being knit too Christ
the head by joints, that is to say by the ministers of the gospel) do
undertake sundry services and duties, according as Christ has given too every
of them convenient power and ableness: woorking in such wise, that the body
of the Church may grow and be builded in love, wherethrough each several
member serves, not too the welfare of it self alone, but too the welfare of
the whole body.

Concerning the life and doings of the apostle Matthew, Of the apostel Matthew.
there ar few things left in any stories of credit. His fathers name was Alphei,
which word in the Hebrew is as much to say as a lieutenant of men of arms, or
a captein of a thousand soldiers. His own name Matthath signifies a present
or gift in greek Theodoros, that is to say Gods gift, or given of God. Before
his conversion he was a Publicane that gathered the common customs and
revenues of the people of Rome, which he had hired at a certain rent, and
wrested as much as he could from their subjects. The story of this calling
and the notable sermon of Christ which he made in Mathews house, may be known
by reading the gospel of this day. It is written of him that after Christ's
resurrection he preched about ten years in Iewry, and afterward taught the
Gospel more than twenty years in Aethiope, and there founded churches, which
(as it is certainly known) do flourishe at this day under the Empire of the
most puissaunt king whom we call Prester John.

Upon the feast day of Saint Michaell the Archangell.
The Epistle. Apocalips. xij.
ANd there was a great battle in heaven, Michaell and his angels fought with
the dragon, and the Dragon fought with his angels, and prevailed not, neither
was their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon that old serpent,
called the devil and Sathanas was cast out which deceyueth all the world. And
he was cast into the earth, and his angels were cast out also. And I hard a
loud voice, saying: In heaven is now made salvation and strength and the
kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ. For the accuser of our
brethren is cast down, which accused them before God day and night. And they
overcame him by the blood of the lamb, and by the word of their testimony,
and they loved not their lives unto the death.

The disposement of a sermon concerning the holy Angels
AS this day the Church haloweth the feast of the holy Angels, to the intent
the godly may consider this exceeding great and wonderful benefit of God,
that he has appointed us Angels too guard us, and yield him thanks for it,
and pray unto him that the son of God himself will defend them against the
Devils assaults and secret trains, by the watch and ward of his holy
Angels. Now that this benefit of God may be the ryghtlyer acknowledged, I
will breefly expound the doctrine concerning Angels, which shall be comprysed
in three places.

1 What Angels be. 2 What is the office or duty of the holy Angels. 3 Of the
evil Angels or Feends.
First. What an Angel is.
THe word Angel is a Greek word, and signifies a messenger. Like as
Sophocles says: No man rewards an Angel (that is too say a messenger) that
brings all tidings. And Homer in the.xv. book of his Jliades, This also is
good, when the Angel (that is too say the messenger) is a wise and politic
person. Theruppon is the word Euangelion, that is too say, good and glad
tidings, which we call the Gospel. And the son of God himself is diverse
times called an Angel by James and Malachie and in others places, by reason of
his office for that he is the eternal fathers messenger, or Ambassador which
shows men the Gospel of glad tidings, or the secret will of God concerning
forgiveness of sins for Christ's sake, according as he himself says: This
is the will of the father that sent me, that every one which sees the son
and believes in him, should have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at
the last day.

But when it is spoken of the Angelical natures or substances, The definition
of an Angel.
let this description such as it is, be had in sight. An Angel is a
spiritual or bodilesse substance, created by GOD after his own image, that
is too say, understanding, free, and ryghtuous, (which is not a part of
another nature, like as the soul is part of a man and is immortal) ordained
of God too set out his praise or too sing glory too God on high, and too be a
servant too the Church, and a keeper of the godly upon earth. This
Description may be set out and confirmed by adding testimonies of the
Scripture. That there be Angels, the sayings of GOD, of Christ, of the
Prophets, and of the Apostles, and the Stories both of the Bible and also of
later times do testify. That they are spiritual substances, and not bodily
masses compacted of the Elements, it is evident in the hundred and third
Psalm. Which make thine Angels spirits. And in the twenty and four of
Luke. A spirit has no flesh and bones.

After what manner Angels were created, it is not certeinely The creation of
Angels.
expressed. But the common opinion is that all the Angels were created together
the first day, and set in the heaven of heavens. That they were created after
the image of God, Christ witnesses. John. viij. And he abode not in the
truth. Then were the Angels created, too the intent they should be endued
with true ryghtuousnesse and holiness. They are immortal because they always
behold the face of the Father.

Concerning their Office or charge I will speak afterward. The degrees of
Angels.
The multitude of Angels is infinite, as it is said in the seventh of Daniell,
thousands of thousands ministered unto him. Dyonisius distinguishes them
intoo nine Degrees, Cherubin, Thrones, Dominations, Principals, Potestates,
Virtues, Archangels and Angels. These names are taken out of the sixth of Esaias,
and Collossians the first, and Ephesians the first, and first Peter the third
Chapter, and also in the hundred and third Psalm. Seraphin signifies burning.
Cherubin comes of Rubih, which word signifies a little boy. And thereuppon
they think that the Angels appeering with face fulsome, fresh, lively, and
cheerful, (such as Childrens faces are wont too be,) are called Cherubin.

In the Scryptures there are the names but of five Angels Names of certain
Angels.
expressed. Michael, that is too say, who is like too God. Gabriel, that is too
say the strength of God, or the Giant of God. Raphael, that is too say, the
Physician of God. Vriel, that is too say, the light of God. Hierameel the mercy
of God. But we will let this geere alone, and entreat of a more profitable
Doctrine, namely of the Office or benefits of the holy Angels.

The first and principallest Office or duty of Angels, is Offices or duty
of Angels.
too glorify God the creator with a thankful voice and with all manner of
serviceableness. As in the.xxij. Chapter of S. Lukes Gospel. They sing glory
too God on high. As the Prophet Esaias in his sixth Chapter does testify. Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath. Heaven and earth are full of the glory of his
majesty. Let this song be breefly expounded, which conteyne a sum of the
Doctrine concerning the being of God: concerning the three persons: concerning
the holiness and ryghtuousnesse propre unto God, and too be imparted too us
for thy Sons sake: and concerning the Gospel, by which alonely God will be
glorified, and by which the glory may be given too God, not only for
ryghtuousnesse and almightinesse, but also for mercy and soothfastnesse. How
be it, concerning the benefits of Angels, let the heerers bear in mind
specially these two textes of the Psalm. Psalm thirty and three. The Angel
of the Lord pitcheth his tents about, or entrencheth those that fear the
Lord, and shall deliver them, which saying is taken out of the.xxxij. of
Genesis. Where Jacob beholding the host of Angels, named the place Mahanaim,
that is too say, the camp or host of God. Psalm. xcj. He has given his Angels
charge of thee, too keep thee in all thy ways.

These has GOD made keepers of our souls, bodies, life, name, houses,
children, and substance. These chase away the Devils when they practyse the
destruction of the Church or of any several person. And doubtless they
fight against the feendes, according as the lesson of this days Epistle, and
the tenth Chapter of Daniel testify. And although we understand not what
manner of encounters they be, yet considering the greatness of our dangers,
let us the more earnestly give thanks too God for these keepers, and gather
toogither the sayings and stories of the holy Scripture, and of other wrytings
too our instruction and comfort. The Angels deliver Loath out of Sodom. Genes.
xix. And an Angel succoureth Agar and Ismael. Genes. xxj. xvj. Angels come
unto Abraham, and bear Rebecca company. Genes. rviij. xxij. xxiiij. and in
other places. An Angel delivers Jacob out of all perils. Genes. xlviij. The
Angels go before the Israelites, and defend them at their going out of Egypt,
and in the wilderness. An Angel appears too Joshua. An host of Angels
defend Elizeus against the Syrians, iiij. Reg. vj. Angels make a slaughter in
the host of Sennacherib, and deliver Ezechias. iiij. Reg. xix. Esaias. xxxvij.
An Angel leads Peter out of prison. Act. xij. A child called Cygnaeus being
in Cygnaeus.
the mids of winter left in a wood ouercouered with snow, was kept and fed
the space of full three days toogither by the ministry of an Angel. Simon
Grynaeus escaped the hands Simon Grynaeus.
of certain Serieantes by the warning of an Angel: which story worthy of
remembrance Philip Melancthon recyteth in his exposition of the.x. chapter of
Daniel.

But the benefits of the good Angels will the better be perceived, if we
consider the manifold dangers that hang over our heads, by means of the Devil.

The third place.
THe Devil is of the Hebrews named Satan, that is too Satan. Devil.
say, an enemy or foe. The Greeks call him Diabolos, that is too say a
slanderer. He is a cruel, subtle, mercylesse, and spiteful enemy of God and
of all mankind, and specially of Gods church. At the first truly all Angels
were created good by God, but some Angels through Pride and Ambition,
(wherethrough they sought for a higher degree of the image of God) fell, and
were cast by God intoo endless damnation. Now although in this life we be
not able too search out the cause why God suffers the evil Angels, which are
the authors of all sin and wickedness, seeing he could utterly destroy them
if he listed: yet must we both think upon and also believe the things that
are reported in the word of God. John. viij. He was a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth. Therefore there is no truth in him,
when he speaks lies, he speaks of his own. For he is a liar and the father
of lying.

He is a liar, and the father of lying, that is too say, he dreepeth Satan a
liar.
into men's minds false and wicked opinions concerning God, and Epicurish and
Academicall doutings, he rayseth up corruptions of Gods word: he confirms
Epicurish blasphemies and al untruths in the first and second Table. And this
Satan like an enemy or a Serpent in deed, led Eve and all the whole world
astray, as it is said in the Epistle.

He is a murderer, for by his outrageous cruelty and most Satan a murderer.
traiterous crafts, he practyseth mischief too our souls, too the life of
our bodies, too our wives, children, lands, and houses, and finally manaceth
destruction too whole realms and kingdoms. Against this cruel enemy
fights our Michael the son of God, who came too destroy the works of the
Devil. He being captain of the holy Angels, casts the Devil out of heaven,
and out of the heavenly Church. Therefore let us give God thanks, y^ he has
appointed the Angels too be our keepers in so great danger of our souls and
bodies, and of all that ever we have. And let us endeuer by godliness and
chaste behauyor, too retain them still.

Upon the feast day of all Saints.
The Epistle. Apoc. vij.
AFter this I beheld, and lo a great multitude which no man could number of all
nations and people, and tongues stood before the seat, and before the Lamb,
clothed with long white garments, and palms in their hands, and cried with a
loud voice, saying: salvation be ascribed too him that sits upon the seat
of our God, and unto the Lamb. And all the Angels stood in the compass of
the seat, and of the elders, and of the four beasts, and fell before the seat
on their faces, and woorshipped God, saying: Amen. Blissing and glory, wisdom,
and thanks, and honor, and power and might, be unto our God for evermore.
Amen. And one of the elders answered, saying unto me: what are these which
are arrayed in long white garments? and whence came they? And I said unto him:
Lord, thou wottest. And he said too me: these are they which came out of great
tribulation, and made their garments large, and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb: therefore are they in the presence of the seat of God, and serve him
day and night in his temple, and he that sits in the seat will dwell among
them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst, neither shall the funne light
on them, neither any heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the seat
shall feed them, and shall lead them unto fountains of living water, and
GOD shall wype away all tears from their eyes.

The disposement.
ALl the whole book of the Apocalypse is a Prophecy concerning the
persecutions and troubles that were too come upon the christen Church, and
wherewithal it should be disquieted, partly by Tyrants, and partly by
Heretics through the instinct of the Devil. And ever now and then there
(...)


