The Epitaphe of the honorable Earl of Penbroke, Baron of Cardiffe, and Knight
of the most Noble order of the garter. Who dyed Lord stueward of the Queens
majesty's household, and of her privy counsel.
SInce playnts want power to perce the skies, or rays the dead from grave,
No tears nor sighs may well suffies, to wayle the loss we have.
Then lordings wype your blobbred eyes, and sobb no more alas:
For death and deastnye does assign, all life like shade shall pass.
No seat nor Scepture certain is, the hye and low a like:
In spite of pomp and worldly blis, fall both amid the dyke.
But when a propp that stayde the state, dropps down as you do see:
The lokers on in muse do stand, at crack of such a tree.
which leaves the world in moorning weeds, behynd to weep the loss,
(Whiles fruit is fled from brantch and bow, as gold forsakes the dross)
O Penbroke will thou part so sone, what have has hyed thee hence:
Had I been warnd I had perfuemd, thy Tomb with frankincense.
But called so swiftly to my pen, the sweet insence I want:
yet swear I by the sacred Gods, though skill and sense be skant.
Thou shall not hyde in clotts of claye, thy rich rare gifts of kind,
Nor skrawlling worms shall make no pray, upon thy noble mind.
The Court that knew thy constant heart, bydds thee return again,
That art for troth and freendshipp fast, a parfect pattern plain.
A father where the counsel sat of tongue and talk divine,
As he at birth had stolen the grace, of all the Musis nine.
His looks did speak when silent lips, locked up great things in head,
yea every word past Penbrokes mouth, peysd well a pound of lead.
No lightness lodged in his brows, and sure a man in deed,
That well might ryes from Troyians race, and honor Hectors seed.
Of nature noble void of blott, in Court and country throw:
As curteys as the little Lamb, or Faucon gentle now.
In bounty did his heart abound, where cause made place before:
Not won by fear, but held by love, what might be wished more.
To such as fau'red learnings lore, (though he no schole point knew)
His pursse and hand as closly crept, as hawk wear clapped in mew.
To those that seemd somewhat to be, whose hearts he saw aspier:
He gave good hope in sign of happ, to further there desire.
To Prince and country true as steell, no blast could bear him down,
He kept his promise faith and oath, in Court, in feeld and town.
Devout to God his life well shows, his death does that declare,
On Christ alone, the corner stone, he only laid his care.
O manly Penbroke yet me thinks, I see thee martch upright,
Thy iesture and thy jolly port, stands still before my sight.
Thy cleanly finenes trimly framd, sprang out of noble breast:
And all thou did within thy days, a noble mind expressed.
But nothing here so clean or gay, can keep the life alive,
Both wealth and Lordshipp leapes away, when death our date does drive.
yet death when he has done his worst, dare not molest the spreete:
That God does claim and angels think, for Abrams bosom meet.
FINIS.
A verse of farewell.
I lost a friend, you lost no less, who least lost, lost to much,
Who looks to light upon the like, in Court shall find few such.
Quoth Churchyard.

Imprinted at London, in Fletestreat at the sign of the Faucon by Wylliam
Gryffith: and are to be sold at his shop in S. Dunstones Churchyard. 1570.
March. 27.


