A Psalm of thankes-giving, to (...) by the Children of Christ's Hospital, on
Monday in the Holy Days, at Saint Mary's Spittle, for their Founders and
Benefactors. Anno Domini. 1634.
Chorus. ^ RIse Orphans, raise your voice, in praise of God, for Patro. ^ For
bounteous Citizens from whom, we daily favor find.

Versus. ^ BY tears spent Mothers in distress, to miseries enthralled, We ^
were Be-no-ni in their pangs, the sons of sorrow called. Nor could ^ our
Fathers tell what state, the Lord would place us in, With better then our
Mothers ^ hopes, to call us Ben-ja-min. But dying, they bequeathed to want, the
Children of their fears. ^ We wep't till from our eyes were wiped, the pity
moving tears. Chorus. Rise Orphans, etc.

They moov'd the God of pity, He a King to pity moov'd,
And he removed our heaps of want, which work the Lord approved.
The King young Edward was the Sixth, but Englands first Josiah,
From Heaven by grace endued with the spirit of Eliah.
Which Spirit on succeeding Kings, on our blessed Charles he breathed,
To them and Citizens, the charge of Orphans he bequeathed.
Chorus. Rise Orphans, raise your voice, etc.
Which they did well discharge, and so does Charles our Sovereign,
You Senate who with Citizens, that Princes charge maintain.
Maintain therefore, O Lord, the state, and stock of King and Queen,
In Council, Peers, and Clergy, let thy work of grace be seen.
The City and the Scarlet Robe, with wealth and honor guard,
Our Patrones in thy mercy great, with happiness reward.
Chorus. Rise Orphans, raise your voice, etc.
CHildren kept and maintained at this present, at the Charge of Christ's
Hospital, in the said House, in diverse places of this City and Suvurbs, and
with sundry Nurses in the Country, which is a far greater number then
hitherto has been since the foundation. -- 960 The names of all which, are
Registered in the books kept in Christ's Hospital, there to be seen, from what
Parishes, and by what means they have been from time to time admitted.
Children put forth apprentices, discharged, and dead this year last past, --
72 THere has been cured this year last past, at the charge of Saint
Bartholomewes Hospital, of Soldiers and other diseased people, to the number
of -- 769 All which were relieved with money and other necessaries at their
departure. Buried this year after much charge in their sickness, 132 Remaining
under cure at this present, at the charge of the said Hospital, -- 280 THere
has been cured this year last past, at the charge of Saint Thomas Hospital,
of Soldiers and other diseased people -- 630 Al which were relieved with money
and other necessaries, at their departure. Buried out of the said Hospital
this year, -- 209 Remaining under cure at this present -- 304 THere has been
brought into the Hospital of Bridewel (for this year past) of wandering
Soldiers and vagrant persons, to the number of -- 1180 Whereof 50. have been
sent beyond the Seas. Of which number many have been chargeable for the time
of their being there, which cannot be avoided, by reason of their misery, nor
passed away without charge. There is maintained and kept in the said Hospital,
in Arts, Occupations, and other works and labors, Apprentices, taken up out
of diverse Parishes and streets of this City, to the number of -- 200
Printed at London by E. Allde, dwelling near Christ-Church. 1634.


