Churchyardes Lamentacion of Freyndshyp.
IN Court some say does freindshyp stolen.
And some to Court for freindshyp go:
But I that walk the world about,
Could never yet find freyndshyp out.
For fyneness: shows so fair a face,
That freyndshyp has no dwelling place
Yea, deep dyssemblynge manners mylde,
Has says and freindshyp both erylde:
The holow^ heart is foul and fell,
Wheare freyndshyp looks now to dwell.
The humble speech and Syrenes song
Has shrouded freyndshyp over long,
The wylye words that waves with wind
Has brought true frendshyp out of mind:
And to be short fair words is all
The fruit that from the tree does fall.
Words weldes the world, and bears the swaye,
And freindshyp daily does decay:
Yet durst I make of it report,
it is among the meaner sort,
If any faith or freyndshyp be:
But I so little freindshyp see,
I fear the virtue of the same
Consystes but in the gentle name.
The world is waren now so nyce
That we have learnd the french deuyce,
At your commandment for a show,
and mean no farther for to go:
We are as free of promise still
as though we mente a great good will,
And brave it out for gloryes sake,
and much ado thereof we make,
To blase abroad our bountye great:
T^^h man the fire has lost his heat,
The flame yeldes furthe but sparkles small,
theare is no freyndshyp now at all.
Give ear and here a pretye Jest:
Theare was a man (at my request)
That seemd an earnest freinde in deed,
and swore he would supplye my need
With all his help he could deuyse,
and often to blere his Ladies eyes,
And make her know his lyberall mind:
(for women Larges love of kind.)
He promyst many a goodlye gift,
but when I put him to his shyfte,
For quycke performaunce of this gear,
then backwarde began he for to swerve
Each word had past his mouth before,
I pray you now if we had store
Of such good friends, when need should cum
might not a poor man stryke his Drum
Before their doors with chereful sprete,
and sound a march in open street
A thousand times amidste his grief,
or he should find thearby relief?
Five hundred of such mates as thease
(whose freyndshyp is not worth a pease,
Whose bravery shynes beyond the Sune,
yet slypper laddes when all is done.)
My hap has been to mete or this:
beware I say the Judas kiss,
The ^yrynge face the Parate gaye,
the babbling tongue that has no stay,
The fa^ner fine that croutcheth low,
the plyant head that bendes like bow,
Whose nature lykes not freindshyps law:
the glorious man, the pratynge dawe.
Tut, tut, I warn thee ouersoone,
full long had need to be the spoone
A man should have for every feate
that with the dyuell thynkes to eat:
For dyuels in these days are to ryfe,
and thou must needs lead out thy life
With deep dyssemblers every ways:
the d^uels are much more to praise
Then muffled men that myscheife breeds:
who are not known but by their deeds?
Oh frendshyp thou art much mysused
to be with freindes thus abused,
For freyndshyp should with open face
be seen and felt in every place.
Of playnenesse first was freyndshyp wrought,
Just as the Gods, and pure of thought:
Full free and frank as Lords has been,
full bent the peoples hearts to win:
Full glad to fill the nedye hand,
full fyrme of word, and sure to stand
As Oak that every storm will bide:
not lost with want, nor won with pride
And welthy pomp, the pumpe of sin,
that brings every myscheife in:
But always clear from falseheddes train.
Than tell me now and do not feign:
Where do that freindshyp build his bower?
where is such freindshyp had this hour?
Where makes he now his mansyon place?
or where (good Lord) has men such grace
To light upon so great a bliss?
man's mind and nature altered is:
The world in wickedness is drounde,
and truly freindshyp is unsound
And rotten like corrupted fruit,
though glorious men will bear a brute
Of freindes, their freyndshyp is so cold
that we thereof have little hold:
When it should serve our turn (god knows)
we reap the weed, and plant the Rose:
We gape for gold, and grype but glass:
now does such words of office pass
Tweene all estates both far and nere,
that talk is naught but feigned chere
To make fair weather for a while
till one the other do beguyle.
I tell the man who plays the part
of wylye For, must learn this art:
They are no small birds (as I guess)
if I in authors may express
The sins that now be kept in store,
that puts in practyse this and more
To compass cloked freindshyp fine.
The Fowler never drawn his line
So strayghte upon the selye foul:
nor sure the byas of the bowl
Goes not so strayghte on master block,
as daily does this dallyenge flock
Upon the polycye of the brain
to bring the selye fool to train.
Men are so used these days with words,
they take them but for ^stes and boordes
That Christmas Lords were wont to speak.
well, well, I say the world is weke,
And weker it is like to be,
when credyte out of the world shall fly,
When trust is gone, and trothe is dead,
and faithful freyndshyp hydes his head,
And words are help of none effect,
and promise faithful is suspecte.
Farewell, al earthly hope is past,
I see our manners change so fast,
And such affection leads our will
awrye, to fyckle freindshyp still:
That sure true freindshyp sylent syttes,
and naught bears rule but wylye w^ttes:
Unshame fast ways, and meare deceyte,
for playnenesse such a pleasante bayte,
As choketh up both hye and low,
and poysoneth all the world I trow:
Wherefore since freyndshyp takes his leave,
and fynenesse does us all deceive,
Let freyndshyppes name be banyshed quyte,
for sure it is a great dyspyte
To speak of freindshyp any time,
to make of freyndshyp prose or ryme,
Or give to freyndshyp any praise,
that is so frutelesse in our days.
quoth. Churchyard.

Finis.
Imprinted at london by Thomas Colwell for Nicolas Dyer dwelling in S. Mariyus
pary^she nere to Charynge Cross, at the sign of Saint John Evangelist.


