THE FIRST part of Churchyardes Chippes, containing twelve several Labors.

Devised and published, only by Thomas Churchyard Gentilman.

Imprinted at London in Fletestreate near unto Saint Dunstones Church by
Thomas Marshe.

1575. Cum Priuilegio.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
1. THE siege of Leeth. Fol. 1 2. A farewell to the world. 13. 3. A feigned
fancy of the Spider and the Gowte 18. 4. A dollfull discourse of a Lady and a
Knight 27. 5. The Rode into Scotland, by sir William Druery knighte. 34 6.
Sir Simond Burleis tragedy. 46 7. A tragecall discourse of the unhappy man's
life 57. 8. A discourse of virtue 70. 9. Churchyeards dream 73. 10. A tale of a
Friar and a Shumakers wief. 84. 11. The siege of Ede^brough castle. 93 12. The
whole order of the receiving of the Queens Majesty into Bristowe. 100.
TO THE RIGHT worshipful his tried and worthy friend, Master Christofor
Hatton Esquier, Captain of the Queens Majesty's Guard, and Gentleman of her
highness privy Chamber.
THe long liking and good will with the fast friendship I find in you (good
master Hatton) procures my pen presently to perform that I promised, no
small time since, touching a book of al my English verses in miter. The offer
whereof came from my self, not for the goodness of the matter, but for the
parfitnesse of ye person to whom I me^t to dedicate my work. And albeit your
valeur may not be seen in so simple a glass, yet I hope this my works shall
not hinder your deserved renowm, nor breed occasion to mislike my unbridled
boldness. And for that from my head, hand and pen, can floe no far fatched
eloquence, nor sweet sprinklyng speeches (seasoned with spiced terms) I call
my works Churchyardes Chips, the basnes whereof can beguild no man with better
opinion, than the substance it self does import, and in deed if any other
tietle had been given to my trifles, than the proper name of chips, men might
have hoped for grauer matter then the natuer of my verses can produce.
VVherefor I prepared a title aunswerable to the weight of the work,
misdoubting not but that you will of cortesie behold what blaes of good will
these my Chips will utter to the world. Assuring my self and my friends,
that herein is no kind of spark, neither hurtful nor uncomely. But as the
world may judge, among many chips may be sundry woods, so the worst of them
all makes but a crack, consumes with the coals, and turns unto sinders.
What fire can be made where neither smoek can be seen, nor hissing of sticks
may be hard? And yet those two properties agree in ye end to one flame,
effect and purpose. I write of several things, whose sundry foundations might
lead me to diverse subjects, but each of them in deed serves to one man's
cogitacion and duetifull dealing toward God and my country. And none of them
has any humor or disease, but such as eury body may broke, disgeste, and
embrace, (bearing any grain of favor to the wrytter) which I hope makes the
reddier passage to that which I caused to be Printed. My first book has but
few things in it, but such variety of matter as shall breed to the Reader
rather pleasure than painfulnes. And the second shall contain a number of
things I trust of no less pastime and commodity, waying mirrely the meaning of
my Imaginacio^s. Thus making my choice of a sufficient patroen, for a far
better work than my cunning can perform, (and creping under the target of
your protection) I weery you no further in reading of this my plain Epistle,
committing to the Almighty, your worship, good naem, and most desired
felicity, with increace of wished fortune.

Yours in all at commandment Thomas Churchyard Gentleman.

To the dispisers of other men's works that shoes nothing of their own.
IF well you judge of my good will,
you yield me my deserts:
If that with frovvns and scorneful locks,
you shoe your hollovve hearts.
(And by disdain disgrace his Verse,
that does the best he can:)
You do not well to hinder so,
the works of any man.
For look what measure you do meet,
the same ye shall receive:
When from the loem of your device,
like webb of cloeth you vveaue.
But if you lead an idle life,
and father near a child:
You are as bad as barain ground,
and so the world begilde.

The loekar on of table play,
finds many faults in deed:
(And with conceits of this and that,
he does his fancy feed)
But bid him play a gaem himself.
and than perhaps he will:
Mis some good point by over sight,
and loes his money still.
A man that builds a pretty house,
in svveete and wholesome air:
(With goodly rovvms and choice of place,
and vvindoes large and fair.)
Shall here his neighbor straight disprayes,
the seat and eek the fraem:
Yet he that praets wants wealth and wit,
and cannot mende the seam.
What needs more words to waest my wind,
about these busy brains:
That povvlts and svvels at others toils,
and take themselves no pains.
The best is though small goodness be,
in these baer chipps of mien:
My hatchet hewd them all in deed,
vvhear they be gross or fien.
And when that theas have maed a blaes,
and bin in world a whiel:
A bigger basket will I bring,
to make you worldlings smiel.
And vvheather theas you like or not,
the rest aer near the stamp:
Which if you pleas to flinge in fire,
will borne as clear as lamp.
Thus faerwell friends or flyring foes,
I kno not how to fawn:
I mean to see you ons again,
so leave my book for pawn.
Aduc.

THE SIEGE OF Leeth, more aptly called the schole of war, (the Lord Gray of
Wiltton general thereof) in the second year of the reign of our sovereign
Lady Queen Elizabeth. Anno. 1560.
AS March did end, so Mars began his reign,
Whose me^ I saw, to bluddy wars were bente
From Barwick walls, they marched throw the plain
With banner splaide, with carriage haell and tente,
All fit for wars, to Leeth this army went,
And as I know, the number was so small,
Six thousand and, five hundredth men were all.
And most of those, not trained for the field
More raw then ripe, unready out of use:
And some men say, each leader was not skild,
But what of that? I write not of abuse
If faults there were, I ought to make excuse:
First do we creep and after learn to go,
All hitts not white, that shoots in the bow.
Among these men, were soldiers of each force
Both old and young, what should there more be said?
And some that sought, to get a good report
To haunt the wars, did hold them well apaid:
Of Cannon shot, they seldom stood afraid
They knew the crack, and horling in the ear
Was half the harm, and most of all the fear.
Such men declarde, they had a det to pay,
And still they wished, in countries cause to die,
They praysde that man, that serude his prince a day
They were a fear, unto the enmyes eye,
They beautifyed, their bands with bravery:
They bare the blows, and brought the yonglings on.
And gave the charge, when others lokt upon*
As erste I said, this camp so furnished out
Lord Gray the chief, Lord Skrope the Marshall than
Of knights and squires, if here I went about
To show their names, as if I list I can,
Time should I loose, and weary many a man
To read their styles, wherefore your leave I crave
To write such things, as in my head I have.
The manner thus, before Dumbar they paste
A Skirmishe at Dumbar.
Where issued out, the French a silly band
On horse and foot, and not requyring fast
To take me thought, the skirmishing in hand:
And thus a while, both parties still did stand.
Till cankred hate, had kindled malice new,
And badde our men, in field their foes pursewe.
But in the end, a few were hurt or slain
They driven in, and none that skirmishe would,
The camp marched throw, and did no while remain
Before Dumbar, the troth thereof is told:
The rest my pen, shall soon to you unfold
So that you do, my tale in order mark
And as you ought, give credit to my warke.
At length in sight of Leeth our army preast
I had forgot, how they the Scots Lords met
Who brought with them, two Thousand men at least
Few more I guess, that were in order set
But still in hope, a greater power to get
They put us in, So thus we ioynde in on
I may not long, this matter rest upon.
But as I said, when sight of Leeth we had
Like as the Bore, his brissels ginnes to shake
When he is chafte, and fares as he were mad:
Or as the Wolf, that newly is awake
In fury runs, the silly sheep to take
So did our men, the French full fast pursue
Where sone was seen, the wars began a new.
They had no mind, on peace proclaimde in Cheap
The leage was brook, they thought in London made
Out goes the Pikes, the soldiers ran in heap
The scabberds falls, and forth was drawn the blade
Some shotes apace, the others chardge and lade
But ere the heat, of this great skirmishe grew
The Dowager, with trumpet took a true.
This stay of war, made many men to muse
How be it was, devised of their Queen
Some say by craft, our Captains to abuse
And so it proud, none other as I ween:
For here and there, the Frenchmen lay unseen
As though were meant, no harm on either side
As fire lies hid, until the smoke be spide.
Our Camp came on, and sought their tents to pitch
The French drew near, to view our manner throw
Whereat Lord Gray, was discontented mitch
And sent them word, they should retire them now:
Wherefore (quod they,) we understand not how
We should give place, or any way be bound
To part from hence, and leave our Masters ground.
Yees (quod my Lord) were not for promise sake
Of truse a while, we should not reason long:
Under the pretense of peace they shot in o^^ faces.
Full stoutly than, the French in braury spoke
Do what you dare, we will not take a wrong
Wherewith in haste, they sange us such a song
With curriar shot, that had not hap bin good,
They had soon shed, some of our worthist blood.
For as our chief, and leaders of the field
In danger stood, under the league we had,
They used such wars, as have bin seen but ^ield
Full in our face, they shot as they were mad:
A trick of France, a bluddy part to bad
But as God would, the skath they did was small
One m^^laine at the (...).
It was but one* on whom the harm did fale.
Our rage was great, our bloudes began to rise
Our stomachs storde, as we did this behold
Throw out the Camp, the noyes ran to the skies
At brute whereof, the coward wa^ed bold
The valiaunte man, had courage dubble fold:
So that a loud, a chardge, a chardge, they cride
They carried not, and looked for a gide.
But as by chance, each one his marrow met
They skirmished, as thick as bees they swarm:
Some lost their lives, and paid the earth his debt,
Some were sore hurt, and had no further harm.
I you assure, this skirmishe was so warm
That as the haills, commes down like rainy tears
The curriar shot, did ringe about our ears.
If Barwick bands, had absent bin that day
A present plague, was like on us to light,
Upon our foes, they raune and led the way
And still they put, the French perforce to flight.
But yet I praise some other men of right
That serud full well, whose names if I should show
Some here might say, the men we do not know.
A further cause, has staide my pen herein,
All have not fame, All have no^ same that do well.
that worthy are therefore:
Some gets great thanckes, that silde in wars has bin:
Some serve so long, their names are clean out wore:
Some have ill friends, ill ha^ and that is more:
So that their acts, lie dead and little worth,
For that no man, their deeds dare well set forth.
I leave this case, and to my matter cumine,
That day was hot, and hard for to endure,
The shot was such, there could no sound of drum
Be easly heard, the t^^e I you assure
On both the sides, they put their force in ure:
And if I shall, not lie for favors sake,
The French that while, serude well I undertake.
Full wise and ware, they were in all their ways
And valiauntly, they did themselves defend.
But as I do, their skill and manhood praise,
So here I must, their boldness discommende
For had we seen, what happened in the end
Or known the ground, as reason did require
We had full soon, compeld them to retire.
Retire good Lord, So well it had not bin
They had bin slain, or taken every man:
But who can tell, who shall the victry win
When men do meet, no more we knew not than
Until in deed, the heat of this began
Where lay their rewen, where our good Fortune was:
For battles are, as brittle as the glass.
Now conquest seems, than overthrows appears:
Now seems it good, that after proves stark naught:
Now is he free, that happens in the breares:
Now men devise, now all is out of thought:
Now much is spoke, and little things are wrought,
This is the course, and custom of the war
Where wisdom bids, no man to go to far.
The soth to show, if men before had known
What vauntage great, to us that day was due
We had in deed, the Frenchmen overthrown
With little loss: and yet I say to you
It happened well, as forth then matter grue:
Our horsemen came, and gave a charge full well,
In whom then lay, the service every dell.
Their names that chardge, I think unfit to wright
Who serves well, Sir Harry Kniuet hurt manfully at the charge.
at length must needs have fame
Let no man think, their deeds are buryd quigh^
All though not here, the persons do I name
I ^ill for that, my work put out of frame.
To them I leave, at large that to disclose
That after shall, this journey wright in prose.
Right hot a while, the enmies shot enduerd
But sone was coeld, the terror of the same
The horsemens force, in fi^e the French procuerd
For to retire, nay ru^ne away with shame:
But yet I may, not much their doings blame
In order still, their battle stood me semde
Five hundredth Pykes, they were as we estemde.
But what should more, be said they shronke aside
And to their town, Twelve men of good name slain on the French side, and v.
gentlemen taken prisoners
they trotted as they might:
But every band, had not with him his gyde
They bode the brunt, on them the bloes did light
And as I heard, and saw there compted right
Twelve men of name, were slain and prisners five,
We took that day, and brought away alive.
Of common sort, of soldiers good and bad
Full seven skore, of them we put to sack,
And some sore hurt, into their town they lad:
Of ours in deed, a very few did lack
Some hurt, some slain, our enmies put a back
And as in deed, the manner is of fortes
The town seeing this, against them shut their ports.
We heard thearof, when all this broile was done
But who could say, he saw the same the while,
Each man can talk, when that a thing is won
And with conceits, his fancy often beguile,
Run throw the hedge, and after leap the style:
This should be done, our after wits can say,
But few at first, finds out the ready way.
Well let that pass, we drew us to our rest
And every man, made mirth as cause he found,
This bickring duerd, four hours and more at le^t.
Men will be glad, when Trump retrait does sound,
That weary are, in trauesing the ground:
So doubt I not, it did both parties please
When they had found, a time to take their ease.
In shot of Leeth, within Lastaricke than
We pitchtte our Camp, where Cannons cabons brake
And often by chance, it killed a horse or man,
But no man would, the Camp therefore forsake:
Such tennis balls, did keep our men awake,
And quickened those, that wear dull sprited souls
And made some ladds, to dig them deep in holes.
To save the ward from harm of enmies shot
Full many a trench, did Pe^lam cause be wrought,
Look what was meet, there was few things forgot:
Our power so small, by every way we sought
To keep the same: But that auailed naught.
Some were so rude, they ran their death to seek
So thus decreast, our number every week.
A Bishop came, from France to treat a peace
Much talk there was, The ^ishop of Valence.
which time consumed still
But all this while, the wars did nothing seace
To hurt our foes, we never wanted will
At length upon, a rock a craggy hill
We plaest a piece, and in a trenche beloo
Was other store, of smaller shot also.
Forget not here, the weather on the Seas
Would not permit, the Cannons for to land
The longer here, we lay to our disease
For lack thereof, which few do understand:
I would demand, how we should take in hand
To lay a siege, or else our camp remove
When most things lackte, that was for our behoue.
Among our men, might Scottishe bitlers haunt
Who with the French, The woman was duckt in water.
a treason took in hand
A wife, a queen, did make the French a grant
Upon this rock, in sight of Leeth to stand:
And there to make, a sign to Dozis band
When that the ward, were careless and at rest
Which she did keape, her self the same confes^e.
The French came on, The bloody monday.
as they thus warned were
Like men of war, they chose their time full well
Our men starte up, amasde with sudden fere
But what was best, to do they could not tell
Some loving fame, his life did dearly sell
Some hating death, did sone from danger shonne
Some past all shame, full fast away did run.
Some made defense, but still they strove in vain
Once order broke, fare well the fight that hour
So in this heat, was many a soldier slain
There was no help, they were orelaide with power
Thus have you heard, how fortune began to lowre
Upon our men, the chance of war is such
A man may not, at no time trust it much.
But at this tide, full many a one was there
Deserved praise, that are untouched for me
And most of those, that did them stoutly here
Were mangled than, mine eyes the same did see
But for they are, of mean and base degree
I leave them out, it is sufficient here
If in the book, of fame their names appear.
Ye know when that, the waspe within his ne^^e
Is sturde with stick, or any other thing
As Soon as he, is troubled from his rest
He crepeth forth, and sharply under winge
He seeks place, for to bestow his stinge:
So lo our camp, that erst in quiet lay
At noyes of this, began a fearful fraye.
Sir James a Cro^^es led the soldiers on their enemies.
Now ran they forth, and forward cryde they all
The drums did sou^de, the soldiers made great speed
Unto the tren^h, the Larum was not small
But all to late, the help did come in deed
The captains still, their men with hope did feed
And bad them ma^che, the day is ours quod they
At sight of whom, the French retierd away.
Great terror made, the Curriars in our face
Some slaughter to, The lord Gray that now is was sore hurt at a valiant
charge he gave
by that to us arose
But yet in spite, the foe forsook the place
And straight to Leeth, in haste the cumy gose
Abide quod we, ye part not without bloes
Upon them rose, the boldest men we had
All had not charge, that day the way that lad.
Undouttedly, the soldiers semd they would
In sonder riue, the ramper with their hands
And pluck them by, the ears out of their hold
But as it was, they slew upon the sands
And left soer hurt, and groaning on the lands
I judge at least, as many men full out
Or more then we, had lost have ye no doubt.
A band of men, by this time to our aid
At Musselbrough, were come unarmed I guess
Of which relief, we held us well apaide
The enmies store, thereby became the less
This done all things, were put in readiness
For to dismounte, such pieces as we saw
Upon a church, that kept our camp in awe.
A battry small, against the same was set
In half a day, down fell thereof the chief
Than for the siege, we found not so much let
Our skirmishers, retired with less grief
Our men might come, more easily to relief
But mark this well, such skirmishing I say
I never saw, nor hard of er this day.
The mounting lark, no sooner in the sky
Then we were fourth: the Frenchemen were so brave
Ne night nor day, they would not let us lie
In rest, for still, they did the skirmishe crave
And they in holes, them selves could finely save
To cause great shot, to play upon their walls
As though that we, were made unto their calls.
Rashness of souldiou^s running out veide of cond^^^ los^th all many times.
And this they used, full often and to our harm
Until a stay, our leaders took therein
Before in field, raw men so thick would swarm
That long we seemd, more like to lose then win By rashness rude, of such as had not been
In wars before, but yet with exercise
A white cote did, become both ware and wise.
And serude as well, as any soldier might
With bow and bill, such weapons as we use
And often therewith, they put the French to flight
What marvel not, you know this is no news?
The bow has often, made them the field refuse
The bow is feared, as far as flies our fame
And bows I ween, wan Englishmen the name.
Our enemies still, to skirmishe us procuerd
And gald our best, and ouldest soldiers sore
I tell you trothe, the heat of this enduerd
Full long whereby, our men away we wore
But God be thankt, the Frenchmens loss was more
For still they spente, upon the stock ye knoe
When we without, had mean to come by more.
By deep foresight, a mount there was deuisde
Which bare the name of Pellam for the space
I had forgot, how Frenchmen came disgisde
In women's wedes, like queanes with muffled face
They did no act, but sone they took the chase
I ^ee that pass, and of the mount I treat
Where to be plain, the service was full great.
The Captain there, Sir Andrew Corbet was here and other gentlemen.
one Cutbert Vaughan was
And joined with him, there were a number mo
This mount thus made, the camp away did pass
More nere the town, how much I need not shoo
This mount to Leeth, was still a daily foo
The pieces there, a long the rampere shot
Some harm they did, but what full few men wott.
Upon the sands, they could no cockells seek
But that this forte, might easily them anoy
Some derely bought, their muskels eury week
Some sacrifisde, their horse to sweet saint Loy
Some in their heads, did take so mad a toy
They never spoke, a word ne good nor ill
Some lernde to feel, the weight of our black ^ill.
A band of horse, there were to ward that forte
Which eury day, did serve full worthily
With whom the French, some times for change of sport
Would mete and so, the matter would they try
The French full often, I can not this deny,
Ma^e Sallies forth, as ^ryme as men might do
And so went home, with blud and honor to.
But commonly, in deed, the worst they gate
Yet still they brau'd, and bare their fortune out
Their warlike shifts, they were of such a traed
My pen shall but, ecclips them out of doubt
To painte them right, but since I go about
To praise them thus, I will proceed for shame
And let them have, their own deserved fame.
Policy (...) of all gouernmentes.
First all they did, was drawn by orders skill
And seld they paste, the bounds of reasons lore
By point devise, they skirmished at will:
That we perceiud, they practiced no more
That we feared not, and had not seen before
They put in use, thus still their heads they bend
To purchase praise, and eke the town defend.
Great need they had, them selves to use full well
For all their lives, upon their doings lay
What should I more, upon this matter dwell
To tier your ears, and waste the time away
There was no side, stood idell half the day
But on both parts, for service driftes were found
And every hour, we drove them from their ground.
Master Pellam Lieutenaunt of ^he ordinance
At Pellams mount, by foot and horsemen both
This trade full long, did there the soldiers keep
Whose pain was much, and sore I tell you trothe
For at no time, in quiet could they sleep
And specially, when day began to pep^
The shot went of, then soldiers to their toil
And as hap drew, they did abide the spoil.
I now return, unto our camp awhyle
That lay where shot, did daily them salute
And where the French, with many a warlike wyle
Did show our men, of wars what was the fruit
And where some get, their death by littell suet
A skarre, a maime, and such a rude reward
As most men finds, that do that life regard.
I spoke before of bickrings, by the French
But here the heat, of serving might be seen
They bearded us, and made them trenche for trenche
And showed them selves, trim soldiers as I ween
But what of that, we came to serve the Queen
Though to our loss, our courage did we use
We forced our foes, their trenche at length refuse.
And to their milles, we went and burnt them down
Slew them we found, where many hurt were than
In service great, right nere before the town
Our hap was such, that we the honor wan:
Not only here, but ever when began
A skirmishe, or a bickering any where
Which as we guess, we wanted seldom there.
A thondring noies, they made when they came forth
Their rattling shot, did perce the clouds me thought
To show the truth, their Corriars were more worth
Then double told, the pieces that we brought
And to be plain, our shot they counted naught
Yet as it was, when that our men came nere
The Frenchmen bought, their coming forth full dear.
Yet would they not, be kept no time within
An hundredth times, they issued out I guess
And sought for death, their honor for to win
What ere they lost, they braud no whit the less
If here I should, all skirmisshes express
What they have done, what we have wrought likewise
Of paper sure, a quere would not suffice.
Unto my tale, my pen I pray thee pass
What hum^r brought? thy reason here so wide
You know good folks, in what discourse I was
The camp thus plaste, we did relief abide
Much loss each day, we had I will not hide
And greater harm, was likely to ensue
If some had not, made up their bands anewe.
Of watch and ward, our men so weary were
They careless stood, of any hap at all
The nights were foul, the days not very fear
The country could, their garments thin and small
And still upon, their Captains began they call
A saute, a saute, we lie ore long in trenche
Let us go spend, our lives upon the French.
It seemed good, the town for to assail
Men willing were, in Princes cause to fight
The battry shot, but that did not prevail
Much ponder spente, the charges was not light
Small skathe it did, as seemed to our sight
This dare I say, so sharp a pele so ronge
I never hard, but yet it durde not long.
For this assault, lewd ladders, viele and naught
The soldiers had, which were to short God wot
The proof thereof, with blud the poor men bought
Had they ben long, the town we might have got
But look what God, assigned to our lot
We could not shonne, needs must it come to pass
That he appointes, as there good trial was.
Let those things go, Captain Randall gave warning when thassault should
begin.
I keep an other vain
Of this assault, the manner show I shall
First were our men, in battle rangid plain
And gardid well, with horsemen were they all
The rest in trenche, did stand as did befall
Till warning made, of Randall mayor there
At which they past, to Leeth withouten fere.
The drommes did sound, the trumpettes blew alowde
The Cannons shot, the bowmen stood not still
The smoke was like, a fogge or mistie cloud
That poulder made, our soldiers lackt no will
To clyme the walls, where they receiud much ill
For when they laid, their ladders in the dike
They were to short, the length of half a pike.
The flankers than, in murdring holes that lay
Went of and slew, God knows stout men enough
The harquebuz, before hand made foul play
But it behoud our men, for to go throw
And so men sought, their deaths they knew not how
From such a fight, sweet God my friends defend
For out of frame, did diverse find their end.
To see poor souls, there wander in the dikes
The stones were flunge, the curriar bet them down
The wounded men, let fall both bows and pikes
The mangled heaps, that creped from the town
The slaughter foul, and here the woeful sown
That Soldiers cries, there made I think in deed
Would sure compel, a stony heart to blede.
The brute of this, abasht our bouldist men
And cut our combs, as all were cast away
The coward sort, did steal them homewarde then
And some in camp, came never since that day
Some sought discharge, Some saw so great a fray
They wished they had, at home bin keaping Crooes
Such is the wars, where men both wyn and looes.
I leave that case, and now return I shall
To those that day, were leaders in the selde
And for in ryme, I cannot show it all
And well set forth, in ryme are Saultes but selde
And words I lack, and that I am vnskilde
To seek out terms, that apt are for that case
In prose I mind, therefore the same to place.
That shall I wright, when this I draw anew
Which in short time, I mind at large to set
But for the first, it may suffice to you
This naked rhyme, out of my hands to get
Yet if I live, I will be in your det
To pay you once a better sum I think
Then I have yet, set forth with pen and ynke.
An other mount, that Somerset was called
Devised was, The Earl of VVorceters brother, master Frances Somerset.
where Somers^t was plast
This forte full often, the French both slew and gald
And many a time, their pieces it defast
Here you must note, these mountes were not in waste
For if they had, not held the town in awe
We could not it, besege for ought I saw.
If that the french, with friends that were without
Had ventred all, and stood to fortunes hap
In danger great, we had been out of doubt
And likely sure, we were to fall in trap
But lo our chief, misdowting such a clap
For want of men, to sege the enmies round
Devised fortes, upon the metest ground.
In this mean while, Sir Frances Leake came to our relief.
there came S. Fraunces Leake
To our relief, whereof much need we had
A greater lack, we had there than I speak
Of men and help, which made our ha^tes full sad
But still with words, the council did us glad
And said the Duke, was coming have no dread
Who much desirde, for to supply our need.
The French came forth, at midnight after this
As though they would, a Canuozado make
But as God wrought, their purpose did they miss
For though some men, the trenchis did forsake
An other sort, defense did undertake
And stood so sure, and shot so in their face
That there they slew, a Corprall in the place.
They seeing that, full hastily retirde
And lokte not back, their fellows for to see
To turn again, was none that them desirde
Each man is glad, to see his enmye flee
A bridge of gould, give him that runs from thee
The wise man biddes, which council they that may
Will not refuse, in wars I dare well say.
Now must you note, the Frenchemens hearts were hie
And of relief, they made a great auaunte
And for they serud, before their mistress eye
The feats of arms, the more they vsd to haunte
As though our camp, their courage could not daunte
Wherefore full late, at night when Sun was set
They issued out, to take us in a net.
Upon our trenche, and all along the sands
They came amain, far past a marching pase
And brought abroad, their brave and chiefest bands
But as God would, we met them in the face
Where lo the shot, enduerd a marvelous space
Some men of theirs, that while cride shirlly bows
So nere the camp: that up the soldiers goes.
A larom in our own camp by the French policy.
A Larom long, among them there they had
And sundry sorts, of things they thought thereon
But at the trenche, was many a stubborn lad
Which still with shot, did prese the French upon
And left them not, until that they were gone
Or saw them fly, there whitcotes serud so well
I lack but time, their worthiness to tell.
Our enmies now, became more circumspecte
And curtsie made, so nere our camp to come
They would not lose, their men to small effect
Nor had no will, to hap in whytcoates thom
They sent them in, without the sound of dromme
They kept such stir, as never yet I saw
And yet at first, they were but blunt and raw.
Still did we hope, to have from Barvvick aid
It coms this day, quod one, it will not fail
The fame whereof, did make the French afraid
They knew they must, abide a new assail
This news among, our men did much prevail
But in the end, they saw small haste was made
Wherefore their minds, were in an other trade.
The Dovvager, the Queen of Scotts fell sick
This while whereon, at length this lady dyed,
Whose death did touch, the Frenchemen to the quick
For sure their friend, she was as well was tried
(And to her realm, it cannot be denied
She was full fast) a Princes of hye sprete
For France a perle, a member apt and ^ete.
I had almost, left out a skirmishe here
Upon the sands, where horsemen honor gate
And in despite, they rode the French so nere
That diverse French, were overthrown thereat
Although that here, I partly touched that
You must not think, but diverse days likewise
The horsemen kept, this common course and guise.
As time consumd, so still our men did waste
And needful was* for aid or else for peace
And to be brief, our country made no haste
From watch and ward, our Soldiers to releace
Great murmurs still, among us did increace
But dewtie bad, each Soldier do his best
Till sweet relief, should bring poor souls some rest.
The bishop of Valence from France.
From France there came, Embasadours this to end
And from our Queen, the like to us was sent
About the same, they did much labor spend
My Lord of Burleighe that novve^, came to conclude th^s peace.
And as you know, both parties were content
The French by Sea, unto their country went
Compeld with force, they did forsake the town
To our great fame, and honor of the crown.
First give me leave, our Soldiers to advance
That with their blud, their countries rest have brought
Next how they serud, against the flower of France
And last of all, did bring their bragges to naught
And more then this, note here and keep in thought
They being weak, did make the strong to bow
And to their h^^^e, return with conquest now.
Lord B^rleigh ended these b^oyle^.
But or I go, to far in Soldiers praise
The instruments, that endid all this toil
I must set forth, whose grave and sober ways
And stoutnes both, did give the French a foil
They forste the French, to yield to their own spoil
They did persuade, nay rather them compel
To part to France, as all men knows full well.
Was this none act, to work them so like wax
That were as hard, as flinte or stony steel
And quenched the fire, that was so nere the flax
And seast the plage, that many one might feel
And brought us peace and cast all war at heel
And as a man, might say mawgre their teethe
Drew out the French, out of the town of Leeth.
Because the brute, and betill headed brains
Can not conceive, the depenes of this peace
And that some think, that we have lost our pains
Or that by this, may further wars encreace
For that I would, such fond conceiptes should seace
Here shall I show, the sum of all the same
As nere as I, can put such things in frame.
By this we have, that many kings did seek
A perfect peace, with Scotland suer for aye
By this the French, that nestlid nere our cheek
Full many years, are now dispatched away
By this small broyle, did seace a greater fray
By this our realm, was rid from further care
Our foes sent home, and we in quiet are.
By this our Queen, has all her owen requests
Unfit for you, to know thereof the weight
By this great things, as yet in question restes
Till for our wealth, they shall be framed straight
By this our fame, is lifted such an height
That every wight, that throwly ways this chance
Shall say we strove, against the flower of France.
How happy are, the Subjects hie and low
Rueld by the Prince, in whose time this was wrought
Which for the zeal, of her own realm you know
And Scotlandes love, has set expense at naught
And in her days, to pass such things has brought
As seldom could, be compast well with wit
Wherefore the fame, thereof to her is fit.
Here have you hard, of Leeth the order throw
As far as ryme, will suffer me to write
In prose who list, to make rehersall now
Thereof has skope, to show in paper white
A better way, that shall you more delighte
For this was done, as there I saw it then
And time but short, I had to use my pen.
A FAREVVELL when I went to study, written to the world.
FArewell thou world, that me betrayde to long
To dearly bought, I find thy follies all
Who shall the serve, is sure to suffer wrong:
Who skorns thy happs, may shun they sudden fall.
Who fawnes on thee, shall drink thy bitter gall:
Who flies thy toys, thy painted face shall find
Who sooner slides, than those which at thy call
Lives like thy slaves, in body, soul, and mind.
First from a child, with fancies was I fed
All at thy hands, till I to manhood grue:
Than in the dark, lo blindfeld was I led,
So that my God, my self, nor man I knue.
Wield wit, young blood, old vice, new bred in bones,
Made me forget, my duty all at ones.
Fair things, foul thoughts, fond works and flattring eas,
Had moff^ed me, and hodwinckt so my wits,
That in the storms, I drad no Sillas seas,
Nor in the calms, I feared no froward fits
Which were to come: things present pleased me best
Those gone I made, no myrror to the rest.
Bed soft, full mouth, gay back and foolish fame
Was all I sought, like Lord to live at lust
At my nowne shape, and shadow had I game
A looking glass, a plaiffeer trim at trust
To pry a po^, my life thus did I frame
Clean out of time, I see it now full well
So that my life, was careless eurye dell.
Yet found I have, a heap of other harms
Thereby: what than, I cannot them amend
When dead they seem, than spring they up by swarms
Such mischief riep, will have a rotten end
Though at the full, the tied of them are now
The ^bb may come, when God a time shall send
Leave that to him, and I shall tell you how
I learnde to know, the course and kind of man
His nature new, his fashion half disgiesde
And how for shame, at length lo I began
To follow that, which I before dispiesde
Full welcome ought, that learning be to me
Which taught me wit, when wieldnes weaud the loem^
Of wanton ways: and blindness began to see
The path he miste, the way that led me home
Unto the Port, where I would harbred be
And rather dwell, with quiet settled mind
Than roue abroad, to seek uncertain luck
Or subject be, to filthy worldly muck
I would not sure: be bound to such a clogg
That would me rob, of reason and good skill
And in the end, but fish and catch a frogg.
As some have done, and some do use it still
Which snatch the bone, before the hongry dog
Who will not part, from that he has in hold
Although in deed, his master would it have
Unto this end, this tale now have I told
To show him wise, that knows what to crave
And asks of those, that freely gives for naught
But he most wise, that has no greedy thought
And can content, him with those little skraps
That falls by lot, unto him for his share
And finds no fault, at others worldly haps
But has a head, as free from inward care
As babe newborn, yea such a one may smile
And laugh his fill, when some cries woe the pie
He shall see much, that has a simple eye
That man shall see, the strong the weak begile
The poor by rich, and mighty swallowd up
The harmles drink out of the poisned cupp
The needy lack, that greedy raueners gripe
The thieves let go, that robbs in skarlet weeds
And sitts on bentch, when troeth feels many a stripe
How fear is dubd, a knight for coward deeds
How manhood beggs, and none are helped that needs
How creep in hools, that did no hurt at all
Are valiant calde, such is the peoples brute
The quiet man, these things behold he shall
And see them pass, and learn thereby some fruit
As I have done, though far from quiet mind
In any case, my self God wotte I find
Save that to toil, and burdens for to bear
I framed am, and letts the world alone
Amid my foes, that fawns and speaks full fear
I live a louff, and will not be a known
There hate I have, I must dissemble there
As does those mates, that plays at Fortunes ball
Do not some halte, that well may go upright
Who can deny, but we dissemble all
In some one point, and wisdom we it call
Things are not found, as they do seem to sight
Some laugh in heart, yet show a weeping eye
You have hard say, the blind eats many a fly
How should the sad, Note.
with wantons mirth agree
The hole with sick, the wise with foolish dwell
The proud with meek, the mean with mighty be
If all these sorts, could not dissemble well
And even so, it fares now by me
I wincke at things, that I would not behold
And see those faule, that profits me no whit
I hear likewise, that I can wish untold
I shoot with them, that never mark may hit,
But me believe, yet win the game I would
Among that sort, that gives aem to sit
I like not sure: I rather wish to bet
Than look upon, and lay on near a sied.
Set doubts a part, it is good sport to get
But he that winns, must hazard needs abide.
(I leave you there) I would so make my game
It wear half won, before the match wear tried
And make him think, that hits the mark is wide
And say himself, he roueth out of frame
I pray you now, who would not do the same
To gain thereby, or else at least to save:
Than grant me this, dissemble sure he must
As I may do, or in time pas^e I have
And made some blind, that better saw than I
And saw full often, that I would not perceive
When that thereon, did life or danger lie
And yet I looked, and leered by your leave
What might befall, and sought to shun the shacke:
And as I fled, ill Fortune followd fast
When she would strike, I escaped many a knock
By douking down, I knew so well her cast
With cap and knee, her favor sone I wan
So in a while, she took me as her man.
But when I thought, most hold of her to take
A way she went, the whirle wind in her tail
Yet with her friends, fair wether did I make
Whose help was good, when world began to fail.
And if you ask, how I acquainted was
With such sure props, that holds up house and all
And how that I, could bring such things to pass
To keep me up, when diverse sought my fall:
(His fall not great, it cannot be I trow
Whose climinge up, was never much you know)
This by the way, I speak yet aunsweare lo
To you I make, that this demaundes of me
To Court I came, Note.
whear I could hear and see
As others did, and with the strong I stood
As world did wag, I wound my bark about
And lea^d me there, where I could find most good
In deed this was, the way to bear it out
And there I found, of eurye sort ynow:
Would I be brave, I knew where mates were had
Would I be stout, I saw who would not bow,
Hie looks was he, that still I saw go throw:
That ship made way, that all the sails could bear.
Small sprite sat low, with finger in his ear
Great curtchie crept, full hie among the best
He made them laugh, that lokt as he would swear
He carried coals, that could abide no geast
Plain life the lowt, was little set by theare
Fine taunting tongues, brought many a fool in fear.
Make love the meek, was ready at a call
Feign would be seen, was fisking eurye where
Set forth to sale, was marked beyond them all.
Uaine glory smield, and loekt for much a do
New fanglenes, shaekt off old friendship past
Fien faule at foot, could whine and bite you toe.
Proud blind consait, would not be placed last,
Small wit would laugh, at wiser than him self,
Disdain that dwarf, loekt like a piuishe elfe
Strange nature fround, when homely folks sat down
Full purse found friends, that came but late to town.
Set by himself, would not salute but few
Small worth made boest, still mouth was all the shrewe.
Tell all that blabb, was called a royster than
Falls semblau^ce thriude, that could ii. faces bear
Happy was he, that was a torncoets man
They sped not worst, that counterfaited wear
Do as world did, drove of the longest time
He had the lands, that was Dick shifters ear
He caughte the birds, that best could set the lime
Yet broken shins, some gate that used to clime
Spite spornde at those, that better sped than he
Note.
All busy heads, could not on shoulders bide
They met full often, that seldom could agree
Who fell so sone, as wit ^ermatcht with pride?
Who rose but such, as roffled forth their years
Yet change of suites, brought many in ye breares
White Plumes cost pens, apparel picked the porse
All worn in Court, was not in City paid
Sharp set said often, back cloutes made belly worse
Bare cloak he ware, whose credit was decaide
Catch naught poor knave, could Court and Courtiers corse
Spend all sat still, and looked like a maid
Hope well, made spoil, and waited for a day
Unthrift would swear, and dice it all away
Toss blade would snuff, and shake a Swinish head
Dare do look big, as butcher in his shop
Save groet smeld out, where honger might be sped
Proud would not speak, that sat not at the top
When Lortch was out, some knew not where to dyne
Who kepes the bar, was asked eury hour
Some spoke full fair, to get a cup of wine
God save you sir, wilt please ye take a flower
A sweet red Rose, he had that kept good cheer
And many a cappe, and curtchie to the ground
An of^ar still, was made of all the year
Old stagers knew, where such a friend was found
Young fry might fast, for any thing they gate
New comers walked, abroad for taking cold
Full pauntch did martch, as he had bin a state
Who looks like me, thought he that chippings sold
When Christmas roobes, wear broesht and yt day worn
Well was that man, might bid that saint good morn
Bear rule stood stiff, and kept his betters out
Bold face thrust in, throw thickest preace and thronge
Hoffe have at all, full hye could hold the snout
Speak as he thought, was not in favor long
Find fault the fool, would flier in echmans face
Rich rueld the roste, lack friends felt all the wrong
Bare life knew not, to whom to show his case
Wast all the wield, might sing a heavy song
Hoyst up in have, forgate from whence he came
Hie office skornde, to look back how he climde
Hog Norton breed, disdainde to know their dame
Pried feared no fall, till foot full fast was liemde
Snatch skratched all, and gave his fellows none
Need likt the plaets, and gnawed bare the bone
Mountch present crept, in corners all alone
Hauoke was made, where meat was little seen
Unworthy of breed, fardewel God save the Queen
Spoil would not spare, his charges was but small
Make feast filled in, the king did pay for all
Seek help, speak fair, yet sloely speed his suite
Give bribs was hard, his money told his tale
Lack naught had more, but want could find no fruit
Need blew his nails, and looked very stale
Skill for a shift, was glad to teach for pens
Old hangars on, would not be beaten thens
Wit did invent, but wealth bare all the brute
Boldness did speak, when bashnes was full muite
Cunning wrought much, but craft beyond him crept
Poets made rymes, but roysters praises rept
UUisedome would wait, on many a wodcocke often
Old broems were good, but new al clean they swept,
Love ease sat long, and loekt to lie full soft.
Eat much would boest, he sarude our suffraunt long,
Fat brows knights, I tell you took great pain
Some went full gaie, that was not worth a thong.
Some thrue at all, and nicked eurye maine.
He talked of wars, that had small wit in peace
Skarce knew himself, would common wealths debate,
He spoke great things, that swelted in his grease.
UUitles well diende, would be a Lords check mate.
Lo croetcht unto, a sore discourse would make,
Make room my friends, (quod he) that kept the gate
Craft had a care, to all he did or spoke
Unwelcomde geasts, stepped in and asked no leave
Some pleased the Prince, yet had the peoples hate
Some sarud them both, and did them both deceive.
He near sat still, that ^orrid favor well
Some played the fox, that like a goose could look
Some askte what news, and yet could wonders tell
Small mind of God, would often bear a book,
He went to mass, that would the challice fell.
Some loud the Church, for the sweet relickes thear
Some made of Saints, brought up another whear:
Some neither saint, nor devil fearde at all
Some liekt this world, more than the world to come
Some in their ruff^, would get about the haul.
Some spent such nights they drad no day of Dome
Some watched their time, and yet thear time they lost
Some bankets made, and wear bankrout at last
Some learnde to be, fine Courtiers to their cost
Some had small help, and yet spent all full fast
Some sought to spend, upon another charge
Some careless liude, and walked abroad at large
Some craude a pace, and caught some croms by craft
Some could not ask, they thought deserts should crave
Some made fair sale, of blades louse in the haft
Some never wanne, nor could devise to save
Some waited hard, and gate small fruit therefore
Some had ill hap, and yet no virtue lackt
Some saude odd ends, and made of little more
Some had their baggs, as full as could be thwakt
Some made cold mirth, yet faured for such vice
Who Fortune liekt, was ever most in price.
All this in Court, I saw and kept in store
Full twenty years, as trial good I have
Not of Court now, as Court has bin of yore
I write I speak, and treat so God me save
To show wherefore, from thence I me withdrew
What harm it did, unto my betters far
What good likewise, he gat that Court well knew
How some did make, and some therein did mar
But to be plain, where I such chaunges found
I list not dwell, let them that will be bound
To that short rain, I choose the quiet soil
The Country large, to have free skope to walk
To be in Court, I count it but a toil.
UUhere heart much thincks, and tongue dare little talk
UUhere some must sit, and look upon the walls
And beat their heels, against formesides all day
And subjects are, to others beckes and calls
That life is weak, wherein there is no stay
A piece of bread, is better had with cas
Than bankets sweet, upon such bitter bords
Some say there is, no fishing to the Seas
Yet many Troutes, are caught on little fords
That shallow seem, with other pretty fish
That at the length, will make an honest dishe
On little brooks, men Angle safe and dry
In lether boots, and dread no drowning there
On these rough Seas, the least wind in the sky
T^eps up the Bark, or brings a man in fear
Some have no hearts, with roaring waves to strive
Full green to sight, and vggly to the eye
Which on the rocks, the silly vessels drive
And knocks their Keels, and makes poor Pilots cry
Hael in the sail, let go the bowling mate
Now in good faith, such sudden shocks I hate
Yet some will think, I am not settled so
But I will seek, to try the Sea again
Why is the earth so narrow would I knoe
I cannot find, where I may well remain
The world is wide, and men must burdens bear
That ordainde are, unto no better chance
That groes not here, takes root another where
Some shoots ill, yet happens by a glaunce
To hit their game, men ought to do their best
And seek for luck, and let God work the rest
So for my part, I shall likewise proceed
And though I bid, the Court and world farewell
I mean to use, them both as I have need
But for to say, in Court I wish to dwell^
I mind it not, as good me help and speed
And for the world, his yoke still draw I must
But sure I serve, him all against my lust
For in the same, is neither hope nor trust
Wherefore my leave, I take as power I have
From him and his, though course of life says noe
A worldling here, I must be to my grave
For this is but, a May game mixed with woe
A borrowd roulme, where we our Pagents play
A skaffold plain, where on we reuells make
A crooked path, a parlous falls hie way
A toilsome soil, where we much travel take
Good Reader now, do neither stinge nor hiss
At any thing, that in this Uerse is plaest
Where fault is found, for favor mend the miss
This rouing rhyme, was slubberd up in haest
And naught thereby the simple writer meant
But neither Court, nor world could him content.
A FEIGNED FANcye between the Spider and the Gowte.
IF that ye list to give me ear,
And with my matter for to bear:
Although a Fable tell I shall,
It is to make you meerie all.
Ye may some pleasure find therein,
And yet my tale, not worth a pin:
As I have hard from things of naught,
Is wisdom and great knowledge sought.
Yea goulde is gotten out of dross,
And torues are made of mucke and moss:
That beetes the poor a goodly fire,
Now to my tale I will retire.
Ten Thousand year ago at least,
I mean when eurye bird and beast:
And eurye thing that we can name,
Could talk and reason in good frame.
It happened than, make you no doubt,
Between the Spider and the Gout:
There fell a strife full strange to hear,
UUhich was ear ended was that year.
These two would know by change of place,
UUho furthest stood in Fortunes grace:
And which of them was best at ease,
So each a part as he did please
A master chose, unto his mind,
A day between them was assinde,
UUhan that the year was full run out,
For talk twene Spider and the Gout.
And at which season meet they would,
Their haps and Fortune to unfold,
The grievous griping gout should go:
Unto a husband man I troe.
And dwell with him for that year than,
The Spider to a gentleman:
And so they parted several ways,
But which of them had mirrist days.
Here after shall you here me tell,
The Spider was not welcomde well:
Into the Palace where he dwelt, Note.

But rather many a mischief felt.
For eury day there was a maid,
That made the Spider sore afraid:
With mirry Lark, this maiden roes,
And straight about the house she goes.
With swapping Besome in her hand,
And at her girdle in a band:
A jolly boutch of keys she wore,
Her pecticoet fine laest before.
Her tail tockt up in trimmest gies,
A Napkin hanging oer her eyes:
To keep of duste and dross of walls,
That often from the windows falls.
Though she was smog, she took small eas,
For thrifty girlls are glad to pleas:
She wanne the love of all the house,
And pranckt it like a pretty mouse.
And sure at eury word she spoke,
A goodly curtchie could she make:
A stoering houswyfe eury where,
That bent both back and boones to bear.
She never sleeped much by night,
But roes sometimes by candell light
To card and spinne, or sow her smock:
There could no sooner crow a cock.
But she was up, to sleek her cloes,
And would be sweet, as any roes:
Full cleanly still the girl would go
And handsome in a house also*
As ever saw I country wentch,
She sweeped under eury bentch:
And shaekt the coshens in their kind,
When out of order did she find.
A rushe a straw or little stick,
She could it mend she was so quick.
About her busnes eury hour,
This maid was calde her mistres flower.
She bare the keys of Ale and Bear,
And had the rule of better cheer:
She was not nice, nor yet to kind,
To proud nor of, to humble mind.
To fine nor yet, to brave I troe,
She had as fair as I do knoe:
Two fair new kirtles to her back,
The one was blue, the other black.
For holy days she had a gown,
And eurye yard did cost a crown:
And more by xviii. pence I guess,
She had three smocks she had no less.
Four raylls and eek five karchers fair,
Of hose and shoes, she had a pair:
She needed not, no more to have,
She would go barefoote for to save.
Her shoes and hoose, for they were dear,
She went to town, but ones a year:
At Easter or some other day,
When she had licens for to play*
I had forgotten for to tell,
She had a pursse she loved well:
That hanged at a ribende green,
With tassails fair, and well beseene.
And as for gloves and knives full bright,
She lacked not, nor trifles light:
As pins and laces of small cost,
I have to you rehearsed most
Of all her goods, Now to the form,
And making of this creeping worm:
Her port was low, her face was fair,
It came no sooner in the air,
But it would pill, her cheeks were thin,
God knows she had, a tender skin.
The worst mischape this minion had,
Her legs were sowllon very bad,
Some heavy humor down did fall,
Her foot was narrow short and small:
Her body sklender as a snigg,
But sure her buttocks were full bigg.
That came I think by sitting mitch,
And in her side she had a stitch:
That made her often short winded sure,
But her complexion was full pure.
She was well made from top to tail,
Yea all her lims withouten fail:
Were fine and feat, she had a hand
There was no fayrer in the land.
Save that with toil, it changed hue,
Her fingers small, her veins full blue:
Her naills a little largly grown,
Her hear much like the Sun it shoen.
Her eyes as black as Iet did seem,
She did herself full well exsteeme:
Her lips were red but somewhat chapt.
Her tongue was still and seldom clapped.
She spoke as she were in a cloud,
Neither to soft, nor yet to loud:
And tript upon the floer as trim,
^e would have thought that she did swim.
As she did go, such was her pace,
She minssed fine, like maistres Grace:
That at the daggar dwelled oens,
Who made good pies of Mari boens.
I dare depoes upon a book,
She was as good a maiden cook:
As ever dressed a piece of meat,
And for a banquet small or great.
And raising Paest she passed still,
As soon as flower came from the Mill:
She made the goodliest ka^ks thereof,
And backed as fair a household lo^f.
As ear was seen or set on board,
What needs more talk? at one bare word
The greatest Lady in a sheer,
She might have sarued seven year,
This maid as you do understand,
With swinging beesome in her hand:
About the windows would she pry,
And where she might a Spider spy:
Down went his webb and all his work.
The Spider had no place to lorke:
Nor make his skaffold hie nor lo,
But that this maiden still would go.
Unto a Form or else a stoel,
And with some kind of reatching toel:
She raught the silly Spiders neast,
The Spider found no other feast.
But eurye day foul served was,
Sometime he builded near the glass.
Sometime full oer his masters head,
Sometime befoer the maidens bed:
Behind the skreen, or on the wa^ll,
Sometime in parlor or in hawll.
In priuey or at portall doer,
But still this maid upon the floer:
Would fling him flat and clap her foet,
(When that she saw no other ^oet)
Upon the Spyder if she might,
But though he lakt, both sens and sight:
His skrawling legs did help him often,
Full soen ye should him see aloft.
And thear he would a web begin,
But all in vayn the foell did spyn:
For loek what all the night he wrought,
The maid at moern, brought clean to naught
This torment still the Spyder had,
When any fly, had maed him glad:
And fell in to the Spyders trap,
Then should thear faull, a fearful clap.
A bro^m or else, a littell poell,
Maco Spyder seek* an other hoell:
He lust his Fly, his house and all,
In wynd^ cloes, nor open wall.
He might not dwell, he felt such wrong,
The Spyder thought, this year full long:
And wished that hit, wear all ron out,
That he might reason with the Gowt.
To here which of them boeth had felt,
The better days, whear they had dwelt:
The Govvt had found, as ill an oest,
The vereist drudg in all the coest.
For if he might a penny wyn,
He labred throw boeth thick and thyn.
And yet he was an honest man,
So held in all the parish than:
A good householder and a just,
But suer he lived not by lust.
Nor sought his eas to lyg in bed,
To many a mouth yet gave he bred.
And yet I ges now by my lyef:
Neither this man, nor yet his wyef.
Wear worth five pounds in reddy gold,
Though they an honest house did hold.
At plow and car^, his goods he gaet,
He lay not long, nor watched laet:
Nor with ill ruell, no surfeit found,
He eat and drank, and slept full sound.
This gruntting grobbe was short and thick,
His face was red as any brick:
Whear in thear stoed a bottell noes,
A couple of corns upon his toes.
He had which maed him cut his shue,
He never put on garment nue,
But when that to the waeks he went,
He was dressed up, like Jack a Lent:
And coblar like, when he did wortch.
But when this yoman went to chortch.
A sleueles iacket than he waer,
A velvet nightcap half thread baer:
A chamled dobled stockt with sylk,
His short fayer weysht as whit as milk.
^ut herein must be vnderstoed,
His wief was come of gentle bloed:
Which would not have him clad in clouts,
But when he mo^sd with other louts.
Than ^^erd she not what he put on,
His house hit was not maed of stoen.
The wauls with lyem wear whitted well,
And thatcht oer head, the troeth to tell:
The smo^k came forth the thatch sometime,
But who did on the rafters clyme.
Should find fat bakon hanging thear,
The house could not be kept full fear:
For Hens and Capons, Dogs, and Cats,
About his bed wear many Gnats.
That hommed still upon his face,
And full of myce was eury place:
Of children had he many a ^en,
But idell in the house was noen.
Except it wear an infant young,
The maidens to their wheell they song*
The Carddars myrry wear also,
The hyends about the fields did go.
The Oxen champped in the stawll,
The pygs lay groutting by the wawll:
The capuls fed upon their hay,
The Hens full many an egg did lay.
The Gees wear gagglyng on the green,
And in good order as I ween:
Wear all things that this poor man had,
The Gowt thereof was very glad.
And thought to try him for a year,
And so to t^est, cold country cheer:
And as the poor man soundly slept,
In to his joints the Gowt he crept.
Like thief that steals upon a wight,
That ryeds a loen in wynters night:
So stepped the Gowt unto this man,
And sought to vex, his body than.
And hoept when poer man casd his grief,
That he should ^inde such great relief.
Such rest, such skoep, and tak such hold,
Of man to wander whear he would:
Yea suer the Gowt had found a soyll,
He thought to bring to utter spoyll.
But lo as leysy lobber lay,
A bed and groend, in break of day:
His wyef so fowll a bawling kept,
And said fie husband you have slept.
God knoes away boeth wit and thrift
Be God ye must maek better shift:
To pay our rent our Landlord cries,
On plowe and cart our wealth must ries,
And not on stretching in the bed,
Ye kno your children must be fed:
Your servants kept and wagis paid,
In deed good man I am afraid.
That we shall forfeit leace and all,
And into shaem and beggry fall:
Ye kno your wyef does go full baer,
And loeks so lean with cark and caer.
She changed has her collor clean,
Unto a Peace, or partched Bean:
And wydthers lyek a cock of hey,
Yea glad to feed on crudds and whey.
And pintch her belly for your saek,
And though I chees and butter maek*
I sell the saem to maek us rytch,
Yet well ye wot we have not mytch.
My goown is lyk to go to gaeg,
The Landlord is in such a raeg:
He will have money out of hand,
He must redeem his morgaegd land
That youthful frysks in hazard brought,
Tushe man your wife tacks all the thought.
Not only how to pay the rent,
But also how to live in Lent:
And get some herrings hoem ye knoe,
Our stoer is gone full long ago.
When fleash and whytmeat waxes deer.
A herring cobbe will wake good cheer.
Among our hynds and children toe,
Let neighbors witness what I do.
To maintain household in good staet,
I wash, I wring, I watch up laet:
I fast, I spaer, I skrat, I skraep,
And after goods, and gayn I gaep.
Whyels husband ^acks his pleasuer still,
And hoeps to have the world at will:
By sleep and crying out of pain,
Let ries a blyster or a blayn
Upon your littell fingers end,
Straight for a surgion must you send:
Your father could taek salt and sut
And lyuly lyek a lusly gut.
A medsin maek for eury soer,
And never would ly down therefore:
No though in deed the shyn wear broek,
Fie lie not smearing in the smoek.
For folysh smarts, and stitchis viell,
The husbandman, began to smyell:
To here the babbling of his daem,
But nill he would he, world did fraem.
So awkward with this sylly soull,
That up he roes, and toek a powll:
In feeble hand, to stay upon,
But busnes said he must begone.
And haeld him out of doer in haest,
This goodly grubbe with faggot waest.
Bestoers his joints about the feld,
In things whear on pooer men aer skild:
And seldom stayed in any place,
A shaemd in house to hyed his face.
Or under hedge or tree to rest,
This trobled much his new come gest:
The gowt I mean, but caerles lo,
Of gowt the poor man trodged thoe.
Oer hedge and styell, he skipt and flang.
And as the birds on boeshes sang,
He whistled all the way he went,
And hoemward for his brekfast sent.
Whyels he the Oxen yoeked fast,
And clyemd the trees to beat down mast:
For swyen that must in haest be sold,
And put the skattred sheep in fold.
He did, for sheppard had he noen,
For lo the greatest flock was goen:
And needles servants aer not fyt,
This man had need pluck up his wit.
To pleas his wyef, and pay his due,
What should I longer talk to you:
Of his affayrs, about he flees,
As though his head wear full of bees.
He ran lyk ^ound that hunts the haer,
(And of the gowt toek littell caer)
About his work, now here, now thear,
Sometime with Brambuls would he tear.
His coet, his skin, and knock his knee,
Against a stubbe or crooked tree:
And as he after horses ran,
Sometime fell down this honest man.
No soever up, but troedgd about,
Theas jobs lyekt not the tender gowt.
He loekt for pylloes soft and sweet,
And ointments for the swollon feet:
And plaesters warm to humors cold,
And in fair clowts to be enrold.
And not to find such froward faer,
Well what of that, good husbands aer:
A labring to make up their mowse,
(And wyn thear bred by sweat of browse)
As was this wight where on I wryt,
Abroed in field was his delyt.
In many a shuer and bitter blast,
And eury day till noen would fast:
For wantton will he would not eat,
But honger sausyd still his meat.
And seldom roes with belly full,
His children from his mouth would pull:
The bred, the chees, and other cheer,
He kept no household for a year.
And waested all in littell space,
But for his lief time in oen case:
Ye should his order find so well,
To much thear was not near a dell.
Nor yet to littell as he throue,
The time and world away he drove:
And maed of peace and bakon sod,
In eeuen house a banquet od.
A feast that fylde the empty paunch,
A ioncket that will honger staunch:
As soen as costly martchpaen fien,
And Sydor in the steed of wien.
And that was dronk at hy myd meall,
A stroek of roest, of beef or veall:
On eury Sunday did he use,
And all his hardness would he skues.
With ma^raeg of his daughter Kaet,
And still he said, it was better laet:
To thryue than never save a groet,
He could on fingers ends by roet.
R^hers the course of all the year,
The chang of Mooen, and could go near:
To tell when eury star should ries,
And talk of planets in the skies.
But that he lernd by sheppards ruell,
At Whytsontyed, at Paece and Yuell:
He gave his household leave to play,
And than at stoelball all the day.
Ye might have found the merry gyrls,
Bedeckt with works and roefs of pyrls:
And fine froes pasts ye startcht full tryme,
And silver pyns about ^atch bryme.
As pretty pearls wear shining thear,
They had no gymmols at the ear:
For that nue trick came out of Spayn,
Yet though their garments were but plain,
They had as piuyshe paets I knoe,
As had in town the corstest shroe:
That goes in skarlet now and than,
In household with this hoemly man.
Wear wentchis worth the looking on,
Well yet the gowt would needs be gone:
His oest had near a lodging good,
To harbor such a heavy blood.
And yet he must his year abyed,
And throw the fire be better tried:
This man had maed a bargain now,
And shaept to sell boeth Bull and Cow.
The Sheep and Oxen in the stawll,
To by a better farm withal.
And out of hand a journey great,
He had to go, in cold and heat:
And all a foet this must be don,
With butten cap and clowtted shon.
With wallet full of bread and chees,
And ragged russet coet of Frees:
And on his back he boer a bryeb,
And littell thought upon the kyeb.
That hard behind the heell he had,
The bargayn maed the foell so glad:
That out he went as he wear wood,
And seldom suer in quiet stood.
Till clean dispatched, theas things had been,
The Gowt that lorked clos within:
At hand beheld theas outward woes,
Than straight unto the Spyder goes.
And maeks a soer complaynt of this,
The Spyder that tormentid is:
A wors discourse to him he told,
Thear masters after chang they would.
As they deuiesd, and brought to pas,
The Gowt and Spyder placed was:
At eas as we may find full well,
With hie degree the Gowt did dwell.
And propped up with koshons gaye,
On bed or bentche, at will he lay:
If Gowt his master did diseas,
Moest glad he was the Gowt to pleas.
With furrs and clowts to keep hit warm,
And to avoid a further harm.
The Gowt was hapt and handled soft,
And with swet earbes well bathed often:
And fed with dainty meats enowe,
The knee nor joint durst no man bow.
That Gowt had gouernd this was true,
Yea eury owr, a pashon nue:
Hit brought and bred in masters heart,
And shronk the vains in eury part.
But he that ons had lodgd this gest,
(And bent him self to give him rest:)
Must needs whyels lief does last take pain,
As lo the ^aister was full fain.
The (...) had found so fien a traed,
That (...) would his resdens maed:
From hand to foet, from knee to wryst,
And rueld his master as him list.
With yomen will I dwell no moer,
quod he, for fear of handling soer:
Nor part I tro from gentill bloed,
The Spyder in liek case he stoed.
He maed his cobwebs whear he would,
And in his lodging was as bold:
As any oen may be at hoem,
And further meant he not to roem.
He found no maid his rest to let,
They wear to other labor set:
Thus Gowt and Spyder wear full glad,
That they their masters changed had.
And so I leave them for this time,
And here knit up this crooked ryme.
This taell is written for your wealth, Note.

To sho wherein consists your health:
I do but here example maek,
Of things I trust ye not mistaek.
Thereby declaring as I can,
That eury grief that coms to man:
By idell lief does gro and spring,
The Gowt is sooner with a king. Note.

Than with a weary labring wight,
Why is it rather with the might:
Than with the mean, but for in deed,
That honger maks the poer man feed.
So diversely he fedeth not,
As does the rich man well ye wot:
The rich haeth many a fyen device,
His mind and diet is so nice.
He knoes not what to eat is best,
And maks full many a needles feast:
To stoer the lust and pleas the mouth,
With sundry sorts of things vncowth.
The belly is no sooner full,
The bones must rest, and down he wull:
Upon a bed, or in a chair,
Syts stretching when to taek the air.
He should go walk the fields about,
The want whereof does breed the Gowt:
I mean of to much eas does ryes,
Great harm and grief in sundry wyes.
And most of those that fienly faer,
Without some sickness never aer:
For eury meat must have his kind,
In Stories old I read and find.
That man by roots and erbs lyud long,
And so grue mighty larg and strong:
Boeth hoell and sound, and well dispoesd,
Until our knoledge had discloesd.
That fleash was sweet and fish good meat,
But when thereof we began to eat:
A ranker bloed that foed did breed,
And causd moer humors than did need.
And altered so our lively vayns
With swellings strange with botch and blayns:
That eury year dissesis ^ue,
Within our bodies daily grue.
And yet as our nue fedings change,
Diseases com which aer so strange:
We can not naem them in their fraem,
Nor seek remedy for the saem.
Some dye that never seems sick,
Some live and would be buried quick:
Their payns they are without redres,
We can not eury greef expres.
That rises of our riots great,
And surfets that we ^a^k of meat:
The Plowman haeth no fear of that,
Though that the Spyder and the Gnat.
Within his house cheer pleasuer taek,
The Gowt does seldom him awaek:
He lets the Spyder kill the fly,
And from the Gowt full saef does lie.
When that the Gentill man is fayn,
The corssed Gowt for to retayn.
A DOLLFVLL Discourse of two Strangers, a Lady and a Knight.
Draw near good mynds that sadly marks,
the sway of worldly broylls:
And here what I at large can say,
of trublous tomling toylls.
Which did befall in forrayn land,
tween two of noble race:
To whose mishaps and haetfull faet,
a world hit self gives place.
Not long ago the case so stoed,
a knight of great estaet: Note.

(In native soyll by deastnies lot)
a Ladies favor gaet.
With whom he joined, a hazard great,
his lyking led him so:
That neither fear of frowning Gods,
nor dreed of earthly woe.
Could maek him stayn his plighted troeth,
such constant mind he baer:
For which this second Phoenix may,
with Turttell true compaer.
But well away, alas for woe,
his grief thearby began:
In prince displeasuer throw this prank,
^ell lo this faithful man.
And Caesar frowning on the fact,
thear was no nothe^ boet:
But fly the realm or prostraet fall,
full flat at Cesars foet.
O stacts by this com lern to sloup,
Note.
no stoutnes can preuayll:
When from the heavens storms do bloe,
and strikes down your sayll.
From thonder cracks boeth man and beast.
yea Sun and Moen does fly:
The earth and all that lives below,
do fear the rattling sky.
When Gods aer moved, in louring clouds,
lyek dusky mantels black:
The troubled air to mortal men,
does threaten ruen and wrack.
I turn my talk from such discourse,
and treat of that tormoyll:
Which long this Knight and Lady felt.
at hoem in country soyll.
And somewhat of the caers a broed,
that he perforce did taest:
I mean to wryt so that as troeth,
my verses be embraest.
For troeth and time that tries out gold,
has tempred so my talk:
That pen nor mues no pleasuer ta^ks,
on doutfull ground to walk.
Now when these staets with links of love,
wear tide together fast:
And many a sad and heavy thought,
between them boeth had past,
Of Princes grace and favor great,
(to which regard they to^k:
As chiefest thing and only cause)
whereon they ought to lo^k*
They wayd in balance of their breasts,
what fittest serud their corus:
And lyek as wood taeks flaem of fire,
and so to synders borns.
So throw the heat of this mishap,
they felt such sorrow thoe:
As though hard deastnye swoer they should,
consuem them selves with woe.
The Lady lost her fredom straight,
the Gods had so decreed:
Her knight by sudden flight a broad,
maed virtue of a need.
And living thear with lingering hoep,
in foreign country strange:
Whear absence might throw present toys,
in some men work a change.
He stoed as ferm as marble stoen,
and kept boeth troeth and tutch:
To her who found few friends at hoem,
and hearts diseas was mutch.
Yea though this Knight with offers great,
and treasuer tempted was:
(As they full well can witness bear,
who saw those matters pas)
Yet small acount of Fortuen nue,
he maed for still in breast:
Was shryend the saint, that stoeny walls,
and prison had possessed.
No feer nor frynd nor fellow maet,
this troylus mind might move:
This Fawcon scornd to pray abrod,
at hoem he left his love.
Full many a sigh and heavy loek.
he sent a long the Seas:
And wysht him self in fetters fast,
to do his Lady eas.
What grief of mind and torment strange,
she suffered all the whyell:
Is known to thoes that bondaeg feels,
whoes frynds aer in exiell.
Could mischief fawll on boeth the syeds,
moer harder than hit did:
The oen from joy and worldly pomp,
in preson cloesly hid.
The other forced by fatal chance,
to seek his fortuen out:
And shonning danger found despair,
in wandering world about.
But wayeng well a subjects st^et,
and what was duties bounds:
He yielded straight to open harms,
for fear of secret wounds.
And ventring lyef, yea lands and goods,
to keep his naem from blot:
(And to requit with hazards hard,
the love that he had got.)
From Spayn with speed he did retorn,
and setting foet on land:
He put his cause in justice doem,
and noble Princis hand.
Though in the yoek with fre consent,
the humble heart did fall:
The heavens stoed so out of ^uen,
he gaet no grace at all.
And clapped up full fast in bold,
a prysnars part he plays:
Whear gryepping griefs and grievous groens,
consuemd his gladsom days.
Whyels he a loef full long remaynd,
and out of danger crept:
The dolfull Dame in deep despair,
his absence soore be wept.
Yet great regard to promise paste,
she had as world well wist:
And therefore often wrong her hands,
when that her knight she mist.
But now began the boystrous blastes,
to blow in bloody breast:
And now the golfe of sighs and sobbs,
burste out with great unrest.
For lo, one house held both these wights,
yet both a sonder were:
And both in like displeasure stood.
yea each of both in fear.
Of Princes wrath and worlds disgrace,
a heavy tale to tell,
A plague past hope of heavens bliss,
a torment and a hell:
That is without redemption sure,
but what should more be said:
Thus under lock and barred doors,
these Iuewels safely laid.
They must abide the happy hour,
that God appoints in skies:
And drink up water sweet or sour,
or what shall hap to ries.
The prison than did plead their case,
the walls both deaffe and dom:
Did show by sines of freedom goone,
what sorrows wear to come.
The skreeking Owl in silent night,
at window clapped his wings:
To threaten death or badde success,
of sondrie doubtful things.
No joyful sound was heard with ear,
no news of happy years:
No pleasure to the pinched heart,
in prison strong appears.
Note.
Admit the Lute with toutch of hand^,
a heavy domp does shoe:
A coelling comfort Music brings,
to wretches wrapped in woe.
No mirth with mourning moen may match,
for mischief measure lacks:
And care consuems the mind of man,
as fire melts Uirgin Wax.
In silly Sell, and seurall place,
these two estates did sit:
Whose coming out did far surmount,
the compass of their wit.
As long they spent their tickle time,
in teen and terror great:
So often God wot of matters hard.
in head did hammers beat.
Now hoping that the clouds would calm,
and storms would stand at stay:
Than looking when the Planets tornde,
their course another way.
But shaken ships in seas do sincke,
when surgis ries aloft:
And under waves (for want of aid,)
weak vessels welter often.
So that no hope of succor seems,
to come when tempests rage:
Except the Gods draw back the plagues,
and wind and weather swage.
The present panges and parlous thoughts,
that pearceth troubled minds:
Is known to none but such I say,
that lack of freedom finds.
A prisner bears a simple port, Note.

most glad to pleas and ^lye:
As subject to the keepers beck,
and iellouse Geillors eye.
Now trasing out a weary walk,
now whisht and quiet stands:
Now down on knees, now to the clouds,
loeks up with streatched hands.
Now listening after happy news,
now nipt with sorrows old:
Now sore abasht and brought in mu^s.
now mirrie stout and bold.
Now riepe and reddie for to speak,
now dumme and dare not store:
Now fearful of each sudden sound,
and clap of eurye door.
Now bent to bear and suffer wrong,
now full repoesd on right:
Now feign to fawn on feeble folk,
now setting all things light.
These pashons still awakes their spreets,
that careful captives are:
Such smart they taste, such bread they bite,
that feeds on loves of care.
Yea some are sarud with change of meats,
yet touch they nere a dishe:
But sits like Tantalus in hell,
and wants what most they wish.
These twain I troe were not so used,
but yet when best they sped:
On heavy morssells mixed with moan,
their hongrie stomachs fed.
No day stood free from Fortunes foil,
no hour but norrisht fear:
No season serude to salve the soers,
of sooking sorrow thear.
No drink could cool the fury hot,
of thraldoms thirsty throat:
No pleasant Uerse nor dittie fraemde,
to dollors dollfull note.
No book nor story might revive,
their drowping dead delight:
For from the thoughts of thirled hearts,
are pleasures banished quight.
To slowth, to sleep and mirthlesse moods,
their dompishe days enclinde:
As from the clue of worldly cares,
should thread of life vntwiende.
Dispiesd the night, abbord the day,
and hated hour of birth:
Thought skorne of food and clean forsook,
the pleasures of the earth.
Would feign have loft both speech and breath*
and loekt when hearts would burst:
Beleeude they were in mothers womb,
or else in cradell cursed.
Though drousie dreede, did death desire,
and grief sought quick dispatch:
There was no parting from the place,
till day dischargde the watch.
We cannot pay our borrowde breath,
before thappointed hour:
The end of strife nor stay of state,
stands not in peoples power.
The Gods that guides the heavens hie,
to secret does behold:
The fine, and fleeting feeble course,
of earth and massy molde.
The heart may heave the breast may bloe,
the body sighe and swelt:
The face by open sines may show,
of privy pashons felt.
But all these storms have little force,
to rid man's wretched days:
As by these parties plain I prove,
throw torment sondrie ways.
Well those from whom ye Gods restrain,
the skope and use of will:
Must bend the back and vow the joints,
to bear the burden still.
And yet no toil nor grief so great*
but finds at length some eas:
There follows after swelling floods,
a quiet calmie Seas.
By mean of suite and labors long,
and gracious Prince in deed:
A sweeter soil these prisnars found,
that better blood did breed.
But kept a part as Fortune shapt,
and so in silent shade:
(As place and time did license grant)
a fresh complaint they made.
Of crooked chance and straung exstremes:
that sondred faithful hearts:
Whose sugared love was ever mixed,
with baell and bitter smarts.
And never after like to meet,
nor set ne eye nor vewe:
The one upon the other Lord,
a matte: mitch to rewe.
Long in the broile of this conflict,
and battle of the mind:
They paste their time with bare belief,
of better hap behind.
And wearing out with waylings long,
their weary life God wot,
And finding haven choked up,
where passage should be got.
At ancker under watch and ward,
in tossed bark they lay:
From whens there was no quiet means,
nor hope to escape away.
Note.
The Lady now for last farewell,
betoke her self to tears:
And of despair in persed breast,
a double porshon bears.
Her hollow cheeks and daesled eyes,
declaerde her death was near:
And bade her keepers to prepare,
both shrowding sheet and Beer.
For nature did deny her life,
her heart was tainted so:
That cankred thought should comeful sone,
and make an end of woe.
Her color changde her cheerful looks,
and countnaunce wanted spreet:
To sallow ashes turnde the hue,
of beauties blossoms sweet.
And dreery dulnes had bespred,
the wearishe body throw:
Each vital vain did flat refuse,
to do their duty now.
The blood forsook the wonted course,
and backward began retire:
And laft the lims as cold and swarfe,
as coells that wastes with fire.
The moisture taken from the tree, Note.

the leaves drops down apace:
When sap dries up and faills the root,
the branches loes their grace.
Some bows you see do flourish fair,
and groes a goodly height:
And some by frost and cold air nipt,
and so are blasted straight.
As eury fruit and flower in field,
do yield to sudden claps:
So all that breathes with living soul,
are subject to mishaps.
How should this dame desire to live,
that hourly wore away:
Who would not shed some tears to see,
this tender twig decay.
What stony heart could suffer more,
and bear with eeuen hand:
The weary weight of worldly woes,
and whiske of whipping wand?
And when she saw her hour aproch,
and death his duty crave:
And she amid her chiefest prime,
must go to greedy grave.
She took of world a noble leave,
and calling for a friend:
(Who lives yet and can report,
how she did make her end)
She said with loud and comely voice,
O world I thee forsake:
I have bin here a pilgrim long,
and now my leave I take.
Of all thy Pomp and pleasures vain,
that makes my senses blind:
Whose glory does begin with pain,
and ends with grief of mind.
In dongon deep of deinty thoughts,
thou hold eurye wight:
And feeds their foolish fancies still,
with toys and trifles light.
Thy prisnar was I borne to be,
and Adams children all:
(Like captius here condemde to die)
must suffer for his fall.
But now the chains and loathsome lincks,
that lay on shoulders weak:
(And all the bands and cloggs of care)
in sheuers small shall break.
And I from cage shall mount to skies,
more swift than bird with winge:
And flicker like a simple dove,
where shining Angels singe.
I bring a badge and liurye both.
that my good master CHRIST:
Did lean for such as bears his Cross,
through foggs of worldly miest.
Yea shaking of* this sinful soil,
me think in Clouds I see:
Among the perfect chosen Lambs,
a place preparde for me.
Here is no home nor harbring house,
but cabbens built on sand:
That eurye pirrie puffs down,
or still on props does stand.
Our Fathers spreetes posses in peace,
the country that we crave:
We are but strangers far from hoem,
that nothing certain have.
T^ese wear her words and many more,
which follows as she spoek:
I d^d ^^o she) by bryttell life,
O Lord, thy wrath provoke,
For which I now repent me soer,
and trusting to receive,
F^^e pardon for my former fautes,
^ar sowll shall body leave.
My ^aynt and feeble vessayll frayll,
so fears thy Justice great:
That hit appealls from curs of law
unto thy mercy Seat.
I am but worms meat well I wot,
all Fleash is naught but gras:
To Earth and ashes out of hand,
must all my pleasures pas.
I want the force, thou have the might
to strive with Death and Hell:
Thou art the Rock, the corner Stoen,
the Fountain and the Well.
From whom the Springs of life must ^
and unto whom again
The thyrsty soulls, and hongry Hearts:
for help do trodg a mayn.
Who has been washed in thy Blood,
is whiter than the Snoe:
O let the streams and floed of grace,
with favor on me floe.
In Book of life, let wryt good Lord,
my name among the rest:
That ordaynd wear, ear world was made,
to sleep in Abrams breast.
Blot out the bleamish of my brow,
that at the latter day:
May strike the con^hens with despair,
and cloked crimes bewray.
G^ue boldness to the bashful sprite,
that fears from hens to flitte:
M^ke hope and faith now ferm to see,
great God in glory sit.
Note.
With closed hand than breast she knocked,
so gave a sighe and stayed:
And then conceiud some inward joy,
with cherefull face she said.
Do mourn no more O trembling soul,
that knows not where to stay:
Come from the kaytiffe carrayue corpse,
and cabben made of claye.
And look upon the Lamb of God,
whose death thy randsome paid:
That blessed babe the virgins Son,
that borne was of a maid.
Come silly byrd out of the den,
where naught but darkness is:
And look on everlasting light,
and loving Lord of blis.
The lusts of flesh and worldly pomp,
I hope are quentcht in me:
Throw faith a lone from sin and bond,
I have escaped free.
And with that word in sine of joy,
a Salme full loud she sange:
The sollemp noyes and sound thereof,
thorowout the chamber range.
And end^^g that to prayer straight,
of her own mind she fell:
The slanders by whose tears burst out,
at this her last farewell.
Began to give her ^omfort than,
of life and welfare both:
Yea live I shall and do right well,
quoth ^he I know for troth.
But that is in a another world,
the hope of this is gone:
And reason is it should be so,
for here there lives none.
But sees the vainnes of our state,
and tastes such torments still:
That sundry times, they wish them selves,
from hence with right goodwill.
Hear is but toil and sweat of brows*
and endless labor found:
And nothing reapt but wretched wrak,
and broken sleeps unsound.
Where I shall go I seace from pain,
and so such joy posses:
As heart skarce thinks nor head conceiues,
nor tongue may well expres.
Than hold your peace, knit up your talk,
and trouble not the spreet:
That draws from hence and hopes it is,
for better place more meet.
A Lady thoe that virtue lykte,
and there some credit had:
Replied and said O noble dame,
in deed you are to sad.
These panges shall pass, these fits shall fade,
and all these pashons dye,
As they have done when you full often,
in such like sort d^d lie.
O Madam speak no moer of that,
my time draws on (quoth she)
I shall not dye, but make exchange,
of breath and life I s^e.
The Glass is run, the clock will stryke,
Death does aproch a pace:
My course is don, the Judge draws near,
to sit upon my case:
No longer here I may abide,
the packing day is come:
Death byds me now vnarm my self,
and here the mortal drom.
That calls me hence, as naked suer,
as to the world I came:
The course of Nature shoes me to,
that earth and dust I am.
The Harrold of long home is sent,
to Sommon me in have:
Than stay me not for in that point,
boeth tears and words ye wast:
Yet ear I part, good friends (quoth she)
behold what hoep I have:
And note what faith and badge of Christ,
I carry to my grave.
And mark, how I confess with mouth,
that Christ has shed his Blood
For me, and those that erst in sta^t,
of deep damnation stood.
And by his Pashon I am saved,
and not by my dezarts:
But by the help of him that knows,
the thoughts of secret hearts.
Now staying here, she loekt about,
and to a Knight she spaek:
And him desired with humble words,
that he the pains would take:
To show the prince what past her mouth*
O tell him sir quod she:
This is the suit and last request,
that must be made by me.
Unto his highness whose estate,
our blessed Lord maintain:
And pray him to forgive me now,
for I confess ^^t plain.
I made a ^ault, and sore offense*
when I against his will:
Estranged my self from his good grace,
for any hope or skill.
But from my birth unto this day,
my heart and thought was clear:
From breach of subjects duty sure,
and I protest it here.
I never meant nor purpoesd yet,
in word in deed nor thought:
No harm (nor lodgd one ill consayt,
nor spark of evil soght)
To him as God may witness bear*
to that which now I speak:
Save now alas by oversight,
of foul fancies weak.
I feell and find the price thereof,
and suffer for the saem:
An open check and priuey plaeg,
and pyn^ching publik blaem.
I hoep his hyghnes haeth forgoet,
the fault I did commit:
And as he is a noble Prince,
in regal throen to sit*
And judge his subjects causis all,
so hoep I of his grace.
He will receive my children poer.
and help thear heavy case.
O God forbid for mothe^s fault,
the children should a bye:
No grayn of grodg, nor ground of gyell,
in gyltles baebs does lie.
I do bequeath them now quod she,
unto the Princis hands:
In hoep the favor that they find,
shall eas the fathers bands,
My nature shoes a moorning cheer.
to part from them God knoes:
For children find small comfort here.
when he^s the mother goes.
If God move not the Princes mind,
to pity thear estate:
Note.
Now as this Lady did at large,
about her baebs debate.
Upon her deer boght Jewel than.
she cast her only thought.
Yea for whose sake and great good will.
she was in troble brought.
And pawsing on this matter throw,
a heavy syghe she gave.
O good sir knight said she to one,
a thing of you I crave.
Comme^d me to my worthy friend,
and bid him comfort take:
And h^ep in God and Princes grace*
though I do world forsake.
He may do well and fredom get*
but me ye shall not meet:
Till from the cave of pampred fleashe,
departs his gronyng spreet.
Whiles life I had I honored him,
and safly kept my vow:
As life did bynd me his in all,
so death does lowse me now.
From him and all my worldly ioye^,
but though my friend I leave.
On hye whear dwells a greater friend,
(if hoep not me disseaue.)
I trust to se his baebs and him,
and though much greef hit is:
To leave them here in bitter baell*
yet noet I go to blis.
Whear is no mind of combros caers,
nor cause of sorrows known:
O tell him that above I hoep,
theas storms shall be oer blown*
And as a skrowll is lapped up,
yea so shall all things here:
(When sowlt shall be immortal maed)
unto our vewe a peer.
No soener of the sowll she spoek,
but soddayn ^hang began:
In loeks and lyms of deadly shoe,
with collor paell and wan.
The eyes did staer the body streatch,
the strength and force did fayll:
The teeth they chattred in the cheeks, A right figure of Death.

the hands did quaek and quayll.
The mouth did ^^em the head did shaek,
the fleashe hit quiured fast:
The feet war^ cold the face did sweat,
full swyft the pol^s past.
The heart did heave and beat in breast,
A pattern of death.
the breath lyk earth did sent:
At ears and nose the styeffled go,
and vittall life soght vent,
Though gasping breath brought pashons on,
and gript her heart full hard:
Yet showd she throw thoes sharp assaults,
to friend a great regard.
And calling for a box of ryngs,
among them choes she won:
In which was set by conning aert,
a rich and preshoes ston.
Hold carry this quod she good Syer,
to my deer noble Knight:
He can remember what that stoen,
presents unto his sight:
The other token that I send,
hit is a weyghty ryng:
Best lykt and derest boght God wot,
of any earthly thing.
And when ye shall give him this gift,
de^yer him well to mind:
The little imps the pretty souls,
the b^^bs I leave behynd.
And bid him bring them up in fear,
of God and Prince I say:
Lo that is al I do requier,
of him my dyeing day.
I have no gold to send my baebs,
but blessing I them give:
Which God co^fyrm with grace good sto^r,
As long as they shall live.
O yet thear is another ryng,
which lo my love must ^e:
Whear is my picture: death I mean,
and tell my friend from me,
That I as cold and sensles toe,
shall be in littell space:
As is that shado^ dom and deaff,
and spreetles shaep of face.
This don she tornd her head a syed,
and bard them all faerwell.
Twear good quod she in syen of death*
I hard the passing bell,
For such as live may pray the whiel,
and knoe when bell does towll.
Into the bowels of the earth,
the boddy partts from sowll.
Yet meet they shall when trumpet sownds*
and that the dead aryes.
And boeth together shall assend,
I hoep to starry Skies.
With this began the battayl feers,
between her lyef and death.
Lyek g^^st she lay, whyells heart did groen*
and mouth gaept wyed for breath.
Than said she Lord in to thy hands,
I do commend my spreet.
And so her self cloes'd up her eyes,
and hyd her head in sheet.
And went away lyk enfantt young,
clean void of storm or raeg.
Or lyk a boddy fawlls a sleep,
that can not speak for aeg.
Thus breathles lay this Lady now,
lyk weyghty lomp of claye,
(That erst had lyef and feelyng force)
and past lyk slowre a way.
But when the nues of this was brought,
unto her playffeers cares:
Which roering voice and blobbred eyes,
thear goeshed out such tears,
That wytnest well with owtward syens,
what woe he felt within.
And truly told when she did end,
his doll^r did begin.
Bereft of sleep, and ro^bd of rest,
he roemed up and down,
And cast of ^^eds of worldly pomp
and clapped on moornyng gown.
No eas nor pleasures could posses,
nor feell the taest of meat.
Resolud to pyen and ^^arue him self,
his gr^^ss they wear so great,
No council could him comfort long,
and still aloen he drue,
To morn and moen to howll and cry,
and make complaynt a nue.
And worn away with^wofull syghes,
when sorrow helped not.
At l^yngth the lyef must be sustaynd,
with some releef ye wot.
But how he takes this mischeef yet,
and how the matter goes:
H^t passes far my reatch and wit,
to iou^ I tell you troeth,
His Lady g^n as you have hard,
when days and years wear spent,
In thraldom long, yet after that,
was better for^uen sent.
For (...) to princes grace again*
(...) came by blessed chance:
And so he lyus in open world,
whear virtue may advance:
Both him and many thousands moer,
that noble lives do lead,
And wyesly walk with upright mynds,
and stepps of honor tread.
Lo here you Daems of hy renown,
a Ladies death set out:
Whoes lyef for faith full feaw shall find,
that seeks wyed world about.
To God and Prince repentant suer,
to world a myrrour bright:
Whearfoer with tongue and true report,
resownd her prays a right.
FINIS.
The Roed made by Sir william Druery Knight, into Skotland, from the East Seas
to the West (with sundry Gentlemen of good calling) for the reformation of
such causes as the Queens Majesty and her Council thought convenient. In
the.xiii. year of the reign of our sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth.
The names of the Captains and Gentlemen in his company.
Sir Thomas Manners. Sir George Carry. Sir Robert Constable. S^r Jerome Bovve^.
M. William Knovvls. M. Henry C^ry. M. Robert Knovvll. M. Michell Carye.
Captain Carye. Captain Caruill. Captain Austell. Captain Edington. M.
Edmond Varney.
My Lord of Sussex ^or^eys I set out in my second book.
MY Lord of Sussex, now lord Chamberlayne, having finished two famous and
notable roeds into Sko^lande, which I have written of (as chargeable as
paynfull, and of no small credit and policy) rested a season at Ba^wyck, by
reason of a sickness taken by overmuch travel of body and mind in the
service rehearsed, and reposing him self in that town for ye benefit of
health thought necessary (in the present exploits and service expected) to
institute another general for the execution of such matters as he him self
would gladly have taken in hand, if sickness had permitted: and because each
gentleman soldier and several bands should duetifully obey (in all points
and warlyke order) the nue general chosen for this purpose, my Lord of Sussex
made an oration in such form ^ manner as thoroughly explayned ye whole
substance of the service, the vnsuretie of the season, the difficult dealing of
diverse adversaries, and uttered the excellencys of an Orator. At whoes
elloque^ce the heerars rather stoed astonyed than vnsatysfyed in any point or
parssell, wherein he opened the bowels of rebellyon, the practies of enemies,
and subborning of traitors, and earnestly persuaded every (...) mind, to be
myndfull of his Prince and country, in the liberty whereof, boeth life and
living is always to be offered, after which Oracion as custom is (for service
past, and things to come) he made these knights that here are mentioned, Sir
William Drury, Sir Thomas Manners, Sir George Care, and Sir Robert Constable,
and placing the General in full authority, he committed them to God and the
good conduct of their Chieftaine: then presently with professed obedience each
man desired to do a days service, to venture his life, to shed his blood, or
show his duty. Whereupon, and as great and weighty cause moved, my Lord of
Sussex commanded them to martch forward, and so they did, and made that night
a greater martch than was looked for, and yet no less speed than was
needeful: by which forwardness, sudden exercises of Arms (and a brute blown
abroad of a more sooner departure) the enemies were discouraged and hindered of
their ho^p, and our men made masters of the field, and possessed in a manner
their wish and desired hap, at the least taking aduau^tage of the time, they
prevented the pushe of a perilous and present policy, and avoided the danger
of a troublous time to come. For the enemy regarding our readiness and desire
of encounter with them, retired so fast backwarde, that all their labor was
lost which they took in hand before. And now were they somewhat abashed that
before used overmuch boldness, yet in doubtful balance stood the weight of
this journey, considering what followed by the fyennes or falshod of double
meaning friends (beside the dangers inside^t to the hazards of Fortune) Our
people being thought at ye first to be great in number, Note.
wear suffered to martch where they pleased, but the enemy advertised of our small
power, not only like chafed Boares began to pluck up the bryssells, but also
bruted abroad we were taken in a pitfold and had need of a treble company to
accomplish the exploit taken in hand. And after our power had passed ^denbrogh
toward the force of y^ adversaries, the secret practisiens of mischief in ye
town, set suddenly on our Lackkeis: and such of y^ train as could not
conveniently follow y^ Camp with expedicio^, Note.
were in danger to fall in ye fury of those bloodsuckers ye delighted in
slaughter, who sought by suttletie to bring poor weaklings to the mercy of ye
sword. But this boldness and audacious dealings, hindered no whit the hope of our
general, nor brake no piece of our purposed matter, for our Camp though it
was but little, took great regard of their safety and honor, and knew yt the
enemies espials slept no more tha^ their sleights, nor nothing was kept more
awaken than their common consent, for our destruction, Which made us so
vigila^t and careful, yt every man was bent to ^eare of the brunt of this
business to the uttermost, with the pollecie of h^d, perrell of body, or hazard
of life: and kept them selves so fa^t linkked to gether, that it seemed a thing
impossible to break their order or daunt their courage, being resolved to try
by sword and service the worst or best, that fortune could do. And so marched
onward as boldly and with as great a show as nothing could have bin a let and
impediment to their purposed enterprises. At the view whereof the enemies were
not only amazed but likewise stricken in such fear they wist not what was best
to be don, and finding their devices ^is^iffred and over taken, (and their
force and people, but weakly guided.) They inverted to cast another compass and
so to frame by falsehood and treason a readier way for the execucion of their
wyeles and wicked wills, as hereafter you shall perceive when I come to touch
the perticulars. Our camp neither spared pains, nor no exersies of arms all
this season, and so approaching many places on ye sudden, they made the enemy
retire and raised the siege of sundry Towns as Glasko and others which were to
long to rehearse, The Duke chattilleroy wa^ at this ^ee^e and (...) away
dis^oraged.
yet always as mildly and quietly as was possible in their passage outward
they behaved themselves: defferring the punishing of false brethren and
deceiuable enemies, til ye return of ye camp homeward again If god so should
suffer. And being masters of the field and emboldned to martch forwards by the
happy suckcesse of their labors, they made as great speed as they might to be
at Dombrit^ain there to finishe by fight or favorable fortune, y^ greattest
hazard and toil of this dangerous journey. And now was it come to y^ utter
extremity y^ either y^ enemy must de^ply dissemble and work some treasonable
train, or openly stand at defense and point of the sword. Whereupon they made a
show and s^yne of great amity, and cloking pretensed malice under a parle and
communicacion of peace, they seemd to mislyke no matter y^ was ministered. As
though they agreed to have an unity and reformacio^ for ciuell wars and
disorder crept in the common wealth by caueling and quarrellous people, and
offering in a manner all security and trust for the saffe m^eting of the lord
Flemming and sir William Drury, who should thoroughly talk and debate of
things than most necessary and convenient (to be amended, or at the least wise
spoken off) So our general co^desse^ded to see what fruit this florishi^g
friendship would yield. And giving occasion of good liking and no suspicious
handling of this business. Sir William Drury prepared him self to go a part
from his power, offering to be armed or unarmed. Always providing if any of ye
enemies had ishued out of ye town (for a train and false practies) he had a
sufficient band ready, to resist al mischeeues yt might follow So as ye
marshall manner is of meetings for such purpose, the Lord Fleming and our
general preased in place, as al kind of doubts and dangers stood void and
clear of suspicion and free from all fear. But y^ lord Fleming contrary to our
hope and against ye law of arms, by cautel and subtle sort had closly laid
abayte to betray Sir William Drury or caused twain of his Soldiars at the very
instant of meeting to shoot of their pieces, and thinking by ye death of the
general, a general disorder would follow to further y^ good fortune of y^
faithles flock and disceitful dealars. And in deed for truth, our general was
no sooner in danger upon trust, but this treason was put in proof and present
practice, for two several shot wear suddenly discharged full in ye face of Sir
william Druery and the enemies missed but a little, the only mark they shot
at. Notwithstanding Sir william Dreury (as one resolved to revenge injury and
falshed) stoed so stoutly to his own business, that he shot of both his
Dagges, to the discourage and infamye of this vnlordly enterprise, and with a
loud voice made a vow, that this leawd fact should not long escape vnreueng^d.
The Lord Flemming like a For to the hoel, withdrew him to his hold, and our
general came orderly, and without harm from this hateful hazard and
unaccustomed entertaynement of wars And being retired in safety and the matter
well disgested, a marvelous mormour and furious talk arose in our Camp among
the whole multitude, and every honest heart hated this haerbrayne and hasty
disorder, harbored and hatched ^n y^ bowels of a Crokadyll. And surely this
powder made such a smodder and smoek, Note.
that sundry stowt stomachs were sturred to anger, and set on a very flame by
the heat there of And one of the chief (and best credit next the general) slept
out and declared, that it was a dishonor to suffer a General to so worthy a
band (and in the service of so mighty a Prince) so v^ed and deryded, and for
that no such filthy fact should sleep in silence nor pass vnponished, he would
leave to the posterity an example thereof for ever. Whereon he earnestly desired
the Generals license, that he might send an Harrold of Arms to the Lord
Flemming, to know the cause of this vnwarlyke demenour, and further (quoth he) it
becomes better m^n^ estate (because I am now under this General) than the
General himself, to try out this quarrel by combat and defiaunce of feyght.
And more noble it was, that a gent^lman Soldiour should stand in those
questions, than a General, considering his calling and office. To the which
offer good persuasion, the General gave this answer. I have my dear frynd
Sir Georg Care, great thanks to give you in this behalf: Albeit for the
greatness of your mind my thanks is to small a recompense, but it stands me
upon to sea^tch out theas matters to the vttermoest, and so I w^ld, wear not
my Commission and charge as ye know otherwise to be employed: yet sens your
suet is so reasonable (and the hoel company and law of arms alows hit) I grant
you your request, and thearin do as best shall seem to your birth and
exstimacion, Sir George Carry (desirous of honor, and to see tretchery rebuked)
straightwayes devised a letter to be sent out of hand whiles things wear
fresh in memory, and wrote such matter as he minded to stand unto what ever
should happen: the effect of wohes letter folows word by word, as the writtar
him self drue it out and delivered hit to the Harrald in the presens of a
number.

The letter of sir George Carry.
LOrd Fleming, if either your birth or bringing up had wrought in you a noble
mind or estimacion of credit, hardly would you have so much forgotten and
stained your Honor, as in a parley of late with our General you did. At whom
vildly and vnhonorably shoeting you falced that assurance of war, which
soldiers submit themselves unto: And trained him to your treason under trust, a
thing heretofore not accustomed, nor presently to be allowed of. He assuredly
pretending your own and your friends good, commodity to your country, and
quietness to the state, Twyse abased and submitted him self, coming to confer
with you thereof: But your pride, joined (...) harmeful meaning, to those that
you profess best unto, and selfewilful vain glory, without cause why, refused
that which reason and honor commanded you to have done? Therefore because
his calling is presently with his charge better then yours, and mine not
inferior. I sommon you, reasonably to excuse that fault supposed to be yours,
or else to maintain that traiterous act with your person against mine in fight
when, where, or how you dare. Otherwise I will bas^ull your good name sound
with the trumpet your dishonor, and paint your pictor with the heels upward,
and beat it in despite of your self. In the mean time I attend your answer.
From Glasco the xxii. of May. 1570.

Subscribed, George Carey.


The copy of the Lord Flemings answer.
GEorge Carry, I have received your brainlesse letter, making mention of my
false and treasonable dealing against your General in sho^ting under trust, so
vildly against my Hono^ and truth traitorously trained him under my trust,
which is altogether false and untrue. And howbeit your General came by the
house of Dunglas, by my appointment, which I suffered and I appointed one place
of (...), ^i^e men of either party, which he re^used, and he departed and
certain of his company came bragging up the river side toward the house,
v^w^^g the same, and the ground thereabouts, (...) your (...) against the same.
I could do no les but present you with su^^ as I had. Whereas you write of
your Genera^s calling to be presently better then mine* and yours not
inferior, when your General challenges me thereof, I shall give answer: And as
for you, I will not be inferior to a better then you, or any soldiour under
your Generals charge. Whereas you sommon me, as you call it, reasonably to
excuse that fault supposed to be mine own, or else to maintain that traiterous
act with my person against yours: you shall wit, I have Gentilmen of Honor
servant soldier to me, as ye are to your General, which may be your fellows,
shall defend the same against you and your falce and untrue invented writing,
and were not the charge I present, or how sone I can be releued of the same, I
should lowly my person, to mete you six english miles fro any other person. How
be it ye be but one Soldier, assure your self from this day forth, I will not
receive no such vain invented message, for I have littell to do with english
me^, ye may ray^e upon my honorable name as ye please. You shall have as
honorable gentilmen as your self against you ^eighting. Take this for answer.

John L. Fleming.


LOrd Fleming often the Flemings after noon answers, smells more of wine then
wit. But as to that common crime, the custom of their country yeldeth the^ part
of pardon: so your common acquaintance, with the same co^ditio^ known to be
very great, shall to me somewhat exscuse your witles writing, wherein first you
disalow my right recital of your traiterous dealing, by terming it false and
untrue, for answer, know this, the truth my pen has written, by the witness of
a number. And my hand I vow shall maintain the same before the world at all
times: but you in denyi^g it, have both falseli and vniusth lied in your throt,
and dare neither defend nor disprove, that in deeds, which in words you have
don, whereas you writ that our general passed Dunglas. By your appointment which
you suffered. Therein you do manifestli say vnhonorabli and untruly for that you
had no knowledge of our first co^mi^g, but saluted us with your shot, and we
likewise scirmeshed with your men, even at their own strength, until we vewed
the ground about at our pleasure. And touching the appointment of six of either
part, easly that may be known, to be a plain lie, seeing we had neither parle
nor conference with you before, to appoint place or meting But whereas you say
you could do no less, but present us with such as you had, therein you
confess, and acknowledge the dishonor and treason that I charged you with all,
taking upon your self that fault which I supposed to have been of your servants,
for our general retired his company far from him. And his trumpet being with
you, approached him self alone to have parled when under trust you discharged
two Hargubusses against him, an act rather seemly for a cowardly traitor,
then one that professes to be a soldier, finally whereas you let me wit that
you have Gentlemen of honor, servant soldiers to you that may be my fellows,
which should defend the challenge that touches so nere your self, as with
honor you should not have refused it. First I think skorne to be any ways
inferior to you, though but a soldier, to honorable a name for you being
better in birth and unstained with reproach as you have been Secondly, I have
more and as good Gentlemen under my conducte, as you have under your charge,
which shall answer as many as you can bring, if with number ye mean to
combat, and will put them to that which you dare not do your self. But assure
you, my quarrel shall remain everlasting, except the proof of your own person
against mine may end it, and when you shall dare, come out of your crowse
nest, I will be ready to ride an hundredth Skottish miles, to meet with you in
any indifferent place, and until that time I shall account you deuoyde of
honesty, and honor unworthy to march upon ground or to keep company with
men. From Hamelton the. 29. of May. 1570.

Subscribed George Car^y.


Though many ways were wroght by message and threatenings to move the Lord
Flemming to defend with battayl the fault and folly committed, yet he put on
such a vizard of rebuke and shameless countenance that he faced out the matter,
and shifted of the combat, by such silly sleights and sutteltie, that all the
awdience might wonder at the weakness of his corrage, and the enemies clapping
them selves in sauegard, gave an occasion to our men to lo^s no further time
about remediles matters. For there could nothing gro on this business at that
season, but cold and ^aer skyrmishes, neither honorable nor worthy the tarrieng
for, as by trial fell out afterward. Theas things ended and order taken for
our retorn from Donbri^taine the Camp martched homewards, and coming to Glas^o
where our power reposed them selves a whiel, and either than or soen after they
besieged Hammulton Castle and took hit, whearin there was the bishop of saint
Andros son, Battred And randered.
Lord Daui, son to to the Duke Shattilleroy, and sundry gentilmen of Scotland,
and this castle subdued and blown up was a terror to the rest, that as yet
our camp had not viseted, and for the more ^^en of victory the general brought
from this castle a dozen good bras pieces which now remain in England. Eatch
thing randered and put under the commandment and pleasure of our general at
Hammulton, from thens, the camp marched to many placis of importance, and
ouerthrue housis and pallacis that belonged to any notorios enemy or falsefyer
of promise and fidelity. Among the rest was the Dueks house bornt a staetly and
delicaet palace and three or four miles about the saem, was ransaekt and
spoiled with ^laem and fire. A pyell called Netherrey, the Lord Seactons house
was by the enemies fortifyed and yet the lady of the castle was glad to make
humble peticion on her knees for the Generals favor, and after her suet and
submission, she kissed the keys of the aforesaid seat, and deliured them from
her, by which humility she found favor at the Generals hand, co^dicionally that
a Baron should be bound with her that this castle should ever hereafter be at the
devotion of the Queens Majesty our mestres, and so the band was maed and
order taken. Another place called Commernawd, Chery.
the Lord Flemmings cheef house was yielded upon great suet maed to the general
who took the lyk band and order thearfore as was taken of Netherrey, The Lady
Liddingto^, great with child mistrusting her self (or her husbands double
dealings toward our country) in great fear began to flee. But Sir William
D^ury heering thereof, sent her word he came not to make wars with women, but
rather to sho pity to the weak and comfortles, and thereupon she stayed and
had no further harm, I have kept this in stoer as a thing to be throwly
con^ithered, wi^h is the coming to L^^^hoe, and the vsaeg thereof don only for
a special point of seuer^^^e, and to terrefie ye stobborn stomachs and
inconstantnes of proud people. The General having entered the town called for
the Provost, and commanded him to prepare with all expedicion to receive a just
plaege and correction through the whole town for treason, and unpardonable
offencis committed. And deeclaring that the inhabitants thereof had suckored
and supported traitors to our country contrary to the leags and quietness of the
realms of England and Skotland, and for that cawse he was fully resolved to
ouerthroe that town and receptakul of traitors, and so commanded eatch Captayn
and soldier what so ever they were under his charge to se due execution on
that which he purposed, Provision ^as made for the preservation of sick
persons, m^n* women, and children.
and taking good regard that the goods thereof should not be possessed by
English soldiers, nor lost or cast away by vehemency of fire, he wylled the
provost to appoint a place convenient to bring the said goods unto, which
might be employed to the Skottes men's use and commodity. And the General
grauntid upon his own cor^tezy eury noble man's lodging and Captayns house to
be free from hornyng. The enemies all this season beholding a far of the
suckses of theas matters. Thus as the day and owre approtched for this
determined execution, caem the Earl Mortton as intercessor, to entreat and sue
for pardon if favor might be porchased, and the Earll Mortton brought before
the General a multitude of wayling people, whoes mourning and pitious cries
was perssing and importu^aet. The General heering thear requests answered For
many cawses the town oght to be destroyed, consythering how diverse enemies
(whoes proud practices wear not to be suffree) had always thear a common
resort and conference, and further quod he the corttezy that is showed to such
placis of repair haeth embol^ned, the rest of Skotlande to use ^epen violence
and secret villainies to the prejudice of Gods glory, hinderance of the weall
publik and breach of good laws and pollecies. Wherefore said he to the warnyng
of thowsands, and example of many, hit was fytt and moest meet (in that case of
exstremitie) to race ou^ such monumentes of mischiefs: and harbor of wicked
conspiracies, and especially that town having crakked credit in a bloddy
action before, deserved now doble afflicttion. Well yet notwithstanding for all
theas earnest and threatnyng words of Sir William Drury, the people of all
sorts so preased about him, and maed such pytefull cries and noyes (with
children lyeng on the ground sukking of their mothers breasts,) that he was
inwardly moved to rue on thear wretched estaet, and albeit in sundry seruesis
before diverse Skots men had naghtelly discharged sertayne shot at him
(paraduenture by the practies of some thear in presence) yet was he content
upon such conditions as he thought good to receive the town of Lithco to
mercy, And ordained by suer band and promise that the prouoest and cheifest of
government thear should follow the camp, and at all times apeer when they wear
called for at Barwyk, and thear to submit them selves their town and goods to
the clemency of the Queens hyghnes, or such order as my Lord of Sussex by
her consent thought necessary, to which bands and conditions they of Lithco
agreed, and for that thear regent was slain and noen than instituted (to whom
they had given faith of alleagance) they confessed that noen might command
them an^ way without license of him that ^ound them in this servitude to whom
boeth thear promise and obligation was passed, and at this day as by their
app^rancies haeth ben proved they are not discharged of this homage and duty,
(...). A ^oet of journey to ^e^ell.
to knit up theas matters (and revenge some injuries y^ Duke Chattilleroy had
offered) A house, of the Dukes house in (...), was blown in the air with
powlder. ^^thco^ ^roght in obedience as you have hard unto some other parts of
importance they martched, and casting the worst of mischeefes that might
fortune (consytheryng heir small number, and the great practices were gone about
to supplant their doings,) they thought not good to enter Edenbroeghe without
standing so sure on their guard that they needed not to doubt any double or
crooked measure, Which sure handlyng of the matter did not only show the
d^u^se^s thereof to have good conduyt and experience: but in deed also
eschewed an inconuenie^ce, as ill as a mischeef. For the enemies had fynely by
frawd and conning wroght such a feat (through the device of a fray to be maed
in the suburbs) that a great murder had burst out suddenly, and no small
blodshed had been set a brotch by the saem, if God and good gyding of the people
had not avoided these harms, and eminent danger, And to be plain some inward
moshon moved the General so suspiciously, Sir Thomas Manners and two nombers
under oen A^seent Of footmen was sent before to s^ay the gates.
that he sent to the gaets at their first arrival and there prevented the
porposed conspiracy, and no soenner entryng the town, but our whole power
kept them selves in order to clear the streets and command the inhabitants
the better, So consuming the night they stood on their guard as the ca^e
required. And when the morning was come Sir William Drury, (smellyng out a pad
in the straw, and a fowl flaem covertly hidden) demanded justice, and strayt
ponishment for such things as he would truly lay to the chargis of some of
the towns men, and told them if remedy were not soen provided, and
satisfaction maed for the follies and owtraeg committed, he would be quickly
revenged to the displeasuer and shaem of all the mainteyners of this mad and
mischeeuous presumsion, after which words and when things wear wayed to the
weight of the cawse, the town delivered the General sertayne malefactors to
be executed and ordered by his discrecion, he seeing their submission, mercyfully
and frankly sent them away to their Captains, and so these broylls were
pacifyed and brought to a better fraem and uniformity. Now here is somewhat to
be spoken of in the happy ^uckses of this littell band, if therein the
disdaynfull misconstrued not my meaning, and wresting troeth to flattery (by
consayt of envious glorious minds) might mormur at the virtue and valor of
thoes who this matter touches, Wherefore I commit the judgment of this journey
to such as haeth ben or would be in the like hazard and service, yet mind I
not to leave out any point or piece that may redownd to these soldiers
renown and estimacion, becawse I would have their prayeses equally distributed
among the favorers of virtue and deseruers of good fortuen, I have a litt^l
seen and somewhat red, but seldom hard and known a company so vni^ed and knit
together, so obedient to dissipline of war, and so peasable in all respects
and porposes, yea suerly hit is to be proved that some of good birth and calling
refused no seruisable labor and toyll if the General but only maed a baer
syen or show of his determina^t mind, And throw out ye camp with a mutual
love and inclinacion, they seemd to bear a general burden, as every member
thear had been a natural framed instrument to the use of one body, And to
foster and norishe this ^r^e of men in the marshall art and rules of war was
thear prescribed good and quiet orders, and a proclamacion made that no man
should take any thing by violence nor without pleasyng the people for the same.
And further, if any found him self grieved, he was commanded to repair for
redres to the General and his officers: whose care and studdy was always ready
to minister justice, Two fawlters punished.
as thear whole doings declared, and namely at Lyt^^oe and Glaskoe* whear two
English soldiers wear seueraly p^nyshed: The one in deed by intercession of
the Lords and Gentilmen, was saved from hangyng, and the other was whypped, as
the merits of the man did require. Now* having sheawed you the manner and
order of this camp, and touched lightly in brief the substance of such matter
as I think worthy ye penning, I will show you of their martching homwards. When
they had rested a while in ^denborogh, they went toward Seatton, the Lord
Seattons chief house, where the Lady of that soil in like sort (as before is
mentioned) presented the keys of that place to the General, who made not
only a redelyuerie thereof, but also gave the Lady the house and all that
belonged thereunto, to her great contentation and his no little good report. A
journey after this was taken in hand to Anderweeke, with intent to overthrow
the same also, yet on the suet and bonds of diverse Gentilmen, the place was
spared from spoil and ponishment, and the offenders received to remission. And
than as occasion* sought to fynishe their travail, they dru^ near the borders
of England, spending about these things but xxiiii. days at the uttermost, a
journey to be noted, and worthy to be registered in perpetual memory. ^ere may
you behold what a wyllyng and valiant company may do in little time, and what
overthrows and plagues are sent by Gods provision, to such as breaks the
bounds of blessed orders, and forgettes the duty to common wealths and
christianity. Thus in simple ^roes I have drawn out this service not myndyng
therewith to eleuate or po^ffe up with ouerweening the minds of any one person
that this gives commendation unto, nor meaning to disgrace no enemy, for that
season against whom this journey was made. But this is written only to set
forth truly and plainly the acts and affairs of our time, that such as
list to argue and reason thereof, shall be the better instructed of every doubt
or certainty belonging to such a disputation. So fare you well.

FINIS.
Sir Simon Burleis Tragedy, who lived in the xi. year of King Richard the
second. ^oke Frozard the last part. Fo. 108.
AM I of blud, or yet of byrih so base,
O Baldwin now, that thou forgetst my name
Or does thy pen, want cunning for that case.
Or is thy skill, or sensis fawllen lame,
Or do thou fear, to blase abroad my fame:
O show sum cause, wherefore I sit in shade,
And why is thus, my Tragedy unmade.
Who thinks great skorne, in silence still to sleep,
And one whose fall, a world may wail and weep
Did Bocace live, or Lidgate wright again,
Same hope were left, my lantern should have light
If any one, that had a Poettes vain.
Knew half my life, or had my case in sight,
In collors fine, I should be painted right.
But gaping grave, and gnawing worms below,
Snapt Bocace up, and Lidgate long ago
And Poettes sleep* within Parnassus mount,
Where lo of me, they make but small accounte.
O Bawldwin yet, what blot was in my brow.
That made the blush, or fear to writ my fall:
With what offense, can world cum charge me now
That I may not, for Baldwins favor call.
Yea durst I claim, the help of Poettes all,
I dought their skill, could skarcely show in deed,
In this behalf, the cunning that does need.
Well Baldwin well, if hedeles men might chide,
I know what check, and blame should Balwin bide.
How could thou read, in stories any while,
And so skip ^er, my life and destney strange:
Thou know, how hap, one me full long did smile.
And that my state, stood free from dout of change,
I spronge not forth, of such a simple graunge:
That I should dwell, in dust from mind of men,
Whilst others are, set out by art of pen.
Thou do me wrong, wherefore the wound to heel
(That sloth has made,) To Churchyard I appeele
Let him be judge, of all my doings throw,
Let him unfold, Sir Simon Burley complains to him that knows what sorrow
means.
my fortune sweet or sower:
Yea unto him* I tell my sorrows now.
Whose resteles hand, is writing every hour,
And so I leave, the Baldwin in thy bower.
Of laurel leaves, where thou may sit and see,
At open view, what Churchyard writes of me.
But err he takes, in hand this work of mine:
I tell my tale, with weping blubbring ^yeu.
Give ^are good frind and here what I shall say, Noet.

And for the while, set all affairs aside:
But suer I fear, to short I find the day.
To show my gre^e, that hardely can I ^ide,
Yet throw I go, and hope with happy iioe.
Though haples wind has blowe^ my bark about,
And dangers deep, did drive my days in dout.
Since calm is cum, and quiet ^ase I have:
Hear his complaint ye late crept out of grave.
How should I speak, that houlds my head in hand
Though dead men speak not there is a mean to utter griefs by degrees.
(Which se^celes skalpe, both life and speech has lost)
Yet out of breast, though hedles here I stand.
I may blase forth, ye greues of groaning ghost:
As from the seas, that is with torments tos^e.
Coms roaring noyes, when calmes full quiet are;
So breath I (...), from breast my broyling care.
Though head be of, a smoking fume procedes,
From quaking neck, and gushing veins that bl^des.
Hear him I say, whose bowels speaks alone,
And wants in deed, both use of tunge and wit:
Hear him that must, by art cum make his mo^e.
And lackes therefore, the members meet and fit,
Hear him that groans, and howles from hollow pit.
Here him whose voice, does give a fearful sownd,
Hear him that long, lay rotten in the ground.
Here him whose plainte, may pearse ye lofty skies,
And for thy aid, and english versis ^ryes.
As naked suer, as he was lapte in shete,
With deadly looks, and gris^ly staring hare:
Not like a man, but like a monstrus sprete.
Sent from the pit, to whisper in thine ear,
And make the muse, of world an other where.
No freindes nor birth can bear of mischaunce
For here as time, does softly steal away,
So life and land, and all things does decay.
No birth nor blud, nor flocks of friends preuayles,
When sturdy storms, strikes down our stately sails
The ship must sway, aside or sinck in seas,
That shaken is, with shocking surges still:
The grenest gras, yt grows in goodliest leas.
To partching heat, A man daily assaulted with sorows, yeldes of force to
destruction.
must yield by reasons skill,
What slene can stay, y^ rowlith down ye hill.
What foot can stand, ye fortune daily trips, whips.
What living wight, can skape her skorging
No sooner out of shell or mothers lap:
But subject straight to sorrow and mishap.
The life (...) sum* most sweetly do embrace,
To trobled tears, does turn or we be ware
We are in love, with fond Narcissus face.
And d^ound our selves, in ye whero^ we stare
And feed the flesh, so long with dainty fare.
That belly swelles, One plage ouerthrows many pleasures.
or stomach belchith up,
The liquor sweet, yt came from spiced cup.
One days disgrace, does bread an endless sore:
And payse us ^ame, for all things past before.
Yet climing up the tree of tickell trust,
We streache the arm, as far as reach may go:
Disguisd with pomp, and pampred up with lust.
We gase aloft and never lokes belo,
Till hatchet cumes, Till the falling blow be given, the tree on triumph
stands*
and gives the fawling blo.
Then crack it cries, and all in shiuers flies,
That many a day, was mounting to the skies.
One stroke throws down, a thousand ^owes withal,
And such as clyme, are crushed by sudden fall.
Was I not one, that in top Galland stood
And bare great sway, with him y^ ruld ye roste:
Was not my house, sprung out of ge^tel blud
And was not I, long time in favor most:
Sir Simon brought up at skole with the price of wales and Acquitaine.
Yes sure I was, and thereof make I boste.
At skole brought up, with prince of pereles race
A playfeere long, with him in every place.
My childhode wan, such love and liking great,
That in mine age, I sat in Senate seat.
Was not my sier, about a king estemde,
And highly plast (wherbi he purchased praise)
And nere the king, in favor as it semde.
Into Galatia to cast ^et Don Pet^^ king of Cast^ll Sir Simon was (...) of
^hese^^^ for that purpose.
Yea mutch made of, full long before my days
Was not I sent, Embaster sundry ways.
And did not I, my dewtie every hour,
With pain and purce, as far as stretched my power.
The world well knows, what service I have done,
And by the same, what honor I have won.
My manhood made, mine enemies fly like sheep,
He appeased an uproar in the city of London.
(Before the Wolf that watches for his pray)
My wisdom did, in peace the commons keep.
When John of Gaunt, they would have made away,
My presence often, could quiet many a fray.
My council coeld, the rage of retchles heads.
My stoutnes sarud, the state in sundry steades.
My noble mind, could never take no rest,
For public wealth, I had such burning breast.
In Po^teou long, agenst ^he French I was,
Where frontier war, He wan victory in a valiant sight, and yet coming home
was taken prisoner.
I hild and did full well:
And as I did throw many a perell pass:
At coming home, in enemies hands I fell,
And when in deed, my prince thereof hard tell.
He sorry was, and spoke of me much good,
But as these things in weight and ballaunce stood*
Our Soldiers took, a Duches of great fame,
Who at that time, of Burbon bare the name.
The Soldiers swore, The Duches of Burbon prisoner and did raunsom sir Simon
Burley.
that she should near be free,
(Nor see her Sune, nor find a spark of grace
Nor look for hope) till she had raundsomd me.
And set me safe, in good and quiet case:
Lo what regard they had, in every place.
Of me those days, lo how I was on height,
Lo how I was, employed in things of weight.
At home embrast, abroad well likt with all,
Yea lou^d and s^a^d, among both great and small.
When forraene frinds, One Paskall was sent from the king of Nauar hither for
succor, and king Richard made Sir Simon answer the Embasdor, ther^e of
Salisbury and other in presence.
did send for succor here,
King Richard baed, me answer make therein:
In presence then, there stood a greater peer.
But I was he, that did the favor win:
To speak and thus, me creadit did begin.
And still increace, as one whose lamp in deed,
Cowld want no oil, the blase and flame to feed.
My Candell blasde, so clear, as star by night:
And where I came, the torche gave littil light.
King Richar^ sent him to conclude a marriage and the duke of Tasson was sent
hither with Sir Simon from the King of Beam and Almine about this ma^ter.
And when the king, for causes good and great,
D^uisd to match with one beyond the seas:
It Was I was thought, most ^it to work ye feat
And in this case, the king I did so please.
Of marriage there, ye knot was knit with case,
And so from thence, a Duke was sent with me:
For this behalf, the state of things to see.
Thus still I was emploid in great affairs,
As hap her self, had hald me up her stairs.
An office here, I had of great renown,
He was lord Chamberlayne.
A place nere prince, and still in court to be:
That might command, the people up and down
And thrust the^ out, or call them in to me.
Bad I the^ run, one flocks then would they fle
Bad I them stand, in deed they durst not sit:
I swayd them all, as horse is ruld by bit.
I bare in hand, the stafe yt kept the sturr:
And knokt their pates, y^ pressed to near ye dur.
Lord warden lo, of ye sinck parts I was,
And captain both, of Dover Castle tho:
Throw lordly roumes, and places I did pass,
As easily sure, as man can wish to go.
I knew no ebb, my tide did daily flo:
VVher fortune smiles, the world fawnes.
I kept the train, I had y^ lively trope,
I held up head, I never thought to drope.
I went no where, but I was waited on,
And shone in pomp, like perle or precious stone.
Among the chief, yea chiefest was I held
My Prince preferde, me so for virtues sake
And what he saw, Favor gi^es more preferments than me^ can honestlye crave.
I able was to welde
I had, for which, I seldom suit did make
I stood beneath, whilst he did appulls shake
Into my lap, when lest I lokt therefore
As somewhat came, so daily followed more
By heaps as though, great mounts of massy gould,
In my most need, should aunsweare what I would.
The flodds of wealth, that does refresh the mind
With gladsome thoughts, Wealth glads the greedy mind.
of threefold sweet delight
Came gusshing in, against both tide and wind
On which fair baits, each fish desires to bite
A careless eye, I cast, of worlds dispight
That spurns at such, that fortune liftes alofte
A wicked worm, that waits on worship often
A swarm of wasps, that uses naught but stinge
On those that ries, and rules about a king.
O hateful flies, Spiteful people are hateful flies.
ye hatched of wretched broad
On eurye dishe, in haste ye blow and humme
O cankred men, of vile and noughtie mode
You do infeckt, all places where you cumme
You make small shoe, yet sound as shrill as drum
In peoples ears, and still your poison restes
On noble minds, and tender harmeles breasts
Ye malice much, the hie and mighty sort
To kill good name, by brute of false report.
^^ If poor men rise, in favor any way
The ritche repines, to see how they are plaest
The world rather does vvo^der at the well doings of many that devise to get
glory by virtue.
As hounds do bark, that houlds the Bucke at bay
The people prate, and spend much speech in wa^st
Look says the lewd, on new start up in haest
Look who rules now, look what this man has found
Look how in lap, does Fortunes ball rebounde
They look not how, to clime for virtues sake
But how of world, they may a wonder make.
So lofty minds, with loathsome lowering looks
Poor and rich have (...) and poute and svvel at other m^^ good fortune.
Saluts the good, that grows in Princes grace
And watches close, in corners and in nookes
How they by wiles, the worthy may deface
No marvel sure, it is a common case
To hear them snarre, whose natures are not like
What Gre^und can rest, by currish country tike?
What Hawke can sit, in peace for carraine crow?
What tongue can escape, the skolding of a shrow.
The dolt disdaines, the deep wise man ye wot
D^s^^ine am^^g al s^orts of people and crea^tures.
The blunt abhorrs, the quick sharp wit in deed
The coward hates, the hand that conquest got
The Jade will wince, to stand by storing steed
The glotten gro^ts, to see the hongrie feed
Thus things from kind, so far can near agree
No more then can, the catte and dog you see
As choice is great, of wealth and worldly goods
Men differ much, in manners and in moods.
One Jewel stains, an other very far
And strife there is, Strife there is in mettalls, stones, flovvers, and
Planets.
in mettalls gross and fine
And sondrye luckes, belongs to every star
And Planets to, they say that can divine
One race and blood, do seldom draw one line
A grain of grudge, is sown so deeply hear
That nothing scarce, can escape from malice clear
Thus malice makes, a murmr where it goes
And strikes out right, yet gives but secret blows.
The greedy gnat, and privy eating mothe
A monster small, Disdainful heads are mischeuous moths that eat up good
clothes.
that skarce is felt or seen
Lies lurking still, in plaits of finest clothe
And little worms, whilst nutts are fresh and green
Crepes in and cates, the kirnell as I ween
So unto them, compare these peuishe pates
That on small cause, do envy great estates
Yea envy often, is coutcht and clokt as clean
In mighty folk, as found among the mean.
The flasshing flames, that from great fornayes flies
Castes forth such heat, Mighty men^ mali^^ comparde to slashing flames.
as few men can abide
The rage whereof, does dim the dainty eyes
And breeds great grief, before the harm be spide
Much mischief coms, by pranks of pow^ing pride
Which puffes and blows, as it would mountains move
And grows at first, on naught but lack of love
Whose spiteful sparks, does spare no speech nor time
(Nor practice leude) to pluck them down that clime.
This envy is, a mighty monster great
(...) is a mon^ter among me.
That swims like Whale, among the little fry
Whose gaping mouth, would soon consume and eat
The Gogions small, that in small corners lie
His thirsty throat, would drink all places dry
And sucks up all, and so of all leaves naught
Which should serve all, if all did bear one thought
O hungry fly, that would be all in all
And maggots brings, when men for feeding call.
With ^^osse and gra^ll great (...) be (...) up.
As greatest floods, most gravel do retain
And strongest tides, runs oer the weakest walls
So hiest states, do nourrishe most disdain
And at rebounde, striks out the tennis balls
Yea they who thinckes, them furthest of from falls
Are watching still, in Court, in field or town
Like stombling stocks, to trip their fellows down
And none do strive, and struggle for the gooles
But such as have, their hearts most full of hooles.
Yea heaps of them, are harbred here and theare
^
In golden haules, that shines like Phoebus bright
Where flattrers flock, who tattles in the ear
A thousand lies, that never coms to light
They work the wax, with fire both day and night
They spin the web, that takes the folishe fly
They bait the hoke, that bleres the simple eye
They shoue them out, that should be called in
They make the match, that does the wager win.
And they breed strife, where all in quiet stood
They pack the cards, Stife only is sowed by foysting f^llovves that
follows fortune and plays on advantage.
and play most filthy pranckes
They sharp the sword, that shedes the giltles blood
Thy leest deserve, and always gets most thanks
They feed the stream, that breaks the mighty banks
They are the sheares, that marrs they garment quite
They have the tongues, that spares no speech nor spite
They are the babes, still dandled on the knee
And those are they, that rottes the soundest tree.
If fawners fled, the house of mighty men
And mighty folk, The giuinge countenance to favvners enfects with their
dissimulation, the hearts of noble men.
would frown on fawning currs
Deceit should shonne, the noble houses then
And velvet weeds, should shake of cleuing burrs
But storing stedes, are pricked that needs no spurrs
Thus palfry flings, and flounceth out of frame
That else of kind, were courteous meek and tame
A iomblinge iobb, does strike the bowl awrye
Which of himself, would close on bias lie.
For noble blood, Noblenes abused with busy bablers.
must needs have noble mind
And fly the gate, of fawcon gentle mild
And sure it is, against their noble kind
To play the Kite, and cruel Coistrel wild
Till tatlers come, with tongues full finely filde
And change their modes, and mar their manners clean
They skarce do know, what cankred hate does mean
But when from best, Noblenes in noble of it ^^lie.
to worst the good are wrought
By busy brains, all sorts of sleightes are sought.
Then burns the breast, as hot as Eathna hill
Hatred hales men to unhappy dealings.
And rage beres rule, where reason dwelt before
The hasty head, is swift to slay and kill
The hautie heart, hurds up much hate in store
The altered mind, does make the mischief more
The kindled coals, does crepe in straw so far
That quarrels rise, and peace is turnde to war
One haleth back, an other draws aside
And weakest bones, must needs the brunt abide.
As I aspierd, by virtue and desarte
Not one may be advanced but either rich or power en^ueth.
And was by Prince, called unto credit still
So some by sleight, did seek to suck my heart
And of my blood, did thrist to drink their fill
They sought to stop, the water from the mill
And turn the wheel, and all the joints awrye
Lo hear how close, the swelling Serpents lie
Lo how they cast, their venom as they may
And mark what hate, they gain that bears sway
For that I grew, full great with Robert Vear
A noble man, full wise and mighty both
The^le of Oxforde called duke of Ireland favored much (...) Simon.
And had the guide, of good Prince Edwards hear
To show therein, my duty faith and trothe
Great malice rose, as grudginge daily grothe
Twene many men that cannot rule their rage
A mightie-duke, there was well stepped in age
That sought to reap, the corn that I had sown
And could not rest, till I was quite oerthrowne.
My roulmes and rule, and things that I had goet
My gain my wealth, His office and dignity made mighty men despise him.
and glory as it grue
Was in his eye, so big a mighty moet
That lo this Duke, my plague did still pursue
With open mouth, he so the bellows blue
That sparks of fire, as thick flew in my face
As in the Sun, the gnatts do fly at chase
Or as the balle, rebounds at every stroke
So lo his words, did smore me up in smoke.
This dreadful Duke, The band that the duke made against the king The Duke of
York, thearle of Salisburye, therle of Aru^dell, therle of Northumberland,
therle of Notingham and tharchbishop of Canterburye.
did drive a wondrous drift
To work his will, with slipper sleight of hand
And sought to give, king Richards friends a lift
For whom he did, prepare a secret band
Whose bold attempts did trouble all this land
But few could find, the darnell in the corn
Or judge aright, the Roes from pricking thorn
So close in cloud, was clokte their cunning art
That none could know, who plaide the Foxes part.
This Duke did raise, a brute the king would have
A tax most strange, A noble of eurie fire in England was the tax that the
noughtie duke said the ^ange did demand.
of all the realm throw out
And to the Lords, and commons council gave
Against the king, to stand both stiff and stout
This practice proud, was patcht with many a clout
Here did the Wolf, lead silly lammes amiss
(And sucked their blood) as wol^ishe manner is
Here traytrous tricks, and trebell trothles traynes
In subjects breasts, began to sprede their veins.
The Duke of York, and diverse noble peers
Forsook the king, and held with this uproar
By which great strife, was sown in sundry sheres
And corsies rose, that made a running sore
Big biles brust out, where flesh was sound before
And though some time, the Surgeon salve did find
To heal the wound, (the skarre remaind behind)
A common plague, does creep alonge the realm
As skulls of fish, swimmes up and down the stream.
The greatest towns, and Cities of most name
The Duke caused all the great towns of England to exclaim on the king and
his council.
As London, York, and many mo beside
These Dukes did draw, with folly out of frame
And made some strive, against both stream and tide
Where banks be brook, the water cannot bide
Where floods flee out, the fish do follow fast
And than to late, to call again is past
The Swallow flies, no swifter under winge
Then men's device, that do forsake a king.
For faith once stainde, seeks straight for starting holes
Where faith is broken all abuses enters and falls to ^onde attemptes.
As prisners do, that has their promise broke
The seames once ripped, of shue farewell the soles
The Ox set free, will seek to shonne the Yoke
The chimney bruste, the house is full of smoke
The sleuce drawn up, down drives the dregs and all
The strongest tript, the weakest needs must fall
There is no stay, to hold mean people in
When might with maine, the mischief does begin.
The Lords alledgd, the king was gouerd still
By such as came, A lordly rebellion and a rebels presumption to their Prince.
from base and poor estate
And said he should, no longer have his will
By which bold speech, there grew so great debate
The land was bent, on murder ruin and hate
Now several ways, from hiue flew out the bees
Now tempests came, and tare up mighty trees
Now traitors flockt, and fell to fackshions strange
Whose fickill minds, still gaped for a change.
O vipars broad, and blody bosom snakes
O Butchers curres, A rebuke for rebels.
that would your master byte
O helhoundes rude, of Plutos lothesum lakes
O cursed crew, more crewell then the Kyte
O kankred hearts, so fraught with froward spite
O Tigers wild, O monstrous men most vile
Where was your love, and dewtie all this while
How durst you speak, so stoutly to his face
To whom of right, the stoutest ought give place.
Among brute bestes, that savage ar and wild
The Lion reigns, Among beasts the Lion is obeyed. Among birds the ^gle Among
fish the Dolphyn. And among the sm^lest Bees a great Be is their king.
and rules with regal power
And so great birds, stoupes down like littill child
(To fathers beck) if Eagle does but lowre
Than to a king, dare people look so sour
That they will force, their suffraine paste their reatche
No scoller ought, his learned tewtor teach
No member dare, presume, to rule the head
None reigns and rules, but kings when all is sed.
Mark what mischief they come unto that same against the stream.
Note how they shrincke, that shapes to give a shocke
Against a king, and mark how traitors speed
Note how their hedes, do tumble of the block
That with vain hope, do peoples humors feed
And note from whence, does Princes power proceed
And note withal, how far does stretche his fame
And faulters quake, that do but here his name
For at the brunte, say here a king does cumme
Home run poor knaves, and down they fling ye drum.
The Londiners being then evil disposed to their king, desired Thomas of
VVodstock to take the charge of the city upon him.
Hark how this Duke, whereof I spoke before
By three estates, unto a coumpt did call
Their king and Lord, whose mind they troubled sore
And vexte thereby, his friends and faures all
They fill in lashe, they felt the bluddy brale
They lost their goods, they got a great disgrace
They fled the court, they were pursewd in chase
They were full feign, for none offense or cawes
At open bar, to plede their case by laws.
Those that stood with right received most vvrong and traitors tormented the
true me^ that lest offended.
Such are the happes, of those that hold with right
Such cureles wounds, they have that sores would heal
Such hate they heap, in hucksters hands that light
Such harms they find, that stands with common weal
And such know not, to whom they should appeal
When wrong will rule, and revel faules to spoil
The faithful flock, are forste to feel the foil
Dread drives desartes, that daily well has dunne
To fly from foes, or else throw fire to run.
Because these Lords, who loekte to lead the dance
Saw other step, The Duke of Gloucester and Duke of York with others maligned
those the king favored.
one stage ere they could rise
By plain fine force, they would them selves advance
And for that feate, this drifte they did devise
Desire of fame, does so abuse the wise
They end like fools, that erste began full well
And sonest smarte, Note.
that ringes the larom bell
For wheles and all, Rebels always beres the blows.
faules down about their ears
From rotten frames, who first stood void of fears.
But we who were, besigd by fortune so
Betrayed I mean, if trothe may tell the tale
Were skorgd and plagd, King Richards best frindes were by traitors frovvardly
handled.
and feign to fawn one foe
And sew to such, as set our lives to sale
We were shut up, they had the bounsing gale
That blew their bark, beyond our compass clean
With sails aflaunte, and had no merry mean
They clapped on all, and went throw streme and flud
When true men's fete, stood fast in mier and mud.
I was the man, that most of mischief had
I was accusde, and called to count in haste
I found most cause to sighe and sit full sad
I was laid up, and thereby clean disgraste
Mine enmies said, I did the treasure waste
And held in hand, the Soldiers money to
I was so nipt, I knew not what to do
My frindes wext fainte, or ferd the like mischaunce
But I, was he, must lead the doleful dance.
A mitred head, a Bishop bold and brave
The Bishop of Canterbury accusde him of sacrilege and co^ueying money over the
Sea by night to the ^^ng of B^ame
Said I conueide, away Saint Thomas shryne
And that I mente, the king of Beam should have
The same from me, by privy practice fine
To hoiste me up, he laid boeth hook and syne
And so by frindes, he framd so flat a feate
That I was called, to strait accounte in heat
For this and more, a libell long and large
(Of forgid faults) that he laid to my charge.
No clarke might come, to make my reckning right
No tale could serve, to show my matter throw
No deep discource, could bring the trothe to light
No man of law, could canues cases now
Strong hand did all, I must both bend and bow
The king knew not, of half the wrongs I felt
Nor none could find, how finely cards were delte
A pack was made, and one had got the ace
Note.
And trimly robbed, the trumps before my face.
No boot to bid, the players deal again
The game was won, and I had lost the stake
These foisters fyen, could nick both by and maine
And kog out right, when they the dice did shake
And of sweet spoil, a bitter banquet make
They called me in, and I the only geste
Was bidden then, unto this bluddy feeste
I was compeld, to taest what dishe they would
And in great heete, to drink up poison cold.
I mean my fate, and fortune was so hard
I could not escape, their hands that sought my life
Who wreackt their wrath, on me without regard
Yet long in sheath, they kept the murdering knife
For on my hap, at first rose all this strife
And on the frinds, that I by hap had won
This end I had, and mischief was begone
For taking part, with such as likt me well
To ground full flat, from top of tree I fell.
When in the tower, my foes had clapped me fast
Few friends I found, the world began to wink
And so at length, in rerage was I cast
And post alone, was left to swym or sink
And judgment was, as I was forste to think
That I should pay, two hundrith thousand frankes
For all my toil, lo here is all my thanks
I did posses, my chargis and my loss
And pains abroad, came home by weping cross.
And wanting wealth, to pay this heavy sum
With bills and glaiues, from prison was I led
And so unto, the Tower hill did I cumme
To suffer death, where sone I lost my head
The king knew naught, of this til I was ded
Loo people here, how things about were brought
And what disdain, and mighty malice wrought
Lo here his end, and sudden sliding down
That was both true, to God and to the crown.
As littill twigges, oer tops of houses grow
Whose branches big, spredes out a mighty tree
Or as small brokes, with seas do swell and flow
Yet has no power, to pass their bounds you see
Or as fair flowers, that in gay gardins be
Sprouts out a while, and when they are at height
They fade and fall, and then declineth straight
So man does mount, a while on stages hie
And at the best, shottes down like star from sky.
When things are grown, as far as course is set
And have attaind* the fulness of their state
They backewarde come, and can no further get
For clean expierd, ye see is then their date
The life we bear, of force must yield to fate
The sl^ppes we creed, wears out by track of time
When ladder brekes, we can no higher clyme
Where Fortune sittes, so fast, does grynde the mill
The whele turns round, and never stands still.
Long is the toil, or man to triumph cummes
Large is the plot, where we our pagantes play
Sweet is the sap, and sower are all the plummes
That pain pluckes of, the pleasane planted spray
Short is the time, of all our glory gaye
Uaine is the hope, of hazardes here in earth
Great are the greues, of life from day of bearth
No suerty grows, of all is here posseste
All comes to naught, when people fears lest.
Loo what it is, to stand on tickell stays
Where hatred heaues, the household out of square
And when it faules, the joints fle several ways
And joyful weights, are cled with woe and care
The servants howl, the wife and child is bare
The friends wring hands, the foes do laugh and flyer
Such chaunges chance, to those that do aspyre
The ground but gaps, who first shall faule therein
And who sekes most, at length the least may wyn.
Loo Churchyard now, my mirthles tale is told
A mourning verse, prepare thou straight for me
And in thy ryme, some stately order hold
For that I sprung not out of base degree
Let every line, a lively sentence be
To wake the wits, of such as world would knoe
And list to mark, how worldly matters go
And when thou comste, to touch the gauled back
Leap oer the horse, or use a ryders knack.
Bear even hand, and hold the bridell right
Yet whiske the wande, sometimes for pleasures sake
Yea spice thy speech, and terms with trifels light
That lokers on, may not thy mind mistake
When store is gone, yet do thy budget shake
Among the best, and feed their fancies still
No matter though, a mouse crepe out of hill
Small toys may bread, great sport in great estates
And in great grounds, men walk throw littill gates.
Do wisely warn, and warely use thy pen
Speak English plain, and roue about the but
And shote at will, and slante by wicked men
Shale out the shell, and bid them crack the nut
Show some delight, and so the sentence shut
And bid the world, behold me in a glass
That did to rewen, from pomp and pleasure pass
Now I am gone, I wyshe the rest behind
(As they desire) may better fortune find.
A TRAGICAL DIScourse of the unhappy man's life.
COm courtiars all* draw near my morning hers
Com here my knell, ear cors to church shall go
Or at the least, come read this woeful verse
And last farewell, the haples penneth so
And such as does, his lief and manners kno
Come shed some tears, and se him painted out
That restles here, did wander world about.
O pilgrims poer, preace near my pagent now
And note full well, the part that I have played
And wyesly way, my thriftles fortune throw
And print in breast, each word that here is said
Shrink not my frindes, step forth stand not afraid
Though monstrous hap, I daily here possessed
Some sweater chance, may bring your hearts to rest.
For though the wreatch, in cold and honger lies
The happy wight, in pomp and pleasure sittes
The weak falls down, whear mighty folk aries
The sound feels not, the feeble ague fits
So world you wot, does serve the finest wits
Though dullards do, in darkness daily run
The wyes at will, can walk whear shyens the Sun.
And hap falls net, to eury man a like
Some sleeps full sound, yet has the world at call
Some leaps the hedge, some lights a mid the dyke
Some sockes the sweat, and some the bitter gawll
The use of things, blind deastnie gius us all
So though you see, ten thousand souls in hell
Yet may you hoep, in heavens blys to dwell.
Let my mishap, a worldly wonder be
For few can find, the fruit that I did taest
Ne leaus nor bows, I found upon the tree
And whear I plowd, the ground lay ever waest
A man would think, the child was borne in haest
Or out of time, that had such luck as I
For lo I look, for Larkes when fauls the sky.
No soyll nor seat, nor season serves my torn
Each plot is sown, with sorrow whear I go
On mou^tayn top, they say where torch should born
I find but smoek, and loethsom smothring woe
Near fountayn head, whear springs do daily floe
Cold Ise I get, that melts with warmth of hand
So that I starve, whear cock and condits stand.
I quench small thirst, where thousands drink and ^yb
An empty cup, I carry clean away
And though as lean, as raek is eury ryb
And hollow cheeks, does hidden grief bewray
The ritche eats all, the poor may fast and pray
No butter cleaues, upon my bred at need
When hongry mawe, thinks throet is cut in deed.
The shallow broeks, whear littell penks ar found
I shon, and seek, the seas to swymme thear on
Yet vessayll sinks, or bark is laid a ground
Whear leaking ships, in saefty still have gone
They harber find, when haven have I non
Hap cauls them in, when I am lodgd at large
Thus plains creeps, in cold Cock lorels barge.
Full thirty years, both Court and wars I tried
And still I sought, aquaintaunce with the best
And serud the staet, and did such hap abyed
As might befall, and Fortune sent the rest
When drom did sound, a Soldier was I pressed
To Sea or Land, as princes quarrel stoed
And for the saem, full often I lost my blod.
In Scotland long, First at VVark with George Lavvson.
I lingered out my years
When VVylford lyud, a worthy wight in deed
And thear at length, I fell so far in breers
I taken was, Taken under the Lord Admi^all at Saint Myruns.
as deastny had decreed
Well yet with words, I did my foes so feed
That thear I lyud, in pleasuer many a day
And skaept so free, and did no randsom pay.
Some said I found, in Scotland favor then,
I grant my pomp, was more than reason would
Yet on my band, I sent hoem sundry men
That else had pyend, in prison pyncht with cold
To French and Scots, so fair a taell I told
That they beleeud, whyt chalk and chees was oen
And it was pearll, that proved but pybbull stoen.
In Lavvther fort, Under Sir Hu^ VVyllovvbe.
I clapped my self by st^ight
So fled from foes, and hoem to frynds I past
The French in haest, beseegd that Fortres straight
Then was I like, Mounsoer de Terms, besi^ged this fort.
to light in fetters fast
But lo a peace, broek up theseeg at last
When weery wars, and wicked blodshed great
Maed both the sides, to seek a quiet seat.
From thens I came, to England as I might
Sir Anthony Sen^lyger depa^^ of Irelande.
And after that, to Irlande did I sayll
Whear Sellenger, a wyes and noble knight
Gave me such place, as was to myen aduayll
Than teasters walked, as thick as does the haill
About the world: For lo from thence I boer
For service done, of money right good stoer*
Meatts in Lorain vvon by treason.

In France served under captain Crayer.


Hoem came I thoe, and so to France did faer
When that their king, wan Meatts throw fatchis f^en
So on the stock, I spent all void of caer
And what I gaet, by spoyll I held it myen
Than down I past, the pleasant floed of Ryen
And so I sarud, in Flaunders note the saem
Whear ^oe at first, my hap fell out of fraem.
For I was clapped, in prison without cawse
In Charles the fifts time, under Captain Matson.
And straightly held, for coming out of France
But God did work, throw justice of the lawse
And help of frindes, to me a better chance
And still I hoept, the wars would me advance
Got out of prison by help of the noble Madame Sell de embry.
So trayld the piek, and world began a nue
And loekt like hawk, that laetly came from mue.
Three year at least, I saw the Emprours wars
Than hoemward drue, as was my wonted traed
Whear Sun and Moen* and all the seven Stars
Stoed on my syed, and me great welcome maed
But wether fair, and flowrs full soen will faed
So peoples love, is like nue besoms often
That sweeps all clean, whyels broem is green and soft.
Well oens again, to wars I drue me fast
And with Lord Gray, Eight years under my Lord Gray.
at Giens I did remayn
Where he or his, in any serves past
I followed on, among the warlyk trayn
And sometime felt, my part of woe and pain
As others did, that Cannon well could like
And pleasuer took, in trayling of the pike.
At length the French, did Giens besiege ye wot
And littell help, or succor found we tho
By which fowll want, it was my heavy lot
To Parris straight, with good Lord Gray to go
As prisners boeth, the world to well does knoe
By tract of time, and wonders charge in deed
He hoemward went, and took his leave with speed.
But poest aloen, I stoed alack the whyell
And country clean, forgot me this is true
And I might live, in sorrow and exyell
And pien away, for any thing I knue
As I had baekt, in deed so might I brue
Not one at hoem, did seek my greef to heall
Thus was I clean, cut of from common weall.
Yet lo a shift, Oens again eskaped out of prison.
to scaep away I found
When to my faith, my taker gane no trust
I did deuies, in writing to be bound
To come again, the time was set full just
But to retorn, forsoeth I had no lust
Sens faith could get, no credit at his hand
I sent him word, to come and sue my band.
He came him self, to court as I did here
And told his taell, as fienly as he might
At Ragland than, was I in Monmouth sheer
Yet when in court, this matter came to light
My friends did say, that I had don him right
A Soldiour ought, upon his faith to go
Which I had kept if he had sent me so.
Served under my Lord Gray at Le^th.
Well yet my mind, could never rest at hoem
My shues wear maed, of running leather suer
And boern I was, about the world to roem
To see the wars, and keep my hand in ure
The French ye knoe, did Englishemen procuer
To come to Leeth, at siedge whereof I was
Till French did seek, in ships away to pas.
A littell breath* I toek than after this
And shaept my self, about the Court to be
And eury day, as right and reason is
To serve the Prince, in Court I fettled me
Some friends I found, as friends do go you se
That gave me words, as sweet as honey still
Yet let me live, by head and conning skill.
I croetcht, I kneeld, and many a cap could vayll
And watched laet, and early roes at moern
And with the throng, I follouwd hard at tayll
As brave as bull, or sheep but nuely shoern
The gladdest man, that ever yet was boern
To wayt and staer, among the staets full hye
Who feeds the poer, with many friendly eye.
But who can live, with goodly looks alo^n
Or mirry words, that sounds like tabrers pyep
Say what they will, they love to keep their own
And part with naught, that comes in their griep
You shall have nuts, they say when ploms aer riep
Thus all with shalls, or shaels ye shall be fed
And gaep for gold, and want both gold and led.
The proef thereof, maed me to seek far hens
To Anvverp than, I trudged on the spleen
And all in haest, to get some spending pens
To serve my torn, in service of the Queen
But God he knoes, my gayn was small I ween
For though I did, my credit still encreace
I got no wealth, by wars ne yet by peace.
Yet hark and noet, I pray you if you pleas
In Anvvarp town, what fortune me befell
My chance was such, A Captain of great charge under the Prince of Arrange.
when I had past the Seas
(And taken land, and thereon rested well)
The people Iard, and rang a larom bell
So that in aerms, the town was eury whear
And few or noen, of lief stoed certain thear.
A noble Prince, I saw amyd that broyll
To whom I went, and swaer his part to taek
The commons caem, all set on raeg and spoyll
And gave me charge, to keep my wyts a waek
The Prince for love, of king and countries saek
Bad me do well, and shed no gyltles bloed
And save from spoyll, poer people and there Good.
I gave my faith, and hand to do the saem
He saved Religi^^s houses and most of the town from (...).
And wrought the best, that I could work therefoer
And brought at length, the commons in such fraem
That some wear bent to blo the coell no moer
Yet some to rage, and robbry ran full soer
Whom I reformd, so that no harm did fall
To any wight, among the commons all.
The streets we kept, and braek ne house nor doer
And for three days, made no man's finger bleed
I daer auoutch, that neither rich nor poer
Could say they lost, the valcur of a thread
Well what of that, you kno an honest deed
Is soen forgoet, of such as thanckles be
For in the end, it fared so by me.
Note.
The town I kept, from cruel sword and fire
Did seek my lief, when peace and all was maed
And such they wear, that did my blud desire
As I had saude, from bloes and bluddy blaed
I crept away, and hid me in the shaed
But as the day, and Sun began to shien
They followd fast, with force and practies f^en.
^
In priests atyer, but not with shaven crown
I skaept their hands, that sought to have my head
A forckid cap, and pleytted corttall gown
Far from the church, stoed me in right good sted
In all this whyell, ne mass for quick nor ded
I durst not sing, a poesting priest I was
That did in haest, from post to pyller pas.
In Brigges than, the parsons breetch did quake
For there a clarke, Follovvde by the Marshall 8. days.
came ^inging of a bell
(That in the town did such a rombling make)
I could not walk, in vickars garments well
So there I wished, my self in Cockell shell
Or Sea man's slopps, that smeld of pitch and tar
Which roebs I found, ear I had traueld far.
A Marshall came, and seartcht our woole fleet than
In boat I leapt, At the Slew the Marshall and he were both in one ship
together.
and so throw Sealand went
And many a day, a silly weary man
I traueilde there, and stood with toil content
Till God by Grace, a better Fortune sent
And brought me home, in safety, as you knoe
Great thancks to him, I give that sarude me so.
In Court where I, at rest and peace remainde
I thought upon, A drift of the Duke of Al^a to dispatch me.
the part that Flemings plaide
And for good will, since I was so retainde
I thought to make, those roisters once afraid
So hoiste up sail, when I had anckar waide
And into France, I slipte with much a do,
Where lo a net, was making for me to.
Yet paste I throw, to Paris without stop
When civil broils, The Lord ^mbassador now Lord N^ui, did help me away.
were likely to begin
And standing there, within a marchaunts shop
I heard one say, the Prince was coming in
To Flaunders fast, with whom I laet had bin
Before you wotte, thus having mirrie nues
I stool away, and so did France refues.
But by your leave, I fell in dangers deep
Before I could, in freedom go or ride
Devouring wolves, had like to slain the sheep
And wiept their mouths, upon the muttons hide
Naught goes amiss, where God will be the gide
So throw the place, where parrel most did seem
I past at will, when danger was exstreeme.
The Prince I found, from Collen at his house
And there I saw, of Roitters right good store
Who welcomde me, with many a mad carouse
Such is their gies, and has bin ever more
To Flaunders thus, we marched and God before
And near the Rine, our Camp a season lay
Till money came, and had a genrall pay.
In Flaunders long, our Camp remained still
And sweet with sour, we tasted sundry ways
Who goes to wars, must feel both good and ill
Some likes it not, and some that life can prays
Where nights are cold, and many hongrie days
Some will not be, yet such as loves the Drom
Takes in good part, the chances as they com.
Perhaps my share, was not the sweetest thear
I make no boest, nor find no fault therein
I sought my self, the burden for to bear
Among the rest, that had ^er charged bin
If smart I felt it was a plague for sin
If joy I found, I knew it would not last
If wealth I had, lo waest came on as fast.
When Prince did pass, to France and Flaunders laft
I license sought, A Pesaunt betraide me and yet was God my deliverer.
to see my native soil
He told me than, the French by some fine craft
On me at length, would make a pray and spoil
I took my leave, not fearing any foil
But ere the day, the sky had clean forsoek
I fell in snare, as fish on baited hoek.
A woeful tale, it is to tell in deed
Yet hear it out, Note.
and how God wrought for me
The case was such, that I a gide did need
So in the field, full nere a willow tree
I found a carle, that needs my gide must be
His hand I had, his heart did halte the while
And treason did, throw trust the true begile.
We held the way, unto S. Quintayns right
As I did think, but long two leages I lost
To ease my horse, he bade me often a light
But I thereat, seemde dumme and deaffe as post
Of stomach stout, the way often times he crossed
And sought to take, my bridle by the rain
That slight I found, and so he lost his pain.
Had I turnde back, the peysants wear at hand
Who mounted were, on better horse than I
A village near, there was within that land
Whear lo my gide, would have me needs to lie
Not so my friend, I aunswearde very hye
Where at he knew the padde in straw was found
So took the ball, and stroke it at rebounde.
Thou can not escape, (quod he) then light a down
A great treachery.
Thou art but dead, thy life here shall thou lose,
And therewithal, the carle began to frown
And laid his hand, upon my Lether hose
Throw si^es he made, the town by this aroes,
And some by wars, that lately lost their good
Sought to reueng, the same upon my blood.
My gied leapt up, upon the horse I roode
And flang away, as fast as he could drive
Down was I haeld, and on my face they troode
And for my roebs, the tormenters did strive
My gide did cry, O leave him not alive
An English churl, he is his tongue does shoe
And gold he has, good store full well I knoe.
They stripped me streighte, from doblet to my short
Yet hose they la^te, vntoutcht as God it would
No power they had, to do me further hort
For as the knife, to throat they began to hold
To save my life, an upright tale I told
They hearing that, laid all their weapons down
And asked me if, I knew saint Quintains town.
I past thereby when to the Spawe I went
(quod I and there, my pasport well was veaud
If that be true, said one thou shall be sent
From hens in have, and so they did conclued
To town I should, from savage country rued
So in the hey, they laid me all that night
Yet sought my life, before the day was light.
But as with weeds, some suffrante flower groes
So in that soil, A secret prou^^ion of God.
a blessed man was bred
Which undertook, to keep me from my foes
And save my life, by fine device of head
He called me up, when they wear in their bed
And bade me go, with him whear he thought best
Lest in that place, full small should be my rest.
I followde on, as he did lead the trace
He brought me safe, where I in surety stood
Thus God throw him, did shoe his might and grace
Which ioyde me more, than all this worldly good
The other sort, ^wear butchers all for blood
And daily slew, such stragglars as they toek
For whom they lay, and watched in many ^nock.
That hazard paste, I found more mischieues still
But none so great, The Captain of Pynoen handled me hardly.
nor none so much to fear
With to^le and pain, with sleighte of head and skill
From France I came, (and laft al mischief thear)
Now here what fruit, my native soil does bear
See what I reap, and mark what I have sown
And let my luck, throw all this land be known.
First let me tell, how Fortune did me call
To Garnesey thoe, Under Captain (...) after all th^se ^o^les.
to stay my troubled miend
Whear well I was, although my wealth was small
And long had dwelt, if destnie had assiend
But as the ship, is subject to the wind
So we must chaenge, as checking chances falls
Who tosseth men, about like tennis balls.
This chance is she, some say that leads men out
And brings them home, when least they look therefore
A dalling dame, that breeds both hope and dout
And makes great wounds, yet seldom to salues the soer
Not suer on sea, nor certain on the shoer
A worldly witch, that dealls with wanton charms
For one good turn, she does ten thousand harms.
A fig for chance, this Fortune bears no shaep
The people fond, a name to Fortune give
Which senseless souls, do after shadoes gaep
Great GOD does rule, and sure as God does live
He griends the corn, and sifts the meal throw sieve
And leaves the bran, as reffues of the flower
To work his will, and shoe his mighty power.
Note.
Promoshon coms, ne from the East nor West
Ne South nor North, it faulls from heaven hie
For God himself, sets up who he thincks best
And casts them down, whose hearts would clime the sky
Thus earthly happs, in worldlings does not lie
We trudge we run, we ried and break our brain
And backwarde come, the self same stepps again.
Till time aprotche, that God will man prefarre
With labors long, in vain we beat the air
Our destnies dwell, in neither moon nor star
Nor comfort coms, from people foul nor fair
Small hoep in those, that sits in Golden chair
Their moods their minds, and all we go about
Takes light from him, that putts our candel out.
This argues now, all goodness freely groes
From him that first, Note.
made man of earthly mold
And flo^ds of wealth, into their bosom floes
That clearly can, his blessed will behold
As sheppards do, keep safe their sheep in fold
And Gardnar knoes, how flowrs should watted be
So God gives aid, ear man the want can se.
Helps coms not sure, by hap or heads device
Though wits of men, are means to work ye wax
And cunning hands, do often cast the dice
All these are toys, trust up in tinkars packs
No flame will ryes, till fire be thrust to flare
No brantch may bud, till he that made the plant
With dew of grace, in deed supplies the want.
Can earth yield fruit, til Springtime sap do shoe?
Can air be clear, till foggs and miests are fled?
Can seas and floeds, at eury season floe?
Can men give life, to shapes and bodies dead?
Such secrets pas, the reatche of man's vain head
So look to reap, no corn for all our toil
Till Harvest come, and God has blessed the soil.
The pottar knoes, what vessail serves his turn
And therein still, he powers liquor sweet
The cook well notes, what wood is best to burn
And what conceits, is for the banquet meet
The Captain marks, what soldier has most spreete
And calls that man, to charge and office great
When he thincks good, and saruice is in heat.
Dare any wight, presume to take the place
Of worthy charge, till he thereto be called?
Dare subject brag, before the Princes face?
Or strive with staets, that are in honor stauld?
Dare village boest, with City stronglye wauld?
Dare children clime, till they good footing find?
No all thing yelds, to him that leads the mind.
He lifts aloft, he flingeth down as fast
Note.
He gives men fame, and plucks renown away
Hap does not so, for chance is but a blaste
An idle word, where with weak people play
Hap hangs and holds, on hazard eury way
And hazard leanes, on doubt and danger deep
That glads but few, and makes Millio^s weep.
I use this term, of hap in all I write
As well to make, the matter large and long
As any cause, or dram of great delight
I take therein: But here I do yoe wrong
To lead your cares, with such a senceles song
From hearing that, I promesde have to end
The bare discourse, the hapless man has pende.
So coming home, and crept from toills abroed
(With charged breast, and heavy heauing heart)
I thought in Court, my burden to vnloed
And cast away, the cares of former smart
But there alas, my chance is so oerth wart
I sit and sighe, and fold mine arms with all
And in old griefs, a fresh begin to fall.
Yea thear where most, my hope and haunt has bin
Where years and days, I spent upon the stock
And diverse do, good hap and friendship win
(And duty makes, a world of people flock)
And thousands Lo, draws water from the cock
I skarce may moist, my mouth when thirst is great
And heart is clean, consuemde with skalding heat*
A spring of kind, does floe above the brim
You cannot stop, a Fountain if you would
For throw hard rocks, it runs clear and trim
And in some ground, it casts up graynes of gould
It bursts the earth, and deeply diggs the mould
It gusheth out, and goes in sundry vayns
From mountains topp, and spredeth all the plains.
The Spring creeps up, the highest hill that is
And many wells, thear on are easlye found
And this I wott, where you do water mis
Small fruit does groe, it is but barraine ground
The soil is sweet, where pleasant springs abound
The Cowslop sproutes, where springs and fountains be
And floeds begin, from fountain heads you see.
The labring man, thearat does coell his heat
The byrds do haeth, their breasts full bravely thear
The brutest beasts, there in finds pleasure great
And likes not half, so well another whear
What cause in me, what dout what fault or fear?
That I may not, in this so weak a plite
Go drinck my fill, whear ^atch thing haeth delight.
The moer we draw, the waetter from the well
Note.
The better far, we bring the spring in fraem
The seas themselves, of natuer ries and swell
The moer the wind, and weather works the saem
The fire borns best, when bellows bloes the flaem
Let things stand still, and stoer them not in time
They shall decay, by mean of dross and slime.
I see some streams, with sticks aer choked up
And rivers large, are marde with beds of sand
I see some bring, from doells an empty cup
Yet craves an alms, and shoes a needye hand
I see baer boys, befoer the banquet stand
And no man says, lo poer man if thou wutt
Take here a dishe, to fill thy hongry gutt.
Of cormrant kind, some crammed capons aer
The moer they eat, the moer they may consuem
Some men likewise, the better that they faer
The worse they be, and sicker of the ruem
And some so chaef, so frown so fret and fuem
When others feed, they cannot God he knoes
Spaer any time, the dropping of thear noes.
The bords aer spread, and feasts aer made thereon
And such sit down, that haeth their bellies full
Whose greedy mouths, from dog would snatch ye boen
Which snodges swell, and look like greisie wull
They puff they bloe, yea like a baited bull
And shoue them back, that on small croems would feed
Whose pashent hearts, maks virtue of a need.
The glotton thincks, his belly is to small
When in his eye, a deintie morssell is
He grins and gaeps, as though no crom should fall
From him: and loeks as all the world wear his
Thus such as want, aer suer the poest to kis
For powltting pried, does preace so fast in place
That poer plain Tom, daer skarce come sho his face.
Catch one does seek, for to aspier and ries
Yet haet we those, that does by virtue clime
The fool he skorns, the worship of the wies
Yet dolts presuem, beyond the wyes sometime
And all this strief, is but for dros and slime
That out of earth, we digg with dangers deep
Full hard to win, and much more wors to keep.
This makes me mues, when some have heaps in hord
They will not help, the nearest freinde they have
And yet with smiels, and many a friendly word
They grant to give, before a man does crave
Sut^h harbors fine, can finely poul and shave
And wash full clean, till all away they wash
Than good sir Griem, like lobb they leave in lashe.
What should men loes, when they enoughe have had
If they did part, with things that might be sparde?
A little piece, out of a golden gad
For service long, might be a great reward
No no as steel, and flinte is stiff and hard
So world is waxt, and no good turn is found
But whea^ in deed, do doble gifts rebounde.
We make a leg, and kiss the hand with all
(A French device, nay sure a Spanish trick)
And speak in Print, and say lo at your call
I will remain, your own both dead and quick
A Courtiar so, can give a lobbe a lick
And dress a dolt, in Motley for a while
And so in sleeue, at sillye wodcocke smile.
If meaning went, with painted words and shoes
It might suffice, such cortteis cheer to taest
But with the same, disdain and envy goes
And trompry great, with words and wind in waest
Than arm in arm, coms flattry full of haest
And leads a way, the senses out of frame
That upright wits, are thereby stricken lame.
This sowtting low, and bowing down the knee
But groeps men's minds, to creep in credits lapp
Like malte horse than, he holds up head you see
That late before, could veil hoth knee and capp
The Nurse a while, can feed the child with papp
And after beat, him on the breetch full baer
A swarm God wot, of these fine natuers aer,
There be that biets, yet gronts and whines withal
There be that winnes, yet swear and say they loes
There be that stops, and stealls away the ball
There be that plants, a weed and plucks a roes
There be pleads want, to whom the fountain floes
Such hieds there haps, to make the world to think
At fair well head, they need not for to drink.
The Whales you see, eats up the little fish
The pretty Penk, with Sammon may not swim
The greatest heads, are fed with finest dishe
To foulest pits, fair water runs trim
He gets the gain, that stands nere the brim
He bloes the cole, that has cold fingers still
He starues for bread, that has no corn at mill.
A world to see, the course and state of things
Some would get up, yt knoes not where to light
Some soer the skies, that never had no wings
Some wrestle well, by cunning not by might
Some seems to judge, fair colors without sight
And eury one, with some odd shift or grace
In world at will, runs out a goodly race.
But to be plain, I lagg and come behind
As I wear lame, and had a broken leg
Or else I cannot, lie within the wind
And harken still, what I might easlie beg
I need not say, in mouth I have a gegg
For I have spoke, and sped in matters small
By help of him, that has my Verses all.
But far God wot, I am from that I seek
And miss the mark, that many men do hit
Wherefore sal^ tears, do trickle down the cheek
And heart does feel, full many a woeful fit
And so aside, in sollem sorrow sit
As one in deed, that is forsaken clean
Where most he does, deserve and best does mean.
No matter now, though each man march and tread
On him that hates, the life he bears about
Yet such as shall, these heavy Verses read
Shall find I blame, my fortune out of dout
But sens on hope, no better hap will sprout
I yield to death, and upward lift the mind
Where loathsome life, shall present comfort find.
Sens hope can have, no honey from the Hiue
And pains can pluck, no pleasure for his toil
It is but vain, for weery life to strive
And streatch out time, with torment and tormoile
Get what we can, death triumphs oer the spoil
Than note this well, though we win near so mitch
When death tacks al, we leave a mizer rich.
To live and lack, is doble death in deed
A present death, exceeds a lingering woe
Sens no good hap, in youth did help my need
In age why should, I strive for Fortune so
Old years are come, and haests me hens to go
The t^me draws on, I hate the life I have
When heart shall break, my grief shall end in grave.
Should I seek life, that finds no place of rest
Ne sotle nor seat, to shroude me from the air
When cramping cold, be clipps my careful breast
And dollor drives, my heart in deep despair
For such foul days, dark death is wondrous fair
As good to make, the skrawlling worms a feast
As pleas y^ world, where mischief maks her neast.
Hie time it is, to haest my carkas hens
Youth stool away, and felt no kind of joy
And age he laft, in travel ever sens
The wanton days, that made me nice and coye
Wear but a dream, a shadoe and a toye
Since slaurye here, I find and nothing else
My hoem is thear, where soul in freedom dwells.
In wars and woe, my years aer waested clean
What should I see, if lordly lief I led
I loek in glass, and find my cheeks so lean
That eury owre, I do but wish me ded
Now back bends down, and forwards faulls ye head
And hollow eyes, in wrinckled brow does shroud
As though two stars, wear creping under clowd.
The lips wax cold, and loeks both pael and thin
The teeth fawlls out, as nutts forsoek the shaell
The baer bald head, but shoes whear hear has bin
The lively joints, wax weery stiff and staell
The reddy tongue, now folters in his taell
The wearishe face, and tawny color shoes
The corraeg quaills, as strength decays and goes.
The sweet delites, are dround in dulled mind
The gladsome sports, to groaning sighs are bent
The frisking lims, so far from frame I find
That I* forthincke, the time that youth has spent
But when I way, that all these things wear lent
And I must pay, the earth her duty throw
I shrincke no whit, to yield these pleasures now.
Had I possessed, the gifts of Fortune here
A house a wife, and children therewithal
And had in store (to make my friends good cheer)
Such common things, as neighbors have at call
In such despair, perchance I would not fall
But want of this, and other lackes a skore.
Bids me seek death, and wish to live no more.
Yet for to bear, a piece of all my woes
(And to impart, the privy pangs I felt)
From country soil, a sober wife I choes
In mine own house, with whom I seldom dwelt
When thousands slepte, I waekt I swet I swelt
To compass that, I never could attain
And still from hoem, abroed I brack my brain.
The thatcher has, a cottage poor you see
The sheppard knoes, where he shall sleep at night
The daily drudge, from cares can quiet be
Th^s Fortune sends, some rest to eurye wight
So borne I was, to house and land by right
But in a bagg, to Court I brought the same
From Shrews brye town, a seat of ancient fame.
What thinks my frindes, that thear behind I laft
What fault finds she, that gave me lief and suck
O courting fien, thou art to cold a craft
The Carter haeth, at hoem much better luck
Well, well I say, a due all worldly muck
Ne house nor land, we bear away I knoe
I naked came, and naked hence must go.
The greatest king, must pas the self saem way
Our day of birth, and burial are alike
Their joy, their pomp, their wealth and rich array
Shall soen consuem, like snow that lies in dieck
No bucklar serves, when sodayn death does striek
As soen may coem, a poer man's soul to blys
As may the rich, or greatest Lord that is.
Well ear my breath, my body do forsaek
My spreet I do, bequeath to God above
My books, my skrowls, and songs that I did maek
I leave with frindes, that freely did me love
To flyring foes, whoes malice did me move
I wyshe in haest, amendment of their ways
And to the Court, and courtiars happy days.
My fortuen strange, to strangers do I leave
That strangly can, retain such straung mishap
To such as still, in world did me disseaue
I wyshe they may, bewaer of such lyk trap
To sclaundrous tongues, that kyld me with their clap
I wyshe moer rest, than they have given me
And bles thoes shreaws, that corst and crabbed be.
To such as yet, did never pleasuer man
I give those ryems, that nyps the gawlled back
To such as would, do good and if they can
I wyshe good luck, long lief, and void of lack
To currysh karls, a whyp and collyars sack
And to the proud, that stands upon their braus
A waynskot face, and twenty crabtree staves.
To surly syers, that scorns the meaner sort
A nightcap foord, with Foyns I them bequeath
To such as skowll, at others good report
(And sets much stoer, by their own painted sheath)
In sien of luck, I give a willowe wreath
To such as aer, vnnaemd and merits mutch
The stoen I leave, that tries the gold by tutch.
To gentill race, with good conditions joined
I wyshe moer joy, than man imagine may
And sens for pooer, I have no money coynd
God grant them all, a merry marriage day
To such as does, delight in honest play
I wyshe the gold, that I have lost thearby
And all the wealth, I want befoer I dye.
Now friends shack hands, I must be gone my boys
Our mirth taeks end, our triumph all is don
Our tykling talk, our sports and myrry toys
Do flyed away, like shadow of the Son
Another coms, when I my race have ron
Shall pass the time, with you in better plyt
And find good cause, of greater things to wryt.
FINIS.
A DISCOVRSE HOW virtue seames to sleep and Justice is ever awaken.
WHen virtue laid her down to sleep,
and would no longer wake:
And wicked world did wanton wax,
as vice would triumph make.
I sat and mused all the while,
on things of wonders weight:
As though our latter judgment day
at hand were coming straight.
For lo each land, and kingdom large,
In compass of my vewe:
Stood all bespred with wailing wightes,
and sudden sorrows new.
Some ran to raise dame virtue up,
but none durst stir her thoe:
Disordred lief kept people back.
and said let virtue go.
Dead sleep has caught her for a space,
to plague proud haguhtie heads:
That wallowes in their wayward wills,
on pleasures wanton beds.
The feeble folk that lives in fear,
and feade in cottage cold:
Were half amasd to here the tale,
that lawles life had told.
Is virtue slombring now alas,
quod one that felt much wrong:
Than shall the poor with pensive mind,
complayn of grief to long.
This was no sooner said but lo^,
in fields and forestes thick:
I hard a heap of wounded hearts,
that pincht were nere the quick.
Cry out so loud they pers^ the clouds,
and in their roaring tewne:
They did pronounce that wretched folk,
full sone should come to rewne.
If sacred Gods that guydes the Stars,
and rules both Sun and Moon:
Brought not a box of precious balm,
to salve the mischief soon.
In this discourse and doleful brutes,
came revel roughly clad:
And made wild havoc sound the dro^me,
as all the world were mad.
And so was haerbraine broils abroche,
and men embrued in blood:
Began to strive with stout attempts,
For rule and worldly good.
The horse did see where lay his strength,
and would not rayned ^ee:
The Ox forsook the wonted plowe,
the Ass would neades go free.
And slang the burden on the floor,
thus savage grew they all:
That had been tame and meke as lamb,
and long at masters call.
The common sort beholding this,
laft labor care and toil:
And sought throw sleights and snatching shifts
to thrive and live by spoil.
Now dullarde^ ^ere so quick of sense,
they began dispute the case:
And sifted finely flower from Braune,
and had so trym a grace.
They could beguyle the Mylnar smoth,
and make the Baker smyle:
It was world to see the world,
And worldlings all the while.
When folly wrought by slipper means,
to reach beyond the wys^:
As though blind Bayards boulnes rude,
could blere clear Argos eyes.
Yet diuelyshe brains and deep deceit,
did drive such combrous drieftes:
That plain^nes in a pilgrims wede,
was put unto her shieftes.
True dealing was but cauld a doult,
or else Gods fool in dead:
Dame flattery claymed frindships place,
yet faild her frinde at neade.
And robbry was good purchase held,
and lust was sollace sweet:
And they were called the lively laddes.
that had the quickest sprete.
Some said lords hestes were held for laws,
but those were Chavvsers words:
And faith did fail in old priests sawes,
tushe all this was but boordes.
Yet in flat earnest this was true,
the gredy groppt for gain:
And hungry guts might gnaw their go^mes
and still in grief complain.
And private profitte prowlde for pence,
her purse lay open wide:
Thus public state with rufull noise,
unto the heavens cried.
For help and succor to the harms,
that fell on cursed earth:
That never yet was pure and free,
from plagues since Abels birth.
O wytles wightes the Gods said thoe,
that sittes above the skies:
O people ^ayne why do you pewle,
and make such wretched cries.
Think you we have forgotten clean,
the feeble force of man:
Saw we not what should come to pass,
^re first the world began.
Yees suer, and ordeind goodly laws,
to stay your strougling states:
And always held up Justice still,
to end your sharp debates.
Are you so childishe to beleaue,
though virtue seame to dream:
That we will suffer s^aetly vice,
to strive against the stream.
No, no, our laws shall link you fast,
in leages of love full long:
And learn each man to know his own,
and what is right and wrong.
The pyllars that holds up the house,
and props unto the same:
Are known among good workmen all,
of such as buildings frame.
What comforts kings and commonweals,
and keeps the land in awe:
But noble rule and threatening sword,
and worthy upright law.
Though virtue do not shine so bright,
as she was wont of old:
In justice seat if you list search,
her beams you may behold.
At times and terms as temperance tunes,
the stringes that are amiss:
So law reformes the wilful world,
when out of square it is.
And Justice suer shall never die,
while S^lons name is known:
And whiles that wit and reason learnes,
each man to know his owen.
These words thus spoke of fearful Gods,
the world shranke back for fear:
And I bele^d mine adell bed,
these things had dreamed theare.
FINIS.
CHVRCHYARDES dream written to Master William Harbert Esquier, dwellinge at
Saint Gillians by Carlion in Walls.
Some men affyrm Dreams are untrue,
But what the judgment is of you
I know not yet, but well I think
They may proceed, of meat or drink
Receyud before the sleep we take
Compl^^cions often fancies make
And talk of things oer night befoer
Breeds dreams in some men's heds great stoer.
But this you know, the powrs above
Our earthly vessels here does move
By cowrs as they, are of thear kind
And sets the moshons in our mind
As oen might say we nothing do
But Planets pricks us thearvnto.
Loek how the Heavens order is
The Earth must follow, grant me this,
Than we that of the Earth are maed
Must needs obey, the Heavens traed
Four Ellements of eatch ye kno
Or all we feell, the ruell is so:
Some won moer mirt thearwith we se
And subject moer, than others be
To them among us here remayn
But what of that, to break my brayn
About disputing of such thing
Or yet my wits in erors bring
I need not seartch so deep a case
I should but ron beyond my race.
Yet of some dreams that aer deuien
Let me a little here defien
Noet.
For priuey warnings god does give
By sleeps to thoes that here do live.
Was not the dreams of kings sought out
By danniell who, maed clear eatch dowt
That by the saem might ries or spring
Takes god no caer but for aching
Is not the poer to him as deer
The meanest as the greatest peer
Thought on of him, yeas than besuer
By dreams somtims he does procuer
A man to think on, things to com
A dream may speak that seems dom.
A dream haeth lief though sleeps full ded
Breed fancies in, an Idell head
Some when they waek do soen forget
What sweauons in the night they met
And drives the day to end with all
And at the length vnwaeres does fall
In that great flo^d or in that stream
That they aer warnd of by thear dre^m.
But I that for to sh^n is glad
The danger of a dream I had
Do tell the saem, lo this hit was
The dream (...)
Me thought from hoem as I did pas
Unto your house you said that tied
You had a journey for to ried
Ahors you lent me for the saem
So forth we r^ed and had good ga^m
We lawght and checkled all the way^
But as you kno that after play
Coms caer and sorrow so it fell
When I beleud that all was well
You frownd and flang from me for o^
And as I used was to skoef
I gestid still and followed fast
But you oer roed me at the last
And for I would not tier my nag
I shaept my self behind to lag
A ^o^n I p^ickt and palfray spord
And mutch I thought yet spaek no word
Save that I said with voice full lo
What Is will my f^ind forsaek me so?
What new told taell does torn him thus
No taell a toy hit is ywus
No toy he is to wies therefore
Some thing hit is yea les or more
But what hit is I need not fear
For seartch my consience eury whear
And clear it stands in eatch traed
To him since he my freende I maed.
Thus muesing on mi giltles case
I then began, to meand my pace
And as the deuell would hit so
That I ill hap should not forgo.
(When mischeeus com they fawl on heap)
My horse did start and began to leap
The ^aed I think had seen a spriet
He maed the fire ries from his feet
Out of the stoens whear he did tramp
Lord than how I did staer and stamp
And thrust the sporrs in to his sied
But girth and saddell baed abied
They fell from Horse full all to broek
And in the myer, flat like an oek
I lay a long, but what of that
Ear I roes up, and found my hat
Which lay fast by, an Elders roet
My Horse was gone, and I on fo^t.
My face with dirt, was so araid
Hit maed the horse, thear of afraid
For as I ran the Iaed to get
The po^r plain people that I met
Thought suer I had bin clean bestraught,
Oen gave me way, a another laughed
The third said sir go wash your face
But still I had my beast in chase
And ran not swearing half a myel
But toek the Iaed against a stiel
By that was Curttals bryedell lost
And I might ryed (but not in post)
On gawldid back and carrayn boens
The harneys, saddell all at oens
Was broek as said afoer I have
No^^.
Than could I call no oes^lar knave
Nor face him down my gear was gone
And piekt away by hangers on
That follow geasts to eury In
By shift some pair of ^oets to win
Such filtchars have so great a lack
They steall the Saddell from the back
But I that brought a Saddell out
Might ried now like a gentil lout
Thear was no thief to shroud my shaem
But plaen poer Tom, to bear the blaem
What needs moer words, of this to speak
Get up I did on Horse full weak.
My girdell was the bridell than
Thus rode I like a clean young man.
A greater fire was in the straw,
As in the Dream me thought I saw,
A further mischeef after this.
I found and felt lo this it is.
As I my journey thought to take
The Horssis back a two it brake Note.

Out stepped his bones, in fell my cors
Amid the belly of the Horse
I looked still, when he would fall
He seemd to have no harm at all:
And kept the way and boer it out,
With that I would have tornd about
To see if all belongd him to
Would sarue as they wear wont to do.
His lims I mean, which wear so soer
That he had mind to turn no moer
But hoemward, held as fast a mayn,
As any Ienet could of Spayn.
Or Irysh hobby fair and fat
I would not have believed that.
If one had told it for no lie
But sure I saw it with mine eye
As well as in a dream I might
I lay no head, on things by night
As in the day I had them seen
This was of troeth and this I ween
Has diffrence far for troeth is sound
And weenyng dwells on doubtful ground
But sens I com unto this clause
Now will I talk and sho some cause
Of Dreams and let the matter rest
Of my deformed broke backed beast.
Yet shall my pen here after plain
Unto my porp^s turn again.
^.
Thear was a man, my self might be
That in a Dream did think to se
A Sargant com with Maece in hand
Who said good sir I pray you stand
I you arest for Det you know
To whom the money you do owe
And if you have forgot the some
Unto the cownter you must com
And to your accyon answer make
What knave quod he thou do mistaek
The man I think that thou do seek
I owe not all the world a leek
Whearfoer I list not the obaye
He drue his sword and maed a fray
Clobbs cried the sargant all in fear
Out came the touns men eury whear
And from the wind mill this dreemd he
Whear hakney horsis hired be
This man was driven by plain strength
And ran in to a church at length
That at saint ^arance laen end stands
Yet cowld not skaep, the sargants hands,
Forth was he brought, and mann^est s^er
But frinds be fownd (to salve the soer)
Among the sargantts all on heap
So that unto, the goet in cheap
He brought was than, and thear to send
For frinds to make, of this an end
Which was fownd out, and had discharg
And whear he would he went at larg
Lo thearwith did this man awaek
Yet of his dream discourse did maek
Unto oen Feeld with whom he lay
Who baed him not go forth that day Ihon Feeld by wa^feeld

For by a figuer fownd he had
If he went forth he should be lad
Unto the countter, or skaep hand
This man did littell that regard
Think you (quod he) the planets may
Cause me to find ill luck this day
As though they had the ruell of man
Do what you will said to him than
His bed fellow, who straightway roes
And out of doer full fast he goes
The dreamaer followd as he might
When cloes wear on and day was light
But he no soenner in the street
^ut lo a sargant, did he meet
And as before you told, I have
Hit came to pas, so god me save
This is no fable maed for mirth
For by that lord that maed the earth
The heavens toe, and all thear in
Believe me now, this thing haeth bin
Laet in the raing of mary queen
And then the proef of this, No^^.
was seen
All men have not a gift a like
Some god does warn, befoer he striek
Some have grosswitts, some heds deuien
For diverse gracis god does sien
To man as pleases him to shoe
Whear for let us confess and knoe
He maed not man so viell a thing
And set him here, as lord and king
Of all the works he did creat
But he taeks caer for man's estaet
And reasons with man eury owre
And in his vessails still does power
What lickor he thynks meet therefore
Note.
The pot can never boill no moer.
Than Coek does list to put thear in
For Cock maks broth, boeth thick and thin:
The pottar likwies has in choice
In which pot he will moest rejoice.
Which vessaill is for honor maed,
And which must sa^ue, a seruyell traed.
The pottar knoes, and fashons all
^lls blind and weak we might him call
If pot or any vesseill clear
To other porpos sarued here
Than he befoer haeth ordaynd plain
To whom the use of potts pertain
As I might say a gardnar good
Yet never throwly under stood
What weeds and flowrs wear meet to gro
With in his gardain, even so
Is that as true that god does want
Foersyght of any earthly plant
That in his vienyard bears graepps
You grant that god does give men shaepp^
And does he give, but form aloen
A picktuer wrought, of fleash and boen
And lets man think, what thought he will
Does not he give him wit and skyll
And sets such thoughts a mid man's heart
As can not com, by kind, nor aert
If god have given lief and breath
And in his hand, have lye^ and death
How should not he, now would I lern
The minds of men, befoer desern.
Eaer they or thought, what they shall be
If god the cause, thereof do se
Than must they needs, from him proceed
As ground and roet, of eatch good deed
For what weer fleash? that no lief had
And lief from feelyng wear as bad
And feelyng coms, by reasons loer
Than reason have we not before
We do receive of God that gift
Why than there is no other shift
But he that puts in the same
Must needs be master of the game.
If naught be put into the pot
It cannot sees full well ye wot.
Who boyls the pot and maks the fire
Puts things therein at his desire
A broken pot, ye call that still
That neither sarus, to good nor ill.
An needless pot, god does not make
That will no kind, of licour take.
What pitchard will for water go
Be it not born, than way this so
No man may think, Note.
a thought say I
But it is ordaynd, from an hie
And powered in us by his mean
That seith eury thing full clean
And knows well to what intent
Catch vessayl at the first was meant
And to such use as they were wrought
He lets them be drawn and brought.
And boldly now, if I durst speak
I think the makars wit wear weak
To form a thing, and does not know
To what intent, he made it so.
Than this must follow if he knue
Of all his works what should ensue
Thear cowrs was set in his foer sight
^ar that he maed, the day and might
So needs they must befall likwies
Than should we not no cause dispies
That lerns us how to kno his power
Which works in us eueri owre
A waek a sleep at meat at rest
We must find lodging for that geast
He will com in and maek a stoer
And knock hard at thy consience doer
And threatten skorgis for thy sin
And speak and talk to the with in
And tell the things that aer amiss
And say thou foell bewaer of this
Thou use often? thy god I am
That for to warn the hither came
To shon the plaegs for the prepaerd
But if this warning be not hard
And men in sin still sleep and snort
And of such visions maks a sport
Than shall they feel no dream hit was
When proef of this does com to pas
^e that will not be warnd by sleep
When he awaeks, may chance to weep
In skriptuer have I red some time
How Ihon saw sowlls to heaven clyme
And Jacob dreamd he saw the rams
Leaping this to the choesen lams
God does a peer yea eury whear
And sleping rownds men in the ear
As Io^b ^oth say, and I cowld tell
How diverse awcttors shoes full well
That dreams do signify to some
Great caers and trobulls for to com
And unto other shoes likwies
When mirth and Joy thear shall aries
I writ not this as for a creed
Let men trust dreams as they shall need
Some dreams spryng fro a feeble brain
And some of sickness and of pain
And other subjects mani a^on
Of which I will deuies upon
In dreams aer dowts and doble freaks
Some sleeps yet in his dream he speaks No^^.

And rises up yet not a waek
And in the house mutch noys does maek
He torns the lock and goes his way
Out of the doer as at noen day
And does such things as fawlls in head
By dream and after coms to bed
He bars all fast whear he has been
And never faulls nor breaks his shin
Yet seems to sleep yea all the whyell
But he that sees the saem may smyell
And wonder at that I dell brayn
That in the bed is laid a gain
Who laet in sleep a broed he saw
A another sort will seartch the straw
And thrust a knief throw bed and all
What may we now this dreamyng call
Of our complexshons coms this gear
No suer of some mad freak I fear
They ries they breed and norrishtt be
And groes in men by some degree
That costom maks to follow kind
Or else they spryng on trobled mind
For charged conshens borthend soer
Of some shrewd sact fowl don before
Which pricks the inward parts of man
That head nor fancy rests not than
Though boddy as his cos^om is
Must ^leep or natuer helds with this
Yet whear the conshens is not clean
Thear seeks the deuell for to lean
And (...) no way that may be sought
(...) plant there in dispaired thought
And maks the dreamar loud to cry
He coms I se him with mine eye
And sweats for fear this known I have
And hard how some do use to rave
And start upright as they wear woed
Some say hit comes of a bloed
A bloed I fear as doctors says
That springs of defaut of faith
Some aer of such a weak belief
They think each mouse should be a thief
And every Rat that runs about
Should be a Deuell out of dout
Such folk as well daer lie aloen
As I dare eat a lode of stoen
God never thought, was on that day
At night than how should any way
Such helhoundes sleep? of deulysh deeds,
Nothing but fearful dreams proseeds
Their minds on mischeef runs so fast
That fear of God or world is past
As long as they can find a maet
To chat with all to lie or praet
In suertie than, ye ^all on hoef
They thank they stand, amid their roef
But when aloen they hap to go
Thear conshens does accues them so
They may not sit ne sleep nor rest
But gnawing worms are in their breast
And trembling thoghts does them confound
Theas men must needs now sleep unsound
Of whoes mad dreams so God me speed
I think wise folk, ought take good heed
And give them counsel in this case
And learn them for to feell the grace
That god does promise to us all
With faithful heart, that to him call
Good prayer suer may salve this greef
This is a part of my belief.
And for to prove that saying true
I will rehers a thing to you
Which has bin trid and trid again
Whearfore give ear I list not fayn
I knue my self and of laet days No^^.

A father that was much to prays
In bringing up his babes catch on
He might be calde a parragon
In teaching youth and using age
Would god catch man would wear his bage
And seek his lyurey for to have
Than in thear hearts they should engraue
The fear of God, his armor coet
And all the worship that he goet,
His aerms, his collors and his crest
His hoep, his curatts for his breast
His sheld, his sword, his enmies rod
And to be short, the fear of God
Was all or moest, of his delight
In sleashly tabuls God did write.
His law, his fear and blessed will
Far past the compass of our skill
I mean within the humble mind
(Of this goodman well bent of kind)
With parfit stamp was printed fast
The law and fear I spoke of last
As all his childern taught he well
To oen apart this did he tell
Moer of^nar than unto the rest
^oet.
Perhaps that boy, he loved best)
How if he would his blessyng win
Than with this ruell he must begin
First eury morning when he roes
Before he had put on his cloes
He should a sollem prayer say
To God to keep him all the day
That he did purpose well to spend
And when the day, was brought to end
(And should repair unto his bed)
Another prayer should be sed
Before he slept, if this he did
In eury point, as he was bid
The Father said, that God on hie
Would bless the place, whear he did lie
And give an Angel, charge he sed
To keep good watch, about the bed.
That neither feend, nor fearful sight
Should vex the silly soul that night,
His son that lesson kept full well
And never from that order fell
But most devoutly that he vsd
Till wanton life, had him abuesd
And made him mind, such follies here
As retchlesse youth, does bye full deer.
Whose pleasuers when the son had caught
The goodly ruell, his father taught
In very deed, forgotten was
And littell did, this young man pas
How he the day, or night had spent
But here what plaegs was aftter sent. Note.

What restles sleeps and dreams he had
For some tims as he had bin mad
(When in the bed he down was laid)
He did such things as would have Fraid
The stowttest man, that treds in shue
And farther moer, I may tell you
He was aferd him self full often
For nothing stoerd by him so soft
(Within the chaember that he sleept)
But thearwith under cloes be crept
And durst not speak, of any thing
To be of all the world a king.
Theas fancies did not chang him so
But he had torments many more
Of other secret fears with in
When for to sleep, he did begin.
Which alttred him on such a sort
I can not make thearof report.
Such frights and startyng in the bed
And of his mowth, I have hard sed
He thought he saw, and marked hit well
A thousand deuells out of hell
Com ronning on him all at oens
Some toer his fleash some broek his boens
Some flang him down, as than he thought
And was thearwith in slomber brought
But still his fancies did him fraem
To cry alowd, on Ihesus naem
Yea such as slept with him have hard
That he the blessed naem prefard
Of Ihesus suerly first of all
Noet.
And when thear on this man did call
His raeg of storms began to slaek
And straight from sleep he did awaek
Than would he loek unto the lord
And so the fathers ruell record
No soever was a prayer said
But ^ownd as ba^b in cradell laid
He slept, and has d^n oftten sense
This prous that under gods defense
^an wa^ks ^ sleeps, and dreams somwhiels
And as he at our folly s^^els
A gent^ill warning does he give
Because he would have sinnars live
And so convert, for causis knoen
To him that sitts in sacred throen
He gieds and gouerns eury whear
And brings the hawty hearts in fear
To make men knoe from whence we have
The quiet sleeps, and rest we crave.
I could of dreams mutch moer resit
But this suffiseth that I writ
To shoe that dreams of many men
Aer true, or moshons now and then
To make us way, in balance right
That god with wonders works his might
And does in sleep, a messaeg send
(Unto some purpose and some end)
To man whoes thoughts and doings boeth
He sees and marks what path he goes
Now to re^orn (I think hit best)
Whear I did leave, and sho the rest
How that, my horse that iomlyng i^ed
To be at home such labor maed
Yet must I needs, now wonder how
This monstrous thing could bear me throw
But things in Dreams ye kno may seem
That out of Dreams, no man will deem
As did this to, for who would think
(Or in his head could let it sink)
That in the bowels of a beast
Thus I could ried, or at the least
How Horse away so fast did trot
The dream would have it so ye wot.
Now when to stable d^er we came
The ro^ll stoed still as any Lam
Then did I light and went my wey
Thear at the horse began to ney
He maed so loud and shrill a sownd
As though in sunder shaekt the grownd:
I never saw, in such a heat
(When on the earth his feet he beat.)
Ne beast nor man, nor living thing
And as the bruit thereof did ryng
Within your earrs you came to se
What ruell and revel this might be.
Wherewith the Horse against his kind
In reason did declaer his mind
And spoke in order like a man
But when to talk the Horse began
You muesd and all your house eatch oen
That still stood wondryng thear upon:
But lo he told his taell so well
And so rehersid every dell
How I within his belly roed
That you than without moer aboed
In his behalf said unto me
Is this an honest pranke of the
First to offend me as thou knoest
Than further in thy solly go
And breaks the back of my poer horse
And after ridest in his cors
And not content with that fowl part
But here again, returned art
To set my heart, on anger moer
Perchance thou may repent it soer.
This said* the Horse fell down star^ ded
And to another world you fled
And le^^ your wife your child and all
To that which after might befall.
My friend thus gone (quod I) alas
Man's life is brittell as the glass
And with the greef that I did take
Out of my dream I did awake.
And when at full I had it s^and
I took my pen and ynk in hand.
Yea ear I had put on my cloes
Or out of bed that day I roes,
This did I write, this did I pen,
In such a plyght my head was then
And by my troeth with no more time,
I wrate to you this barrayn rhyme,
Wherefore a shamd, I am to send
A matter now, so basely pend,
To any friend or learned man
That judgment has as well ye can
^o the judge and mend the fa^tes here in,
Or when the like is to begin
A better make, yet take in worth
Such fruit as my, baer tree brings forth
If sweeter appuls cowld it yield,
Than with sour wieldings of the feeld
And such dry crabs, new fallen from tree
You should not thus presentyd be.
But whear thear groes no goodly fig^
And springs hard breers and robbishe twigs
Out of such brambuls seek you not
No moer than of hedge weeds are got.
How should I hit in Chausers vayn
Or toutche the typ, of Surries brayn
Or dip my pen, in Pet^arkes stiell
Sens conning lak I all the whiell
And baesly have I been brought up
I never sipt on knoledg cup
Nor could com near the troeth to tell
To drink a draught of that sweet well
That springs from Pernasoes hill
Wear I oens there to drink my fill
Or that fair fowntaine might I keep
Among the Poets thear to sleep
I would so make my belly swell
With bibbing of this worthy well
That eury word out of my breast
Should be a sentence at the least.
And eury sentence from my head
Should way in weight, a pownd of led.
And eury lain with pen I wraet
Should wear garland Lawreaet.
I mean my stiell should be so hie
That it should sho I sucked dry
Pernasoes spring, and make men think
If ever Poets pen and ynke
Or well cowtcht ^ens did prays attayn,
My verse should eury tongue constrain
To give me lawd but all a mis
And out of frame, the matter is
I never knue what muesis meant
No gift of pen, the gods me sent
But such as in, wied world I fownd
And dug up, in stoony grownd
Whear I do tomble, up but st^ens
And if I hap a mong the boens
Whear any Poet has bin laid
Lord god than am I well a pa^d
(...) good reliks I them hold
(...), to speak of gold
(...) they (...) ^^ar at my call
And I could not at (...) at all
No (...) of (...) secret skill
^
(...) ^^^bull forth I must needs now
For if I should let go the plowe
And bakward look how I have don
Than all wear mard I had begone.
For as the fawts to mend I soght
I might in such despair be brought
That I should fling the pen a syed
Should every one that shoetteth wie^
Give o^r the pastime god defend
An artchars hand, may daily mend
A writars skill, may ^^pper be
(...) stombleth now, that well may se
And fawll no whit, a another day
(...) poer soell, what do I say
^o help my self, as thogh^ thear might
(...) unto me, a (...)
(...), is (...) I se
(...) and me
(...) of uncunning dark
(...) the whit or mark
(...) hit, I r^uelar of
And biet a p^^ce, but on that loef
Whear other cuts a can^ell great
At knowledge doer I do but beat
And knock when thousands steppeth in
God knoes I cannot find the gin
Nor may set hand, upon the latch
Yet take they as great pain that watch
To enter thear, as those I say
Whom lernyng shoes, the reddy way
But they deserve, the praises moest
That knowledge wins, in any ^d^st
And for my luck was never such
Taquaynt my self with knoledge mutch
I seek no praise, but thank I crave
For my goodwill, and for I have
In Uerse setforth this dream at full
In deed I did no Feathers pull
From other Byrds, to patch this pluem
But as in head I had a ruem
Or fancy better might he naemd
So all this Dream, here have I fraemd
According as in thought hit fell
Whearfore I pray you take it well.
Finis.
NOw noet you Redars of this Dream
And of the garment rip the se^m
And se what lies in folds of cloeth
I mean mark how this matter goes
And how my Dream, against my mind,
Took force and virtue as I find.
I dreamd I lost a friend in deed,
Yea such a friend, who now should need:
Will say that I, a Jewel lost.
But now to speak, that sarueth most
Unto my dream, and purpose here
The same self day, the owre and year
That I did dream, my friend was gone
(And he at layser looked thear on)
The self same week, he bad faerwell
To all the world, when passing bell
A witness was, to that a due.
For xx. years, the man I knue
But if to me (good God would give)
The grace that I ten skore should live
I wear right suer, in all these days,
To meet with noen, so worthy praise.
O Harbert thou do harber now
Whear I if I could compass how
Would have a harbor for my bark
But thou in light, and I in dark
Are seured far, the moer my doell
And suerrer harbred is thy soell.
In wicked world no harbor is,
The end of labor is owr blis
Whear Harbe^t hugs in Abraham's breast
And whear the choesen Lambs shall rest.
Finis.
A TAEL OF A FREER and a shoemakers wyef.
IN Waels thear is a borrow town,
Carmarden hight the same:
Whear dwelt sometimes a lusty Freer,
I need not sho his name.
This Freer was fat and full of fleash,
a jolly myrry knave:
Who with the gossips of the town,
him self could well behave.
Thoes welthy wives and thrifty daems,
could never make good cheer:
Nor well dispuet of Peeters keis,
if absent wear this Freer.
He said his mattens in thear cares,
and gospel at thear bed.
And spaerd no sarues for the quick,
nor caerred for the dead.
With abbotts ^as and faering well,
this Freer so wantton was:
That neither maid nor married wief,
his Dorttour doer might pas.
With out some stop such staells he laid,
to make them stomble in:
That by his lyef men g^st he thought,
that letchr^ was no syn.
A l^uing Freer good fellow like,
in thoes days was he held:
In eury corner of the town,
good com^^cte out he smeld.
And as ye kno in hauntyng long,
all sorts of people thear:
He must find out some baytyng place,
a Mistres fowl or fear.
A deyntie morsel for his toeth,
these Freers loud well to faer:
Though some were pleased with cheesis still,
some fownd a better shaer.
As did this honest brother in christ,
by gosseping about:
Who when he would a hakney ried,
had fownd a palfray out.
A nag mutch of a woman's height,
that used for to bear:
Moer sacks perchance unto the Myl,
than corn was griended thear.
I not declaer what trim consaits,
he gave her all the whiell:
^ar he obtaind the thing he sought,
how he his tongue could fiell.
To talk and mince the matter well,
the better to disgeast:
And how full often at morrow Mass,
his Mystres could he feast.
And after noen to gardens walk,
and gatherd Poesies gaie
And woer them cloesly in his cowll,
as he did sar^s say.
Nor can not shoe you half the seats,
he wroght to please his trull:
But those moest fit for you to read,
(...) put in riem I w^ll
A (...) that held a (...)
far from his dwelling place*
A fair wife had a good brown weantch,
and com of no il race.
Some sai of waggtaills pretti fo^lls,
a kindred great and good:
That knoes what shears will sarue the torn,
when shroes will shaep a whood.
The cheef of this great lynnage leads,
thear lives like holly Nons:
That for releef in gadding time,
about the cloister rons.
A catter wawlling oens a week,
in breath to keep them well:
Least virgins should some surffet tack,
when they lead aeps in hell.
This woman went not out of kind,
and suer for Simons sake
She vsd great deeds of charity,
and mutch a do did make.
Saint Simon was a goodly man,
the Freer might so be called
I towtch no further least he kick,
for suer his back is gald.
A live the man was many yeer^
sens abbaies wear suprest:
And dwelt not ^arre from cardief town,
when written was this Jest.
But to my taell let me retorn,
this woman seldom faild
The morrow mass at four aclok,
to see how Christ was naild.
Unto the cross to whom she kneeld,
with bo^k and beads in fi^t:
And for deuoshion many timee,
this gentill freer she (...).
At eury Pater noster whiell,
which was a preshoes thing.
And Jesus how hit did her good,
to here her lubbor sing.
And when he tornd about his face,
and loeked throw the queer:
She skrat her head, she sat on pricks,
and crept the awter near.
This costom kept she many days,
the freer thear of full glad:
Yet still refard his other sport,
till better time wear had.
You must conceive this mirry man,
in Ieasts and light consaits:
His head was set and for the saem
full often he laid his baits.
To lawghe and pas the time away,
such toys he would devise:
That few men for the mirth thereof,
the matter could despise.
Note.
Upon a day appointed was,
this wife as was her use:
Should early come to morrow Mass,
there might be made no skuese.
She kept her owre and hard she kneeld.
without the Dorttour doer:
The Freer came forth and haeld her in,
and slang her on the floer.
Fie, fie, sir Freer she cried a pace,
but what should more be sed?
She was content to take her case,
and leap into the bed.
And as mine aucthor does declare.
the fownder for to sleep:
She had no more upon her thoe,
than has a sho^ren sheep.
Sir Sunkin had no points to lowse,
in Cowll and all he skips:
God send my Freer well forth again,
the Moen was in the clips.
How long he lay, or what he did,
in soeth I cannot tell:
But at the leyngth the Sexten went,
and range the Serves bell.
The Freer wished Rope about his neck,
the Mattens was begun.
That he that moern would sing or say,
and all the Lessons dun.
Yet up he must for fear of che^k,
his course was com to ries:
The night before he took his rest,
to heal his bleared eyes.
A law there was within that house,
who slept the saruis out:
In Fraettry should be hoyst full hie,
and whipped like breetchlesse lout.
Whearfore to tinder box he slept,
and light a Sies in haest:
And as he gyrded knotted kord*
full hard about his waest,
Lie s^ill said he unto his geast,
I must go take some pain:
And singe a Psalm within the queer,
but I will come again.
Out goes he then, that likte her not,
she durst not lie aloen:
For fear of buggs, thus leave I now,
a bed this goodwise Ioen*
And tell you how in queer full loud
this sh^uen kock he kro^s
And drowned his fellows eury choen,
he sange so in the nees.
But as he tornd the plain song book,
^ull smoethly cowld he smiell
Yet noen of all the covent could,
perceive him all the whiell.
To mend his mirth and make him lawghe*
a fancy fell in thought
^e saw the owner of the beast,
that he had ryd for naught.
The housband of the wife in deed,
that he in bed had laft
Who walked with in the church beneath,
all careless of this craft.
Not^.
Be god thought he I will go prove,
this man if he do knoe
His wife by measuring her foet,
or mark a pen her toe.
For if I so disceaue the foell,
and make the wife a s^rd
He nor his wyef is near the wors,
a hear not of his berd.
And I shall mutch the better be,
and laughing have at will
Thus eury way and be my luck,
I shall have sport my fill.
Down went this good religeous man,
whear hornsby housband walked
And cortchy made and dowkt ^ull lee.
and as he with him talked.
In have (quod he) known thee right long,
and still the troeth to say
I have thee fownde a faithful friend,
in every kind of way
A customar thou have of me,
my Money I bestow
On thee before all other men
that dwells within thy row.
And to be plain I love thee well
and playner now I am
Than give good ^are I shall declaer,
whearfore to thee I came.
But wise and w^erly use my words,
and keep my council boeth
Thy promis is sufficient band,
I will no further oeth.
This man full well he knue his good,
who cortched to the grownd
Sweet sir (quod he) tell on your mind,
I am your headman bownd.
Thou knoest my neybor men must live
and have a wentch sometime,
And we poer Freers must keep it cloes,
for fear of open crime
It wear a spot unto our house,
a sklandor to our name
When we have sport if all the world,
should understand the same.
For god himself does give us leave,
as thou have hard ear now
Although the world we do disseaue
in keeping of our vow.
I am to long in preaching thus,
and time I do abues,
I have a wentch for whom thou must,
^o make a pair of shues.
Let them be good, when I thee pay,
a penny more to boet
I shall the give, I lake (quod) he,
the measuer of her foet
Than boldly spoke this baer foet Freer,
by God that shall thou have:
If thou keep close and follow me,
else call the Freera knave.
The straight plain path to Dortter than.
they took the way full right:
The Freer before, but you must note,
it was not full day light.
Wherefore the man came far behind,
the Freer went in a pace
And causd his wentch the others wife,
right cloes to hide her face.
When entered was this honest man,
put forth thy foet (quod he)
The Freer I mean which at that time,
the bolder man might be.
She thrust her leg out of the bed,
but head fast under cloes
She kept and cursed the saus^e Freer,
a hundredth times god knoes.
The workman took his measure well*
and had no further caer
The Freer well laughed within his sleeue,
thus pleased both they aer.
But how the wife contentid was,
let wives be judge here in:
That from their housbands beds somti^
in such like case has bin.
Yet let me shoe how she did quake,
and tremble all the whiell
And wished the roeprip hanged full hie,
that did her thus begiell
And how for fear her body was,
on water eury part
Here after shall you kno likewise,
what hate was in her heart
Which for the time she couerd well,
and near a word she spoke
Her husband haested to his shop,
and so his leave did take
I have a pair of shues (quod he)
(which I shall bring a non)
All reddy made for my wives foet,
and hers I think both oen
Ye say the troeth good moem thought she,
the Freer has played the knave
Make for your wife what shues ye list,
the measure twice you have.
The Freer ^ons forth, ye man went hoem
the woman lay a space
As she had bin in swadlyng clowts,
and durst not sho her face.
When she had found her self aloen,
she roes and speed did make
To be at home ear her goodman,
his breakefast came to take.
As in her house she did ariue,
she bard the doer full fast
And burst a weepyng like a babe,
and this she said at last*
O he shameless knave, not pleased to spoill
me of my wiuely fame
But a^ my fautes thy ^rantik head,
must ^ the^of a game
Could not my bre^tch of wedlockes band,
content thee but in spyt
Thou must devise so leawd a fact,
my says with frawd to quyt,
How dydst thou knoe, I durst not sto^r,
that towtched was so near
I might have skapt my housbands wrath,
but thou had bought it deer.
If I had spoek as oens I thought,
to do my fear was such
Thy folly had bin tentimes moer,
though mien were very mutch.
He might have took his wife again,
and knocked full well thy part
And shaud thy crown a another sort,
than fawls for thien estaet.
Or else he might have shaemd us boeth,
and so refuesd his wief
I could have liud, but whear woldst thou,
have led a Frears lief?
O beastly wretch that of thy self,
have had so small regard
As for the knavery showed to me,
I will it well reward.
Not for the malice due therefore,
but that I mind to leave
E^ample to thy fellows all,
how they their frinds disceaue.
Did I procuer thee to this deed,
did not thy Gospels sweet
And momblyng often make me believe,
a Devil was no spreet?
Did not thou seek me every owre.
to sho me thy good will,
And brought me grapes and goodly fruets.
among my gossips still.
Thou caerst not if ten couple of hounds.
did follow me full fast:
And I a For wear in the field,
sins now thy geer is past.
Did not thy flyryng face full often,
frame me thus to thy fist:
Than wast thou hot, now art thou cold,
or warms the whear thou list.
A warmyng place within the town,
here after may thou lack:
And mis perchance so meet a seat,
to drink a cup of Sack.
Thou keepst not such a diet still,
nor art not so presies:
But as the thirst does com again.
thy appetite will ries.
I pray to God it be my lot.
to see thee at that stay:
So thus the woman held her peace,
and out she went her way.
Unto the market for to seek,
such things as hozwiues do
You know that have more skill than I,
what does belong theartoe.
The poer man brought the Freer his shue^
and thought no harm thearin:
And to his labor did return,
his living for to win.
His wief and he as they wear wont,
full quiet days did lead,
He near perceived by her shue,
whear she awry did tread.
She went as upright in the street,
and with as good a grace:
And set upon her follies past,
in deed as bold a face,
As she that never maed offense,
for custom breeds a law:
And maks them keep their countnance trim.
that ones have bro^k a straw.
Well, all the winter passed forth,
this couple at their will:
The wief her counsel kept full cloes,
the poer man meant noen ill.
But as the spryng came on a pace,
the Freer waxt wanton toe:
And ^ayn would nag, but credit lost,
he knue not whear to woo.
And so bethought him of the prank,
he played in way of sport:
And sought to salve the soer again,
with words and medsons short.
So he deem so amends to make,
and turn hit to a gest:
And thought to laugh the matter out,
as it was meet and best.
Note.
And as by chance he met this wief,
god speed sweet heart (quod he)
I marvel why th^se many days,
you are so strange to me.
The Fowlers myrry whi^^ell now,
must needs betra^ the byrd:
The wielly wief now shaep^ her tongue,
to give the Freer a^ird:
Not strange (quod she but that in faith,
I did unkindly take:
The part ye played, and yet I thought,
it was for favors sack
Or for some mirth, for if of spite,
it had been wrought I kno:
I should have had some shaem ear this,
but suer I find not so.
I swear by good saint Francis daem,
the troeth thou say in deed:
Whearfo^r let pas such follies old,
that may nue quarrels breed.
And be my friend thou have good wit,
thou knoest now what I mean:
Let all old ^ests long gone and past,
be now forgotten clean.
The wief thus findyng fortuen good,
to compass that she would:
A gentill lie in twig began she make,
to take the Freer in hold.
Yet shaept to save them harmles boeth,
from blot and worldly shaem:
And quit the knack, so she might laughe,
and have thear at some gaem.
Well sir (quoth she) I kno at full,
the meaning of your mind:
And would to God some honest way,
for you now I might find.
My husband happily may me mis,
if I should com to you:
Than our old fatches will not sarue,
we must deuies a nue.
A color must the paynter cast,
on poests and patched wawls:
Who ta^ks away a stomblyng stock,
shall freely skaep from fawls.
A Iellows toye is taken soen,
a trifull breeds ^^strust:
Great danger folows fowll delits
as sklander folows lust.
If will be won with worldly shaem.
the pleasuers torns to pain:
Whearfor we need a doble clock,
to keep us from the rayn.
When that my husband is in shop,
if you the pains will taek:
To com unto my house betimes,
thear will myrry maek.
But com as soen and if you may,
as any day a peers:
The way ye knoe unto my house,
but stands by the freers.
I will said he, and sight thear with*
so wrong her by the hand:
But littell of the matter yet,
the foel did understand.
As beettell brains are brought in breers,
before they se the snaer:
So this wise wodkok in a net,
was caught ea^ he was waer.
The time came on, the Fr^er was there,
and up the stayers he went:
A cup of Malmsie quod the wife,)
now would us boeth content.
The littell bo^ that is beneath,
shall soen go fetch the same:
Take money with thee quod the Freer,
so thus ^oes down the dame.
Unto the boy and bad him run,
unto the shop above*
And bid his master com in haest,
if he his wyef did love.
For sick she was, but boy quod she,
than trodg thowe for the drink:
O boy I fear that I shall sownd,
befoer thou com I thinck.
Out ^lings the lad, up goes the w
and at a window pride:
Until at length fa^re of full well,
her husband had she spyde.
Alas go ^ied the quickly freer,
said she if that thou can:
For ^^er at ^and I do not fain,
thear comes my good man.
^er^ is no corner to get out,
full (...) is me there foer:
Now shall we by our pastime deer,
and pa^ for pleasuers soer.
Now al^ the myscheef will be mien,
because I have the here:
Now shall my honest naem be brought,
in question by a Freer.
Well now thear is no another shift,
but here the bront to bied:
Except that in th^s littel cheast,
the self now can thowe hied.
Now chues thou whether open blaem,
or secret prison sweet:
In theas e^streams and ^aest is moest,
for present myscheef meet.
The Freer to find some reddy help,
was pleased and well a paid:
So in the cheast this great wies man,
is crept full soer afraid.
She lokt the same, and clapped the keys,
close under bolstor saer:
So laid her down upon the bed,
and ^^d soer fits enduer.
Or faynd to feell about her breast,
such grieps she said she felt:
The g^oening of the same did make,
her h^sbands heart to melt.
How now deer wife, what ayleth thee,
the simple soul said than:
Fie wief pluck up a woman's heart,
yea husband God knoes when.
Quoth she if Aquauite now,
I drink not out of hand:
I have a ^^itch so soer godwot,
I c^n nor sit nor stand.
Thou have a bottell in the house,
I daer well say quod he:
Of aquauite laetly boght,
thear may no better be.
Within thy cheast, where are thy keys,
I kno not by my life:
Said she, you set moer by a lock,
than you do by your wief.
Ye was and you wear sick I should,
the lock right soen up break:
That shall be don (quod he) you need,
thereof no moer to speak.
A Hatchet to^k he in his hand,
and stro^k hit such a bl^^:
The Chaember sha^kt, the Freer he qua^kt,
and s^onk for fear and woe.
The Cheast with Iron bars was bound,
which made the goodman sweat:
The Freer like doctor Dolt lay still.
in dreed and danger great.
(And durst not s^ur for all the world,)
^^s ^orrage quite was gone:
The poer man ^ad a pig in po^k,
had he lo^kt well thear on.
The lo^k was good that knue the wief,
who b^^d her husband strik:
(...) on loed the frer with in,
that sport did littell lie^.
At le^^th the bands began to lowse,
the wise had eye thereto:
She s^a^d if he did strike again,
the lo^k^ would suer undo.
Than thought she on a woman's wiell,
which never ^a^les at need:
If Feer wear seen than was she shaemd
no, no, she toek mo^r heed.
O hold your hand you kill my head, Note.

(quod she^ to here you knock:
Now am I ease, great harm it wear,
to spill so good a lock.
My such is gone, than let me sleep,
and rest my self a wh^ell:
The goo^man went unto his shop,
the wief began to s^^eil.
When ^he had sent away the boy,
a^l ^hu^g^s in quiet wear:
She roes and went to ^ase the Freer,
that lay half dead for fear.
(...) resurrection who had seen,
must (...) have laughed at least:
(...) how (...) lay, than how he lo^kt,
and (...) like a beast.
Now am I quit quod she sir Freer,
and yet you aer not shaemd:
And throw a woman who you skornd,
your folly now is taemd.
This tael so ends and by the saem,
you se what Freers have been:
And how their outward holly lives,
was but a clo^k for sin.
Here ^ay you se how plain poer men,
that labors for thear foed:
Aer soen disseaud with sottel sna^ks,
of wicked serpents broed.
Here under clowd of matter light,
some words of weight may pas^
To make the leawd abhoer fowl liet,
and se them selus in glass.
Here is no terms to stoer up vice,
the writtar meant not so:
For by the foill that folly ta^ks,
the wies may blotles go.
The moer we se the wicked plaegd,
and painted plain to sight
The moer we pace the paeth of grace,
and seek to walk upright.
Finis.
THE SIEGE OF EDENbrough Castle in the.xv. year of the reign of our
sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, at which service Sir William Druery Knight
was general, having at that time under him, these Captains and gentlemen
following.
The names of the Captains that had chardge.
Sir Francis Russell. Captain Read. Captain Eryngton, master of the
ordinance and provost marshall. Captain Pyckman. Captain Yaksley. Captain
Ga^^^ine. Captain Wood. Captain Case. Captain S^^^ley.
The Gentilmen: names.
Sir George Carye. Sir Henry Lee. M. Thomas Cecyle. M Mighell Carry. M. Thomas
Sutton. M Cotton. M K^lway. M Dier. M. Tylney. William Killigrue.
AS cause fell out and brought in matters new
(And bl^ddy minds, set many a broyl a broetch)
So soldiers swarmd, and loud they Trumpet blew
Whose sound did shoe, at hand wars aproetch
Than marshall men, in coats of Iron and steell
With great regard, did wait on Cannon wheell
And in the feeld, a noble martch they maede
To practice shot and skowre the rusty blade
But when the camps, set fo^t on scottish ground
(...) the power and (...) was ver^ small^
(...) them selves, ^t Drom and Trompet sownd
(...) push of Pyke, to give the proud a fall
The quar^ll good, the force ^^doubleth still
(...) ^old attempt, maks way with bo^ and bill
It is not strength, alone that wins the g^ell
When c^^rage co^s, the^r ^ortune deals her doell
A wonder great, to se so small a band
In forrayn soyll, to seek for any t^me
I seldom here, such matter t^^n in hand
That conquest gets, and skapeth free from blame
Bewaer I say the men whoes minds aer good
And mark the plage, of thoes which sucketh ^lo^d
Against thorns they ki^k, that ro^s to wilful spoyll
Thear consiens prick, that give just folk a ^oyll
O Neroes broed, O blody butchare viell
That strikes down the (...) up
O wicke^ Snacks, O (...)
That (...) brings, (...)
^
That spoyl^ ^o (...) h^rm.
^ people vayn^ that (...) down
That stays your ^^act, and still mentayns your crown.
(...) dealyngs rash, and wretched revels ru^d
(...) did steer from hiue the quiet ^^es
Your gra^es hands, i^ gil^les^e blood ^^brued
Was in ^^tch sort, disdaynd of all degrees
That needs must com, some force with mayn and might
To take up wrongs, and set your staet aright
The cut throet knief, in sheath could seldom rest
Such mischeef lorkt, and lodgd in lawless breast
Ye neither spard, the hiest head nor fo^t
The cheifest branch, Two Regents slain by sed^^^us parsons ea^ this broyll
began.
nor yet the meanest ^pray
But in your rage, to ryue up all by roet
At fullest prime, ye soght the reddiest way
But he that holds, in hand the horsis rain
When steed bolts out, cawls bayard back a gain
And so god sent, amid your retchles raeg
A quensching coel, your fury to a swaeg
Of zeall and love, to knit your hearts in peace
And stop the stream, that oer the banks did ron
A noble queen, whoes lief our lord encreace
A s^klar was, ^ar greater greef begone
But stordi minds, sto^d stiffly in thear case
Till feeble force, gave roering cannon place
Than fast in sort, they clapped them selus with speed
And maed defense, to save the present need.
A castle strong, that never noen assayld
A strength that stoed, on mownt and mighti rock
A peerles plot, that all ways haeth preuayld
And able was, to sufer any shock
The enmie choes, and suer the seat was Such
That might harm all, and feaw or noen cowld tutch
And thought to be, the only sort of fa^m
Most meet and fit, to bear a maidens naem
Yea sondrie kings, with slight did seek her spoyll
And threatened often, to throe her in the dust
But non could boest, he gave this maid a foyll
With labor lost, she sarud their gredy lust
And still she stoed, like sun among the stars
(Like pucell puer, a per^l in peace and wars)
Which would not suer, be bought for gold nor good
Nor yet well won, without great loss of blood*
This lofty seat, and lantern of that land
Like Loed star stood, and locked oer eury street
^hea^in thear was, a stout sufficient band
That furnished wear, with corrage wit and spreet
And wanted naught, that sarud for their defense
Or could in fien, repulse their enmies thens
Well stoerd with shot, yea suer boeth good and great
That might far of, ^t will the country beat.
The Castle ^^eed, so strongly, no^t it well
Thear was no way, but one taprotche the same
And that sel^ thing, was s^^r a second h^ll
For smothryng smoke for shot and fier^ ^lame
It ^^owrd the streets, and bet the (...)
And kept in awe, catch (...) the town
(...) man nor child, could ^oer in oppen sight
But they wear suer, upon some shot to light.
^ith th^ndr^ng n^^es* was shot of roeryng (...)
(...) throw the thick^^^ she thompt or^thawrt the (...)
And (...) sh^^ld of act in or (...)
(...) though^ an ar^, had cut down little sprayes
The Bullets still came whizzyng by their cheeks
That prowld about, and sudden danger seeks
Here groene done, and there another lies
That went to far, or whear blind bullet flies
The lively flock, that daer do mutch in deed
Do catch a clap, ear cause requiers the saem
So some perhaps, for want of taking heed
Did feell the lash, as fly that fauls in ^^aem
But when of force, they must the battrie plant
The Soldiar shoes, he does no corrage want
Some beat the lowps, some ply the walls with shot
And some spy out, whear vantage may be got.
For saefties saek, of such as lay a broed
A trentch was maed, to hold the emnye short
With powlder still, thear peecis fast they loed
To skowre the place, whear soldiars did resort
Now might you se, the heds fly up in air
Now clean defaest, the goodly buildyngs fair,
Now stoens faull down, and fill the empty dikes
And lusty ladds, auance the armed Pickes.
Now cannons roerd, and bullets bownst lyk bawls
Now throw the throng, the tronks of wieldlier ^lue
Now totring tow^^s, ^yept down with rotten wavils
Now some pakt hens, that never said a due
Now men wear known, and corraeg played his part
Now cowards quaekt, and corst all soldyars aert
Now catch device, of death was daily sought
And noble ^aem, and lief was deerly bought
Here must you noet, how they with in that hold
In warlyk sort, a counter battry maed
And on thear brau^, began to be so bold
They thought to lern, our men a fy^nner traed
(In using shot, and planting cannons thear)
So hoeping thus, to put our ^amp in fear
They plied a pace, thear practies eury way
With iron b^wls, to make the soldyars play.
And gra^ing oens, upon a piece we had
They drove a way some gonnars from thear place
A^ vow thear of, the enmies wart so glad
They s^^^ll, s^oed against us face to face
Note.
What ruell is this, quod than or general straight
Whear aer th^^s ladds, that slynks a way by sleyght
He skarce de^a^us, to wear a soldiors coat
That haeth in deed, his dueti thus forgoet
But lo the bro^t, of mischeef was so great,
A feawe or noen, god wot did that they oght
He se^^g that, stepped in a mid the heat
And in his hand, a smoking lyntstock brought
And so gave fire* to ^hee how coraeg must
His credit save, when he is put in trust
A part well played, a passing point of skill
That tries great mind, and blaesseth mutch good will
The go^^ars than shot of a ringing peall
Of ^^^ous great, and did such cunning shoe
(...) man, might se what l^ue and zeall
And (...), they had to contry shoe
For in small time, so near thear mark they weent
That straight as lien, in cannon mowth they sent
A shot of owrs, that ^all twelve intches bears
Which all to toer* thear piece a bowt thear ears.
That cut the coms, of many a bragging kock
That broek the gawll, or gawld the horse to soer
That was the keye, or knak that piekt the lock
That maed some mues, that tryumpht mutch befoer
Yea that was hit, that mard thear market quit
And dawnted had, thear hearts in great despit
For after this, they began to step a back
And saw at hand, came on thear ruen and wrack
A littell harm, does breed a great mistrust
A simple storm, maks some on seas full sick
A feeble poef, of wind does rays up dust
A littell salve, full suer can towtch the quick
A small attempt, maks mighty matters shaek
A silly spark, a soddain fire does make
An easi proef, brings hard mishaps to pas
As this declaers, whear all theas myscheeues was
The happy shot, that braek their piece in twayn
Discorraegd clean, the boldness of our foes
When battails Ioin, in feeld and open plain
Full soen is seen, whear that the con^quest goes
For unto such, that suer and stowtly stand
Good fortuen coms, in torning of a hand
Yea when man's force, does faint and feeble wax
Down weapons go, and straight they torn thear backs.
And set the world, agoyng oens a due
It is mutch like, a stream that has no stay
To late comes wit, to give them corrage nue
That fear before, has taught to run away
What would you more, the Skots did have them then^
Wheare first they stood, and sought to make defense
And cloesly kept, the Castle as they might
Not willing o^t, to come in open sight
Yet ^ar these things, could well be brought to pas
With baskets byg, and things to sarue the turn
A cross the street, a trauers made there was
Whiels for a sh^ft, wet straw and hey did borne
And for to plant, some playing pieces thear
A Mount was ^aysd, which kept the foe in fear
The Gunners suer, thear dueti throwly did
And at that tied was no man's saruyce hid
The enmies lo^kt, for sucker out of france
Or help at hoem, if matter so fell out
For diverse things, might drop to them by chance
That reason thought, wear hard to bring a bout
For hoep denies, that hap or hazard bryngs
Good ^uck is swift, as swallow under wings
And thoghe at first, hit coms not that we crave
At last some help, by fort^en men may have.
Thear frinds far of, and propps at hoem lykwies
With great afair^s, soer gr^ued wear the whiell
And ^^ance ye knoe (whear blod for vengance cries)
Had mutch a do, for wikked murders vyell
A matter strange, that now I must skip oer
To write at full, of things I spaek befoer
Thus in exstrems, the Skots did stand with in
Moer lik to loes, than yet to save or win
For eury day, our men did creep so near
And b^t the wawlls so ^lat unto the grownd
That in short time, thear durst not one apeer
To ma^k defense, or at the breatch be fownd
Yet stowtly long, and with mutch manhoed boeth
And (...) great, they stoed I tell you troeth
(...) kept thear strength, as sa^ly as they might
Though all in vain, they toyled day and night
In eury part, they wear so throwly plied
With soldiars sleyghts, with shot and sharp asawt,
That in the end, they wear full fain to hied
Thear heds from bobs, in hollow caves and vawt
First did they loes, The Sporre was a ^ro^g piece of stony work.
the Sporre a place full strong
Which soer avoid, the town and soldiars long
And driven thens, they wear in fine right glad
To keep such skowp, as easly might be had.
A kind of shot, that we great bombards call
(...) thear wits, and brought mutch fear in deed
And whear that hueg, and mighty stoen did ^all
In weaklings brains, it did great wonders breed
A Princ^s power, does many a practies shoe
Beyond the reatch, of common peoples boe:
And when their hearts, aer daunted with device
Their corrage ^hoe, is held of littell price.
And sondrie drifts, with out aer put in evr
When the^ with in, do dwell on dreedfull dowts
Who is betrapt, in penfold cloes is suer
At need to want, a broed boeth aid and skowts
And subject still, to mutins and revolt
And wilful ladds, and youth as wield as colt
In whom when toys and sudden mischeef fawls
They threat to fling, thear captains oer the wawls
Thoghe wies and waer, the cheef and leadars be
Yet ^ued and raesh, the roeflinge roistarrs aer
And when in fort, the bands can not agree
The soldiars ware, as mad as is martch haer
Now do they Iarr, than murmor mues and skowll
And fall from words, to brawls and quarrels fowl
And shonning death, do seek thear lius to save
By any means, and way that they may have
When such vproerrs, is raiesd and set a gog
Thear folows straight, a storm and flawe of wind
Than some perforce, must lern to leap the frog
And light full lo, for all thear lofty mind
The danger drius, such diulyshe na^els in head
That throw dispayr, man's hoep is streken dead
Thear might by chance, for any thing I kn^w
Such byells borst out, among the skotish crew
Our mownts wear maed, so mutch to our a vaill
Our Gonnarrs cowld, dismownt what piece they would
No marvel thoghe, thear hearts with in did quaill
Who did at hand, thear own decay behold
Thear powlder faild, thear water wared skant
Thear hoep is small, that does munishon want
When with warm bloed, the waeter cold is boght
Death maks dispatch, and sells the lief for noght,
In some great need, the castle stoed that time
When on the breatch, our shot and cannons played
And for thassault, we had no^ far to clinic
Nor mutch to do, when things wear wie^ly waid
Save that ^atch wight, that led his felows on
^o^kt all for faem, when breath and lief was gone
And frankly swoer, to die or win the seat
Or pas the pieks, by sword and dangers great
A fre consent, of faithful soldiars than
A mong the cheef, was fownd by vewe of face
A sawlt asawlt, cried eury forward man
The day is owers, we will posses the place
Or leave our boens, and bowels in the breatch
Tys time quod they, to charge and not to preatch
Dispuet no moer, the greatest dowt is past
Lets win or loes, sens now the dice aer cast
With that came in, the general full of Joy
And th^nkt them all, that to the asawt would go
As you this day, quod he your lius employ
In sarues of, our noble queen ye knoe
So if I live, my pors, my power and all
To save your torns shall reddy be at call
Th^ies happy is, that captain suer in deed
That haeth in camp, such soldiars at his need
A showt full shrill, as loud as Larum bell,
In Tren^ch, in Tent, and Town throw out a roes,
The Skots encloesd, that sat like snayl in shell,
By bruet of this, their fatal deastny knoes,
And findyng void, their hoep and connyng clean
They thought it best, for lief to maek some mean
And rather yield, (ear sword, the matter tried)
And suffer shaem, than so assaut to bied.
Yet diverse proves, wear maed the breatch to view,
And some wear slain, that did assayl the saem
And when our men, thereof the secrets knew
And found the way, to put eatch thing in fraem
A band or two, with some of right good race
(When Drom did sound, did forward martch apace
And fully bent, resolved less and moer
To win the Fort, or loes their lives thearfoer.
Now noble mynds, stepped out in foremost rank
And skornd to be, the last should give a charge
His hap was best, that could desarue most thank,
And might by death, his contreys faem enlarge
But he moest viell, that could no valuer shoe
And he embrast, that to the breatch would go
A time was com, to try who triumphed moest
Who toek moest payns, and who did brag and boest.
And in efect, the soldiars all wear glad,
To make short work, and se what hap would do
But as I said, when that our enmies had
Well waid theas things, and pawsd upon hit toe
They wear content, in plain and simple sort
Unto our queen, to yield and give the fort
Lo here how soen, the strong becoms full weak
And out of shraep, fly cocks and so cry creak
THE PRAYS of our Souldiars.
WOuld god my pen, might be your tromp of faem
To sownd the prays, that you desarued thear
O marshall men, that seeks but noble naem
^e oght of right, be honored eury whear
To you I speak, on whom the burden lies
Of wars and does, by sword and saruice ries
Who spaers no charg, nor pain in princis right
When staet must stand, by stowt and manly fight
Your hearts aer such, you haet at hoem to bied
When any bruet, or voice of wars is hard
A shaemd in street, on foet cloeth here to ried
When forward minds, in feel should be prefard
And skorning pomp, and p^^she pleasurs vain
For true renown, ye troedg and toyill a main
Whear danger dwells and heapps of hazards aer
And ha^dnes great, you find with hongrie faer
You ward the day, and watch the winters night
In frost, in cold, in son and heat also
(...) aer so bent, that labor ^eemeth light
(...) the steed, of joy, you welcome woe
For wealth you taek, such Want as does be fall
No^ shonning gere of, but tasting sorrows all
Moer glad ^odie, tha^ live with blaem or blot
Moest ready still, whear least is to be got
And least exsteemed of all the men that lives,
(Lik hackney horse, cast of when torn is sarud)
Yet aer you thoes, that greatest honor gives
(If world may judge, what soldiars have dezarud)
Unto your prince, for you aer paell and park
To keep the deer, and lanterns in the dark
To shoe them light, that else at plain noon day
Might stomble down, or sleely shrink a way
Who b^eds the bront, or who bears of the bloes
But you a loen, yea who does sho his face
In time of need, a mong our foreign foes
Or boldly says, let me suplye your place
Toeshe that's a taell, was never hard nor seen
That any one, to serve a king or queen
Did strive with you, or ofred half so much
For faem as they, who now theas versys tutch
Whearfore step out, and bear a brantch of bays
In sien of world, the victors suer you aer
For this I knoe, in right respect of prays
And worthy lawd, may noen with you compaer
You may be cal^e, the aw^ull marshall band
The jewels ^^ye, and garlands of the land
The budds of faem, and blosoms of renown
The contreys hoep, and beawty of the crown
Now must you mark, I mean not hierlings here
Nor summer birds, Not^.
and swallows for the time
That wagis taeks, and sarus but oens a year
And sprowts a whiell, as flowrs do in the prime
But thoes whoes minds, and noble manners shoes
In peace and war, lo thear a soldior goes
Of lief moest clear, of deed and word full Just
In trial still, a man of speshall trust
Finis.
THE WHOLE ORder how our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, was received
into the City of Bristow, and the speeches spoken before her presens, at her
entry, with the residue of versis and matter that might not be spoken (for
distance of the place) but sent in a boek over the Waetter.
At the hie Cross in a disgised manner stoed Yaem, very orderly set forth, and
spoke as follows, by an excelent boy.
NO fleet of foet, nor swift of wyng,
nor skarce the thought in breast:
Nor yet the Arrowe out of Be,
nor Wind that s^ld does rest.
Compaers with me quick worlds report,
that some calls Flying Faem:
A bruet of prays, a blast of pomp,
a blazer of good naem.
The only lawd that kings do seek,
a Joy to ^atch estaet:
A welcome friend that all men loves,
and noen a live does haet.
Saluets the Queen of raer renown,
whose goodly gifts deuien:
Throw Earth and Air with glory great,
shall pass this tromp of mien.
And knowing of thy coming here,
my duetty had me go:
Before unto this present place,
the nues thereof to shoe.
No soenner was pronownst the name,
but Baebs in street began leap:
The youth, the age, the rich, the poer,
came runnyng all on heap.
And clappyng hands, cried maynly out,
O blessed be the owre:
Our queen is coming to the town,
with princely trayn and power.
Than collors cast they oer the wawls,
and decked old howsis gaye:
Out flue the bags a bout afayrs
that long a hording lay.
A sid they set thear townishe trashe,
and works of gredy gayen:
And tornd thear toils to sports and mirth,
and warlike pastimes plain.
As shall be seen to morn in feeld,
if that your highness pleas:
Whear duly haeth deuiesd by art,
a shoe on land and seas
To utter matter yet unknown,
that shall explayned be:
By such dom sights and shoes of war,
as thear your grace shall se.
Thus subjects means to honor prince,
whoes sight they have enjoyed
Moest glad hit is thear hap to have,
thear saruice so employed.
Than FAEM flang up a great Garland, to the reioysyng of the beholders.

At the next Gaet, and near her highness lodgyng stoed.iij. other boys, called
Salutacion, Gratulacion, and Obedient goodwil, and.ij. of these boys spoke as
follows, and all they three drue their swords when it was named, the hoel staet
is reddie to defend (against all dissencions) a pesable Prince.

Salutacion the first boy.
ALl hayll, O plant of grace,
and speshall sprout of faem:
Most welcome to this Western coest,
O Perll and princely daem.
As lo, a custom is,
whear humble subjects dwells:
When Prince aprocheth near their view,
for joy to ryng their bells.
So all that bears lief,
in Bristow now this day:
Salutes the Queen from deepth of breast,
with welcome every way.
And we poer silly boys,
that came from skoell of laet:
Rejoice and clap our hands withal,
as members of thy staet.
Our duties here to shoe,
and further moer in deed:
Thear is a cause wh^arfore we say,
thy helpyng hand we need,
(...) is O mighty Queen,
in wa^ of mirth and sport:
A master moud ^ween Peace and war,
and therefore buylt a Fort.
Dissenshon breeds the brawll,
and that is Pomp, and Pried:
The Fort on law and order stands,
and still in peace would bied.
The Wars is wicked world,
as by his fruet is seen:
The Fortres representith peace,
and takes thy part O Queen.
It seems the Gods have sent,
in this great quarrel now:
A noble Judge that shall with speed,
decied the matter throw.
Gratulation the second boy.
YEa suer this is a fien,
that all the gods above:
Taks part with us and freely here,
does men and childern love,
In such a sharp conflyet,
to send to suer a stay:
That shall surseace Bellonas brags,
and end our fearful fray.
A sottell Snack of laet,
with sopple sugared words
Haeth sleely crept in breasts of men,
and drawn out naked swords
And with his wrangling taells,
haeth sto^rd up strife enough:
And drawn the merchant from his traed,
and plowman from the ploughe
Disenshon is his naem,
that all this mischeef breeds
Who still with dross and roemish dregs,
blind peoples humor feeds:
And maks them mortal sick,
and sway somtims a sied:
With wicked wars, and wilful brawls,
that should with peace abied.
But yet O pee^les Prince,
a true and loyal flock:
Against the proud presomtuous minds,
are b^nt to stand the shock.
And swears by sacred Gods,
not o^n within this soyll:
But reddy a^r with l^sse of lief,
to give thy foes a foyll.
For pr^^f the feeble youth,
and ba^bs of tender aeg:
Daer draw their swords, in this attempt,
to corb disorders raeg.
Sens Englands hoep is com,
to payse these things in breast:
We daer not stay her longer here,
whose travel craves rest.
Obedient good will, the third boy, who could not speak time was so far spent.
YEt if the Prince would stay, or if men might make choice
Of oen no bigger than my self, to speak in Cities voice
I would declaer in deed, what deep desire they have,
To spend their goods, their lands? lius, her staet in peace to s^^e
But sens the time is sh^r^, and Prince to lodging goes
I say god bles our Qu^en yt gius, the whit ^ fair ^ed ^o^s.
After these speeches wear ended.iij. hondreth Soldiors well appointed, waited
on her highness to her lodgyng, and thear she being settled, they shot of thear
pieces in passing good order, at which warnyng the great Artillery went of, a
hundred and.xxx. cast peecis, and so the watch charged, and a hundredth shot
appointed for her Guard, her highness rested that night, whear she lay all the
season in sir John Yongs house.

A Fort was made beyond the water in a ground fit for that purpose, and to the
saem as a frind (called Feeble Pollecie) joined a littell Bastillion, builded on
a hill, which was not strong by reason of the weak mayntenance belonging there
unto, to the which piel the Soldiers of the main fort did repair, now must be
understood that dissension passing between wars and peace (wars being placed
in sight) had sertayn speeches as follows, which speeches could not be said in
the heeryng of the prince, wherefore they wear put into a boek, and presented as
here after you shall kno.

Dissencion to the City to move them to arms, has his speeches as these
things wear don in action.

The Sunday next the Queen went to the College, to here a Sarmond, whear thear
was a speetch to be said and an Imme to be song, the speech was left out by
an occasion unlooked for, but the Imme was song by a very fien boy.

The Speech at the College.
YOu subjects that desierd to se,
this gladsom preshos Ieam:
Behold lo here the only Joy,
and iuwell of the Ream.
A Prince in deed of princely mind,
that Princis loves and fears:
Whose passing head, yea all the staets,
of christen princis bears.
And thoroughly sees and lo^ks into,
as though a man might say:
Here ^s the toutchstoen for the Gold,
the Pillar, Prop, and stay.
Of eury region far or near,
that to us neyghbors aer:
How mutch is this poer College bound,
in naked buildyngs baer.
For to receive so bright a Star,
as clouds can skarce contayn:
Who for to se so small a Sell,
has taken so great pain.
The P^^ps and Organs of our hearts,
shall yield thee thank therefore:
By sound of Psalm, and sollemp Immes,
yea could poer Preests do moer.
The Music that thy Chapel maks,
should be so sweet and shrill.
Might ^ull a sleep the Musis all,
and sha^k Pernas^es hill.
The Song.
O Happy ower o^ blis,
O College thou do se:
Th^ll^do ^on, the substance com,
(...) does sh^en on thee.
Away you bosum S^a^ks,
that sowes dissenshon here:
Go make your neasts, whear Serpents breed,
this soyll and coest is clear.
Enchant no man with charms,
ye shall receive check maet:
If that you play with paltring pawns,
before so great a staet.
She hates H^dras heds,
and lous the harmles mind
A foe to vice, a friend to grace,
and bent thereto by kind
Which grace and grashos god,
now gied her whear she goes:
With treble grace throw troblous time,
to tread on all her foes.
A skafold the next day was set up full over against the Fort, and the Prince
being placed, the speeches should have bin spoken for the better understanding
of the devised triumph, so you must here the speeches or else shall you be
ingnorant of the hoel matter.

Dissension to peace (which was the mayn Fort) speaks in a fury these words
that follow.
O People vayn, that spends in peace your days
To prowl about, for pens and piuish pealf
And maks no count, of Faem and poblik prays
So eatch man lives, like Prince within him self.
And so posses, the pleasuers on this mold,
The Iuwels brave, the gay and glittryng gold,
You cae^ not what, great glory elders won
Nor who at first, the worthy wars begone.
You sleep and snort, in sweet perfumed sheets,
And hug your heds, in harb^r warm and gay,
Whearby in deed, ye have such heavy spreets,
You can not se, the goodly sunny day,
(...) though the clouds, the Son, the Moen and al
Wear reddy now, upon your heds to fall,
You would not, move, nor seek your selus to save
On dross and dong, such deep desiers you have.
You here not how, the enmies at your noes,
Aer up in aerms, and ^awls your cowards still
You caer not mutch, abroed how matters goes
When that at hoem, ye want no wealth nor will
Clap corrage on, and cast long gowns asied
Pluk up your hearts, and fling down pomp and pried
Make Idell hands, and heds in heels that lurk
For worthy lawd, com forth and learn to work.
A corslet fien, is worth ten skarlet goowns
A blast of faem, sormounts all things you wear
Call lusty ladds, to spend your spared crowns
The wars aproetch, it is time the bo^es wear thear
If you a bied* at hoem till Canno^s roer
The plaester coms, to laet to salve the soer
Break down the banks, that hol^s the water in
First ^^rik thy foe, and so the brawll begin
Put fire to straw, and make the fornayes hot:
And bid them cry, that borns thear fingers first
Yea cast on wod, to boyll the brows pot
And let them starve, that wants to coell thear thirst:
When world is wield, and all is set a gog
A man's a man, and than a dogs a dog:
Advise you now, my dwelling is not here
I must pack hens, another stern to steer.
Now dissension went to the wars which was set out in open view (with all
orders of marshall manner) and spoke as follows.
Give ear good maets, and mark full well,
the tidings that I bring:
For I will be a larum bell,
that in your earres shall ring.
A pestlens peall of rumor slrang,
that flies throw many a land:
The plain report whearof remain^
in me dissenshons hand
If I keep cloes that I do knoe,
and stoer no clapper now
The hargaboz, the bill and boe,
will seartch your corraeg throw
Trust this for troeth that peace is bent,
to trus up soldiors all:
Wealth will no wars, peace is so proud,
the people fears no fall.
They bragg and boest thear treasuer can,
to^n eatch thing how they list:
For eury staet is wone with wealth,
as hawk stowps don to fi^t.
A mas of gold will porchace peace,
and make w^eld wantons taem:
If wars wear wod and waxed mad,
and hot as fiery flaem:
P^ace ruells the ear^h, and wrings thear thombs
th^^ raging revel maks:
Yea play what gaem ye list they say,
that peace does swep the staeks:
P^ace is the prince that gouerns all,
and says a fig for war:
Yea peace will put you all in pownd,
and make you stand at bar.
Peace calls you roges, and swashing dicks,
that stand upon your braues:
A swarm of wasps, a flok of wolus,
a neast of theeus and knaves
That lius by spoyll and morthers viell,
and triumps still in bloed.
And have such hot and greedy minds,
you thirst for neibors goed.
The Trompets loud that slaughter sownds,
and drums with rombling noyes:
Was never maed for men of peace,
but rather fit for boys.
They say whoes childhoed liks fond bruets,
and lous such trifling toys:
Will you that kingdoms conquered have,
be now subdued by peace
Shall seuill swams to loethsom gaiell,
lead men lik dogs in leace.
Shall p^^rsh peace and people weak,
oer com the soldiour stout:
Shall ^ortrarrs lewd lik rebels raill,
and manhoed wax a lowt
Ah fie for shame set hand onsword,
in your behalf I bloeshe.
Bid trompet sownd advance the piek,
and give proud peace a poesh.
On thoes words was wars in such a stoer that you might se the feeld all
over spread with soldiors, and so they martched down a hill and maed a goodly
shoe full against the littell fort (called Feeble pollecie) and repolsing in all
the soldiers of the same* wan it with great fury, and so rased it and
ouerthrue hit down to the earth.

The mayn Fort in the meean whiel did send such suck or as they might, but
preuaylyng not, they wear in like sort driven back, and their Fort beseged, and
mutch ado about the saem, which drove out that day, and than by Tortchlight
the Prince from her Skaffold, went to her lodgyng, and in the mean season some
fire works wear seen, and so the watch was charged.

The second day was thear maed a nue aproetch to the mayn Fort, for a better
order of war and to the aid of the Fort, came diverse gentilmen of good
calling from the Court, which maed the shoe very gallant, and set out the
matter mutch.

Now sarued the tied and up the water from Kyngroed came three brave Galleys,
chasing a Ship that came with Vittayls to the Fort, the Fort seeing that their
exstremitie within was great, sent a Gentilman to the Prince for aid, who
brought her a boek couerd with green Velvet, which vttred the hoell substance
of this device, the gentilma^ had a spech of his own making, as follows, after
he had swam over the water in some danger Cloes and all, he spaek his part to
the Prince.

M. John Robarts of the Temple.
ESkaept from waltryng waves,
from sword and fire, and enmies slight:
From storms and sturdy flaws,
from roeryng shot and fearful fight.
I com to quiet land,
whear noble Prince does pastims view:
And bring a boek in hand,
of all the shoes, and matter true.
That must by practies pas,
before your highness as it fauls:
And suerly sent I was,
by those that keeps your warlike wauls.
To crave your curteys aid,
in their defense that peace desiers:
Whoes staet is maed afraid,
by falls dissenshons kindled fires.
As your poer people have,
throw peace possessed great gayn and good:
So still such peace they crave,
as may avoid the loss of blood.
As here I came a mayn,
so have I promesd if I may:
For to retorn again,
throw salt sea foem the saem self way.
So he departed, and all this while the business was great about the fort,
(which hazarded the gentilmans lief) and in a wonders bravery the ^royll
continued, with a shoe of fight on Land and Sea, till the very night
approtched, at which time the Prince partted and stoed maruelously well
contented with that she had seen.

Now must you conceive that Wars (with blodsheds, mizeries, and other horly
borlees) waxt a weery and that neither the Fort, nor the wickedness of the world
(which Wars represented) was desirous of further trobuls, but rather glad to
have the matter taken up in any reasonable conditions, for the which purpose was
devised that Persuasion should go and tell his taell, and unfold what follies
and conflicts rises on Civil broyls, and what quietness coms by a mutual love
and agreement. This persuasion had a speech, as hereafter follows.

Persuasion to the City, called the Mainfort.
NO greef so great, nor soer so mutch,
but finds at length some rest:
As Wars begins by wrath of God,
so Peace is counted blessed.
Yet Wars is suer, a needful thing,
for man's offense, A scorge:
A Salve to heal the sinful soul,
and for the staet A porge.
That skowrs the body of the Realm,
and kyngdoms all t^row out:
And leaves vnseartcht no member suer,
that walks this world about.
Wear not the woe that wars does bring,
sweet peace should seem full sower
The net^ls sharp and wiked weeds,
sets forth a pleasant flower.
By si^nes pangs we judge what health,
and quiet rest is worth
And out of pain is pleasuer found,
as Gold from dros coms forth.
The harms, the haps, and cruel claps,
that wars and Cannon bryngs:
Maks Princis seek the fear of god,
and subjects kno thear kings
Though peace in deed dispiseth wars,
as plainness falshed haets:
Yet warlik people aer enbraest,
and liekt of all estaets.
The knief that cuts the finger soer,
in sheath about is born:
The sword that takes away the life,
makes peace whear it is worn*
The are that heaweth down the tree,
is needful for man's lief:
Thus prove I as man's help or harms,
remains in sword and knif?
So wars whear they aer used well,
keeps world in fear and awe:
And shoes moer terror by his raeg,
than al your ruells of law.
Sens Cayn slew Abell wars haeth bin,
Note.
twen brethren as we reed
And soldiors has bin wagid well,
as world of wars sto^d need:
Than sna^r not for the faem they snatch,
nor b^^ll to her thear bru^t.
When broyls have sown ill seeds of caer,
peace reapes from wars good fruet.
And learns a lesson worthy gold,
which Peace holds deer of price:
And maks thereof a mirror bright,
to view and sift out vice.
The Battayll ends whear conquest coms,
and when great charge is spent:
For peace the post with Pakket goes,
Embastars else aer sent?
To knit the knot and make a Leag,
thus all the brawls that be:
Do bend to peace, and Wisdoms boe,
how ear foels bolts do flee.
Whearfore agree with Wars in haest,
you se what quarrels aer:
And how that Wars bryngs woe and waest,
and leaves a kingdom baer.
The people spoyld, the howsis bornt,
the friends and neighbor slain:
The giltles plaegd and eatch man wronged,
whear rage and war does rayn.
The Cities answer to Persuasion.
Dissension first that called to mind,
our old foerfathers faem:
(And ripped out seams of patched prays,
skarce worth the noet or naem.)
Brought Peace and War in this vproer,
our ruels such brawle denies:
Our traed does stand on Civil lief,
and thear our glory lies.
And not on strief the ruen of staets,
a storm that all destroys
A heavy bondage to eatch heart,
that fredoms fruet enioyes.
Our orders maks the roister meek,
and plucks the proud on knees
The l^f and st^bborne kno the yoek,
and roets up rotten trees.
That may ^iect a fruetfull feeld,
what can be sweet or sownd:
But in that soil whear for offense,
is due correction fownd.
We make the s^uill laws to shien,
and by example mield.
Reform the rued, rebuek the bold,
and tame the country wyeld
We venture goods and lius ye knoe,
and trauill seas and land.
To bring by trafick heaps of wealth,
and treasuer to your hand
We aer astay and stoer house boeth,
to kingdoms far and near.
A cawse of plenty throw foersyght,
when things war scarce and deer:
And thoghe our joy, be moest in peace,
and peace we do maintain.
Whear on to prince and realm throw out,
does ries great wealth and gain:
Yet have we soldyars as you see,
that stoers but when we pleas
And sarus our torns in howshold things,
and sits in shop at eas.
And yet daer blaed hit with the best,
when cawse of country coms
And calls out courage to the fight,
by sound of warlike Droms.
We Merchants keep a mean unmixed,
with any tarryng part^:
And bring boeth Treble and the Baess,
in order still by art.
A Soldier shall be liked well,
if his dezarts be such:
A noble mind for noble acts,
shall suer be honored mutch.
But if men glory all in wars,
and peace disdayns in deed:
We skorn with any Siroep sweet,
their humor sour to feed:
And blessed be God we have a Prince,
by whom our peace is kept:
And under whom this City long,
and land has safly slept.
From whom liekwyes a thousand gifts,
of grace enjoy we do:
And feell from God in this her raygne,
ten thousand blessyngs to.
Behold but how all secrets f^en,
of falshed coms to light:
In these her days, and God taks part,
with her in troeth and right.
And mark how mad Dissenshon thriues,
that would set wars abroetch:
Who sets to saell poer peoples lives,
and gets but viell reproetch.
And endless shaem for all their sleights:
O England joy with us:
And kis the steps whear she does tread,
that keeps her country thus.
In peace and rest, and perfait stay,
whearfore the god of peace:
In peace by peace our peace presarue,
and her long lief encreace.
This was to be don and put in exersies befoer the Queen came to the knittyng up
of the matter but persuasion being dismissed, the battry was planted befoer the
FORT, and they within so straightly enclosed, that they must needs abied the
mercy of the Sword and Cannon.

At which instant, in the after noen that present day the Prince was in her
Skaffold to behold the sucksesse of these offers of war, and so went the
Battry of and the as^aut was given in as mutch order as might be, the enemy
was three times repolsed, and beholding nue suckors coming from the Court to
the Forts great comfort, the enemy agred on a parley whearin was rehersyd that
the cortain was beaten down, and the fort maed sawtable, and yet the enemy to
save the lives of good Citizens and Soldiors thearof, would give them leave to
depart with bag and bagaeg, as order of wars required. To the which the Fort
maed answer, that the Corttayns nor Bulwarks was not their defense, but the
corrage of good people, and the force of a mighty prince (who saet and beheld
all these doyngs) was the thing they trusted to, on which answer the enemy
retired, and so conditions of peace wear drawn and agreed of, at which peace
boeth the sides shot of their Arttillery, i^ sien of a triumph, and so ^^yinge
God save the Queen, these triumphs and wa^l^k pastimes finished, the Prince
likyng the handlyng of these causes very well, sent i^ hundredth crowns to
make the Soldiers a banquet. Now here is to be considered that the Prince went
into the Gallees and so down to Kyngroed, aer these things wear brought to an
end.

At her highness departuer a gentilman in the confiens of the Towns liberties
spaek this speech that follows.

The dolfull a Due.
OUr Joy is joined with grievous groens,
Our triumph tornd to tears:
The brantch whoes blosoms gladness brought,
a bitter berry bears.
In house and street whear mirth was hard,
is moen and moorning noies:
The summer day is dimd with clouds,
eclypsed aer our joys.
The loedstar leaus our wished cowrs,
and clims the heavens hie:
Our sofrant will no longer lord,
in walls of Brislow lie.
No marvel sins our barrain soil,
and ground of groes deuyce:
Haeth yielded no thing that might pleas,
a prince of so great price.
Our deuties aer not half dischargd,
no thoghe we kissed the grownd:
And prostraet fall full flat on face,
whear her foet steps aer fownd.
The Persians daer not cast up eyes,
nor loek upon thear king
Shall Christians then presuem to preace,
on such a Sacred thing.
And tho no part of duties bownds
^ nod forbid I say:
But that the lords anointed should,
be honored eury way.
Long lo^kt this C^^te for a prince,
long ^e^s and many a year:
A ^ing or Que^n beheld this town,
short time she ta^yes here.
Good fortuen follow thee O Queen,
god gieb thy doings all:
A world of threfold blessed happ,
upon thy kingdom fall.
As loeth to taek our heavy leave,
as leave our lius in deed:
A due dee^ lady of this land,
the living Lord thee speed.
Some of these Speeches could not be spoken by means of a Schol^maister, who
envied that any stranger should set forth these shoes.

FINIS.

