A Pleasant conceit penned in verse. Collourably set out, and humbly
presented on New-yeeres day last, to the Queens Majesty at Hampton Court.

Anno. Domini. 1593.

AT LONDON, Printed by Roger Ward, dwelling in Holburne at the sign of the
Castle.

To the Queens most excellent Majesty.
MAY it please your Majesty, so long as breath is in my breast, life in the
heart, and spirit in the head, I cannot hold the hand from penning of some
acceptable device to your Majesty, not to compare (in mine own over weening)
with the rare Poets of our flourishing age, but rather counterfeyting to set
forth the works of an extraordinary Painter, that has drawn in a pleasant
conceit, diverse flowers, fruits, and famous Towns: which pleasant conceit I
have presumed (this Newe-yeeres day) to present to your Majesty, in sign and
token that your gracious goodness toward me oftentimes (and cheefely now for
my pencyon) shall never go out of my remembrance, with all dutiful services,
belonging to a loyal subject. So under your princely favor and protection,
praying for your prosperous preservation and Royal estate, I proceed to my
purposed matter.

Your Majesty's humble Servant, Thomas Churchyard.

A pleasant conceit.
THE Painter thought, to please his own delight,
With pictures fair, as poor Pigmalion did:
But staring long, on kindly Red and White,
He found therein, a secret nature hid.
A frayde to fall, like Fly in flaming fire,
He finely cast, cold water on desire,
So shaping grapes, and grain another while,
At his own works, the Painter began to smile.
Because with grapes, the byrds were once begield,
And men might dote, on goodly corn and grain:
At more conceits, this merry man he smield,
As though he had, possessed some Poets vain,
As Petrarch had, who did his tryumphs make,
In sweetest sort, for Lady Lawraes sake.
This Painter took, in pensell such a joy,
As he could make, much matter of a toy.
A rush a reed, a feeble feather light,
Was ground enough, for him to work upon:
What ever came, to mind to view or sight,
Stood for good cloth, to clap his colors on.
But his most skill, was how to set forth flowers,
And show at full, trym Towns and stately Towers.
Not every Town, he meant not now to tuch,
For that their names, cannot avail him much.
NOrth-hampton first, the Painter took in hand,
As cheifest work, his pensel lately drew:
Because the plot, did come from foreign land,
In that fair form, as does appear to you.
Not roughly heaw'd, as timber is in haest:
But smoothed well, and with great honor graest.
A worthy piece, of workmanship so rare:
With golden Fleece, North-hampton may compare.
Warwick he drew, in colors sad and grave,
In elders days, a noble name it bore:
It builded was, on virtues rare and brave,
As ancient seats, and Cities were of yore.
The walls were reard, on constant Rock full fast,
That durst abide, the brunt of enuies blast.
The streets were paude, with plainnes mixed with grace,
Where good report, filled up each empty place.
The houses hie, shone bright against the sun,
And all the walks, and steps were smoth and clear:
This famous Town, great love and laud has wun,
As by the brute, of world does well appear.
It stands and stays, on honors pillars large,
Sure props that can, bear up a greater charge,
When Warwick thus, the Painter set in frame,
He turned his hand, to Towns of stranger name.
BEdford he made, in goodly sumptuous sort,
With colors rich, bedeckt and clear set out:
Like Town of state, as strong as warlike Fort,
With wise advice, well senced round about,
Not to be won, the watch and ward was such,
Ne fraud nor force, durst not attempt it much.
Bedford is blessed, for from that house and soil,
Sprunge many a branch, that never yet took foil.
Old Lyncolne now, that stands on mighty Mount,
Yet low in earth, the first foundation lies:
He drew for that, it was of great account,
And lifted up, in favor to the skies.
The best we know, did love old Lyncolne well
In former age, her beauty did excel.
Of latter time, her credit was not small:
For some do say, that Lyncolne past them all.
KYldare came now, to mind among the rest,
A right fair seat, and so set forth it was:
As Gods above, and nature had her blessed,
Which seemed to sight, as clear as Christall-glas.
From Hawthorne bough, whose blossoms brings in May
Kyldare did come, and joys therein this day.
Kyldare commands, more men than thousands do,
Yet duty bids, it be commanded to.
HArtford he called, unto remembrance than,
A Town where Term, is kept as cause does crave:
It favored is, and likt of each good man,
It does in world, it self so well behave.
Gallant and gay, and gladsome to the sight:
Framde from the stock, that still grows bolt upright.
Most meek of mind, and plain in every part:
Where duty ought, show love and loyal heart.
Now Huntington, was drawn in order due,
As did become, the value of that seat:
The honor old, the name is nothing new,
The worth not small, the soil and place is great.
The buildings fair, and stately too withal,
Stands strong and sure, as does a Brazen wall.
Full glad to please, both God and man indeed,
And pressed to serve, the Prince in time of need.
WOster that once, like Huntington did look,
Stood still far off, as it would not be known:
Yet soft and fair, in rank her place she took,
She worthy was, of right to have her own.
In fame and praise, and worldly honor both,
In noble name in virtue grace and troth.
If Painter had, not touched this Town no way,
God knows thereof, what might good people say.
SOuth-hampton came, in view and judgment now,
A Haven town, of great esteem and praise:
Of nature good, and well disposed throw,
And nobly has, bestowd both years and days.
A princely Port, where ship shall safely ride,
Against all storms, how ever turns the tide.
From Mountague, whose truth no time might stain,
South-hampton took, her form and manner plain.
PEmbroke a pearl, that orient is of kind,
A Sidney right, shall not in silence sit:
A gemme more worth, then all the gold of Ind,
For she enioyes, the wise Mineruaes wit,
And sets to school, our Poets every where:
That does presume, the Laurel crown to wear.
The Muses nine, and all the Graces three:
In Pembrokes books, and verses shall you see.
Now Shrewsbrie shall, be honored as it ought,
The seat deserves, a right great honor here:
That walled Town, is sure so finely wrought,
It glads it self, and beautifies the sheere.
Her beauty stands, on bounty many ways,
That never dies, but gains immortal praise.
Her honor grows, on wished well won fame:
That people sounds, of Shrewsbries noble name.
OXford came last, like sober Sibbill sage,
Whose modest face, like fair Lucyna shone:
Whose stayed looks, decors her youthful age,
That glisters like, the Alablaster stone,
Her blotlesse life, much laud and glory gate,
And called her up, to be a great estate.
The Diamond, does lose his dainty light,
And waxes dim, when Oxford comes in sight.
THese Towns and all, the people dwelling there,
And all the rest, that loves their Country well:
And all true hearts, and subjects every where,
That fears God, and do in England dwell,
Salutes with joy, and gladness this New year,
Our gracious Queen, and sovereign Lady dear.
All wished haps, and welcome fortunes to,
Still waits on her, as handmaides ought to do.
With long good life, with peace and perfect rest,
And all good gifts, that ever Prince possessed.
The Painter stayed so, yet rising from the floor,
To Court then did he go, to Presence Chamber door:
And peeping throw the same, he saw in evening late,
Full many a noble Dame, sit near the cloth of state.
Where the stood 5. fair flowers, whose beauty bred disdain,
Who came at certain hours, as Nymphs of Dians train.
Those goodly Nymphs most gay, like Goddesses divine,
In darkest night or day, made all the Chamber shine.
Dame kind with colors new, gave them such lively grace.
As they had took their hue, from fair bright Phoebus face,
If such fair flowrs quod he, in Presence men may find,
In Priuey-chamber sure, some fair sweet saints are shrind.
The Painter as he might, with that did him content,
And wondering at the sight amazed he homeward went.
Where he is drawing still, some works of stranger kind,
If this may gain good will, for plain true meaning mind.
Their names are here, that honor much our state,
Who dwells in Court, or Courtiars were of late:
Who sendes to Court, their New-yeeres gifts to show,
Our gracious Prince, the homage that they owe.
FINIS.
To the general Readers.
Read with goodwill, and judge it as ye ought,
And spare such speech, as favor can bestow:
So shall you find, the meaning of his thought,
That did this work, in clowd and colors show.
Wrest things aright, but do no further go.
In balance thus, wey words with equal weight,
So wisdoms skill, shall scanne the matter straight.
The book I called, of late My dear adieu,
Is now become, my welcome home most kind:
For old mishaps, are heald with fortune new,
That brings a balm, to cure a wounded mind.
From God and Prince, I now such favor find,
That full a floate, in flood my ship it rydes,
At Anchor-hold, against all checking tides.
The hour is come, the Seas do swell again,
And weltring waves, comes rolling in a pace:
The storms are calmd, with one sweet shewer of rain,
That brought my Bark, unto the Port of grace,
Where clouds did frown, now Phoebus shows his face.
And where warm sun, shines throwly clear and fair,
There no foul mists, nor fogs infects the air.
The Sayler stays, at anchor in good road,
Till wind blows ore, ill weather from the seas:
The Pilot wise, will not put out a broad,
Till wind serves well, and men may sail with ease.
The Writer first will his own fancy please,
Than to the rest, that will no word mistake,
He sends those scrowles, that studious man did make.
The learned sort, scannes every labor well,
But beetle-braines, cannot conceive things right:
And if good works, comes where disdain does dwell,
Despite in have, bloes out clear candles light.
I hope this book, comes not in enuies sight.
Whose staring looks, may make my betters blush,
Yet all his chat, nor babble worth a rush.
If he mislike, a babe but newly borne,
It is condemnde, for no offense at all:
Ne wit nor skill, can escape the scowling scorn,
Of bold male boush, that like ban-dog does ball.
The sugar sweet, he turns to bitter gall.
The Vargis sower, has not so sharp a taste,
As has his words, that spyte will spend in wast.
No Writer now, dare say the Crow is black,
For cruel Kytes, will crave the cause and why:
A fair white Goose, bears feathers on her back,
That gaggles still, much like a chattring Pie.
The Angel bright, that Gabrill is in sky,
Shall know that Nashe, I love and will do still,
When Gabrils words, scarce winnes our worlds good will.
No force, my hope, lies not in hateful men,
That cannot help, themselves in time of need:
So I please those, that have the gift of pen,
Or such as can, think well of that they reed,
The bargain is, well made and won indeed.
That dog scarce bites, that daily loud does bark:
Each wind beats not, true Archers from their mark.
In rouing sort, my feeble shafts so flies,
Drawn to the head, yet from my head does go:
I wish but that, my shooting please the wise,
That looks upon, or does a mark man knoe,
The rest God mende, let him be friend or foe.
Thus now no more, but as I turn about,
This work I end, till greater books comes out.
FINIS.

