A general rehearsal of wars, called Churchyardes Choice: wherein is five
hundred several services of land and sea as Sieges, Battles, Skirmiches, and
Encounters. A thousand Gentle men's names, of the best sort of warriors. A
praise and true honor of Soldiers. A proof of perfect Nobility. A trial
and first erection of Heraldes. A discourse of calamity. And joined to the
same some Tragedies and Epitaphes, as many as was necessary for this first
book.

All which works are dedicated to the honorable sir Christopher Hatton
knight, vize Chamberlain, Captain of the Guard: And one of the Queens
Majesty's privy Counsel. Written by Thomas Churchyard Gent.

1579.

Imprinted at London by Edward White, dwelling at the little North-doore of S.
Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gunne.

To the right honorable my most assured friend, sir Christopher Hatton Knight
vize chamberlain to the Queens Majesty, and one of her highness privy
Counsel: Thomas Churchyard wishes as great good Fortune and worldly
felicity, as he desires heavenly blessyng.
IF the ground yield not corn, the Tree bear fruit, the flower keep sent and
savor, we hold them as waste, and in a short season forget their former
goodness: So friends waxyng faint of memory, feeble in duty (and negligent
of that becomes them) fall at length out of favor, and lose the blessed
benifite of freendshippe. For the pen, hedde, or hand, that has used
honest exercises, once liyng idell, does not only purchase suspicion, but
also breeds much misliking, and makes men forgotten, where most they
would be remembered. So right honorable, considering these causes, I ought to
be occupied in my accustomed manner of writing, least that time and sloth (the
corrupter and cankerar of good conditions) wear me clean out of credit and
compel me to forthinke the idelnesse I have used. Yea, albeit the matter be
but barraine, I seek to bring forth, yet a duetifull well willar, ought to be
doing the best in his power, that the best may be taken, and gathered of the
good will, that still has a desire to bring forth some acceptable fruit. And
truly though my senses are simple, to sift and search out such matter, as
were meet for the personage, to whom this is offered. Yet I can not want good
store and copy of causes to write of in this crooked age, where no one thing
is straight and upright but a noble mind, that neither stoupes to the
mutabilitie of fortune, nor boweth down to the wickedness of this waiward
world: To treat of the which (under correction) I have a great desire. For
the common people have clapped on such new Natures, and are so finely
transformed, from the old fashion of goodness, as a perfect just man is as
hard to find among them, as a Phoenix out of Arabie. Yet was there never more
curiosity of words, nor less constancy in deeds: for now is he accoumpted
no body, that can not deceive a multitude. And the more finelier he can behave
him self, the more affection is borne him, so that the plain meaning is
ouermatched with the connyng co^ueiance of muffled mischeef. And the outward
show of simplicity, disceiues the inward judgment so mutche, that the subtell
Fox goes unspied, and the simple Sheep is led to the slaughter. For with
artificial courtezie, and double dessembled countenance, plain people are
carried from them selves, and made the bond slaves of those wolves, that
priuelie deuoures the^. The little Antes ronnes not so fast out of the Moule
hill, as the fauners with flattrie follows their heels, that they mind to
over reach, and wrest to their profit: And who is so diligent as the
deceiuer, and so ready to attend and wait, as the wily worldlyng. Who
first can fish out men's manners and inclinations, and after feed their
humors, according to their infirmities. And in deed these crafty men
pleasars, have more mind of Mammon then of God, of vanity then of virtue. For
like vices on a stage they serve in a State, and help to fill out a bare
matter with a bad laughter. These are the wiely Spannyels of the world, that
can not be beaten from the heles of nobility. These are the turning weather
cocks, that seldom stands still. And these are the cunnyng Clerks, who
never came in university, and yet are fine masters of Art. And who licketh up
the crommes, that falls from the table of good fortune: but these whinyng
whelps, that privily can bite and openly can faune. For the dissembler getts
more by doubleness, then by plain dealyng, and more by good luck, then by
good manners. As some of the Sages affirm, that conning creepes always in
favor. And blind affection is the only father, that begettes the children of
good chance, and brynges the favored to prefarment. And all the rest are but
bastardes of beggarie, begotten out of season, and borne in haste. Which babes
for want of blessyng, are become wanderars of this world, pilgrims of the
earth, and blossoms of a blasted tree. But the grave and wise hold opinion,
a man may as well seek to clime to the clouds, as come by commodity till
the cause and ground of all goodness, call him to the doale, and deal him an
alms. For neither shifte nor snatchyng will help, where portions are divided
(and lotted out) to the pleasure of the giver. In plenty he tombleth that is
prefarred to any place or benefit by this celestial order, and appointment of
the almighty. But some shreude serchers of secrets, hold opinion that Satan
is princeps mundi: and the mucke of this moulde undeservedly, falls in their
lappes, that least is thought worthy of so great abundance. And the poor
are the personages, that in the other world (for their patience here) shall be
placed beyond our common exspectation. It may be most likely: For riche's is
a ready instrument, and a pleasant pipe to make men dance after the deuells
Tabber. And poverty is the perfect pathe to lead men to felicity. Yet there
needs no argument to descipher the one from the other: For in both estates a man may do well, but the rich has better mean to do good then the
poor. If those that are fleetyng in the flood of good fortune, look backwarde
on the little brooks, that feeds the Sea with water, and follows the tides
by continual recourse, the only cause of the swellyng of the Seas, and pride
of the streams. For, if every small spryng were stopte, each large River kept
in, and all kind of Fountains restrained from their course, a second Sea
would be seen on the land, or the fullness of the first would begin to
decline. So that the repair of people to any place, procures vain glory,
lofty looks, ambicious minds, and maintains mutche pomp, and such as
withdraw them selves from wilful servitude, neither flatter their own
judgments to far, nor filles up the flood to fast. There is no more to be
said, but in this worldly Theater, every man plays one part or other, that
either is worthy rebuke, or merits commendation. O that men knew what gaie
garlande, is gotten by the goodness of virtue, then the inferior sort would
not strive and wrastell, to put on the wretched wreath of vice. For as right
renoume is the true reward of well dooyng: So open reproach follows, as a
shadow the body, that is ready to do harm. The good that is dooen among
the thankful, is not only redoubled again with good will: but like wise
linketh in a chain of love, the hearts of those that receives it. And they are
privy rich, that can by bounty purchase many debtars, deserve many
blessings, and make many people be beholding unto them. A number of glosyng
and glorious worldlinges, that by bragges of bou^tie, offer good turns to
saell, with a sign and show that they may be bought for a little or nothing:
but on a sudden they rather look who can do them good, then remember to
who^ they have offered the saell, and commmoditie of their marchandice. Such
fine fellows and petie foggars, are the frothe and scome of the sea, that
welters with the waves: and not the Honey and Cream of the earth, that ought
to be preciously made of. And lo for a proof of praise such yonkars can
promise more in an hour, then they mind to perform all their life time,
thinking with bare words, to win friends and followers, where naked
works of Nature nourishes nothing, but hollownesse of heart. For proof and
example thereof, let the thristie look for drink, and find his hope deceived
(at the well hedde of comfort) he flynges away his bottle, beats his breast
with repentance, and falls in misliking for ever, or seeks some other fair
fountain, to cool and quench the flaming furnaies of the stomach. An other
sort there are (but no great number) which without boste, brag, or
business, are glad to find an occasion to pleasure their freende, by word,
deed, trauaill, or charges: And these are the Salt of the world, that
seasoneth the life of man with sweet savor, and gives good taste at the
death to the soul before God. There is no one man so mighty, so strong,
valiant, or wise, but needs the aid of an other, and happy are the hands,
hedde, and body, from whom help proceadeth. It breeds merry thoughts,
causes sweet sleeps, shakes of displeasure, to work a common commodity,
or a private benefit, which goodness and noble Nature, is in some that I
know. But for fear of falling into a kind of adulation therein (nor in the
discourse of the world) I go no farther, confessyng that who soever lists
to write, has coppie and store of matter enough to treat upon, when willing
mind leads the pen, and honest judgment shall skilfully scan the manners of
men, their sondrie inclinations, their quallities and callinges, and the
disposition of the world. And for that my capacity reaches not far, and
discoursyng of great things, may bring my small knowledge out of compass. I
have bente my study to treat of common causes, as familiar with the wise and
learned in these our days, as weakest fancies in other seasons has been with
the ignoraunte people embraced. And because many writers have but slightly
touched (both in Chronicle and otherwise) the affairs of war, the honor of
Soldiers, the cause and beginning of Nobility, the erection of Haraldes, the
names of Gentlemen that well have deserved: the goodness that Calamity
brings, and the fame that noble life attaineth unto. I have taken this
troublous task in hand, not only to work truly, for the daiely hire that
good report gives, but to show plainly my honest meaning (in the things
named) that both labor and long study has brought me too. Not thinking but
your honorable insight, and acquaintance with these matters, needs none of
my discourses: but because I promised in the book of my Chipps (a matter unfit
for your honor to look on) to present an other work, which has been long
of coming out, and I fear is over simple with all this great laisure, to
merit thanks. Notwithstanding, the pains has been great, and desire to
do well not little: yet the bareness of the words and weakness of the
matter, I dread will either lose my thanks, or drive me in disgrace. And yet I
might say that the matter (now presented, though not well written) may claim
a great consideration, and merits as mutche favor, as any thing that ever
passed from my pen. The judgment whereof, can not escape the compass of
your honorable knowledge, and albeeit that with diverse devises and books
dedicated, to sondrie good and great personages, I have wandered a while)
after the favor of this world, and the good Fortune, that diligence might
have brought: yet now wearied with ouermutche labor in gaddyng about, for the
purchasyng of freendshippe (hardely to be gotten, and as dangerous to be
kept) am driven to retire to my first Fortress and hold, where help is to
be had, and succor is to be sought, because my second practice neither
purchased prefarment, nor paid for the pains and paper, that I think well
bestowed. And though verily some think, that good turns comes rather (in
general cases) by Fortune, affection, or favor, then by diligence, study,
or desarte, I a dress my last works, where I trust a noble mind shall be
judge of my labors, and so further my happ and favor in the world, that no
hateful Fortune, nor people shall hinder my hope. Thus hopyng the works, by
help of your protection presented, shall have as many favorers as readers, and
no more readers (that mislikes the matter) then likes to write an other
discourse as well meante. I shadow my self under the sheelde of your honor,
so dwelling in that saffetie and staidness of mind (which is a beauty to
hoarie hears) I wish you what best can be imagined, of honor, wealth,
knowledge, credit, and worldly felicity. Praiyng with all, that the blessed
deawe of heaven, multiply and keep moiste the manifold graces, of your well
desposed mind. From my lodging the xv. of October. 1579.

Thomas Churchyard in all that he may, at your honorable commandmente.

To the freendly reader.
AS it is a thing sufferable, and daiely seen, that each man favors those
personages, whose nature, quality, or condition agrees together, so I hope
(albeit I am but a small Soldiour, I may boldly write of Marciall affairs,
and men of war, without dislikyng of any: because such matter or men, are
fittest for my pen to be honored withal, and nearest the compass of my
knowledge, and profession. Yet albeeit that some of the malicious sort, do
marvel at my boldness herein, I let them babble, and answer the quiet
people of mild and sound judgment, that I think the best time I can
bestow, is to further the fame of the honest, next to the prefarmente of my
countries commendation. And that before all other things (except the
honoring of Prince and public state) a true writer ought of duty, to have
in admiration and reverence, the valliaunt Soldiers, and men of worthy value.
For thereby the best are known, and reap the reward of well doing: and the
worst will blushe, in the beholding of the virtues of other, when the burden
of their own vices co^dempneth them, as idell drones of the common wealth.
And surely in mine opinion, the next way to make a number of meet members
(to the state we dwell in) is to give them that deserve, as mutche renown as
can be clapped on their shulders: and follow with infamy the base minded
fellow so far, that he shall scarcely know, in what soil he may hide his
hedde. The noble Romans in the time of their greatness of courage and
conquestes, were regestred not only in golden books and monumentes: but also
were made in a manner half gods, and more then men in any kind of condition,
or respect.

The Lacedaemonians, Athenians (and other nations, a number did strive so by
virtue, one to excel an other) that the whole world to this day, does ryng
of their glory. And happy was he in those days, that either deserved well
him self, or might find by fine invention and just cause good matter, to
advance any one of singular learning or manhood. But now every manne is so
covetous, and greed^e of fame for his own works, that few or none can spare
any dragme or spark of credit to an others praise and good report: by which
general ambition, and naughtiness of nature, all good studies and noble
enterprises, are drowned in disdain, and little or nothing is suffered to
florishe, but that which Fortune prefers, or the fond affection of a
multitude will commend. A custom so perilous and cankred, that I fear will
ruste, and corrupt all good sciences, and bring in oblivion, better matter
then I speak of, or can be remembered. Yet some hope is left to the wise and
well doer, because the honest and rieppest men of judgment, are glad to
embrace and welcome the labors of well disposed people, and painful exercises
of the learned. But now to what end make I this florishe, and recital of
abuse in any: since I want power to reform any one person, envious of others
reputation. Wherefore, without further recital of needelesse causes, I will
follow the substance of the matter, here intended to be written of,
requiryng the readers to admit, I praised them selves (if any be praise
worthy) for some warlike exercises, in the which consaite of theirs they will
be the better contented, to bear with the commendation of others. For if every
one were a Soldiour in deed, that reads this volume, I know but a few
would be angry, to hear of their own glory and deseruinges. Thus committyng
this discourse, to the judgment of the wise, I commend you to the Almighty.
And fall to my matter.

FINIS.
Churchyardes Choice.
IN the renoumed reign of that noble prince King Henry the eight, whose
famous memory, shall last whiles this world stands: All Cheualrie was
cherished, Soldiers made of, and manhood so much esteemed, that he was
thought happy and most valiant, that sought credit by the exercises of
Arms, and dissipline of war. Which did so animate the noble minds of men,
that in a manner he was counted no body, that had not been known to be at
some valiaunte enterprice. And every simple subject, was given to the
aduaunsement of his Country. As the burning of Treporte, the winnyng of
Tornay, Bullaine, and sonderie other places does manifestly declare. The
iourneis into Scotland and victories there, would weary you to read of, and
bears yet record, what great honor was in our king, and courage in our
people. So that in this fortunate season, the whole world did resounde of our
worthiness, and forward desire of service. And then began M. Nicholas Malbie
to favor the war, and take therein such pains and delight, that in King
Edward the sixte his days, the first year of his reign, master Nicholas
Malbie was at Gines, a Clarke of the victualles, in a reasonable good credit
under Master Wauller, then a special officer. And the second year he was a
light horseman, under captain Crayer, in the service of the French King,
where was much service at that present. And in this time there was a practice
for the taking of Arras, which the noble men of France had devised in this
sort: The nobility put them selves in Peisauntes apparel, colourablie to
become prisoners to the English horsemen: And so marched a foot, toward the
gates of Arras, as though the English horsemen of the Emperors side, had
brought in certain prisoners from the French, but one Peter Androwes, a false
traitor to the English seruyng in France, being made privy to this
practice, disclosed the matter to the Burgonions, before Mounsire Vandiuill of
Graueline, whereupon a great number issued out of the town, and so a hot
skirmishe was begone and ended, to the great loss of the Burgonions side,
and so the French disapointed of their purpose, retired away. From thence
capitain Crayer and his company, were commanded to Heddyng, where they took
diverse great booties, and made many spoils, to the great benefit of all
the English horsemen. I had forgotten how that the Duke de Vandome, before
these exploites entered the low Country with an army, and about Bottes
Bulwark, and other parts nere unto Saint Homers did great harm, which I
saw being then a soldiour on the Emperors side, and under Mounsire de Rues
grand master of Flaunders. And after that Heddyng was besieged by Mou^sire de
Rues, and won in a short space, at which service was captain Matson, M.
Richard Bingham, Willyam Hind, and one captain Plonket, with a number of
other gentlemen not here named. And at the winnyng of Torwain, these Englishmen
that served the Emperor were in like sort. From Heddyng captain Crayer with
his band, were sent three leagues further into the frontires, to a place
called Farsine, which borders upon the County of S. Poule, where there was a
Castle of the Emperors called County, in the which was a band of footmen,
and an other of horsemen, who daiely skirmished with the English horsemen, but
always the loss returned to the Burgonions side: and capitain Crayers band
gatte great honor, in so much that the borders where the Englishemen
served, stood in as good security, as though a number of other bands had
been there, to have aided the English horsemen. In deed there were such
soldiers in captain Crayers band (the Malbies being as then ryng leaders
among them) as has not been seen seruyng any where at that season, for so
small a company, and so great value of courage and conducte. From this place
this band was placed in garrison at Mottrell (where mou^sire Vilboun was
governor) at which town the two brethren desired the leadyng of xxiiij. of
that band, and went with them twelve leagues into the Burgonion Pale, to a
rich village called Drues, and spoiled the same of all their cattle and
riches, and brought away from thence eight rich prisoners, and at the request
of the Soldiers in Mottrell, those prisoners were given to Mounsire Bilboe, to
purchase his favor, because he seemed to be angry, for the burning of the
Abbey of S. Poule, and the Friar house there. Now at the same time when this
booty was gotten, and brought into Motterell, they made open sale of the preye
in the Market place, and the soldiers being of the old garrison in the Town,
bloshyng at the boldness of the Englishemen, and disdainyng their well dooyng,
(that were not of their own nation) immediately began to spoil the booty
Masters, and by force thought to have reaped the labors of others, that
better deserved. Whereupon the Scottishemen of Arms, assembled in the Markette
place, and taking the English men's part, demanded wherefore that outrage
was committed, and said, they would not suffer such a folly to go
unrevenged: For the which cause, and encouraging of good men, Mounsire Bilboe
took order in the matter, committyng one of them that made the spoil, to
pass the shot of the Hargaboes without mercy, notwithstanding the two
brethren (seeing that Mounsire Bilbowe favored so much law of Arms, and
dissipline of war) made suit for the pardon of the offendour, by which suit
and courtesy of theirs, they conquered and obtained the love of all the French
soldiers, which amity after did the^ as great pleasure, as their present
pity, was a thing to be liked. For when the Englishemen went to any service,
the French would strive to see who could be favored most to go in their
company. Such force and virtue has mercy, and gentilnesse to lead the
hearts of people every where, either toward service, or any other hazard, or
worthy accion, that the remembrance of mercy may reche into, and consider of.

The English being commanded then, to lie in the borders of Picardie of
season (at their own discretion, and the Countries charge) were after sent to
Bohayn, and put there in garrison, where was a Captain called Captain
Hearing, with a valiant band of Gascoins, which joined with the Englishmen,
and made many iournies and roades together into the Burgonion Pale: spoilyng
the Country, and puttyng the Burgonions sondrie times to the worse, and
endamaged the country so much, and so often, that the poor people complained
to the Emperor, of their Burgonion capitaines being many in number, did suffer
a few of their adversaries to distress the whole Frontiers. Whereupon
Mounsire de Fammey then capitain of Laundersey (seeing the Emperor moved with
this incurssion) began to practice by all the means he might, to overthrow
the English band, either by policy or Treason, and findyng a guide that
always had the leading of the English, when they went about a booty, Mou^sire
de Fammey infected this guide with a few Crounes, to betraie his company, and
in the mean while, against the day appoincted, Defammey had prepared and
made ready a thousand horse, and diverse bands of footmen, to entrappe the
English soldiers of Bohain. The day of this practice and murder approchyng,
and all thing in readiness, the Burgonions to lie in wait, and the English
to issue: there fell a debate and quarrel between two Englishemen (the one
called Tuttell, and the other Cheaston) which faulyng out, hindered their
going to horse, and detracted time, in so much this traitorous guide could not
at the hour appoincted, bring forth the Englishemen, nor answer the
expectation of the Burgonions, and so the Captain of Laundersey mistrustyng
the guide had deceived him, brake suddenly into the country, and fell to
spoil, and to follow their most advantage for the season, and being many
in number, did much hurt about Gwyes, before the small power there might
make any head toward their enemies, but in conclusion, the English band
(though but a few of them, were at that present at Bohayn) with the help of
capitain Hearing, (a valiant man and leader of the Gascoins) set upon the
Burgonions, and at the first encounter overthrew so many Burgonions, that the
residue fled, and made shifte for them selves, at which on set and
courageous charge, master Nicholas Maelbie was sore hurt through both the
sides, and one Ihon Day and he being by service drawn from their company,
in a dangerous place and plight, they took great care how to recover their
people, and in the end to escape the hazard, Ihon Day carried master Malbie
on his back, till a horsemanne by chance happened to come, and comfort them
both. Mounsire Deffammey by means of a blow that Ned Driuer had given him on
the hedde piece, was feign to keep his Beauer down a long season, and tarried
al a whole night in a woodde the mean while.

A none after this bickeryng, the French king made a Proclamation, that all
his Garrisons should repair unto Reins in Schampanie, at which time there was
a secret speech of battle, between the Emperor and the French king, for
the which cause all the bands and garrisons that might be made, with great
expedition repaired to the place appoincted for the fight. And being assembled
together, they encamped, and so the French king marched toward Meattes in
Lorraine, where he used such policy and fair speech, that he wanne the
town (without bloodshed) took the Duke of Lorraine, and sent him safely into
France. And from Meattes the king marched unto Speeres in Almaignie, where he
had a certain mass of money. And so to Stroseborough, the king giuyng order
that the English horsemen (and others that served as vaunt currours) should
ride about the country, and spoil what they thought good. Master Nicholas
Malbie being left at saint Quintaines, to be healed of his hurt as you have
heard: had his brother Ihon Malbie in the camp with the French king, who
joined an other gentleman unto him called George Liell, and they two seeking
adventures, met two gentlemen Almaines, well mounted and appointed, but the
two English men charged them, and took them prisoners, and possessed their
Borespeares, and other weapons of war. But George Liell having somewhat to
amend, delivered his prisonar his Borespeare to hold, because he could not
himself amend his things, and hold his Borespeare at that instaunte, the
prisoner seeing his advantage, thruste the Borespeare under the armor of
George Lyell, and so slew him, he giuyng his last gasp and woeful cry, made
master Ihon Malbie look behind him, who findyng his fellow dedde, ran
hastily on the Almaine, and in that charge slew him, and so forthwith set
upon the other prisoner with like determination, the other Almaine fell on his
knees and asked mercy, upon which submission he was saved, and led away
by Ihon Malbie, where other Englishemen attended to hear some news. And
hearing of this strange case, they altogether repaired where the two dedde
bodies were, and buried them both, as the time and place did permit.

The French King marchyng from Stroseborough, came to a strong town called
Domuiell, which the King besieged, and the assault being ready to be given,
the captain of the said town came, and rendered it to the kings hands* in
which town was left a sufficient Garrison. And the Camp retired for that
year, and broke up at Reins in Schampaine, where the king paid his army for
five Months, and those he kept in wages, were commanded to lie in
Garrisons, the English band was appoincted to remain at Abontton, five
leagues from Gwies, to which place was now Master Nicholas Malbie come, and
there the two brothers showed such courtesy to a gentleman of Yorkshire, as
is worthy the remembrance, and seldom has been seen in a strange land,
and hard season. At Abantton were many honest and valiant soldiers English
gentlemen, as master James Crues, Nedde Driuer, Humfrey Blont, and a number of
others that accompanied the two brethren. Whose names I would gladly show,
because those gentlemen did such service in those days, (and beyond the
seas) as they deserve to be honored for the same in their own Country whiles
the world lasts, but having forgotte most of their names, I proceed to my
former matter. From Abantton the English band were commanded to lie at
saint Quintains, where liyng but a season, they were employed for the
furnishyng of a ronnyng Camp, appoincted to march into the County of Saint
Poule, and in this exploite Saint Poule was burnte, and spoiled, and many
villages there aboutes brought to utter ruin and mischeef.

The Emperor to revenge these injuries, sent into France an other runnyng
Camp, entryng at Noua Chatteau, and did much hurt in many places, albeeit
the Englishemen were so often in the skirtes of the Burgonions, that they could
not do many times what they intended, they were by the Englishemen kept so
well occupied, and daiely waited on. The Burgonions being thus nettled and
vexed (by a few in comparison of their great number) began politikely to
work, and so laid an ambushment, to entrappe Captain Crayer and his band,
and placyng fifty Spanyardes all horsed upon gallant Genettes, to break
upon the English horsemen. It came to pass by occasion of service, that
suddenly they brake on capitain Crayer, who wheelyng about for his most
succor, had not his horse so ready, as he was disposed to turn him, and
there withal his horse stombled, and fell flat on the earth, in which
faule Captain Crayer was taken, and the residue of the enemies retired
toward their ambushe, which lay a league from the place, where captain
Crayer was taken. And yet upon aduisemeante, (and hope of good hap to be
gotten, by some hazard presently offered,) the Englishmen grew so warm, that
they had the enemy in chase, and in the end the broile and business began to
be so hot, that both sides were Pell Mell. Ihon Malbie being in a Swarffe
rotters garmente girded on his armor, was taken to be one of the Spaniardes
own troop, and knowing him self not far from the English company, he
plucked out of a Spaniardes hands, the raines of his horses bridell, and
carried him over the Brook perforce, where was one of the English band, that
challenged half of the booty, and strove so for that was not his own, that
the prisoner lost his life in the pleadyng of the matter. Which prisoner had
he been void of that brabble, might have paid a good and reasonable ransom.

Now on the taking of captain Crayer, was captain Clauers his lieutenaunt
made leader of fifty horsemen, and he chose master Nicholas Malbie his
lieutenaunt, upon the erection of which band, or immediately after the
Emperor besieged Heddyng, and Captain Clauers band being commanded to
keep upon the Frontires, happened upon the Prince of Oranges band (which
had been in the country spoilyng as they might) and findyng the Prince of
Oranges band in a manner tired, set on them so courageously, that they gave
them the chase, where was thirty or forty prisoners taken, and master
Nicholas Malbie took a gentleman of the Princes chamber, and M. Ihon Savage
took another of the Prince of Oranges troup, which were well used, and
suffered on their faith to go where they would, showing them selves at night
to their taker. But two of the worste of those prisoners stoale away, and
their fellow had been like to have been straightly handeled therevppon, but
favor was found, and he sent by a Trompette to the Emperors Camp for all
their ransomes which was but quartarage (a courtezie then used among
Soldiers) and so sone as the Princes gentilman came before the Prince, he
complained of his companions, for breakyng of their faith: for which cause a
post was presently set up, and the prisoners lost both their ears on the
same post, and after they were banished the Camp for ever. The Prince paid
all their raunsomes, and giuyng a reward of ten crounes to the Trompetor,
sent him safely away in like sort.

At the siege of Heddyng Captain Clauers was taken prisoner, and master
Nicholas Malbie had the leadyng of al his men, and having occasion to ride to
Paris, he let his charge to his brother Ihon till he returned: His brother
as desirous of fame as any other (after he and his band lay awhile at Braie
upon some ingarrison) made many rodes into the Burgonion pale, and committed
great spoils. Which the captain of Beawpawlme sought to revenge.

And upon a Sondaie at Mass time in the morning, he brake into the Frontires
with a great troop of horsemen, and took a great booty from the town that
the Englishemen lay in, whereon there was a larum, that every man in all haste
mounted to horse, and followed the enemies in such a fury, that in rescuyng
one of their own people, the enemies were between some of the English band
and the town, but Ihon Malbie and an other were in greatest hazard, for they
two having taken two prisoners, were feign to pluck the bridelles over the
horses heddes, pricking the horses in the buttockes, to the end the enemies
might be occupied, about the recovery of their own men. And when the
prisoners were let go in this manner, they ventered through the troop of the
enemies, offering their Pistolles from one to an other, till they had passed
through the thickest and at the last slew one, and ouerthrewe an other, and
took the third prisoner, and brought him horse and man into the town. The
tounes men and nobility (among the which was captain Gordant now
captain of Calice) beholding this boldness, advertised the French king of
the service, who rewarded at the next pay day Ihon Malbie, with a good sum
of money. For that a king would not forgette such an act, nor let such
service eskape vnrecompensed.

The next Sondaie (after this business rehearsed) the captain Beauppawm came
again with a troop of five hundredth horsemen, and a regimente of three
thousand footemenne. And to encounter them marched fifty English horsemen,
and as many others of the Albanoies (which served before at Bulleyn) with a
few gentlemen of France, puttyng them selves in good order as nere as they
could, under the succor of the great ordinance of the town. So being
abroad the skirmishe began to be so hot, that no one of the Garrison
returned to the town, without his Lance broken. And the Albanoies band
served so valiauntly, that each of them brake two staves upon the enemies, in
which hazard and courageous service, their lieutenaunt was taken prisoner. But
an Englisheman called Willyam Spencer, seruyng in the Albanoies band,
beholding his lieutenaunt taken, cried a charge, a charge, and therewith all
flue in among his adversaries so furiously, and fought with such courage and
manhood, that he set the lieutenaunt at liberty, and so recovered the town.
And at that time was taken five horsemen Burgonions, and brought to the town,
and one horseman was taken away prisoner, and brought to Beuppaum.

That day capitain Twettie desired Ihon Malbie, to go with him into the
feelde a foot, and they having but ten Pikes, and one and twenty shot,
withstoode fifty horsemen, and slew diverse of the^, the Skottes men beholding
that service, gave all the honor of that day to the English nation.

At that service was a worthy Captain called Gurdan, before spoken of, whose
band and himself, surmounted the rest in the feelde, and came with great
glory to the town.

Now the whole company that served in that piece, assembled them selves
together and devised, how to revenge the injuries at two several seasons,
offered to them by the Burgonions: and concluded that all the Garrisons nere
the^ on the Frontires, should meet at a day appoincted, for the skalyng of
Bauppaum on the soddaine. And in the mean while Ihon Malbie went toward
Bauppaum with the English band, and took with him thirty or forty pound of
matches, which was tied upon cords and lines twenty fadome long, and every
mache half a yard a sonder, and for every line was two stakes prepared
breast hye, to be set in the ground when the matches were a fire. The night
being dark, and the matches being espied (after they were pitched) of the
Soldiers in Baupaum they took alarm, and the Englishmen that devised this
mockery, cried skale the waules, and so privily stoale away, but they within
the town of Bauppaum bent all their ordinance upon the matches, and shot at
them all the night after, pliyng the matches with small shot in like sort,
which was a great madness and folly, as they them selves confessed. When
they day appeared and made them judges of their own oversight and matter
mistaken.

In the neck of this, but three nights after they came in deed, with their
whole garrisons upon the Frontire, and brought Lathers for to skale the
waules, and aproched nere the town for that purpose in a very darcke night,
and in passing good order, but the Ladders being set to the walls, as secretly
as might be devised, they were feign to withdraw them again, because they
were to short, and the noyes that the Ladders made awakened the watch, and
thereon a terrible larum began in the town which had been taken, if the
Ladders had been long enough. For they that came to surprise it, were fiftene
thousand footmen, and two thousand horsemen well and thoroughly furnished,
for a noble enterprise.

Which power disappointed of their purpose, entered the country, burning and
spoilyng as much as they might every way, for the space of a whole day, and
then every one retired to their garrisons, from whence they repaired before.

And within a short season after, the Emperor besieged Mettes in Lorrain with
a great army, the French king on that news sent many bands thither, among
the which the English band was placed twelve leagues from Mettes, where they
daiely annoied their enemies, and sondrie times took many, prisoners and
spoiled the Forrengers horses, and other necessaries very often, and grew so
rich by the rau^somes and spoils they had gotten, that their enemies laid
many a staille and trappe to take them in, but that prevailed not. For their
Fortune and courage brought them through many dangers, and made them as much
feared, as their were spoken of, and more spoken of, then ten times so great
a company.

The siege of Mettes continued about a whole year, and it was thought that
there lay before the Town six score thousand men in pay, among which
number was such mortality and Plague, that it was a wonder to rehearse it.
For they died sometimes two thousand a day, by which mischeef and misery,
the Emperor raised his Camp, and yet was feign to leave in cabbens sick
behind him, twelve or thirteen thousand Almaines, which could not march
away. The Duke of Gwies being general of the Town, seeing those poor
Soldiers left to the mercy of God, or murder that manne list to commit,
thought it not fit to put them to the sword. And so upon advice and suit of
their general they were relieved, and as many as lived, were sent home without
ransom: which courtesy of the Duke of Gwise, was well remembered and
requited ten years after this. For some say that those Almaines seruyng the
Prince of Condie, at the battle of Drues, when they saw the Gwise, they cast
down their Pikes, keepyng their promised vow, which was never to bear arms
in feelde against him: that had saved their lives, and dooen them so great a
good turn at Mettes.

The siege of Mettes being raised, as you have heard, the English band was
commanded to lie in Picardy, where the Duke of Vandome was lieutenaunt, who
heard that the Emperor was coming toward Amiance with a puissaunt power,
and to encounter him the Duke reised as many soldiers as he might, and so
kept the Frontires till the Emperors power came, and showed them selves with
in two leagues of the City of Amiance: then great was the Alarm, and every
man to horse, and a marvelous brave company issued out of the town to give
battaill, and try the vttermoste of Fortune. And so well they agreed together,
and were so gallauntlie disposed, that one of them swore to an other, never to
depart without blood, nor never to return again into the town, without
doing of some exploit. The Emperoures power were in like disposion, and so the
Trompettes on both sides sounded, as heaven and earth should have joined
together. Then the English band provoked the skirmishe, and so the bloody
broile began hotter and hotter, in so much that the horsemen joined, and came
to hand strokes, where many a Lance was broken, and many a man lay grouelyng
on the ground, some under their horses, and some strike^ from their horses
backs, such was the terror of the time and fury of the fight. And Mounsire
Dangwion brother to the Duke Vandome lost no time, but charged Mounsire
Benyngcourtes band, or Mounsire Derues his company. The Prince of Condie and
Duke D'onmall charged on the Duke Deaskot and Mounsire Demberies bands, and
withal came in the residue of the French and Burgonion companies, and stood
so manfully to their business, that the conflicte on both sides was great,
and the victory hanged long in ballaunce, in so much it was doubtful to
whether party good Fortune would fall, but in fine the Burgonions fled
toward the woodde, where all their force of footmen stood, and in that
encounter and bloody fight, the Prince of Pianoyes was smored to death in his
armor, the Duke of Askotte compelled to creep, and lie in a woodde all night,
where the Peisantes on the morrow took him, and fifteen hundredth prisoners
more were led away with the Duke by the Frenchemen. And when the vieue was
made at their return to Amiance of their loss, the Frenchemen missed many of
their own people (especily of the City) and many by mean of their
valiauncie, were come home sore wounded, mangled, and out of hope to live any
long season, the fight had been so dangerous and cruel, that few which were
desirous of fame, escaped skotfree from the conflicte.

The Emperor not long after this broile, gathered his people together, and
came to Vallencian with a great army: but the French king gathered in a manner
such a multitude of soldious (wherein was much Nobility) that it was gessed
his Camp was at the least fifty thousand horsemen and footmen, and himself
in person nobly mounted, marched toward Valencian, where he found the
Emperor entrenched, and passing before the Emperor with his vawwarde
(wherein was six thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen) the
French king presented the Emperor battall, who had out of his trenche
certain Spanishe and Italian horsemen, with a small troop of Lances, on the
which company the Frenchemen offered skirmishe, and the skirmishe grew so
hot, that a charge was given, wherein was prisoners taken at the very entry
of the trenches, so that the Emperoures power being not twenty thousand,
were feign to tarry in their Trenches all that season.

The French king seeing this, and coming from his maine battle on a barbed
horse, with a goodly troop of brave gentlemen, made no more a do, but
showed him self in the feelde, and marched so away, making his waweward his
rereward, and his maine battle his waweward, yet I may not forgette that
sondrie in his company were hurt, among the which M. Nicholas Malbies horse
(a bastard courser) was shot through the neck, and in at the reins of the
back behind the saddell, which horse when he was whole, was given to the
lord Gray of Wilton, then lieutenaunt of Gynes.

Now the Emperor bearyng in mind, the brave offer the French king had made,
as here before is expressed, he sent Mounsire graunde Master, as general of a
great army, to besiege Torwain shortly after (a town of great momente, and
well fortified) to which siege (so soon as the French heard of it) was sent
Memorancie that now is living, to assiste Mounsire Dessie then captain of
Torwain, a man of great vallue, for the same Dessie was before general of all
the Frenchemen, that besieged Sir James Wilforde at Haddyngton in Scotland.
Now Mounsire Memorancie bryngyng with him diverse gentlemen (for the aidyng of
Mounsire Dessie in Torwain) determined to do some good service, and the
French king in the mean while leauied thirty thousand men, to remove the
siege if it were possible, or at least to relieve the town in some sort, as
the time would suffer. Where upon diverse capitaines and gentlemen requested,
that they might be the first that should enter the town, among which was M.
Nicholas Malbie, the king granted their request, and prepared powder in
bags, and other munition for them to carry with them, that took this
enterprise in hand, thus one Humfrey Hassock and a gentleman called Ihon
Griffin, with two other called Poell and Kockes, joined with three score
Frenchemen (M. Nicholas Malbie being with them) and passed through the
Emperoures Camp with great hazard, and so entered Torwain, which gave no
little comfort to them that were besieged.

Then upon the hope of the kings coming and other causes, they fallied
daiely out of the town, and did often annoye the Burgonions Camp. And one
day the watch espiyng a band of footmen liyng louse from their succoure,
under a bank, gave warnyng thereof to the captain of the town, who sent on
the spur the French horsemen, to give charge upon them. And master Malbie
espiyng when he came near them, that they were Englishemen seruyng the
Emperors side, badde them go away, or else they should be cut all in
pieces: Go away that is aferde said Nicholas Sibbill, a valiaunte gentleman:
The Alarm then was given, and the French footmen approached, and so capitain
Sibbell was slain, and sondrie others of his company defeated, and Humfrey
Hassocke having a red dubblet, was taken to be a Burgonion, and so unhorsed.
But M. Malbie seeing his servant in danger to be slain succored him, by a
charge he gave on those that would have killed his man, and brought his
servant to the town with much a do, the soldiers on the walls beholding
the same, commended the act very much.

Thus every second or third day they sallued out, and slew in the feelde and
in the trenches many soldiers, but still the Englishemen gatte great praise,
for their stout and desperate adventures.

The Captain of the town walkyng on the walls, and notyng how busily the
Canons went of against the breach, came down and devised that both horsemen
and footmen, should suddenly make a sallie out of the town, and so they did,
but though the Camp seemed to be quiet, and did nothing but plie the Battery,
they were well provided to resist the force of the French, and at their
issuyng out, there was a very great skirmishe. And an Almaine being an armed
Pike, marched bravely out of the Camp upon some lusty conceipte, unto whom
rode master Nicholas Malbie, and brake his staff on him, and so the Almaine
was slain. For which service Mounsire Memorancie, and the Capitain of the
Town came and embraced him when he returned, and gave him both a reward, and
thanks for his labor.

But after this town was held so short, that the soldiers could issue no
more, for a general assault was daiely looked for, and the breach being
assaultable, the Burgonions attempted the assault, Captain Gonnie having the
leadyng thereof (with whom I was in wages) but capitain Gonnies band and all
the rest were repulsed, to their great rebuke and loss, notwithstanding an
other assault was a preparyng for, and the great shot went of so fast, that
they within the town were feign to hold in their heddes, a great time. But
Mounsire Dessie aduaunsyng him self a little to hye, (for to discover the
meaning of his enemies) was stricken in the hedde with a little shot, and
yeeldyng up the ghost, spoke certain manly words, and so fell down dedde.

Then the town was somewhat discouraged, and came to a composition, howbeit a
midde the Parley, the Spaniardes brake into the town, and did much mischeef,
yet the composition was, that all of the Town, of what degree so ever they
were should become prisoners, because they abode the assault and stood so long
in their defense, against a mighty power and shot of the Cannon. Master
Nicholas Malbie was prisoner to a Spaniard, for whose ransom capitain Matson
(a honest English gentleman) was aunswerable, and so master Malbie returned
to Muttrell, where the Duke of Vandome embrased him, and took him to the
French Court, who being there presented to the French King, was much made
of by the Dukes means, and bountifully rewarded without suyng for the same (as
good soldiers be in many places,) and so he was sent to Braye again to lie
in Garrison there, till they were removed to Amiance. And when the whole band
was come thither, the Country furnished master Malbies soldiers with all
kind of victual, by the kings commandment.

The Spryng coming on, all the French Garrisons, and English Soldiers were
commanded, to make their repair to saint Quintaines, where the King
assembled his power, and marched into Henault, where he took a Town called
Synnie, and from thence went and besieged Marryngbrough, a very strong town,
which was yielded unto him within fourtene days: A garrison of the Gascoins
was left therein, and the Camp marched to a Castle called Denouanter. In
which Castle Iullian Romero was, and had with him five hundred Spaniardes,
and as many Almains that valiauntly defended it, in so much that there was
diverse bands and Capitaines, that refused to assault the said Castle. The
king hearing thereof, called those capitaines and bands before him: and caused
them to be degrated, and committed them to the Spade and Mattocke (which is as
much dishonor as a soldior may suffer) but there was great suit made by the
Duke of Vandome and the nobility, for to restore them to their honor again.
Which suite the King would not hear, nor give any grace unto. The company
degrated on knees, besought the king that they might go and win their
credit again at the assault: The king hardly granted that, but seeing they
sought to serve, and do their duty, the king badde them make new black
Ensigns, and said, such as could win their old Arms by manhod, at their
return from the assault, they should be restored to their first degree of
honor. Whereupon the assault was given, and very many of those men made
there, their last service for ever, but their manliness and furious approach,
was occasion that the Castle was rendered shortly after to the king, and such
as returned from that assault, were much made of again, and grew in great
favor with other soldiers ever after.

The Castle being randered, Captain Iullian marched Ensign displaied, armor
and weapon, bag and baggage, (with Wagons for their hurt men) and so he and
his soldiers, were conveyed saffely to Mowns in Henaulte, where Iullian made
the Wagomers great cheer, and gave them good rewards.

Within three days after, the Castle was undermined and blown up, and the
Camp marched from thence to Cambraie, where the Emperor was with a great
Camp, which Camp lay within three leages of the Freche kings, in a night
before the king marched forward, so that there was Alarm given to the kings
Camp, and many issued out to the skirmishe, in which skirmishe albeeit it was
hot, master Nicholas Malbie being unarmed, took an armed man from his
company, and brought him prisoner into the French Camp.

In that season D. Wotton was Ambassador in France for Queen Marie, who
commanded all the Englishemen to retire home, or serve the Emperor: The two
brothers hearing of that Proclamation, took their leave of France, and came to
the Emperor, who gave them fifty crounes a piece every Monethe, and so waited
on the Emperor, to raise the siege of Renttie, where the French king had
lain three weeks before, with forty thousand men, and had battered it
very sore, and was likely to have won it, had not the Emperor prepared to
give the French king battle, and come thither in time. But the French
kings forty thousand, might not fight with six score thousand. And yet
the French king shot of his Battery, in the full hearing of the Emperor,
and would not withdraw never a piece of his ordinance from the breach,
although the Emperors Camp came in a merueilous bravery, and approached nere
unto Renttie.

The Battery was so plied, that it went of from Sun risyng to Sun set,
and never seized, which made the Emperors Soldiers meruell, and therefore
the sooner to show some noble service. Notwithstanding, for fourteen days the
Battery seized not, these two Princely Camps liyng all that while, within
one league of an other, a meruell of the world how such a sort of people,
could be so long kept a sonder.

Then Martine van Rous an Almaine, seruyng with fifteen thousand soldiers,
said to the Emperor, it was a great scorn, to see his enemies lie so nere
him in quiet, on which speeches Martin van Rous was sent, to join with the
Duke of Sauoye, and many Spaniard and Italian bands, and so to set upon the
Frenchemen, that lay in a woodde between Renttie and the Emperors Camp, and
to attend upon those companies was appoincted Count de Horn, with five
hundredth Pistoliers Roittars, and certain other bands that served as wings,
to Vanrowses regiment.

So these people well bent and set in order, marched toward the woodde, and
the Spaniardes on great peril entered the woodd courageously, where they
found a hot and dangerous business, and were sharply encountered, but
they behaved them selves so stoutly, that with much a do they made the
French retire to their maine battaill, and whole Camp, which was within a
quarter of mile of the woodde. The Duke of Sauoye with certain bands of horse
men and footmen, accompanied with Martin van Rous, and the Count de Horn,
marched on the plain until they came to the wooddes end, where they found
the kings battaill ready to present the combat, or give the assault to the
piece, that so long he had besieged.

The English and Scotts horsemen that served the French king, were in a
troop together in a valley, where they provoked the skirmishe. The Barron of
Kyrtton who was a most valliaunte gentilman, charged upon a band of
Spaniardes horsemen, and clean defeatted them. The Count da Horn seeing that
slaughter and overthrow, charged the Barron of Kyrttons band, (which was a
little out of order, by mean of their fury) and so ran through them every
man, as though they had been a few children in his way. Such is the
advantage of disorder, who wiselle can take it.

In which charge the noble Barron was taken prisoner, and brought by one of
the band to the Count de Horn, the Count seeing him took out a Pistolet,
and presented the shot to his breast, but he was so well armed, that the
shot could not enter: The Barron beholding by this outrageous deed a bloody
murtheryng mind craved mercy, and told the Count that he was a noble man, and
would give a noble ransom, who answered, that he should have a noble death,
because he should be killed at a noble man's hands, and with that word
slew him, which was against all civil order, or law of Arms, but note what
followed. The Duke Domale in the end of this cruelty and encounter, charged
the Count de Horns band (with a brave company of men at Arms) and
ouerthrewe most of the Count de Horns people, and defeitted them all, or
carried them away prisoners with him. And in that charge given, there was a
company of French footmen, which set upon the Spaniardes and Italians in
the woodde, and drove them out of the same, and possessed the woodde again,
to the great discourage of the other party: which Frenchemen entrenched the^
selves in the said woodde, as surely as they could.

The English and Scotts men being well mounted, and desirous of some honor,
beholding what good success the Duke had found, by the valliaunt charge he
had given. They suddenly brake upon van Rousis Launceknightes, with a great
shoute and cry, who amassed at the noise (and afferde of the charge) flang
down their weapons, and betoke them to their feet: which oversight, and
feblenesse of spirit in them, was occasion of a great slaughter. For when the
English and Scotts horsemen, were a weary of killyng the poor Almaines,
they took prisoners some one man ten, or twelve a piece, as was credibly
reported.

So that in a manner most of all van Rousis Ensigns were trodden upon, or
taken from them that carried them. The Emperor was somewhat moved at this
misfortune, and determined the next day in the Morning, to give the French
king battaill. The French king on that victory, sent a Harralde of Arms with
a Trompet to the Emperor, declaryng unto him, that within four and twenty
hours, he would meet him in the feelde. For which message the Herralde had a
good reward, and the Emperor was glad, that so honorable an act as was
offered, should end the quarrel between the French king and him.

The fame night being well spent, and things in order for battaill, the
Emperor caused the Drommes and Tro^pettes to sound, and strike a march to
the feelde: for that he would by the break of the day, behold his enemies
power. The French King being a beaten Soldiour with many dangerous services,
(and lookyng into the danger of an exstreme fight, for a wearied army) took
compassion on his ouerlaboured men of war, that had lain in the open feelde
all that year, and so without sound of Dromme, or any noyes making, he retired
his Battery, caused his footmen to march quietly toward Muttrell (which
they recovered before the break of the day) and the king with the rest of
his army at midnight, priuelie withdrewe him sell and his power, from danger
of the Emperors Camp.

Placyng his horsemen in the reergarde, to tarry till the Emperor were ready
to march: who had intelligence of the French Kings privy practices and
departure. And thereon gave commandment to follow with all expedition (the
horsemen having that in charge) to see if they could overtake any of the
French kings army, especially the footmen.

The Duke Denamores attendyng on certain straglars in going out of a woodde to
the plain, happened with his whole band on Captain Stukeleis troop (who
all that journey, and at sondrie other services had dooen merueilous acts) in
which troop was the two brethren, master Nicholas Malbie and Ihon. And the
Duke Denamores was no sooner espied, but capitain Steukely and his troop
charged him, who fled as fast as he might, to recover some friends and Ihon
Malbie being well horssed, put the Duke to leap hedge and dicke, till he met
with a band of men at Arms, which the Englishmen were not strong enough to
deal with all, and so they retired. M. Richard Bingham at this service.

And in that retiryng they met with the Emperor, who gave them great
thanks, and rewarded him that deserved most praise.

The Emperor liyng at Renttie five or six days, caused the breach to be
made up again, and that being dooen, he commanded the Duke of Sauoye (being
his Lieutenant general) to make his repair to Heddyng with his whole Camp.
Where he made a very strong Town, and there was not a noble manne in that
Camp, but for to give good example, put once a day his hands to the
Baskette and Spade. And every soldiour had a double pay, so long as the work
was a buildyng: where there was in wages a hundredth thousand daiely, whereof
some were suffered to make roades into Picardie, and many boots gotten, among
the rest the Spaniardes had gotten a great booty, being accompanied with the
Burgonions in the same attempt, and coming into the Camp with their preye
and spoil, they were to pass by the Almaines Camp, or quarter which they
kept. The Almaines seeing a great compaie, desirous of spoil, or glad to make
a mutenie: fell to take some sheep, and what else they thought good from the
Spaniardes, the Spaniardes thereon made Alarm. The Duke of Sauoye knowing of
this vpprore, gallopped with his band among the Almaines, and took diverse
sedicious fellows, and committed them to the Provost, and one manne among
them, retained to a noble man of Germany, which came to the Duke, and did
request him to spare his manne, and pardon his offense: the Duke answered, he
should suffer for his folly committed, the noble manne spoke again, in so
much that the Duke was displeased at the suite. The other seeing he could find
no favor, told the Duke in a rude manner, that if he were not a Lieutenaunte
general over him, he should not put his man to death, the Duke made no more a
do, but took out a Pistolet that was bente, and discharged it upon the noble
man, and so slew him. The Almaines and Roiters thereupon armed them selves, and
put them in order of battaill. The Spaniardes, Italians, and Burgonio^s
presently repaired to the Dukes Pauilion. The Prince of Orrange and many other
noble personages, came between the two powers, and made a peace, and so the
business ended, which at the beginning, was like to have come to a great
flaughter and bloodshed.

Now for the better contentation of the Almaines, there was a road made unto
Muttrell, and twenty thousand Almaines appointed to be at the winnyng of the
booty, where was a great skirmishe provoked, and at that time Captain
Steukeleis horse was killed under him, when he gave a valliaunt charge on his
enemies.

There was a challenge made by the Frenchmen, for the breakyng of certain
Lances for their mestresse sakes. To answer the challenge went a Portugal, a
great companion with the Duke of Sauoye, and one captain The Other an Albanoies
(sometime seruyng in England) was an other. And the third was a gentleman
called Ambrose Digbie, who encountered a valliaunt horseman named Petro Strose,
and they brake both the one upon the other: Ambrose Digbies horse was somewhat
strong hedded, and bare his Master away into the French troop, where the
Duke Denamoures courteoussie asked him, if any thing were amiss in his armor,
in purpose to amend it, (yet the Duke was a great freende to Petro Strose,
for Strose was his Lieutenaunt) Ambrose Digbie answered, that all was well,
and gave the Duke and the gentlemen great thanks for their courtesy, and so
gallowped to the other side at his pleasure. Petro Strose in like sort went
back again to his own company. For capitain The Other was not so fortunate
that day as courageous: for he ran three courses one after an other, and
could not break, and the Frenchman that ran against him, brake every course
his lance, the reasons was, why capitain The Other brake not, always at the
couchyng of the Lance, his horse flang out, which moved the ge^tleman very
much and for which foul condition, he gave the horse immediately away. The
Portugal being bravely horsed upon a baye courser, had not worse hap then
courage. For he brake full in the face of the ^eue^, it was thought that he
that ran against him, was the Barron of Burnasell, who brake in like manner
always upon the Portugal.

In the mean time there was diverse bands, that had gotten a great booty,
and spoil in the Country, which contented much the Almaines, who with their
spoil and booty, were retired to the camp, whereof intelligence being given
to the Duke, he caused a retraite to be sounded, and every man marched forward
to the Camp.

But the French waited on them, and skirmished all the way, where good
service was to be seen on both sides, so they departed the one side to the
Camp, and the other side to Muttrell.

When they were in the camp, and the Duke in his Pauillion at supper, there
was great commendation given to the Portugal, for the best dooer that day,
he hearing his own praise, replied and said, he should but flatter himself,
to believe that report to be true, since all men might see the English
gentleman ran with the greatest Lance, and brake most fairest, and
especially, because he ran against Petro Strose, who was counted to be one
of the valliauntest gentlemen of France: so with this and such like talk,
they rose from the table.

When this Town called new Heddyng was finished, there was left in the same
a very great Garrison, both of Burgonions and Almaines, and then the Camp
was dispersed, and many soldiers cashed, and put out of wages.

Whereupon the two brothers, thought to make their repair into England, to
which place the Duke of Sauoye was going, and so with him they came over, and
attended on him three Months, and came again to the service of the Emperor,
where they remained, until an Army was appointed to go to Saint Quintaines.
The noble Earl of Penbroke being Lord lieutenaunt (for that service) over the
English Army, in which regiment M. Nocholas Malbie had charge of fifty
light horsemen. The Army liyng between Gynes and Arde, the garrison of Arde
being strong issued out, and gave our Camp Alarm, and our English men
unacquainted with that kind of noyes, and order of war, were in a manner a
mased, some ronnyng one way, and some an other, and one George Broughton,
having the leadyng of fifty horsemen, went out of the Camp, and was
immediately encountered with a band of Frenchemen, who charged so furiously,
that they wanne the Gydon of George Broughtons band, and carried it away.
Nicholas Malbie coming from the scoute with his band, and hearing the Larum
without the Camp, made his repair with certain of his company, where he
met with Broughton, who said he had lost his Gydon, upon that news master
Malbie caused all his company to return, and make haste to overtake the
French, which they ouertooke at the tournepike, and so sharply dealt with
them, that the Gydon was recovered again, by master Malbies own hand, who
brought it him self, and delivered it unto George Broughton, that gave him
great thanks therefore.

Master Broughton caused the Lord Lieutenaunte, to promise master Malbie a
recompense for this bold attempt, and diverse noble men commended the
service, upon the report of such as saw it.

The next day the Camp removed to Samedeboyes, and so toward Saint
Quintaines, where king Phillip was besiegyng the town, with a mighty Army,
which had overthrown most of the nobility of France, that came to succor
saint Quintaines, and the English Camp being before the town, was appointed
to set out certain bands, for the going to the assault, among which was one
Captain Vaughan, who came to a freende of his, and desired of all
freendshipp, (and for old acquaintance sake) to light of his horse, and go
with him to the saulte. Now in good faith said Nicholas Malbie, though
horsemen never come to the breach, with my freende I will either win the
Spurs, or loose the Saddle, and so a lighted, and went with master Vaughan
(having first procured license of the Lord lieutenaunt) to the assault, where
the enemies were ready to defend their Town, and their lives, yet as God
would, the enemies gave place with much a do, to those that valiauntly
entered the breach. And the first that entered (as diverse did behold) was
these two friends: which upon their enterie, ran to saint Quintaines
Church, and gatte there saint Quintaines hedde (a rich jewel) and were
coming away with this great treasure, but the Almaines had entered at the
other breach, and met master Malbie and Captain Vaughan, and being a
strong company together, took away the gained booty from them, and put the^
in hazard of their lives, so that they were feign and glad to escape, and
leave saint Quintaines hedde behind them.

Vaughan was hurt in the face, and therefore desired to go to the Camp to be
cured. And at this assault there were many made rich, though these two
friends had but evil Fortune, and found enemies, where they should have had
friends. The town was spoiled and ransackte, and the Admiral of France with
many others were taken there, and so king Phillip fortified it again, and
left therein a great Garrison, and retired toward the Burgonion Paile,
taking certain tounes and fortresses in his way.

Not very long after a peace was concluded, and the English Army being well
paid, and in England, master Nicholas Malbie went to the Irishe wars, and
kept captain Girtton company not in pay, but upon pleasure: The Earl of
Sussex then Lord Deputy, and Captain Girtton having somewhat to take with
the Lord Deputy, desired master Malbie, to see that his charge and country
should be well governed, till his return: and gave M. Malbie power, to do
what he pleased in that behalf.

There was one in those parts named Mighell Patrick, that was a tickell
Subject, and did many wrongs to his neighbors, and namely to Captain
Girttons men, against whom master Malbie went, and had diverse times the
upper hand of him, and put him and his Kerne to flight.

In this season there was a Proclamation, made by the Lord Deputy, that
whosoever could take a Rimar (which were a kind of Supersticious Prophesiers
of Irelande) should spoil him, and have his gooddes, without danger of Law.

Master Malbie, master Anthony Poor, master Robart Hartpole, master
Thomas Masterson being all at Kilkennie, heard of certain blind Prophesiers
called Rimars, that had been abroad with gentlemen and others, and gotten their
best horses, Plate, and Iewelles, for tellyng them fables and lies: which
Iewelles and treasure, came to the value of two hundredth marks.

These Rimars going home, were followed by these ge^tlemen, and brought back
to Kilkennie, and there spoiled and whipped, and banished the town, which
Rimars swore to Rhyme these gentlemen to death, but as yet God be thanked, they
have taken no hurt, for punishyng such disordered people.

In a little while after, master Malbie went to my lord of Warwick his
master, who was Lord Lieutenaunt of New Haven, where master Malbie was not
only my Lords Secretary, but also was ready in all services, and had good
and great entertainment at my Lords hands, and Ihon Malbie served there at
his own charges on horse back, and Captain Horssey can tell what good
service he did at a skirmishe by Harfflue, master Thomas Horde is a good
witness in like sort of the same service. For Horde was stricken through the
hippes with a shot, and lay on the ground, at the mercy of the enemies
sword, when Ihon Malbie flang in among the thickest, and recovered his
country man, who yet is living, and able to do good service.

At this service master Ihon Malbies horse received two shot, and yet
carried his master to New Haven after.

At New Haven was diverse times great an noble services to be seen. The
Ryngraue and all his regimente could well show you the same: For they thought
and found, that our Soldiers were of great vallue and worthiness. For many
of the Ryngraues band, passed under the misericorde of our English black
Bills. And the Ryngraue (a most worthy and noble warrior) confessed him
self, that English soldiors ought to be honored. But the Plague being so sore
and so terrible in New Haven, the value of our men could not be seen but a
little season, and so the town of necessity was yielded, wherein was left
Captain Randall, and Captain Malbie, to see the hurt men conuayed away,
and the great ordinance carried into England, that was agreed upon between
the French, and the Earl of Warwick, by which means (and to see the
conditions performed) Captain Randall, and Captain Malbie were the last of
our English nation, that came out of New Haven.

These things brought to pass, and all things in quiet here at home. The
two brethren heard of wars between king Phillippe, and the great Turk:
and tariyng a small time here, they sailed unto Spain, and came to the Court
where by the means of the Count de Ferrey, the king gave them a gracious
welcome, and commended them in his letters to Dom Ihon de Tholethoe, then
Viceroye of Cisill, and Captain general of his Army against the Turks,
and Admiral of the Leuaunt sea. The king also gave them letters unto the
Viceroye of Kateloniea (who was Duke of Langgiuill) for their passing into
Cisill, which Duke used them very courteously, and appoincted them a
Frigette, which was rowed with four and twenty Oers, and had appoincted for
their safe conduite fifty Soldiers with victualles, for all the whole
company.

They arrived in a City called Guarthelagare, and walkyng abroad up and down
the streates, till their men had provided their supper. There came one unto
them, that was the Algusie Magore, and crossyng the streate before them,
offered them his varge, as in a manner of, a rest, which they yielded unto, and
with that he drew out their Rapiers, to se if they were according to the sise
of that Country, and findyng one of them about the breadth of a straw, longer
then his measure, he carried both the two brethren to prison, they
mistrustyng his dealyng, requested him to bring them to the Corige door. Who
answered they should go to him, but straight ways he clapped them up in a
strong prison: where they were feign to work for their liberty, and sendyng
a great journey back again to the king of Spain, that lay at Madriell, by
means of master Shelley, and the Count de Ferrye, they received letters
again from the king that he which did them wrong, should be put out of
office, and should pay their charges (that was the Corigedoore) and the other
that did areste them, first should have his neck broken, and should be cast
into a Well, except they that had the wrong would pardon him. Which they did
pardon, but he lost his office, and paid for their charges, which was
thought a great matter in a strange Country, and taken to be a great
Justice in a king.

So they passed toward Palarma through many dangers, and perilous passages,
being sonderie times in hazard, to fall in the lappes of the Turks Galleyes,
and yet through good hap, and conducte of the Frigette, they were in (which
was well furnished) they escaped all perilles, and came to Palarma.

From thence they held company with the Galleyes of Cisill that went to
Messiney, where being arrived, they presented their letters to the Viceroye,
who used them courteously, and presented them to diverse noble men, and
furnished them with all such necessaries as they needed.

There was a gentleman that came from Sardinia (where the brethren had been)
and brought letters of commendatio^ (from king Phillip and Dom Ihon de Austria)
in his behalf: who the Viceroye examined gentely, and findyng him not meet to
take charge in such a great service, as was then intended, gave him good
entertainment, and told him that other ancient soldiers, must be first
preferred, because the greatest service of Christendom, was presently to be
followed, with men of most experience.

And so placyng this gentleman in a Capitaines wages, and at his own table, he
gave the two brethren the charge of a Galley, which was under the leadyng of
a gentleman, whose name was Giles Andratha, one of the order of the white
Cross. And within five day, the whole power pasfed from Messina to Seragosa,
where they remained seven days, and from thence they passed to Malta, every
man bearyng on his back two and thirty pound weight of biscuit, which
burden both noble and simple, were willing to carry, at the least four
Italian miles. For they landed at S. Paul's rode, and marched to the aunciente
City named Ciuerauegia.

Sir Ihon Smithe that now is (a valliaunte grave gentleman) showed him self
there so honorable, that he advanced the fame of his country, by the
nobleness of his mind.

The Turks upon the arrival of the Christians, plucked back their Battery,
and embarked their great Ordinance, and retired their men of war a
Shipborde, but in their retire they lost fifteen hundred Turks, and those
soldiers that were before penned up issued out, and recovered two great
Cannons, Dom Garsia was gone back again to Saragosa, for the residue of the
Army. And in the mean time the Turks stoale away, and retired toward
Constantinople, when intelligence was sent unto Dom Garsia (being in Cicill)
of the departure of the Turks Army, he made great speed to come to Malta,
leauyng the power he went for behind him: and being arrived, took order for
the fortification of every dismembered piece, that being done he took certain
soldiers into the Galleyes, and sought to find some of the skattered Turks
on the seas. So passing from Malta Eastward, he came to an Island called
Strumdario, Ihon Andredoria met with an Argosie, and was so bold as to
borrowe such victualles as the Argosie had, for the better releeuyng of his
Galleyes. And after the Army had refreshed them there* they passed to an
Island called Sireygo* where the Army of the Turks were upon the one side of
the Island, so attendyng some good Fortune, they tarried there seven days, in
which time fresh victualles waxed skante. Then were they driven to retire
toward Cisill, without dooyng any exploite, and having great want of
victualles, and sweet water, the Spaniardes died out of all order. And if God
had not sent a shower of Rain, by mean of a Thonder, full many a stout man
had perished for want of fresh water, which relieved both the Soldiour, and
the Galley slave, the shower of Rain was so sweet, and comfortable.

In the mean time, a brute was blown in Cisill (on the soddaine departing of
Dom Garsia from thence) that the Turks had won Malta, by which report and
overthrow, a noble man of Cisill, thought to expulse the Spanyardes out of
that country, and so slew as many as he might lay hands on, and whiles he
was in his greatest glory, and practisyng a general reuolte. The Galleyes
arrived there that lacked victualles before, wherein was six thousand
soldiers, and the General being at Messina, having intelligence of all this
business, caused the noble man to be apprehended, and with him six of his
confederates, and setting up a Skaffolde, and a pair of Gallows, caused the
noble man's hedde to be smitten of, and his six fellows to be hanged before
his face. And after this execution, a new Custom was raised for their Silks,
in sign that this reuolte should never be forgotten.

The Army dispersed, and every manne gone to his country, a quarrel had like
to have growe^, between the capitain of the Kings Galleyes, and the Captain
of the Galleyes of Naples, in the going out of Messina, for they began to
strive, which of them ought to bear the Flagge of the Admiral, Dom Garsia
stated the matter, and made the^ both friends, and took a good order for that
cause.

Then it was appoincted by Dom Garsia, that the two brothers should enbarke
with the Captain of the Kings Galleyes, but sir Edward Standley being at
Messina, was occasion upon his request, that the brothers might not keep
company together for a space, but they met merry after at Naples, where sir
Ihon Smithe met with them, who dealt as courteously with them there, as he
did before in Cisill.

And they remainyng in Naples fourteen days, they enbarked them selves with
Dom Alueray de Basane (for Spain) who was the Captain of the kings
Galleyes, and passing from thence all along the coaste of Italy, came to Gene
and remained fourteen days there. From Gene to Barsilonia, in which voyage
befell a great storm, but the danger being passed they landed, and were
forced for want of horses, to travail through the kingdom of Katellonia, and
Aragon, and so into Castile. And then findyng the king at Madreell, they made
at their leisure their repair to the Count de Ferrey, who presented them to
the king: He being in his privy Chamber alone, with one of the Generals that
was at Malta, which commended the service of the two brethren so much, that
the king made them kiss his hand, and so they departed toward their
lodgyng, where they found Secretary Arras servant, ready to present them
from king Phillippe, five hundred Dukettes. Dom Garsias letters were delivered
the king of their service, a little before, and so with the kings favor, and
bountiful reward, they reposed them selves a season.

And mindyng but to take their leave, they came to the Court again, where the
king gave them gracious speeches, and five hundred Duckettes more, a
liberality meet for such a Prince, and a reward that might have pleased a
right good subject, as in deed the two brethren stood so well contented
withal, that they accounted all those Soldidiours happy, that might serve
such a king.

And there withal the king gave them fifty Duckettes a piece, to be paid
every Monethe, so long as they listed to serve him.

In Naples, the like entertainment the Emperor his father had given them
before, but they seeing the great bounty, and Princely dealyng of the king of
Spain, (and mindyng to have more experience of the world) they took their
leave of his Majesty, and purposed to return toward England. So passing
to Bilboe, they found master Man, who was come to be a leeger in Spain, and
having a bark to bring them into Foye, (a haven in Cornwaill) they took
shippyng and in five days came into England.

Being come to the Court of England, the honorable sir Frances Knowlles was
to pass into Irelande: then maistes Nicholas Malbie made suit to go over,
where he might be employed. And his master the noble Earl of Warwick prefarred
him, both by letter, and commendation of his service: So attended he on sir
Frances Knowles, till he came to sir Henry Sidney then Lord Deputy, who upon
vewe of his letters, and the regard of his knowledge, made him Sargeant Mayor,
in which room he served well and worthelie, till upon good consideration, the
Lord Deputy placed him at Karikfargus, and gave him charge there of a hundred
horsemen, in which charge he so behaved him self, toward the Prince and
soldiers, that he spente five hundredth pound, more then his entertainemente,
to the honoring of his Country, and enrichyng of his Soldiers.

Thus he did continue to his great charges a long while. And at length came
down to Karrikefargus, sir Willyam Fuwillyams as Lord Justice, who liyng long
in Camp, with a number of Soldiers, for the reformyng of matters out of
frame, he wanted victualles. So sent for Captain Malbie, and sought his
advise for the releeuyng of the whole power. And master Malbies opinion was to
preye upon the enemy, and findyng things ready for that purpose. Prepared
to set upon a Kreete as they were feedyng, the enemies had intelligence
thereof, and drove they Kine into a Bawne (otherwise called a place of defense)
Captain Malbie seeing their craft, shot of the Hargabose among the
beasts, they that were so hurt, ran in a madness among their fellows, and
so drove out five hundredth good Kine, in the danger of the Soldiers, and so
they were driven to the Camp, and the hongerie people thereby found
sustentation.

Sir Henry Sidney came out of England anon after this, and landed at
Karykefargus, where remainyng but a few days, he marched toward the Ban, for
to parley with Torlo Lenno, who named himself Oneall. The Deputy being there
made Proclamation, for all such as had any pledges for their behavior,
willing them to come in accordingly, or else their pledges should suffer for
their disobedience, that left them in pledge. Among all the residue Macke
Ilaspete was one most accounted of, but he nothing respectyng his pledges, (or
else nothing doubtyng the danger they were in) stayed and would not come unto
the Lord Deputy, the Lord Deputy being no dallier in causes of duty,
caused the pledges to be executed. That being dooen, Macke Ilaspet sought to
revenge, and came with five hundredth Scotts into the Country, he was
encountered with one Richard Hunt a Lieutenaunt of horsemen, a very valliaunt
soldiour, who upon his first charge was slain. Then Captain Cheston being in
the feeld, marched toward the Scotts with a hundredth footmen, and being nere
the Scotts, there were certain gentlemen (as it seemed by their apparel)
that attempted the band of foot men, and charged them, but Cheston and his
band stood very fast, and determined to fight it out. In which stout
standing to their business, they slew on the first charge given unto them
forty gentlemen, whereof Macke Ilaspite was the best, for he had the leadyng
of the rest that time. Upon which repulse the residue fell to fly: so that
they were murdered and slain, like a sort of Sheep.

Now Bryan Mackefellyn standing not far of, seemed never to come in, till he
saw the overthrow given, which happened otherwise (peradventure) then he
hoped for, but at the length he came faintly in, and yet would not follow the
chase, being called a very good subject.

This broile enden, Captain Chestons men took the spoil of such as was
slain, and so retired.

It was not long after, but there came a new supply, to revenge Macke
Ilaspetts death, which being entered the Country, were encountered withal
again with Capitain Cheston, who showed such vallue, that in one skirmishe
were slain two hundred Scotts: and in the same skirmish that valliaunt
Soldiour Cheston by name, was shot into the baule of the knee, of which hurt
he died, which brought great sorrow to Karyckefargus.

Captain Nicholas Malbie being in the English pale with his band: There was
a journey appointed by the lord Deputy, to be made upon a certain Rimer,
that belonged to Oneall, at a place called the Kloher. This draught was drawn
by one Thomas Flemmynges, a great freende of captain Malbies. And there was
cheef appoincted for that journey the Barron of Deluin, master Edward More,
and Captain Collyar.

Some business was among the soldiers, for the going of that journey: and
some drew back, and some misliked the long march, which must be dooen in
short time. But the Barron of Deluyn and Capitain Malbie, did determine to
try Fortune, and appoincted the footmen a place of metyng, and to retire unto
them, if occasion so served: But the horsemen rode on the spur, and entered
the Country they sought at a good hour, and slew there a number of rebels,
bringyng from thence a great booty, to the number of xij. thousand Kine and
Mares, and drove their prey to the Cloher. Which was within two miles of
Onealles house, and thither came the foot bands, and so Camped all together
that night.

Oneall whilst they were there sent them word, they should be foughten
withal, ere they went out of the Country, to which threats they gave small
ear, and made less answer.

Shortly after Captain Malbie was to return to Karickefargus with his
charge, where he remained a small season, there was an occasion given by the
captain of Kyllowlto of his disorder, and having a convenient time for the
correction of the same, and did it not. Wherefore Captain Malbie called his
soldiers together, and entered Kyllowltoes Country, and took a part of his
prey, and marchyng through apace. There went by Captain Malbie a woodd Kerne
talkyng with him, the Kernes sword drawn, and passing under a bow in a
strait: the Kerne let drive at the Captain, and hit him on the hose, which
was so well stuffed with hear, that the hurt was nothing great, and so the
Kerne sled into the woodde.

It was not three days after, but Captain Malbie, and Captain Peers having
a Commission to sit upon, made Proclamation, that whatsoever he was of any
degree and had made offense that would come in, and answer to that should be
laid to his charge, he should come saffe and go saffe, without any harm or
danger.

On which Proclamation, the self same woodde Kerne came, and presented him
self before the Commissioners: whereat Captain Malbies heart sturred, and a
soldiour of his that gave him warnyng of this Kerne, in the place said openly,
Captain this is the traitor, that stroke you stoupyng under a bow. The
Kerne answered, it was he in deed. Then was he demanded, how durst he come
thither that had dooen so traitorous an act. The Kerne answered again,
because I heard that the Captain never brake his word: I ventered to try
his fidelity, not caryng for mine own life. With that he was had into a
house, and made both drink and eat, and so was sent away: which courtesy
and trothe kept in promise, made this Kerne ever after a true follower of
Captain Malbie.

Captain Peers upon some conceit or cause, hated this Kerne, and afterward
arrested him diverse times, which Kerne sent to master Malbie to be his
surety, who became bound for him, to pay four and twenty Kine at a day
appoincted.

There was one made a complainte to the Lord Deputy of Bryan Ballowe, who
sent for Bryan to answer the wrong he had dooen. Well quod Bryan I will go
keep my promise, for I hope Captain Malbie will not see me suffer death,
which keeps my word: The only credit of a man's life.

With that his wife and friends took hold of his mantell to stay him, but
he so struggled that he gatte from the^, and came stark naked before the Lord
Deputy, of whom Bryan Ballowe was cherished for his faithfulness.

In that time while Sir Harry Sidney was Deputy, there befell a great broile
about Kylkennie, to redress the which business, was sent sir Peter Carowe,
Captain Gilbart, Captain Malbie, and Captain Basnette, who being in
Kylkennie heard say that a thousand Gallowglasses were in a plain, not far
from the town: so these Capitaines issued out of the gates, (which were kept
shut for great occasion) and came in the vewe of those Gallowglasses. There
fell a great shower of Rain the same season, and the Gallowglasses seeing the
Englishemen but a few, and they being many, made a show of fight, and
puttyng of their broeges, and shaking their Axes, gave a great shoute and a
cry, as their manner is when they hope of victory. But the English Capitaines
minded not to give over the matter for a brag. And determined courageously to
set upon their enemies: which in deed they did, and gave so lusty a charge
that they ran clean through them, and slew at the least four hundred of
them, puttyng the rest to flight, and followyng the chase, drove them into a
woodd, which being nere saved many of their lives. Sir Peter Caroe said,
much of this victory rested in Captain Malbies manhood and conducte.

The Lord Deputy sent Sir Peter Caroe, for to take possession of a certain
Castle, in which Castle was a company of stout men: And to the service was
Captain Collyer, Captain Furs, and others sent. They within shot and
slew our people, which increased the hatred and malice: Much business was
about this Castle, and at length it came to a parley, and whiles the
capitaines were at the parley, the soldiers were made drink, and a silver
boule sent the^ to drink in out of the Castle: But the parley could not take
up the matter, and so they called for their silver boule again, but a soldiour
with one leg, whose name was haltyng Dick, having the silver boule in his
hand, made answer, that he would keep that till the reckenyng were made of
the rest. And the parley being done, they put in the Conestable of the Castle
at a grate, and suddenly withal they thrust in a great piece of Timber, which
kept the grate open, wherein the Soldiers entered, and so won the Castle,
where after was a pitiful murder, for man, woman, and child were put to the
sword. And the soldiers found therein great riches, especially Tapestrie and
Plate, and much good household stuff.

It was not long after, but the Lord Deputy raised a great power, to go to
the West against the rebels, whose leader was James Fitz Moris: which was
reported to be of great force. And the Lord deputy marchyng forward toward
Clammell: the news was brought, that Fitz Morris was so strong, that the Lord
Deputy was to weak to deal withal. So counsel was given him to retire.
The lord Deputy seeing the cowardies of some (and having good courage him
self) called Captain Malbie and asked his advise, who answered, if good
guides could bring my lord through the plain Country, his five hundredth
horse would march in despite through all Irelande. The Lord Deputy thereon
said, he never bare the George that day, that he gave place to any rebels:
and so the Deputy commanded them to march, and his power came that night,
and lodged at a Castle of his enemies, as the report went. There was a
stout Kerne seeing the Deputies camp coming, ran out of the Castle and
set many houses a fire, because the Lord Deputies power should have no
succor thereof, and be in so^^ danger by their approach. To which Kern Ihon
Malbie galloped apace, and so dispatched him, which was a good piece of service.

The next day the Castle was yielded, so the lord Deputy marched to the
White Knights Country, and besieged a strong Castle of his, and because they
did withstand the siege, they were all put unto the sword.

From thence he marched toward a Castle in the Desmondes Country, called
Bally Marten, where they withstode the siege, so it was battered. And there was
one called the Seneshall, who found mean in the night, to steal away with
all his company, and so they took the bogge, and escaped to James Fitz
Morris, who made many words and threateninges, but he performed no piece of
those promises. So after this, the Lord Deputy came unto Cork, and from
thence to Lymbrick, taking all the Castelles in his way that he found, till
he came to Gallawaye. And after he returned toward Dublin, in which journey
his enemies did never show their faces.

Shortly after this, Captain Malbie took in farm the country of Lakaell,
at the hands of the Earl of Kildare which Lakaell had lain waiste three years
before, and after that came sir Thomas Smithes base son with his horsemen and
footmen, to a place called the Ardes, nere neighbor to Captain Malbie, who
furnished master Smithe with diverse things, and did bestow on him and his
soldiers, a good round so^me of money: but master Smithes fortune was not
good, and so at the length he was slain, as after you shall hear.

Now the noble and most bountiful gentleman of England, came over as
Governor of Vlster, I mean the Earl of Essex, whose praises no man in the
world can ecclips. Which Earl was accompanied with a goodly band of horsemen
and footmen, he arrived at Karrickefargus: And there came with him the Lord
Ritche, Master Henry Knowlles, and his four brethren, master Mighell Carry,
and master Ihon Carry, soonnes to the Lord of Honsdon, and master William
Norrice, and master Ihon Norrice, two of the eldest soonnes of the Lord
Norrice, whose courages and deeds, did show their noble race, as in deed the
other gentlemen named before them, by their own acts aparte, did often times
express their honorable birthe. There was likewise one master Blunt a
valliaunt gentleman, brother to the Lord Mongie, and sonderie others, whose
names I have forgotten.

Within a pretty space after this noble Earls arrival, sir Bryan Mackefellin
(who was accounted then a rebel) did sue to come in. To whom the Earl gave
protection, and yeldyng him self simply, unto the Queen, the Earl not only
granted him a pardon, but also gave him great gifts, and used him so
courteously, as he could not imagine how to be better entertained.

But Bryans follower being weary of well doing (and peradventure by Bryans
consent) the soldiers horses could not be in saffetie, and the followers of
Bryan fell to open theft, and privy filchyng. The Earl willed Bryan to give
correction to the malefectours, who promised from time to time, but no redress
could be had.

The Earl lettyng those offenses pass, and conceived that he had not his
people in such obedience, as was reason, and so bore with little faults, in
hope amendment would follow: but all this while the soldiers were robbed,
and as the poor men them selves were caught alone, they were murdered. For
which outrage the Earl shaped a revenge, and so to cry quittaunce: but Bryan
hearing thereof, desired to come in, and make his answer, the Earl granted
that, and so sir Bryan came, and made his submission, declaryng he could not
rule his naughty people, and was sorry for their follies, and foul factes
committed. So the Earl badde him bring them all into an Island called Mahair,
and offered Bryans men an aid, to bring them that would refuse to come,
promisyng they should be all well used, and all former faults shoud be
forgotten.

Sir Bryan so departed, and in fine wrought cunnyngly to deceive the Earl, and
depart with all his Creett of Kye, (which amounted to twenty thousand) into
the wooddes, or where he thought best: but my Lord of Essex had good espiall
on Bryan, by mean of Captain Malbie, notwithstanding, the sleightes of the
enemies were so fine, that they could not be easily perceived, nor prevented,
because so many tales were brought, and so many flatters took sir Bryans
part. Yet always the Earl did that, which he thought for the best, and was
loathe to seek blood, but upon a great occasion, and yet in the end true
word was brought, that Mackefellyn was stolen away, by this means as I
shall tell you, Captain Malbie and his brother hearing of this dispute, and
having great business to repair unto Lakaill took their journey, and as
they were ridyng, they espied a freende of theirs coming galloppyng, whose
name was Mark Hoult.

Who brought news of Bryans going away, which messenger they sent in all
haste to the Earl: and they appointed a place, where they would meet the
Earl. But in the mean while they hasted to stay Bryan and they might, or to
hold him play till the Earl came. But that was in vain, for all the Creete
had take a strength before the day. Yet the Earl marched apace, and came
within two miles of the enemy, where he met Captain Malbie: but of
necessity the Earl retired to Carryckefargus, for this matter could not be
recovered.

Yet in a few days after, the Earl made a rode against Bryan, and by mean
of a Spaniell in the company, their intent was eskried, and wantyng Kerne to
enter the wood the Earl retired homeward again.

The Earl sent for the Barron of Dongarren, and master Edward Moore, and one
Thomas Flemmyng, but Bryan had gotten intelligence thereof, and lay in wait
for to entrappe them: The Barron came to Bellfaste and passed the Foorde, and
sent to Hollyngburne Abbey for master Moore, so passing a soft pace toward
the Earl, Bryans horsemen brake, and so the Barron retired back to the forde
again, where by chance master Malbie was, and gave the Barron succors, and
caused them to pass over the Foord, for their better suertie.

But those horsemen that they had sent for master More, did light in the
lappes of their enemies, in coming back again: yet some of them were well
horssed, and so escaped to Hollyngburne Abbay, and those that were nerest
mischeef were slain.

This hazard being paste, Captain Malbie sent in post to the Earl, to
come closely with as many horsemen, and footmen as he might make, and to come
in the night followyng: the Earl made speed, and came as secretly as he
might, three hours before day, to the place appoincted: where he lay in
couerte, till it was time to pass over the Foorde.

Now the Barron with master Moore and their company passed over, and had not
gone but a little ground, but they were sharply set upon, and sent back
again, Bryans foot men were so nere them: with that Capitain Malbie and his
brother hastened to the skirmishe (which grew very hott) and as they were
almost over the water, master Richard Blunt coming with them, cried, a
charge, a charge, and so setting his staff against his thigh, he ran among
the^m which were footmen, which had quickly killed his horse, and had him
down, laiyng load upon him (which was a wonder of the world he had not
been slain) capitain Malbie and his brother with five or six more, gave a
charge to rescue him, and so put his enemies back, where at a man of the
Barrons, and an other called Thomas Flemmyng, took him up, and haled him
away. At this skirmishe many of Bryans men were slain: and the Englishemen
did retire over the water in time, for the tide was coming.

And the very same night, the enemies came over the water, and encamped them
selves by the English power. And in the morning betymes they provoked the
skirmishe, both cunnyngly and manfully. For at the first beginning, they
killed master Willyam Norrises horse under him (who valliauntly behaved
himself) and in less then an hour, captain Malbies horse was stricken down:
and if Sir Willyam Morgan with great courage, and one master Egerton had not
dooen very well, Captain Malbie had been slain, for his horse lay upon
him. The noble Earl beholding this broile, with his footmen came fliyng in,
and gave a charge on the rebels, and put them to flight, and did it in such
order, that many of the enemies lost their lives thereby: And after that
charge, they retired into the wooddes, where sondrie of them were overthrown,
and those that escaped went to their Creete.

As time did pass, and the Earl lay at Karrickefargus, news was brought that
one Noall Macke Bryan Artho, had devised a draught, for the killyng of Master
Thomas Smithe, who was slain by that devise: My Lord of Essex was much moved
at that deed, and Captain Malbie and his brother were marvelous sorry, for
the loss of such a neighbor, and good companion. And swore to revenge his
death, ere it should be long, as they did when occasion served therefore. In
process of time the two brethren desired leave, to repair into Lakaell
(meaning to practice a revenge for master Smithes death) the Earl not knowing
their minds, gave Ihon Malbie leave to go, but kept the other Captain about
his own person. Master Ihon Malbie coming into Lakaell, mustered all the
men he might make, and having a good power, sufficient as need required,
practiced with one called Donny Sallowe, for the catcheyng of Neall Bryan Artho
at some advantage, and promised at the least an hundred pounds for his labor,
that should draw such a drifte. This Donny Sallowe as much for the money, as
glad to please his freende, went closely about this matter, and brought such
certain news, of Neall Bryan Arttoes haunt and order of life, that it was an
easy thing, either to compass him in some danger, or lay hands upon his
followers.

And by a good occasion master Ihon Malbie, with three score and four
horsemen, and a few footmen, he made such a slaughter, that five and thirty
of his best men, that followed Neall Bryan Artto were licked up and slain,
and a great preye and booty taken from him, and brought away, he being two
hundredth footmen, and forty horsemen in the feelde. Among those men that
was slain, was one Con Mackmeloeg, who before caused master Smithe to be
eaten up with Dogs, after he had been boiled, and this same Con Mackmeloeg
being slain, was left among wolves v. days, and was had into a house, where
his friends howled, and cried over his dedde body so long, that by mischaunce
a great deal of powder caught fire, and set the house in a flame: the Dogs
in the town smellyng this ded body ran in, and took it out of the house,
and so tore it in pieces, and fed upon his carraine flesh openly. Which
was a thing to be much marueiled at, and thought to be sent from God, for a
terror to all tyrauntes hereafter.

Now here is to be noted, that the Earl so long as he had power, left no
occasion to trouble Bryan Mackefellyn, and to make him know he had offended
the Queens highness, and for that cause the Earl made diverse iourneis upon
him. As a journey where a preye was to be won, where master Maunsfeelde, a
proper man was slain at, and master Harry Knowles was fore hurt in, who
served nobly that day. And a iourneye made to the Glyns, to Freers Town, and
to many other places among the enemies, but with this service and diligence,
the English glentlemen were so weried, that sondrie sought means to depart
into England, and so the Earl remained with the less force, and could not
put further the matter in practice, then his power and Fortune would suffer and
procure, notwithstanding he found means to entrappe, and take sir Bryan
Mackefellyn, which he sent to Deuelyn, and caused to be returned again. At
whose return to avoid further trouble sir Bryan was put to death, on which
execution runs diverse reports, the manner whereof I leave to the world.
For my intent is but to show breefly, how things were begone and ended, at
that present time of service.

All this season remained with the Earl, sir Nicholas Malbie and his brother,
Captain Barkley, Captain Selbie, Captain Bousar, Captain Deeryng, sir
Peter Carewe, sir Willyam Morgan, and two of my Lord of Hunsdons soonnes,
master Harry Bronkar, and others of good calling, courage, and credit.

Sir Willyam Fuwillyams was Lord Deputy then, who took great pains, to
reform the badde disposition of disobediente people, and often times was in
Camp him self to use the sword, and minister Justice. And at his going away,
came the honorable sir Harry Sidney, in whose time was much to be done, but
especially against one Sarlaboyes a Skotte, that kept about the Ban, and had
overthrown a number of talle soldiers, saruyng at Karryckefargus, among the
which company was Captain Baker slain. So for the revenge and redress of
these and such like causes, the Lord Deputy made a power, and marched from
Dradaffe to Dondalke, and so to the Newewrie, and from thence to Lakaell, and
so toward Bellfaste, where in a wood a great number of wild Kerne (under the
leadyng of Brian Macke Farttie) did attend us, and stayed us from taking the
advantage of the tide, they plied us with such shot and other their leaude
demeanor. But we charged on them, and so drove them into their fastness:
Capitain Harryngton and his band served well that season, I beheld the same,
and with small difficulty we put the enemies back, and passed the River with
some hazard, for the flood was come in, and we were feign to carry our
footmen behind us a horseback, and some we led by the hands, which moyled
and wette the poor soldiers extremely, but the march that we had after to
Karryckefargus, brought the poor men in good heart again: but their
victualles waxed scante, and we carried a longer season then was looked for, by
mean of the hollow and false dealyng of the wild Scotts, of whom Sarlaboyes
was Captain.

This Serlaboyes had in his Creete (as they call it) thirty thousand Kye, and
yet we wanted both Beef and Biskette: The reason was, the wind served not
to conueigh us victualles from Strangfforde, and other places appoincted to
victual the Camp.

At the length Serlaboyes was feign, and glad to send us some Kye, and so we
marched away: but the second day after, the woodde Kernes spied their time,
and set upon some of our carriages, and took with them both tronkes full of
apparel, and some plate, but they could not do to our power any hurt at
all, save to a few that went without order, and felt some scourge for their
folly.

After this the Lord Deputy road to a place called Blackwater, to whom came
the Oneall, and made his humble submission: and so we held on in iourneyng,
and march still toward the Weste, and came first to the Forttes in
Affayleye, where some offenders were hanged, and then to Kylkennie the Lord
Deputy passed, but before he came nere the Town, the noble Earl of Ormonde
with a brave train met the Lord Deputy, and afterward feasted him most
sumptuously: and now to speak of this valliant Earl, it shall beautify my
matter. For his service, charges and trauaill has been such, that it
deserves memorial for ever: For always and at all seasons, he has on his
own proper cost and charge been as ready, and as forward to serve the
Prince, as any man that ever I have heard spoken of, noble or otherwise: and
this is most to be commended in that noble Earl, he never brake faith in his
days, but had such regard to his honor, that he would keep touch with his
mortal enemies, and much more with his friends, and where due obedience
does lead him. I lack but laisure to praise that noble man a right, and so
for this time I go no further, in his honorable commendations.

Now from Kylkennie the lord Deputy went to Korke, and so to Lymbricke, where
I saw the Earl of Desmonde come in with great humility and reverence: and
many others of the Nobility of Irelande, duetifully behaved them selves there.
So from that place the Lord Deputy went to Gallawaie, and returned home
through Connaught (where now Sir Nicholas Malbie remains as governor.

FOr that it shall not seem in any sort, that either affection or report,
should lead my pen to the praise of one, and leaving out the laud of an
other (which is a kind of curryng favor with men, and a favorer of good
fortune) I have drawn and set down in good order, the valliant services of
diverse capitaines that were at New Haven, who ought not to be forgotten, if
I write not parshallie, and void of consideration. Among the which Capitaines
I find Captain Read (now in the Garrison of Barwicke) a man so worthy of
memory, and garnished with knowledge and courage, that he not only merits to
be spoken of, but likewise deserves to be honored in Marshall causes, and
exercises of war.

And because sonderie reports has been bruted (and blown abroad, otherwise
then reason requires) of the keeping and yeeldyng of New Haven: I mind in
breef and short manner, to make a whole and sound description of the services
there. Which in mine opinion were both dangerous and manly, and may be
called a noble exploite: till Gods visitation by terrible Plague and
diseases, had infected the town, and disouraged stout soldiers.

For in calling to mind the sondrie hazardes, and extremities they were in,
(considering a few in comparison in a strange Country, withstoode a great
nation and multitude of men well experimented. I am moved to touch a little
their vallue, and to shut in silence by this my true rehersall, the bablyng
speeches of those that have barked, or snarred at the well dooyng of their
Country men. Whose fame and laudation in our Forefathers days has
ouermatched, and far surpassed the glory of any our neighbors, examine but
their deeds and conquestes, and you shall need no further trial of the
matter.

Now to make good minds of upright meaning conceive the trothe, and in a manner
marvel at the hap, and manliness of our people: I will first and formoste
declare unto you, a victory gotten against the Count de Ringraue (albeit it
falls not in order of the whole discourse) a man of great honor, and no
little courage and conducte. Who governed his Camp and regiment, with as good
policy and knowledge, as any manne living in his days, and place of service.

It fell out after the French were knit in union, and that both the Religions
were bente against us (as in causes of dominion is always to be looked for)
and so determinyng to lay siege to New Haven, with all the power they could
make. They sent this noble Count Ryngraue, to take a certain village not far
from the Forte: in which village did encampe the whole regiment of the
Ryngraue, when he had with some difficulty possessed it. The Earl of Warwick
Lord Lieutenaunt for the Queens Majesty, being careful of his charge, and
watchful to preuente mischeef: Sent out at Midnight Captain Read and some
other bands, to hold the enemy some play, and bid them the basse, and so
in skirmishe as the season and occasion would serve, they drove out a piece of
the night, receiuyng little harm, and doing all the hurt they could devise.

But my Lord Lieutenaunt beholding the boldness of the Ryngraue, and seeing
how nere he sought to nestell him self to New Haven, with such a power as
peradventure, might have troubled the whole town. My Lord issued and went to
the Forte, which stood a good distaunce from the Haven.

And after my Lord had a while digested this business, and had well foreseen
what might follow, if the enemy were suffered like a strong hedded horse, to
take the bridell in his teeth: my Lord called Captain Read before him, and
told him that the enemy must be removed. For by Gods will quod he (as it is
my Lords earnest word) if the Ryngraue lodge so nere my charge, the one of
us both shall take little rest, and so my Lord concluded, and fully
determined that Captain Read should have the leadyng of a thousand men, and
go give a charge on the enemy. To which commandment Captain Read
willyngly obeyed, whereupon Captain Souche, Captain Ward, Captain Gam
Captain Somersettes Lieutenaunte, Captain Apleyarde, Captain Parkinson,
Captain Anttwesill, Captain Wilfforde, and all their bands, were
appoincted to follow Captain Reads order and direction, in as duetifull
manner, as my Lord him self had had the leadyng of these bands and officers.

Now it behooved Captain Read to look well about him, and to set down a
course and order to keep, firmly and advisedly, because he had not to deal
with men of small value, nor people that before time had been ignoraunte, of
the service in the feelde. Wherefore he sorted his soldiers, and placed them
in the most assured and aptest manner, for the accomplishyng of such an
enterprise: divided them into that order, that one might answer an other,
and the maine battaill should give releef to the whole company.

But here is to be noted, that the enemies were thought very strong, and to
the number of five or six thousand soldiers, French and Almaines, who
looked for some encounter, and were in battaill closely set and knitte
together, at the entry of the village: having certain louse shot without the
town, and some horsemen withal, ready to give a charge and take what
advantage might be gotten.

Fearyng little, that our people would have ventered on their battaill, and
doubtyng nothing the victory, if so small a power as ours, durst put in
hazard the fight, or offer to give the repulse.

Well, in this dangerous and doubtful piece of service, Captain Read
being resolved, to try the vttermoste of Fortune, and follow my Lords will
and pleasure, who beheld all the exploite: With as great expedition as could
be devised, he set Captain Souche, Captain Gam, Captain Parkinson, and
Captain Ward (men of good service, and ready to adventure for renown) as
a wyng on the left hand of his battaill, to plie the enemy with shot, and
in the battaill and as occasion required, he placed Captain Apleyard,
Captain Anttwesill, and Captain Wilford. For to answer his hope with
their manhood and diligence: and do that was convenient, in such a hot and
courageous encounter.

Now Captain Souche and his company, made such haste to the service (this
being at six a clock in the Morning) and had trotted so fast toward the
enemies, that they were likely to have been out of breathe, and in great
peril: had they not been succored with the foresight, and dexterity of
Captain Read. For he beholding the swiftenesse of the wing, and the
necessity of the cause, began suddenly to mende his wonted march, and held
a good pace and trotte toward the village, having ever an eye and regard to
bring on his people (which was the battaill) always in good order and breath.

But this haste and bold attempt was no sooner offered, but the enemy thought
to prevent it, and so with such horsmenne as they had at hand, they charged
our footmen, who were so strongly guarded with Pikes, that the horsemennes
labor was lost, and some of them slain among the Pikes, they were so well
joined, and clasped together.

By this time went of all the small shot of the enemies battaill, and as God
would (our men were come so nere, that they were crept under the danger of
the hargaboze, by mean of a smother and smoke, that a great while before, the
enemies shot and ours had made. For Captain Read espiyng that advantage badd
march apace, to come to the ioynyng: so that through this occasion the enemies
shot did little, or no hurt at all.

At this instaunt were our people even at the very entry of the village, and
a French gentleman as seemed, beholding Captain Read (the cheef leader of
our battaill, marchyng before the rest) levied his piece at him, myndyng to
have shot, but by trauesyng of ground, Captain Read stayed the French
man's hand, who stepte straight way behind a little waule (and at the
enteryng into the Town) discharged his peecefull at the breast of Captain
Read, the piece being charged with two bullettes, but albeeit it was so
nere, that the fire flewe in his face, yet he was so well armed, that the
shot but rent and broke his Armor, and did him no further hurt. Whereupon
Captain Read steps to the Frencheman, and so thrust him through with a
Halbert: an other gentleman standing nere this, offered to be taken prisoner:
but Captain Read myndyng to do that he came for, followed his enterprise,
and charged on the battaill of the enemy, that stood as stiff as a waule,
till our men laid their Pikes lustely upon them, and by very fine force and
pushe of the Pick, put them back, and caused the^ to wheel about. In which
conflicte six hundredth were slain, and nine score and three persons were
taken, and brought away. The victory was followed a small season, with as
much manhood as could be showed, and the enemy driven out of the village: But
for the auoydyng of such danger, as over far marchyng into a strange
Country, as might have brought our men unto: Captain Read with fame and
victory, retired in very good order, and manner of the feelde.

Now I pray you, was not this a piece of service, worthy the honoring, and
because many at home, that never saw service abroad, sittyng on soft cushons
(and feles no hard fortune) does desca^t of every man's doing: yet neither
knows plainsong, nor understands measure. I have thought good to set out
plainly such a piece of service (put in proof at new Haven) among the rest
of services, as the ignoraunte babbler shall be a shamed to speak against, and
the manne of knowledge shall honor, and hold in reputation, when he shall
hear what trothe has reported. After Captain Read and his valliant
companions (capitains and soldiers) had given the Ringraues company an
overthrow, there befell a second and a third days service: such and so
nobly maintained and followed, as seldom has been seen in any place of the
world. And for the better understanding of the same, (and in praise of our
English nation) I will rehearse it unto you orderly as it was, or at the least
wise as well as I ca^. The French stomackyng the overthrow lately spoken of,
(and the Ringraue seeking a revenge) drew a draught to train our men out of
the town, which were ready enough either for skimishe, or any other manner of
enterprise: and to this service on the sudden, went out one master Charles
Leighton, as leader of all our shot in the feeld, that day: this Charles was
Sir Thomas Leightons brother then there, and now governor of Garnesey, on
whose good service I could speak in like manner. But now to my former matter.

The French side with as great a bravery, and order of war as might be,
came lustellie to provoke the skirmishe, having certain bands of horse men
for their guard, and great advantage: And our English Soldiers desirous to
encounter, ran in upon their enemies so feercely, and with such a courageous
charge, that nothing but smoke of shot, and flaming fire was seen between
the two powers. And always master Charles Leighton (who was a most notable
Soldiour) kept his company in so warlike an order, that the horse men durst
not charge them, albeeit they made many an offer, and ran in upon our men
sondorie times, but they came so sparkled abroad, and so daungerously (without
fastness of troop, and surety of force) that our armed Pikes had many of
them at their pleasure: And our shot made great havoc among their cheifest
Soldiers. But the manner of this fight was so Soldiourly handeled, that those
of the French side (being masters of that art) were learned a School poinct
of skill, and took out a lesson worthy the notyng. For those which they
took for ignorant scholars, taught a new kind of conuyng, and showed an
Artificial poincte of pollecie, and practice of war. Which was sometimes to
retire upon fight, to draw the French forward, and there on to charge with
the Pike in both the hands, enterlarded with shot, sword, and Targette,
and came so gallauntly to the pushe of the Pike, and blow of the sword (a
volley of Hargaboze shot of before) that the French and Almains thought,
that our meinie had been rather dauncyng the Almaine Hay, then trauessyng the
ground to forsake the feelde, and retire into the Town, and albeeit, it was
in earnest for life and honor our Soldiers did strive, yet they made it but a
sport, it was so lustely maintained, and so nobly handeled. In the beginning
of this skirmiche, and when the service grew somewhat hot and furious (at
which time diverse stout gentlemen were come to the feelde) sir Humfrey
Gilbart was hurt with the shot of a Hargaboze. There were at this service
sondrie of our gentlemen, as master Thomas Gorge (now of the privy Chamber)
master Ihon Horssey, master Ihon Souch and to be short, diverse of good
calling and reputation, which I must omit, for that an other days* service
must be remembered, whche was upon a Saterdaie, not long after this. Yea such
a days service it was, as who so ever notes it well, shall find matter enough
to talk, or write of a long season: the manner whereof a little shall be
touched, because such valliauncie shall remain as a spectacle to look into,
while the siege of new Haven can be remembered.

Now as you have understood, the French and Almaines desirous of honor, and
to bring to pass that they came for, laid an ambushe of horsemen and footmen
privily for their purpose. And so a few of them about Dinner time, approached
a trenche that was fortified with barrelles, (because the ground served for no
other fortification) on the Peeble, and there our men withstoode them to the
vttermoste: and issued out of the same trenche diverse times, with the force
they had which was but small. The enemy seeing the Trenche not sufficiently
manned, waxed more bolder then they were wont, and so meant to drive our small
power into the town: which was from the new devised Trenche a good
distaunce, and so determinyng and disbandyng certain shot, and other apt
Soldiers for such an exploite, they gallauntly came forwards, and in a
little season (yet with somewhat ado) they enjoyed the Trenche, forcyng our men
to retire to their better aduanntage and more surety. My Lord of Warwick
beholding this broile, and bold attempt (not meaning that our men should
either lose honor or ground) began to be somewhat moved in mind and for
that he would beard the enemy, and know what his friends, and those good
Soldiers under his charge would do. He called Captain Horssey, now sir
Edward Horssey Knight (and Captain of the I Will of Wight) and asked his advice
in this matter: who answered my Lord, that he and his power, with the help
and aid of master Francis Somersettes band, would drive the French out of
the Trenches, and that right soon, if they that issued out of the town,
followed good direction and order. My Lord Lieutenant agreed to this device:
And so captain Horssey had the whole charge of this service, who marched
toward the trenches, with great courage, and hope of victory. The enemy
both at hand and far of, in the vewe of this attempt, framed themselves to
defend and resist, that came to defeite them: and so on both the sides, a
hot piece of service was put in proof, and no party was well, that might
any way occupy weapon in that present action. But alwaie the French side
with their forces (which were double, or treble our number) sought advantage,
how to give a charge on our men with little loss: which Captain Horssey
had a good eye unto, and sought to preuente. For even as the enemy came
lustely on to do mischeef by horsemen, so our men met them a foot as
stoutly, and seemed by runnyng upon the French, rather to give an onsette,
then receive a charge, by which pollecie and manhood, the enemy was mutche
amassed, and suffered some loss of horses, which could not be avoided, the
pusshe of the Pike was so well offered, and the feight so courageously
maintained. Yet the French foot men so applied the service with shot,
that our people neded more hands and help in the feelde: To the which aid
my Lord sent sondrie stout gentlemen, who did very valliantly, and continued
the skirmiche a long season, wherein one master Chidley, and some other of our
side were slain.

And the enemy seeing some advantage sent diverse horse men, to cut of
our men from the Town, and were likely to have dooen great hurt, by mean
that many of our Pikes were broken, and but a very few left whole to defend
our Shot, and withstandyng a charge. Master Thomas Gorge, with a small
company of gentle men on horseback, beholding these things, came gallopyng
into the feelde, and without any delaiyng of the matter, gave a charge on the
enemy, and runnyng in among the thickest of them, passed and persed the whole
troop, and returned back again in feight through the same power, with no
little hazard nor honor. Yet in the neck of this, the French charged our
Pikes a freashe, who met them in the faces, and made them retire: albeeit
the fury of the skirmiche continued, and the enemies all this while gave not
over the feelde (though they had lost the Trenche they had possessed) nor
showed no sign that they were weary, and would march away. Thus with much
a do, and with great exercise of Arms and Marciall attemptes, a great
part of the after noone was consumed: our men always keepyng the feelde,
till at length when our companies were come together, and were out of the
danger of the great Shot, (which before could not be shot of, because
our men were pelle melle) the Ordinance of the Town began to thonder and
rattell in the air, and the Armed men of the enemies, either on horseback or
a foot, began to shrink, and draw from the danger: notwithstanding many
of them were slain at that season. And we had lost in the fight some
gentlemen and good Soldiers, among the which was one master Treimain, who at
many services was very forward before this time, and now with his
forewardnesse and misfortune lost his life.

So this service brought on by the Ryngraue, maintained by the French, and
performed by the English, was then to be taken up, for want of better time to
execute the things that all these nations exspected.

And here is to be noted, that the Ryngraue did what he could, the French did
attempt that they might, and the English left no one thing undone, that was
answerable to the time.

For from the beginning that new Haven was possessed, to the very last day
it was given up, our Soldiers never lay idell: but did always what became
men of war with as great manhood, forecaste, judgment, pollecie, and honor
to England as could be devised. Never out of fear suspicion, hazard, and
doubt to be betrayed: for the which occasion (and to be in some certainty)
they were feign to remove the inhabitauntes out of the Town, which albeeit it
seemed a kind of hard dealyng, and strait order, in good faith it could not
be avoided, except our Nation should have put their necks into the yoke, and
have been taught to draw (contrary to their minds) in a servile band of
bondage.

And this is to be spoken of, and mutche to the commendation of men that love
their own country: that so sone as they saw and found, we went about to
enjoy their Town, their Ships, their Lands, and such like things as they
had before in their own possession. They forgatte all kind of amity,
freendshipp, favor, promise, and obedience unto us, and stuck so fast
together, in one league of love among them selves, that the Papist and the
Protestant, were both become our enemies, and although in Religion they
differed far, and had committed many offenses one against an other, in
Town, in Church, and open feelde. Yet to drive us out of their kingdom, they
were knitt in one union. And albeeit that the remembrance of old quarrels,
might breed some heart burn, and be an occasion that they should not continue
in freendshippe and fidelity, yet the hatered that they bore unto strangers
(that they saw were masters of their goods) made them forgette any former
injury, and wrongs among them selves, and fall into one opinion, for the
remediyng of their present mischief. Which agremente of theirs, and
neighbourly love in that necessity: may be left for an everlasting example
to all posterity and ages, to procure every Nation to have in admiration and
reverence, the liberties and honor of the soil they are borne in.

Now as I have showed the overthrow, that Captain Read and his company gave:
the service that master Charles Leighton was the leader of: and the victory
that sir Edward Horssey was at. So I must report and make mention of the good
speeches that the French them selves let fall openly, in the commendation of
our English Soldiers: by which good words it appears, that such as think
not the best of the service at new Haven, do their Country men wrong. For
as I have written a little, somewhat in their praise, so could I rehearse
mutche more to their commendation. But I must make excuse presently, of a fault
that folowes ten lines after, which the printer should have placed at the
overthrow the Ryngraue had. And yet I return to my matter, and say, that
new Haven men were worthy to be spoken of: and should such Capitaines and
Soldiors, escape the praise of the world, and the recital of my pen, no sure
in very deed, and for that I have gone so far in their behalf, in this
poinct of well doing, I mean as commes to my memory, to show sonderie of
their other services, and feattes of war. Not only because every manne ought
to reap their due renown, for the painful labors they have taken: but also
to animate and encourage others, to seek by dew desarte, the like good mean
and noble commendation, a thing more precious among men of war, then any
other riches, or worldly pleasure.

The Count de Ryngraue standing among a great troup of horsemen, a good way
of, beholding this overthrow began to muse at the matter: and albeit he had
lost many of his men (and his expectation being frustrate) he gave great
commendation to the English Soldiers, and told the French, that they should
them selves attempt the next approach. For he held the English nation other
manner of men, then they were accounted, and said withal, he thought but to
have dealt against Soldiers, but he had to do with the Furies of hell, or
Spirits of the air. Such was the nobleness and good disposition of the
Ryngraue, that he would give his enemies fame, and ecclipps no iotte of honor
from them, that well had deserved.

Yea, this Ryngraue was such a noble warrior, that after the battaill or
skirmishe was ended, or any piece of service was done, he would send flaggons
of wine to his enemies, and in time of truce, or breach of war (which he
used often for honors sake) he would make bankettes, give gifts, show
liberality, and be as courteous as a little child: And in the feelde a very
Lion more like then a man, and yet a man of most sober judgment and
knowledge.

The whole Camp of the Frenchemen came to a great hille, after the overthrow
that the Ryngraue had, and fully bent to besiege New Haven: they made every
day a new approach to the town, in most soldiourlike sort and order, and
to hold them in some awe, as our power might, many skirmishes were made, and
good policy and courage was put in excersice, and nothing left undone, that
either time or place would permit. But what should I further delate, of things
paste man's help and pollice: when Gods wrath and visitation does cut of
all arguments, and makes a quick dispatche of the matter. For the Plague was
so sore in the Town, that many men in a rage did leap out of the windows,
into the streate: and such a general disease and dispairing sickness, was
spread throughout the whole company of soldiers, that no one stood in
certainty of his own state or life. Such was the heat and fury of the
fearful Pestilence, and grievous botche, a dauntyng malladie, that takes
away the use of wit, and courage of man.

Well, albeeit that this great mortality, and miserable state of life, might
have utterly overthrown, the valliaunte minds of many good men: yet our
people stood so stoutely to their defense, that many exploites were taken in
hand, and they forced the enemy to make an offer unto them, of a noble
composition, which of necessity must be taken (all things considered) for
there was no succor to be hoped, for to come out of England. And some that
were sent thither, as sir Thomas Finche, and diverse other gentlemen, were
cast away by the sea, and presently drouned.

Then noble Captain Randall (who can not have to much fame) who after was
slain in Irelande, was appoincted by the Lord Lieutenaunt, to tarry behind
when the Town was yielded up: to see all conditions and capitulations
performed, which were but slackly handeled, and looked unto by the French,
and yet in effect our soldiers (with as much honor as men in their plight
could have) came home, and brought much ordinance and goods with them. But
they had so great a plague still among them, that many here at their arrival,
departed this world.

This was but a piece of the service, that captain Read was at in his days:
for his most pains has been taken about the wars of Scotland, and roades
made into that Country: where he has borne him self so well, and that a long
season, that all those who knows the same (or can call the service to memory)
gives good report thereof, and speaks much to the ad^^^ncement of his good
name.

And seeing that in (...) praise and others, my pen has gone so far, I will
^ touch the services of sir Willya^ Winter, who both by land and Sea, has
often been employed. And in the rehearsal of some part of his doings, I will
as I may make mention of sir Willyam Drewrie, sir Humfrey Gilbart, sir Willyam
Morgane, Capitain Barkley, Captain Morgane, Captain Chester, Captain
Bingham, and sondrie that of late days has been in diverse places of danger,
and good services. But this is to be looked for, that the honorable sir James
Croftes (now Controller of the Queens Majesty's household) sir Ihon Walloppe,
sir James Wilfforde, and sir Ihon Bellyngame, be not forgotten, and that every
one of these, as remembrance shall serve me, be breefly spoken of. For if at
large I touched some of their noble exploites, (that last I have made mention
of) I should make a great volume of the same, and so seem to write a
Chronicle, that means but to treat of a few passages, for the passing of the
time, and the pleasuryng of my friends.

The services of sir James Croftes, may well be understood, if you look into
the siege of Bullein: The wars of Scotland, and the troublesome affairs of
Irelande, where he was Lord Deputy. And who that looks depely in the
mannagyng of those matters, shall justly of him self, yield due honor to
the person that has taken these pains, without the report of my pen, or
further publishyng of the same.

Sir Ihon Walloppe that long remained governor of Gines: and the service of
the good knight Bellyngame, once lord Deputy of Irelande, are of no little
moment. For the one had such a hurt by a counter boffe that he got at
Laundersey, that he carried it to his death (albeit he lived long after, and
did many great things) and the other was given to such valliauntnesse (as
his doings do declare) that in a manner we can not imagine more worthiness in
two men, nor rightly attribute unto them, the glory they deserve.

If never any service but the siege of Haddyngton were spoken of, it were
sufficient enough, and a witness great to show the great mind, and manly
courage of sir James Wilfforde. For he being there as general, held out the
force of France, and power of Scotland: the Queen mother lookyng and liyng
at the siege, and the Town was so battered and beaten, that men on horseback
might have ridden over the breach. Yet notwithstanding, besides a number of
other great causes, to make men rander a Forte, sir James Wilfforde kept the
enemies out: and did so nobly every way, neither scarcity of victual, nor
want of powder could move his invincible mind. For the more was the misery,
the greater grew his heart, and hope to have good Fortune: for the which
assured fortitude and determinate purpose, he purchased everlasting renown.
And lives at this day in as fresh memory, as he were seen presently before
the eyes of the people.

In that season was a place called Donglasse at our devotion, where one master
Aston was placed, and an other fort beyond Fiffeside called Broghttie Cragge,
where sir Ihon Luttrell did serve very valliauntely a long time. And at a
Town nere the same Forte called Dondie, Sir Willyam Winter and others, did a
great piece of service, worthy the rehearsal. But for that Broghttie Cragge
was at the length lost, for lack of succor out of England, I leave out
much matter, that otherwise I had written.

After the Siege of Haddyngton was raised, and the French had withdrawn their
battery, and the old Earl of Shrewesburie was come with an army, and lay at
a place called Abberladie. The Earl of Linkcolne that now is, being Lord
Admiral, landed a great company of soldiers at a Pile called saint Minius,
where our Fortune was but froward: and for that I was taken prisoner there,
and our people had no great good hap: It shall remain untouched any further.

A little before this, between Tom Tallent and the Basse some French Galleys
were placed, and three of our Ships liyng in vewe of them, (the Antheloppe,
the Heart, and the Grand Mestresse, so were the three Ships called) hoissed
up Sails to feight with the Galleis, which were two and twenty in number:
but there befell such a misfortune by castyng about to fetch aborde, that
our Ships fell one in others takell, and were so hard clasped together,
through mean of mischaunce, that they might not shoot at advantage, to
annoye the enemy. Who espiyng this opportunity, came orderly forward, and shot
many shot of Cannons among us, breakyng down a Maste or two, and killing a
few persons. But in the end the Ships were set free, and my Lord Admiral
had sent to our succors, and the calm was gone, in so much that the gale of
Wind blewe our ships full upon the Galleys, which the French being in
fear of, drew apace toward the Shore, and ran their Galleys on ground.
But ere they could depart out of our danger, we were so nere them, that our
Bow men shot into their Galleys, and our Cannons made a great murder, and
havoc among the poor slaves, whose legs arms, and Ores I saw fly about,
as the force of our shot might attain them.

These Galleys hopyng to keep victual from Broghttie Cragge, crepte a long by
the Shore, and encountered a Ship wherein was Captain Peers (now seruyng in
Irelande, and then a venterar) and laid so sore to his charge that they shot
his Ensign through and through, and were like to have bouged the Ship, but
he mindyng more his reputation, then regardyng the hazard he was in, plied the
Galleys so well, that they durst not approach over nere, and so in the mean
while came a lusty gale of wind, and sent Captain Peers from the French
Galleys, to his great safety, and the comfort of his friends and country
men.

Our Ships manned furthe Boats, and set upon diverse sails that lay in
Bornte Island, and so spoiled them, and left them on a flaming fire: and
thereon rowed toward a mighty great Carrecke, that lay under the succoure
of Ynchskeeth, and boorded the same Carreck, and so burnt it: the fire whereof
discharged many great shot in the said Ship, before our men could come
aborde again, but that shot did little hurt at all: and our Navy in the
mean season, lay in the mouth of the Frithe, not far from an Island called
the Maay.

Within a short while after, was there a lusty gentilman (and a serviceable)
sent to take Yntchskeeth, his name was master Ihon Cotton, a Captain of good
account, he landed and valliauntly took the Island, but when our Ships
departed from the Frithe, the French and Scotts men entered the Island
again, and recovered it to our great discontent: in which fury and fight
Capitain Cotton was slain, albeeit he did what became a man of stout heart
and courage, and fought it out to the last man in his company: which made
the enemies marvel, considering they were void of hope to be succored and
releued.

The Scotts and Frenchemen taking a great despite, to go without Haddyngton
liyng so long before it, determined in a morning to assail it manfully, and to
try what Fortune and force of men might compass. So the Ryngraue and
nombers of the French side, came priuelie from Edenborough, and set upon the
base court of Haddyngton, and in very deed were likely to have distressed
the Town, if good watch and circumspection had not prevented that approach.
For the enemies were in the base Court, and began to glory much of their
conquest, but one gave fire to a great piece that stood full of haileshotte,
at the enterie of the gate, and slew diverse of the enemies, whereat our men
issued and dealt so valliauntly with the enemy that they retired, and lost
all their labor. At this time either sir James A Croftes was general there,
or anon after. For Sir James Wilfforde was either before taken prisoner at
Donbarre, or within a short season after. But how so ever that case stands,
the soldiers of Haddyngton kept the town, and wanne such fame thereby, that
to this present age they are spoken of and honored.

Whiles these things were in dooyng, time roulled on, and produced further
matter. For the wheel turned, and Fortune so frouned at our prosperity, that
the world began to fall to declination, and so Haddyngton was rased, and left
to those that would possess it, and the French having some hope, to recover
what they lost before, took occasion offered by some sudden alteration, and
common course of worldly affairs, and thereupon they besieged Bullein Bark,
the old Man, and many other members belongyng to Bullein, and a great
captain called Mounsire de Terms was in Scotland, preparyng to besiege
Lawther Forte, where Sir Hugh Willoughbie had government, with whom was
Captain Colbie, Captain Maneryng, Captain Haeles, Captain Whitton,
Captain Colliar, Captain Knapp and others, whose names I have forgot,
albeeit I was then there newly escaped out of Scotland. The said Mounsire de
Terms lay a long Mile (with his whole Camp) from Lawtherfort, and we to
make him sport, devised that some lusty gentlemen, should clapp on white
scarffes, and so ride like Scotts men into the enemies Camp, which we
performed, and slew diverse in the Markette place, and came away untouched.
And not content with this little attempt (for among our companies were
soldiers of Haddyngton) we daiely offered to skirmishe, when in the feelde
was always to encounter us five to one of as good Soldiers, as then were to
be found in France. But our hope and forewardnesse was such, that every
second day, we did somewhat worthy the meetyng: and at this service came one
Iho^ Carr of Warke (a valliaunte old Captain, and a special Soldiers in
those parts) and brought hard Cheese and powder to us. For the eating of
Horses did argue, hard Cheese was as welcome as powder: yet none of them both
might be spared in that extremity.

Mounsire de Terms being desirous of victory, determined to come with
Ladders, and so to scale the fort, whereof we had word, and prepared to
receive him with an vnfreendly welcome: and for that we found he brake his
day, and would wax weary of rest, by long liyng idle in a place. The
General caused all the great Ordinance of the fort, to be bente fully
upon Determes his Camp (Captain Manneryng in deed put that device in
hedde and practice first) and early in the morning on an Easter day, the whole
great artillery was discharged on Determes his Camp, which slew diverse, and
so vexed the Camp: that as you see a number of Crows fly out of a wood, when
a harkaboize is shot of, so the Frenchemen came out of their Hiue, that
yields no Honey, and gave us a sower and sharp encounter. For in a small
season they drove us out of the feelde, and gave an attempt to win the base
Court, where we attended their coming, and strove with them so stoutly, that
in that struggle we were joined, and wrastled together, as daungerously as any
man living may imagine, but in such order, that the French were forced to
retire a little, and we were feign to recover the Forte: and yet the French so
valliauntly handled their business, that they lay under the rampire of the Base
court, and slew sondrie of our soldiers, that could not in due season come
in. Among the cheef Captain Manneryng had his deaths wound, and fell down
in the dike before the gate: whose body we recovered with very little loss,
but he died within three days after. And the French missyng that they sought,
retired that present night to their Camp: where they abode not ten days,
but a peace was concluded, and we marched all toward Barwicke.

Now here is to be noted, that in those days we had great soldiers a live,
and most of them at Barwicke, as Captain Honte, Captain Sanders,
Captain Tems, Captain Pickman, and very many others of good experience and
credit.

Now I must leave to your judgments (and readyng of other books) the wars
of Scotland, and will show you of some services that happened in Irelande,
during the time that sir Anthony Sellenger was Lord deputy there who was a
grave and fatherly wise governor, and had much a do in that country, to
bring things in good perfection and quietness. For the Lords of that soil,
were at that presence given to sondrie troublesome practices, whom he reformed,
and set in very peaceable estate: among the rest was one Makarttie More, which
held out a great season, but the Lord Deputy going against him with an
army, made him come in at Cork, where upon his humble submission, I saw him
bear the sword before the Lord Deputy. Yet albeeit, that in this and many
other services, sir Anthony Sellenger at several times, deserved great
commendation (he being a knight of the Garter) yet his fortune was so adverse
and contrary, that he was seldom at home in his Country out of trouble, and
danger of displeasure, and felt as many have dooen (that governed Irelande)
the self same plague that Scipio Affricane possessed for his praise, the greef
whereof brought sir Anthony to his grave: as the works I could show of his
one pennyng can testify. For this honorable knight had an excellent gift to
write in verse or prose, and was of so tractable a nature and condition, that
most men did honor him, as much for his virtues, as for his office and
calling. But my matter depends not only in one man's merits or praise:
wherefore I do pass to other things, that comes to my mind.

In Irelande at those days was the noble Captain Randall, Captain
Masterson, Captain Lippiarde, Captain Thomas Smith, Capitain Coolley, and a
number of other Capitaines that now are out of my remembrance, who for service
and well doing, are nothing inferior to many good Capitaines that I have named
before.

The honorable sir James A Crofttes was Lord Deputy of Irelande (and had
taken the sword at Cork of sir Anthony Sellenger) at this season when many
great things was to be dooen: And he had no small regard to his charge and
government, the services them selves, are sufficient argument of his no
little labor and diligence, and may well enough declare that which I omit,
and for want of laisure do not speak of.

Now the wars burste out between the French king and the Emperor, on whose
sides sondrie English gentlemen, served for knowledge sake, and reputation.
And on the French side did Captain Crayer, Captain Twittie and their
company florishe, and did many exploites, as in an other place of my book I
have reported. And on the Emperors side was Captain Plonket, Captain
Matson, and a great number of very valliaunt soldiers of our nation, who
sought nothing but credit, renown, and good report. Sir Willyam Drewrie (now
Lord Justice of Irelande) was then so gallauntly disposed, that he did but
daiely search where, or how he might bestow his time in service, and so served
a long season, to his great commendation with the Emperor, as heretofore I
have rehearsed. And he was so inclined to Marshall affairs, that when foreign
wars were ended, he sought entertainment at Gines and those parts, which
had war with the French, for king Phillippes quarrel. And he having charge,
and a lusty band of horsemen did many things, that merits good likyng. For
at that time was much ado, and a band of horsemen very well appoincted, and
full of gentlemen, was sent from the lord Warden, an honorable and a worthy
gentleman, (most full of nobleness) the Lord Cheinees father now living. In
this band, and belongyng to that charge, was sondrie of the Keises, gentlemen
of good service, master Crippes having the leadyng of all that company. There
was sent in like sort from the Prince, Master Willyam Harbertes brother of
saint Gillians, called master George Harbertte, with a band of footmen, and
one Captain Borne whose Lieutenaunt I was, at the siege of Gines.

These bands a good season before Callice and Gines were taken, ioynyng with
other bands of Callice, did make diverse iourneis into Bollinnoyes, and sped
very well: Sir William Dreurie at every service, deserved no little praise,
and one Captain Winnibancke an ancient soldiour, was oftentimes so forward,
that he was run ones through the buttocke with a Lance: Many gentlemen in
those services did well and worthily: And sondrie times the Lord Wardeins
band was to be praised. And at length a voyage was made by the consent, and
whole power of Callice and Gines, to fetch a prey from Bolleyn gates (
Mounsire Snarppoule then being governor of Bolleyn) but we could not handle
the matter so privily, but the French by espiall, had gotten word thereof.
Notwithstanding, as Soldiers commonly goes forward with their devise: so we
marched secretly all the whole night, to come to our purposed enterprise: and
our footmen whereof sir Harry Palmer (a man of great experience) had the
leadyng. He remained with the whole power of footmen nere the Black Neastes,
as a stale to annoye the enemy, and succor for such as were driven in, if
any such occasion came. So the horse bands brake into the Country, and
preased nere Bollayne, where was a great number of gallaunt soldiers to
receive them? but our horsemen making small accounte of the matter, began to
prey the country, and drive a booty from the face of the enemies. The French
horsemen taking their advantage, offered a skirmishe to detracte time, till
better opportunity served to give a charge. This courageous bickeryng grew so
hot, that the French bands began to show, and our men must abide a
shocke, or retire hardely with some foil, whereupon the cheifest of our
horsemen, charged those of the French that were nerest danger, by which
attempt the French stayed a while, but upon a small pause they charged our
men again, and ouerthrewe of the Black Lances a thirty, carriyng away
with them into Bulleyne, eighteen gentlemen prisoners. This skirmishe began
at seven of the clock in the morning, and lasted in very great service till
a leven. And from this overthrow came diverse Soldiers fore wounded, to our
foot bands whose heaviness made the valliaunte sort pluck up their hearts,
and seek a revenge.

Then albeeit that foot Capitaines and Gentlemen, seldom leaves their bands,
and venters beyond their charge (a rule to be much regarded) yet the
stoutest Capitaines and Gentlemen, found means to horse them selves on Carte
horses, and vittellers nagges, and put certain skarffes, in manner of Guidons on
staves ends, showing those Guidons under a hill in several sorts, sometimes
appearyng with twenty men, sometimes thirty: and last of all made show of
all our number, which was not fifty, and so with a courageous cry, set
upon the enemies (leauyng some of these devised Guidons behind on the hill
top) and charged them with such a fury, that they left their booty, and
stood to their defense, but in fine were forced to retire, for by the little
stay we held the enemy in, our footmen had laisure to march, the sound
of whose Drommes gave no great courage to the French. For they thereon gave
back, and left some of their best soldiers behind them, which we
brought to Gines, driuyng the prey before us, that was gotten in the morning,
lost in a skirmishe, and recovered again at Noone. At this service was Sir
Willyam Druerie, Captain Alexander of Newnam Bridge, Captain Crippes,
Captain Reyes, and three of his brethren, Captain George Harbert, and
sondrie others in like manner, that merits good report.

Our power met many times together, and did much hurt at Bolleynnoyes: and
we besieged Fines Castle and wanne it. Blosshyng Church, and ouerthrewe it,
and killed all the men that therein we found: because sir Harry Palmer was
hurt through the arm there with a shot.

A long season our fortune was good, till at length by some oversight or
mishappe (let the blame faule where it ought) we lost Callice, and Gines.
But a little I pray you give me leave, to touch truly the siege of Gines,
not because I had some charge there: But for that sondrie reports has been
raised thereof, by those that never thoroughly knew, or understood the
matter. The very trothe is, after Callice was won, and that all hope was
taken from us, for any succor out of England, our general the honorable
Lord Greye that is dedde, and master Leawes Diue his Lieutenaunt, sir Harry
Palmer, and all the Capitaines of Gines: Determined to abide the worste that
Fortune, or the French could do. And the day of the first approach the
enemy made, we offered a hot and stout skirmishe, but being driven in by
an over great power (though our whole people were thirteen hundredth men) we
keep the Town awhile. But considering the Castle to be most strongest, and
doubtyng by a Cambozade, or sudden assault, the town might be wo^ne (for it
was but weak) we retired our whole power into the Castle, and so manned the
base Court, the Braies, an Bulwarks, the Keep, the Catte, the heart of the
Castle, and all that was necessary with double men. And out of Flaunders at
the present siege, came fifty valliaunt Spaniardes, and a band of
Burgonions, Mounsire Dieffkie being their Captain, and Mounsire Mon Dragon
was leader of the Spaniardes. These Burgonio^s were placed in Mary Bulwark
with Captain Bornes band, whose Lieutenaunte I was. The fifty Spaniardes
were placed in the Braies, where Captain Lambert had some shot to succor
them. Against this Bulwark (which was thought inprenable) the great Battery
was planted, albeit three or four days were spente (we held the enemies
such play) before the Battery was planted.

And one day we issued, and set upon Mounsire Degwyes, as he was in a place
called Milfeelde, vewyng of the ground, and had taken him had not he left his
cloak behind him, on the which white cloak, one of our gentlemen had hold
of: And though that he was succored, we brought away some of his company,
and retired with little loss, or none at all. We set upon a great troop of
horsemen, not long before this, that came from the spoil of Callice, and took
nombers of them. For I had for my part, a couple of fair horses and a
prisoner: at both these services was old Captain Andrea, Captain Ihon
Savage, and a sufficient number of lusty Soldiers. And the Lord Graie that
now is, was at the hard escape of Mounsire Degwies.

We made diverse sallies, but that prevailed not, for the Battrie went of, and
many other great Cannons did beat at the hye Towers, the stones whereof did
marueilously anoye us: and the shot was so great, and such great
advantage of ground the enemies had gotten, that we could not walk, nor go
saffely no any way within the Castle. For our general and sir Harry Palmer
sittyng on a form, deuisyng for our commodity, were in such danger, that a
Cannon shot took away the form, and brake sir Harry Palmers leg (of
which hurt he died in Parice after) and a great shot took of master
Wakes hedde, as he was slepyng under a great Tree. And so sonderie that
thought them selves saffe, were so dribbed at with Cannot shot, that they never
knew who did hurt them. Well, the time drew on after the breach was made, we
must defend the assault, that was given to Mary Bulwark, which stood out of
the Castle, and far from succor of any, because the gate was rammed up, and
we could not pass into the Castle but by that way. First a long the Braies,
and then between two gates, which way the enemy had espied, and placed
many great shot full upon that passage.

Now Mounsire Diffkie, Captain Borne, Captain Oswolde Lambertt, and the
fifty Spanyardes, were forced to abide the assalte, which begaime at a leven
a Clock, and lasted till night. Mount Dragon came into Mary Bulwark, and
three gentlemen more, and stood stoutly to our defense, two of them were
slain. My Capitaines hedde was smitten of with a Cannons shot, and Captain
Diffkie was wounded to the death, whose band fought manfully in the revenge of
their Capaine, and unto our band was left no more but one master Holford, and
I to gide the whole company. And the old Captain Andrea, covetous of Fame,
was desirous to have our fellowship: but he had no band nor people to do us
pleasure. Captain Lambert was crossed with a great shot, and mine armor
with the breakyng of a great piece, was stricken flat upon my body, but being
unbraced I might continue the service: which service in mine opinion, was so
terriblie handled by the French, ( Mounsire Dandelot being the leader of the
assault) that both English, Burgonion, and Spanyard at that Bulwark had
enough to do to keep the enemy out. And as I believe at this assault, we
lost a hundredth and fifty good soldiers: but the night coming on, the
French surseased their fury, and yet kept them selves closely under the top
of the breach, where our shot nor flankers could do them no harm. For all
our great Ordinance was dismounted long before the enemy made any approach,
for the giuyng of an assault.

The next day within three half hours, the Battery had beaten the breach
so bare (which molded away like a hillocke of Sand) that we were forced to
feight on our knees, and being kept wakyng all the night before, with false
Allarummes, our men began to fainte, and wax weary of workyng at the breach.
But we defended Mary Bulwark so well, all that dangerous day, that the
French lost a thousand Soldiers by their own confession, at the same
service: and yet the assault endured to the very darcke night, with as much
cruelty as could be devised. And always when the enemies first men, did wax
feeble with labor, there was a second and new releef of fresh bands, to
continue the assault. So that as long as the day light served, it seemed by
the fight a bloody broile has no end, nor season to take breathe in, which
certainly would have daunted any heart living.

The next night was so plied with polliticke practices, that we had skarcely
laysure to take any rest, or sustentation: and in deed with over watchyng,
some of our men fell a sleep in the middell of their tale, and time of greatest
necessity, to debate and argue of those things, that pertained to life and
liberty, and to avoid utter servitude and shame. And now we that were
without the Castle, might hear a great business and stir, throughout the
whole body and heart of the piece. For the next morning (which was the third
day, we were assaulted) our general looked for a general assault, and to be
assailed roundely, as of trothe he was. In the mean while we might speak one
to an other* a far of, and our friends answered us over the wall: for nerer
together we might not come, and for succor or aid in Mary Bulwark to our
soldiers we hoped not after. Every man was occupied with his own business
and charge, that no one person might be spared from his place. Well, as God
would permit, the poor Spaniardes, and such Burgonio^s (as was left us a live
in Mary bulwark) fell to make a cou^ter skarffe to beat out the enemy from
the Braie, when the Bulwark should be won, as it was likely to be lost,
the breach was so bare, and the entry for the enemy was so large. For in a
manner they might assault our Bulwark round about on all sides, and did lodge
at the very edge of the breach, to the number of two thousand of their
brauest bands, mindyng to assail us, as soon as the day began to pepe out of
the skies.

Which they performed when the third day approached, for a general assault
was given to every place of the Castle which assault endured till the very
night came on, and the French in this assault wanne the base Court, and were
ready to set fire under the gate, and blow it up with powder. And Mounsire
Dandelot his own person, was entered Mary Bulwark, with two thousand
soldiers, who slew the Spaniardes in the Braie, and forced as many Burgonions
and English as was left a live (which was but fifteen of four hundred) to
leap down into the Dikes, and so to scamble for their lives, and creep into
a hole of a brick wall: that my Lord Grate had broken up, to receive such as
eskaped from the assault, which was Captain Andrea, Captain Lambert, and
my self with twelve common Soldiers. But when we had entered the hole in the
wall, the French followed at our heels, and we to save our lives turned
again, bendyng Pikes against the passage, and so shot of one Hargaboze, by
which means the enemy followed no further: And yet we were in as great
distress as before. For we were between two gates, and at the gate we
should have entered, was two great Cannons ready charged to be shot of, to
drive them back that would have set fire on the gate. And the cry and noise
was so great, and terrible on all sides, that we could not be hard speak.
But as God would master Jews Diue (a man of warshippe now in Bedforde Shire)
hears my voice, then I plied the matter so sore for life, so that with much a
do, master Diue received us into the heart of the Castle: and yet in the
openyng of the gate, the French were like to enter pelley melley with us, if a
Cannot shot had not made place, whiles the gate was a shuttyng. But now we
were no sooner come before my Lord Graie, but all the soldiers cried, yield
up the Castle upon some reasonable composition. And when the Soldiers saw,
they could not have the Castle yielded: they threatened to flyng my Lord
Graye over the walls, and that was determined, if my Lord had not prevented
them with a policy. Whereupon the Capitaines were called together, and there
they agreed, to send me to Mounsire Degwise with an offer, that if we might
all march with bag and baggage, Ensign displaied, and six pieces of
Ordinance, we would yield the Castle into the hands of the French. Now was
it night, and I must be let out at master Harry Norwitche his Bulwark: but
neither Dromme nor Trompet wentte with me, because a Trompettor was slain, as
he sounded to have a parley, and as I heard say, a Dromme that would have
followed me, was shot into the leg. But there was no remedy, but I must
wade over the water: in which water lay certain galthroppes, as they term
them, which were great bordes, full of long spikes of Iron, on the which
having good boots, and a stay in my hand, I was taught daintely to tread,
and the night was so darcke, that the enemy might not take any good mark of
me, (albeit they shot diverse times) so with some hazard, and no great hope
to attain that I was sent for, I was taken by the watch, and brought to
Mounsire Degwises tent, where duke D'omale, and many great estates were in
presence, my message being said, with decent reverence made. The Duke told
me that all our Ordinance was dismounted, and that thereby our malice was
cut of, and we could not do his Camp any annoyaunce: Wherefore said he,
this was a stout brag, to seek a capitulation with such advantage upon. I
replied to his excellency, and told that we had flanckers, and other great
pieces, which would not be discovered till the next assault, declaryng
likewise our soldiers had sworn, rather to dye in their defense, then not to
march away like men of war. The noble men on this mine answer badde me
return, and will the rest of the Castle, to do the worste they could: So I
departed, and the Duke of Gwise beholding (as he thought) we were resolved to
see the vttermoste of Fortune, called me back again, and fell to questions
and arguments with me, such as I liked not. But other answer did I not
make, then before you have heard: wherewith he called for some meat, and made
me to sit down, and after I had a little refreshed my self, I demanded to
know his pleasure: Who straight ways told me there was no help to be had,
but to become all captives, and prisoners to the French king: Not so sir, I
answered, and that should the next assault make trial thereof. Then he went
to talk with the noble men, and there they concluded, that the soldiers
should march away with bag and baggage, and the capitaines and officers
should remain prisoners, which I knew would not be liked, and so desired to
be sent to my Lord Graie. But when I came into the Castle, and the
soldiers had gotten word, that they might march away at their will: They
came to me, and threatened me with great words, commaundyng to make
dispatche, and yield up the Forte. For said they, since the matter is in
talk, and likely to be brought to a good purpose, they would cut my throat,
if I made not hastily an end of the case. And thereon had they made a great
hole in a wall, and so they thruste me out among the Almaines, who rudely
handeled me. But my Lord Graie at my departure, badde me tell the Duke, that
the Almaines were about to break into the Castle, and to set the gate a
fire: and my Lord said, he would shoot of his great Ordinance among them,
if the law of Arms were not better observed. But in the mean time at an other
place was entered Mounsire de Tree, master of the Ordinance, and the Lord
Graie that now is, was sent into the Camp, for the paune of Mounsire De Tree.
But I was come to Mounsire Degwise, before those things were finished, and had
told him my message: And he like a noble Prince, and faithful Captain road
to the gate (causyng me to mount behind master Harry Dudley) where the
Almaines were busily occupied about some naughty practice: and with a great
trontchon he struck diverse of the Almaines and others, to make them retire, and
laiyng load about him, he made such way that the gate was free. And the
capitulation was at laysure talked of, but I was not suffered to enter no more
into the Castle: and so stayed as a prisoner, notwithstanding, look what
promise Mounsire Degwise made, it was so well kept and observed, that our
soldiers marched away with all their wealth, money, or weapons: And great
wealth was by them borne from Gines, in so much that diverse poor Soldiers,
were made thereby all their life days after. And this was to be noted, there
was great honor in the Duke of Gwise, for the bands that parted either sick
or sound, hurt or whole, were honestly conueighed, and truly dealte withal,
even as long as they were in any danger (albeit they had great sommes of
money and Threasure with them) and the General, his Capitaines and Officers
were courteously used, so long as we were in the Duke of Gwise his Camp. And
to say the truth, I think our peace was not so dishonorable, as some
report: For succor had we no hope of: The next assault had overthrown us:
The whole members of the Castle were cut of from us. There remained but the
bare body of the Castle in our custody. The enemies Cannons did beat us
from the breach on the in side: The Castle was subject to every shot, both
from the Keep, the Catte, and Mary Bulwark. The French possessed all the
special places of our strength and comfort. The best and cheifest of our
soldiers were slain, or lay maimed in most miserable estate. And we had
lost eight hundredth men, in these assaults and services, which did their
duty so well, that the enemy confessed, that they had lost four thousand,
before we could be brought to any parley and composition. But some of our
Officers by craft and cunnyng, escaped home out of the French men's hands:
came to the Court, and made up their bands again, to the great reproach of
those that meant no such matter: and so by that subteltie and shift, they that
escaped gatte a pay, or some reward of the prince. And those that abode out
the bronte, and hazard of the bloody broile, were left in prison: and the
world thought by seeing so many come home, we had lost but a few at the siege
of Gynes. Which is otherwise to be proved, and affirmed for a trothe, when
true trial shall be made.

Callice was lost before, I can not declare how, but well I wotte Sir Anthony
Ager a stout gentleman, and a valliaunte knight there lost his life, and one
Captain Saul was terrible burnte with powder, in making a train to destroy
the enemy.

Now leauyng of these uncomfortable discourses, I will show what gentlemen of
ours after, served in sondrie soiles where many great Princes were in daiely
exercises of war, and many great victories and exploites were to be seen,
and though I write not the iourneis in right order, as one that writes a
Chronicle may do, yet the matter I write of shall be so true, that it shall be
needless to show what season, the causes were put in practice, or make
mention in due order of the date and time, of such noble enterprises, for your
common Chronicles can sufficiently satiffie you in those poinctes.

The services on the Sea I do set aparte by them selves, and so here I
proceed in some matter, which touches a piece of the business of Flaunders
and France, where diverse of our ge^tlemen were, and beheld many great exploites.

Now is to be noted, that M. Henry Champernowne of Devonshire, after his
return from the wars of Hungary served in the cause of the Protestants of
France, of his own proper charges in the second Civil wars, with xij.
gentlemen or more. And in the third Civil wars after the battle of
Iarnag, he served with an hundred men of his own proper costs. Likewise
accompanied and followed these gentlemenne, Edward Barkley, Phillip Budsed,
Gawine Champernowne, Richard Kirkam, Walter Rawley, Carro Rawley, Ranoldes,
Hugh Vdall, Thomas Courtney, Willyam Font, Richard Keys, Willyam Walwyng,
Thomas Atkins and others, whereof some returned after the death of the old
Prince of Conde. But master Henry Champernowne, as one desirous of renown,
and greedy of glory gotten by service, remained till his death, where lively
fame was to be won: and served so nobly and so gallantly, as the whole Camp
where he was in, sounded of his valliantnesse, and many of those gentlemen that
he brought with him, augmented so much his fame, that to this day his deeds
and theirs, are most nobly spoken of, greatly to the honor of all our
English Nation. For his gentlemen (or the most part of them) lost their
lives with their Captain, much is to be said in this matter. But I must
return to give others their due praise: that served in France and Flaunders,
in these perilous times, and days of no little danger.

Among the rest I find, that Sir Willyam Morgane was one: For he came on his
own voluntary will and charges, with the young Brickamone (and a few other
French gentlemen) to a town called Vallencia, and at their enterie, which
was on a Sondaie morning, the Spaniardes that held the Castle issued, and
thought to expulse both French and Burgonions out of the Town. And in deed
the common soldiers having small heart to maintain their quarrel, began to
shrink. But the French gentlemen, and sir Willyam Morgan gave a charge on the
Spaniardes (after a long skirmishe and much adooe) and drove them into the
Castle, and followed the Spanyardes so fast, that they set a fire the draw
bridge, because by that means they thought that the Spaniardes should make no
more sallies, to assail the Town.

Upon this service sir Willyam Morgan (by the governor of Vallencia) had a
goodly gentilmannes house given him, stuffed with gooddes, and furnished with
Wines and victual for a long year, that might have served his people and him:
if his hap had been there to have remained. But the Grave Lodwicke sent for
Sir Willyam, to come unto Mowns in Henault, and after he had been there but a
week he had the Threasurers house, and all his substance delivered him.

The Duke of Alua besieged this Town, where many great skirmishes and
services, were offered on both the sides, albeit the Dukes power did far
excede the Count de Lodwickes, yet every day the soldiers of the Town did
the vttermoste they could, to disquiete the Dukes Camp. And undoubtedly the
valliauncie and courage, of them that were besieged, was so great and so
noble, that their very enemies commended them for the same. For it was no
ordinary manner of service they did show, but rather a new devised excersice
of war, to make the assailantes as much astonished at their enemies
stoutness, as take any hope to win the Town by any advantage might be
espied. And in this manner of service the time was spent along season, to the
everlasting praise and fame of those, that stood in the Tounes defense.

Sir Willyam Morgan was not idell, in no one piece of all these bickerynges,
and at the length beheld the coming of the Prince of Orranges power of
horsemen; whose power encountryng with the Duke of Aluaes force, in a morning
betymes continued in skirmishe, till three a clock in the after noone: and so
with the loss and slaughter of eight or nine hundred men, the two forces did
depart and severed.

The Prince of Orrange thus marchyng away, had given occasion to the Duke to
follow, or go about some policy: and after at a place called Saint
Gillyng, the Dukes force gave a great overthrow, to the Prince of Orrenges
side. Which conflicte did argue, there was no hope of succors, to be looked
for from the Prince, at that present necessity: and Mowns standing in this
extreme danger, and being not well furnished with things, that pertained to a
long siege, (besides their General Count de Lodwick was sick) the Soldiers
and Tounes men began to give ear to a parley, and so a peace was concluded,
on a strait composition: which was that all the Soldiers in the Town
(saving a few Almaines with the Count de Lodwick, and himself) should swear
never after to bear armor against the king of Spain, or of France.

Sir Willyam Morgan hearing of that oath, required rather death, then to make a
promise paste the compass of his alleagance, and duty to his own Country:
and said, that he would never co^descende to such a straight composition,
though life and all he had, lay upon the refuse thereof. Whereupon a new
parley and communication was had, and there the Duke granted sir Willyam
Morgan, and those Englishemen he had with him, to march away in the same
order and liberty of mind, that the Count de Locwick and his Almaines had
obtained.

The Town being randered into the hands of the duke of Aluae, there were that
persuaded sir Willyam, to leave the company of the Count de Lodwick, because
it was presupposed that he should be slain, or escape hardely from the Duke.
But sir Willyam beholding the honorable dealinges of the Count (and espectyng
the regard that the Duke ought to have to the law of Arms, and performaunce
of a Princes promise) determined to put all to the hazard of Fortune, and
to follow the Count de Lodwicke, who marched saffely toward the Prince. Suthe
was the faithfulness and usage of the Duke at that season: that the Count
tame to his brother the Prince, at his will and pleasure, who lay with an
army at Riermont. The Frenchemen had forsaken the company of the Count
before, and had procured that a passeport, should be given to sir Willyam
Morgan, to pass through Flaunders by Julian Romeroes freendshipp, a gallaunt
ancient man of war. But Sir Willyam refusyng that courtesy, came with the
Count to Riermounte, where the Prince embraced him. And after the Princes Camp
was dispersed, he had sir Willyam to his brother in Law, called the Count de
Bergges, and so to West Frese land, Holland, and many other parts that the
Prince had then in possession. And in sondrie of these soiles saving in
Hollande, sir Willyam Morgan served with ten great horses at his own
charges. For that he was the Queen's Majesty's servant, and would not be bound
for wages, neither to pass the bounds of his duty, nor to tarry a longer
term in a foreign country, then good cause might command him. So thus
much have I thought good to write of, in the behalf of those that willyngly,
have offered them selves to services, worthy commendation.

Sir Humfrey Gilbart in this season (with a good number of soldiers, and
English gentlemen) was at Floshyng and served well in those parts: and one
Captain Morgan and master Cotton a Pensioner, did their duty so thoroughly,
that much was spoken of their praise: at which service one Captain Bowsar,
and a valliaunte gentleman called master Mackwillyam were slain, with sondrie
others of our nation, that did no whit forgette the former fame of our ancient
predecessors and countrymen. And those that lived and served there at that
time, were well paid: For the Floshyngars had drawn many a good hand of the
Spanishe Fleet, and were become wealthy with the spoils, they had by hazard
gotten.

I have made mention of the going of the Earl of Essex into Irelande, that fell
out anon after this season, with who^ was sir Willyam Morgan, master Henry
Bronkar, Captain Barkley, and sonderie other gentlemen, that endured to the
end of all the services, to their great charges, hazard and pains. And for
that I do but breefly touch those things, and have spoken on them
heretofore, I commend the length and discourses of those matters to your
judgments, that have laisure to look and read, what other men have written
of those causes.

Now I make a little recital of a service, being dooen between saint Dennis
and Parris, where the Conestable of France was slain, in whose company was
master Edward Barkley, attendyng on Mounsire Brizak. This battaill was
attempted and fought, by the power of the king against the Prince of Conde:
whose force lay scattered a broad in the country about Parris, and yet the
number of xviij. hundred horsemen, and three thousand footmen were left at
saint Dennis. Which hearing of the kings power, marched toward them,
issued out of the Town, and began the skirmishe most daungerously, and with
such courage, as seldom has been seen, or read of: considering their power
was so small, and the Parrisians were such a multitude, and to tell the
trothe, it seemed that the Prince of Condes force was but a handful, in
comparison of the contrary side. And it seemed a great madness, or mockery,
for the small number to encounter with the great and huge company. But
necessity that either redoubleth the strength of men, or dauntes the hearts
of cowardes: had so plucked up the hearts of this little number: that they
imagined they rather sought against children, then champions. And as it proved
this little troop presupposed, that in a multitude is many opions, and many
that would rather be at home in surety, then abroad in danger: which
opinion and desire of of the weaker sort, breeds oftentimes a confusion, and
utter mischeef among a great multitude. Well, albeit the hazard was
marvelous, and the enterprise paste all the exspectation of man: yet the
Prince of Condeis power did set a good face on the matter, and plied the
kings force with shot, and polliticke devises of war. Yea, in such sort,
and with such manhood at every encounter, some paid the best blood in their
bodies, and some were forced to give a lusty charge, to stay and amuse the
whole battaill. And charge upon charge, was given on both sides most nobly,
with most assured hope of victory: And the fight being begone nere Saint
Dennies, endured from the windemilles, almost to the suburbs of Parris. But
always as the multitude did ouerlaye the little band, the small companies
courage did increase, and their minds were become so great, that they thought
the feelde to small, and the day to short to show the valliauncie of their
hearts. And in this their manly disposition, they gatte ground at every charge
they gave: And in fine being furiously bente, compelled by great Fortune and
dangerous service, the kings side to swaie a little about, and taking the
advantage offered, they charged a band of horsemen, where they thought the
Conestable of France stood in troop, and hitte so full upon the mark they
shot at, that the noble Mounsire Memorancie was slain at the first stroke,
by the hands of one called captain Steward a Scottishe gentleman. Thus the
Conestables death, and others of good credit being known, and published
among the Parrisiens that came with him to the feelde. They fled as fast as
they could, and so the whole army was discouraged, and as they might every man
made shift for him self. But yet some order was kept among them or else a great
slaughter had been made: and yet in trothe the Prince of Condeis side were waxt
so a weary, that they but looked for a time to take breathe in, and refreshe
their ouerlaboured horses. Here may the world behold, what good Fortune the
forward minds of men may attain unto, and what victory and conquest is
compassed, by a constaunt determination, and a resolute service: Which who
that looks into and regardes thoroughly, shall ever have a prosperous success.
For in all battles and services (where good Capitaines are the leaders) the
valliauncie of men commonly goes away with the garlande: and all worldly
glory and triumphs attendes, and waits on the worthiness of men's
courages, as a thing incident to those that dare adventure by vallue, to strive
for good fame.

The King notwithstanding this overthrow, (which might not a little move his
Majesty, raised a great Army after this, (when Sharters was besieged by the
prince of Conde) and marched thetherwardes with a princely power: where was
great service, and many a man slain before the siege was raised. But for
that, but a few of any great name lost their lives there: I write little of
the particulars, and yet if I list to delate, there is matter enough left, to
enlarge my volume of the same service. Master Edward Barkly was on the kings
side in like sort at this service: and at the rest of the French wars, that
follows on the Prince of Condies side.

Captain Barkley went after with the Prince of Conde, and was at the siege of
saint Ihon Dangill: At the siege of Poictiers: At the siege of Angulem: At the
skirmishe of Lodwyne: At the skirmishe of Lasmirie: At the skirmishe of
Pompero, in which skirmishes, many great conflictes were given, and many
thousands were slain. And a number of great adventures were to be seen: the
Chronicle of France settes them forth at the full. For which cause I leave
out much of the matter. And after Captain Barkley had been at all these
services before named, he was with the Prince at the battaill of Iernake, where
there was a great fight, and a hot encounter, long in ballaunce, hangyng
between hope and doubt: But to conclude, as the French writers, and trothe
does testify. The King had the upper hand, and the Prince of Conde was
slain, and his whole force driven back: In which fight and blouddie battaill
thousands were discomfited on both the sides. But the grace of good Fortune,
and the glory of that day went away with the King, that long had sought
victory, and found but hard chance till that present hour. Some do excuse
the Princes misfortune, with an oversight of those that were about him. But in
Gods blessed bosom, the bowels of those broiles and business, is shrined, and
lies fast locked from the looks and judgment of man.

Now I mind to touch somewhat, the services that were by Sea, since we that
are a live, can remember the report of the same: and yet I may not express
at large any great thing thereof, because I would not be tedious to the
reader: nor would not write more, then is, or may be well liked* For that I
search no books, nor rob no one Aucthour of his study and labor: I run
but to my own vewe and reach of reason, or follow the true report of those
that I knew, will not fable with the world, in matter of trothe and credit.

In the reign of that most redoubted, and perelesse Prince King Henry the
eight (whose famous acts can not be to much spoken of). There was a noble
and terrible fight on the Sea, between the French Galleis (which were
nineteen in number, and two Foistes) and our ships, which were not many.

The King having sent to Laundersey sir Ihon Walloppe, and a sufficient power
to annoye that Town, and for other great causes then mouyng his Majesty:
prepared anon after a small Navy, to moleste his enemies, making Admiral of
that fleet, the noble Lord Lyle, after Duke of Northumberlande, and with him
was sent the Lord Clinton, now Earl of Lincoln, sir George Caro, sir Peter
Caro, sir Gawine Caro, sir Robert Stafforde, master Clement Parstons, master
Willyam Winter now knight, master Biston a valliant Captain, with whom was
master Biston the Pensioner that now is a live. And all these gentlemen under
the leadyng of the Lord Lyle: encountered the Galleis in most braueste, and
warrlike sort upon the Seas, and fought with them half a day, daungerously
and in great peril, our Ships having a great disaduauntage, because the
port holes were not so low, as reason required: by which mean our Ships
might not come, to do the harm that was intended. Notwithstanding the great
Ordinance played on the enemy all the while, and our gentlemen behaved them
selves as nobly, as might be devised: not in no little hazard, nor without
great courage. For this fight was so sore and dangerous, that every man's
vallue and stoutnesse might be seen. There was no hole nor cave for the
cowarde, to hide his hedde in: For the Cannon could fetch them up, that would
creep in the Cook room, and set them a work, that would sit down and
do little good. The bars and chains of Iron flewe about so thick, and the
smoke and smother of the powder was so great, that one might scarce see an
other for fume, flame, and the fury of the shot. And to be plain, because
I have seen the like, I take it to be the most terrible, and cruel fight
that can be named, or expressed with pen. For it is rather (if it be
rightly painted out) a hell, then any other thing it can be compared unto.
But how so ever it is, or was, at that present time our fleet abode the brunte
thereof, and tried it out to the vttermoste, as the French them selves, did
afterward report and affirm. And so both the sides being wearied with
roaryng of Cannons, and murtheryng of men, were driven at the length to leave
of, and sail several ways: but the French had the worste, and were glad to
depart, to their loss and mischeef,

But in the neck of this, the French Navy came gallauntly to Portchmouthe,
and in the vewe of King Henry, they made a stout show, and sign of some
shrewde intent. Against the which Navy went out sir George Caro, in a noble
vessel, and with a great number of valliaunt gentlemenne: but by mischaunce,
and oversight of some reachlesse persons, the Ship and all was cast away
and drouned, full before the vewe and face of King Henry the eight. And yet our
other Ships made out, and set so lustely upon the French fleet, that
they made them return homeward to their small contentatio^: so that little or
nothing was done worthy the notyng, a good time after.

An other service there was, where master Clementte Parston, and Captain
Wolffe was, in King Edwardes days, where they had a Galley in chase, and
overcame the same Galley: For master Parston brought it away, and had in
sign of that victory a Jewel thereof, made in manner like a Snake of gold.

In Queen Mary's reign, the Lord Admiral that now is, with sir Willyam
Woodhouse, sir Thomas Cotton, sir Willyam Winter, master Gonstone, master
Holstocke, master Morley, Sir Richard Brook, Captain Poole a knight of the
Rodes, as sir Richard Brook was, sir Richard Winkfeeld, sir Robert Conestable
that now is, Master Willyam Gorge, and Master George Biston, both
Pentioners, went to the burning of Conkquette, and did there a great exploite,
and made much spoil and havoc in that country, and retiryng to our
Ships, took good order for the saffetie of our men. But the Almaines being
greedy of gain, and overcome with wine, could not be brought a Shipboarde in
no due season: and so through their own folly and lewd behauioure, they were
entrapped and overthrown: and yet was there as great regard for their
preservation as might be, but their reatchlesse manner was such, that no
devise could recover them, and so they perished. When our people did prospere,
and came away with honor and commodity.

From Concquet there was appoincted seven Sails of Ships, to go to my Lord
of Sussex, then Lord Deputy of Irelande: The names of which Ships
follows, the Hue Willoughbie, in which was sir Thomas Cotton, Admiral for
that service. The Gearfaucon, in which was master Tornar of the Guard. The
Newbarke, where was Southerwicke of Dover. The Saker, at the commandment of
M. Peter Killegrey. The Barcke Caree, under the charge of M. Gregory Carry.
The Ihon of Plimmouthe, in the which was master Richard Bingham: And all
these attended my Lord of Sussex at Daukkith, who nobly set forward and
bornte Kynteer (James Mackono being in the country) and raized two of
Mackonoes cheef Castles, took diverse of they Galleis, and executed many of
their me^.

My Lord also burnt the I Will of Butte, the I Will of Combra, and the I Will of
Amilashe, with diverse other places in that journey.

And at this service was sir Willyam Fitz Willyams, master George Delues,
Captain Colliar, master Thomas Masterson, Captain Warren, Captain Peers,
sir George Stanley, master Edward Sta^ley, who was there made knight. And a
number of other lusty gentlemen, that presently I make no mention of.

Sir Willyam Winter did a great piece of service, (with other English
gentlemen and Soldiers) at a place called Alderneye. For the French to the
number of mean hundred had taken that Island, and were in the Castle in a
marvelous triumph: But sir Willyam Winter having but four hundredth soldiers
and Mariners (which Mariners who so marks, shall see great worthiness in)
landed in Alderneye with his small company, and handeled the French so
hardly, that he drove them into the Castle: and would not leave them, till he
had dispatched the Island of them. And so in his countries honor, returned
into England again.

There was an other piece of service by Sea, when Mounsire Determes lost a
battaill by Grauelin, and as I do remember, master Nicholas Gorge was at
this service. But be there who might, it happened well on Mounsire Degmondes
side: that the shot of our Ships had any mean to annoy his enemies. For
even as at Mosseborough feelde, our Galleye did great service (that flancked a
long the Scotts Camp, and slew many stout men). So our ships at this
battaill, made such way among the French that the Borgonions gatte good
passege by that bargain, and went away with victory.

In the reign of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, there was sent the
Hope, the Lion, the Heart, the Swallowe, and the Phoenix (very goodly Ships
to new Haven, sir Willyam Woodhous being Admiral, who falling sick at Deep,
went home again with master Holstocke: And then remained master George
Biston Admiral, having but three sail in his company. But he proceaded
onward, and houered up and down the coast a certain space, till at length
coming before the Castle of Cane. Mongomrie having espied the Ships, that
Captain Biston brought before the Town of Cane (which was besieged by the
enemies of Count Mongomries) began to prepare him self and all his people, to
go a Ship boarde, and so came from Cane, and passed to New Haven by
Captain Bistons means, giuyng him great thanks, for his coming to Cane,
and for seruyng the Counties turn in that extremity.

The Count had brought with him from Cane twelve hundred soldiers, and other
things necessary for his furniture. And Captain Biston departing from him,
made sail into England, and received sir Adriane Poinynges, and master
Cutbart Vaughan, with two thousand Soldiers, and there on sailed back
again to New Haven, and landed them there at their own wills and pleasure.

After the siege of New Haven, the Count Mongomrie gathered a great Navy,
and went out of England, in hope to succor Rotchell that was strongly
besieged: and enteryng in at the havens mouth of Rotchell, a Cannon shot
passed through the Ship the Count was in him self. So upon that, or other
causes unknown to many in his company, he returned, and left Rotchell in
great danger. Which town notwithstanding, against all hope, or expectation
of man, kept it self in surety, and did such wonderful things during the
siege thereof, as to this day and to the worlds end, is, and will be spoken
of. For among all the sieges that ever we have heard of, there is not one
comparable to the siege of Rotchell. Albeeit Haddyngton, Harlam, and Malta, are
monumentes and patrons to show that manhood may work maruailes, and
constancy joined with courage, is not easily conquered. As Rotchell, and these
places before mention of does witness, and shall whiles we are men be daiely
remembered.

In that season whiles the Count Mongomrie was about to succoure Rotchell:
Bell Island was assaulted, and very valliaunly won with a few men, one of
sir Willyam Winters brethren, being the cheef leader to that service. In
which service was many a hot skirmishe, and many more matters worthy
memory put in practice, wherein manhood, and diligence of man was
thoroughly tried: And the English nation did show their accustomed courage
in, in such manner and sort that the French, which thought to keep Bell
Island, were forced to leave it, and seek their best way to conueigh them
selves from danger: albeeit they defended the said Island as long as they
might.

Now having further causes to treat of, and meaning no more to weary the
readers with many words or war either of Sea service, or Lands bloody
broiles. I mind to express and set forth at large, how Soldiers were made
of, and honored in times paste: and what prerogative they had above other
people. And to declare how Princes held them in admiration, and gave them
liberties, titles, and dignities: far beyond the rest of any, that lived
under their laws and obedience. And this by the way is to be thought, that
all my former discourse and rehearsal of wars, attended to no other purpose
and effect: but for the advancement of Soldiers, and to be as it were a
foil to set forth the matter, I presently mind to publishe out. For now I
will in a manner show, how Gentilitie began, and where and in what sort
honor was first gotten and maintained, which argument as I hope, shall not
only content the wise and well learned, but also please every degree, and make
the simple sort pluck up their courages, and imitate (by some honest
exercises) the lives of noble Soldiers.

I trust I need not in this ready and ripe age (wherein good writers, great
learning, and studious judgments does florishe) rehearse by particulars
every parcel and poincte, that belongs to a Soldiers profession. Nor that
you look I should recite when, and where the Romans, Lacedaemonians,
Athenians, and other nations did prefer and extol men of Marshall minds,
and noble courages. For their books and Commentaries, and the innumerable
Libraries of great antiquity, are the very records of my discourse, and
remain as mirrours for you to look in. And shall prove a thousand parts
more in the comendation of Soldiers, then either my pen or tongue (by
sufficient cu^nyng) has power to express. For it can not be, that from a
little gutte or Channel of water, you should look for so great a flood, as
from a multitude of springes, from whence mighty Rivers takes original and
recourse

And so I send you to the Welspryng of ^^^^^edge (I mean the ancient Fathers
works) to fetch true intelligence, of the things I make mention of,
touching the worthy reputation of a good Soldiour, and the antiquity of his
credit, triumph and glory.

First, look in the sacred Scriptures, and search from the death of Abell,
coming down orderly to the birthe of Christ: And see whether Soldiers were
made of or no. And doubtless you shall find they were not only embraced and
maintained, but like wise they are of a long continuance and credit. As all the
Bible before Ihon the Baptistes time declares. And Christ him self in a sort
did utter, when he said, he had not found such faith in Israel, as he saw
in a Senturion. Yea, and in the Apostles Acts, there is a special poinct to
be noted: Devout Soldiers were sent to Simon Tanners house to find out
Peter. Well, now I commit you to the Scripture, and I will follow profane
histories: and begin at the very Infidelles (a scorn for a Christian to be
taught by) which are no small number, nor of no little continuance, people
always brought up in war, and Princes of great fame, power, and authority.
Yea, conquerours of the whole world, and kings to whom all people did stoop
and do homage.

These Paganes, or as we may term them lost sheep to whom the great
Shepherd would not be known, (and yet among them tormented and crucified)
did make such laws and orders for Soldiers, as the Turk to this day
observes, and holds in great reverence. Regard but the liberties and
authority of the Ienessaries: and that shall manifestly prove, that men of
war are had in great admiration. But because you shall have the more belief
to the matter: read the life of Alexander the Great: The Commentaries of
Julius Caesar, and the noble acts and victories of a number of other notable
Princes. And then assuredly you shall be persuaded, that the renown of
Soldiers has reached, and spread as far as fame can fly, or good report
could have passage.

I pray you can any manne deny, but it springs of a great courage, and
zeal to the Common wealth: when a man forsakes the pleasure of life, to
follow the painfulnesse of war, and danger of death: and refuses no toil
nor trauaill, to purchase credit, and attain unto knowledge. Yea, some such
we read of, as Marcus Cursius and Musius Sceuola, that refused no
enterprises, to do their Country pleasure. Yea, some have sold their
patrimony, and consumed their Threasure and riches, to enriche their Princes
with glory, and everlasting renown.

Were not this a madness, and more then a mere folly, to be a drudge to the
world, and a labourer for those that sittes at rest, and to watch and ward.
Feight, strive, and struggle with strangers for victory: and then to come home
and be rewarded as common persons, and walk like a shadow in the Sun,
without estimation or countenance. Would any that had wisdom, vallue, and
courage, be over run with vicious fools and cowardes: or be made a
footestoole to there inferior, when they have climed up the steps of honor,
and are gotten into the top gallaunte of worldly glory, and warlicke
triumph.

Among children that do but play at the bucklars, there is a pre-eminence,
and one will acknowedge the other to be his better, when good bobbes are
bestowed: and suddenly a stout taule lobber will lay down the waster, and
yield to him that has more practice, and skill in the weapon then him self.
Then shall not a man that has coped with Champions, buckled with Conquerers,
and abidden the hazard of the Cannon, stand on his Pantoffelles, and look to
the steps he has passed. Yes sure, and such a member of the state, (the
baser sort are Ciphers) ought to be made of, deserves place and pre-eminence,
and is no companion for punies* nor meet to be matched with Milkesoppes,
whose manhood and manners differs, as far from the grave Soldiour, as a
Donkite in courage and condition, differs from a Ierfauco^.

As the duty to a man's country, and the wages that he takes, binds him
to do the vttermoste he may: so were there not an other cause, that forces
further matter. Full coldly some would feight, and full slowly some would march
to the battaill, albeit the Princes quarrel and wages received, commands
much, and is a thing stoutly and wisely to be looked to. But I tell you, fame
and reputation is the mark that men shoot at, and the greediness of glory
and ambition, pricketh the mind so fast forward, that neither the man looks
upon the multitude of enemies: Nor regardes the danger of death, so he may
be eternised, and live in the good opinion of the Prince and people.

For he that but bluntly looks about him, and goes to the war for wealth
(which hardly is there gotten) is lead on with a coueteous desire of that he
shall not have, and may feight like an Ox, and dye like an Ass. But who so
respects his credit, and paiseth in ballaunce the worthiness of fame, that
rises by well doing: does combat like a Lion, and either conquers like a
man, or dies like a conqueror, as many great Kings and Capitaines have
done, whose ensamples a long while ago, as yet remains freashelie in memory.

It may not be thought that every mercionarie mnane, and common hirelyng
(taken up for awhile, or seruyng a small season) is a Soldiour fit to be
regestered, or honored among the renowned sort of warlike people. For such
nombers of besoingnes, or necessary instruments for the time, are to fall to
their occupation when the service is ended, and not to live idellie, or look
for embrasyng. For neither they tarry long in the feelde, when they are priest
to go forth. Nor are not often called again to the like journey, so great
is our store of such persons: and so many shifts they can make, to put of
any pain and hazard. But he is to be accounted the courageous Soldiour, that
is given by his own disposition, to delight and follow the Cannon wheel,
whose countenance and cheerful face, begins to smile and rejoice when the
Dromme sounds, and whose heart is so high, it will not stoop to no servile
slavery. But has a body and mind able to answer that is looked for, and
has often been tried and experimented in Marshal affairs: through hauntyng
whereof he is become ignorant of drudgyng at home, and made a skillful
scholar in the discipline of war: which is not learned without some loss
of blood, charges of purse, and consumyng of time.

And this may be judged, and plainly presupposed, that many of that sort of
men are not found a live, to trouble or burden a common wealth, because they
are cut of through dangerous services, or forced by seeking of Fame in the
feeld, to sell that they have at home, and so to travail abroad, subject to
all misery, and far from any freendship or prosperous estate. And sometimes
through the greatness of their minds, that galloppes after glory, are
carried away to seek out new kingdoms, and refuse their old abitatio^. A
matter falling out well, worthy to be liked, but other wise, a heavy tale to
be told, and an experience bought with ouermuche repentance. But every way
occasions they are, that dispatcheth many a good Soldioure, and makes the
number so little, that it is reason such as are left a live of that
profession: should either be rewarded, or at the least reap some such
credit, as the common sort of people should have them, in admiration for, and
offer them such courtesy, as the worthiness of their experience and service
requires.

If in the old time our forefathers used their men of war nobly,
prefarred them to promotions, and dealte honorably with them that served
their country, when wars were not so cruel. Why should not this world,
wherein policies, murders, and bloodshed is followed (and hazardes are
maruelously escaped) to the vttermoste of man's power, have more regard to a
soldiour that shunneth no hazard, nor refuses no peril. There is no more to
say, for the aunsweryng of this great oversight, but the Hackney horse is
unhappy, having borne a burden all the day on his back, and is cast of at
night to a bare common, there to seek for food, and abide a hard Fortune.

There is a worse matter then this to be treated of, yet nothing but that so
far past remedy to be touched: let any one seruyng man get a good master,
and for followyng his heels at an ynche, he shall be more spoken for and get
more benefit, then twenty of the best Soldiers that you can name, that have
followed the wars all their life days, and knew not how to flatter and
faune, or crouche and coursie for commodity. Yea, such as serves at home, and
can not go out of the vewe of a fair house, and Smoke of a foul Chimney,
snatcheth up good tournes, and stealts away prefarmentes privily: when those
that merits more consideration, often goes openly a beggyng, and finds few
among thousands that wishes them well, or does them any good.

Some say the cause of this hard hap to the one, and good Fortune to the
other, is a certain deadly discention, fallen between the Sword and the
Pen. By which mortal malice is bredde and nourished in bosom, such a
headstrong hatred and parciallitie, that the Pen is ever giuyng a dashe out
of order, against the commendation of the sword, and the Sword being
disgraced, by a balde blotte of a scuruie Goose quill, lies in a broken rustie
scabberd, and so takes a Canker, which eats away the edge, and is in a manner
lost for lack of good lookyng to, and consideration of a painful Cutlare.

And the Pen (as many people are persuaded) is like the Pensell of a Painter,
always ready to set out sondrie colors, and sometime more apt to make a
blurre, then give a good shape and proportion to any invention or devise, that
proceades of a plain meaning. And as all Penselles are as well occupied of a
bonglyng Painter, as a cunnyng work manne. So the scriblyng Pen is ever
woorkyng of some subteltie more for the benefit of the writer, then commonly
for the profit or pleasure of the reader: yea, and the Pen is waxt so fine,
and can show such a florishe, that a master of Fence, though he played with
a two hand Sword, might be put to a foul foil: where the Pen is in
place, and is guided by a slight hand, and a shrewde hedde.

But under correction, if a man may be plain, the Pen and the Sword can
never agree, because the Pen stands in such fear of the Sword, it would
not come under the blow of the blade: and the Sword is in such doubt to be
moiled with ynke, by the dashe of a Pen, that it loves not to come where the
Pen may annoye it. And so the dissension and quarrel between the Pen and
the Sword, is never like to be taken up: the harms are so great that grows
on their amity and meetyng, and the advantage of them both is so much when
they be kept a sonder.

For the sword is best and in his most bravery, when it is shinyng in the
feelde, where blood may be shed, and honor may be won. And the Pen
is in cheifest po^pe, when it lies lurkyng in the town, where pence may be
purchased, and peace and quietness may do what it pleases. And the Pen is
so glad to rest in the Pennar, till profit calls him out, that he can not
abide the hindrers of his commodity, nor the disquieter of his ease. Which
comes by wars, and proceeds from the Sword, when the Drom and the Trompet
puttes the Pen out of credit.

Now to speak roundly to the reason, may be alleged in the Pens behalf
(and praises of those have the use of the same) it can not be denied, but the
Pen may both persuade war, and purchase peace. And those that here at
home maintain good Laws: see justice ministered, uphold the public state:
Plead controversies at the bar, study to unfold doubts. Labor at their
book to be profitable members, and strive daiely to excel in learning, and
quiet the quarellous people of their country. Such I say that with Penor
tongue, aduaunceth virtue, and overthrows vice, are meet to be honored,
deserves great land, and ought to go in the rank and place of
commendation and dignity. For there is but four sorts of true Nobility, or
Gentlemenne. The first is Governors, by whom all states and Kingdoms are
guided, brought to know order, and made possess in quietness the gooddes
that either good Fortune, or sweat of brows has gotten.

The second are Soldiers, whose venture and valliance has been great,
service and labor not little, and daiely defended with the hazard of their
lives, the liberty of their Country.

The third are upright and learned Lawyers, that looks more to the matter
they have in hand, then the money they receive. And are never idell in dooyng
their duty, and studiyng for the quietness of matters in controversy.

The fowerth are Merchants that sails foreign countries, and brynges home
commodities: and after great hazardes abroad, do utter their ware with regard
of conscience and profit to the public estate.

And as from the beginning governors and rulers were ordained by God, and the
rest of gentilitie came in, and did follow as reason required, and desarte
did command. So ancient birth and blood (joined with good conditions) is a
thing much to be honored and esteemed, and beautifies not only the noble
race, but brynges likewise a treable beatitude, to the person so verteouslie
bent and nobly borne.

And as for the soldiers and their original, of honors, titles, and calling,
the Romans (which were the Fathers of all Marshall affairs, and conquerours
of the world, have so much spoken of and praised, that no man can deny, but
they are the men of greatest antiquity, and people that princes first
prefarred, and gave stipendes unto. Yea, and the cheifest conquerours that ever
were before our days: had a great glory them selves to be called Soldiers,
and Noble Capitaines. For they thought none so worthy as the soldiour, nor
none so mete to compare them selves unto, as the man that stood on his honor,
and would neither stoop to no kind of slavery, nor yield to no villainous
action.

But in very deed, to speak of every one in their order, there is none so
much to be feared, loved, and honored as the rulers and leaders of the
common people.

For the peaceable Gouernoure, and such as are experimented in worldly
policies, knows how to make war, and how to avoid troubles: and as they
are loathe to fall from rest and wealth, to ruffelyng war and wickedness,
that breeds bloodshed and want. So they can break the bands of peace, and
set men out to the feelde, when causes commaundes them, and opportunity does
serve. But since that my purpose, is but to treat of Soldiers alone, (and
that I lack skill to set forth the rest) I will return to my first
discourse and intent, and leave the wise to consider, what good matter may be
said in the thing I leave of.

The Soldioure, because his life is in Ballunce, and his death is at the door,
has so many mischeeues to pass, and so few means to escape danger: that he
is compelled to be honest, and be ready to make an account every hour of the
day. For as the Cannon may call him before he be a ware, or the policy of
the enemy may cut of his years: So is he assured that the pot, which
goes often to the water, commes home with a knock, or at length is passhed
all in pieces. Through which accidents or cross chances, he is held so
hard, and curbed so short (if any fear of God be in his breast) that he
has no scope to run at riot in: nor play the parts of a wanton, or
prodigal soonne.

Albeeit some hold opinion, that Soldiers be given to spoil, and offered to
insolente life, by a number of inconveniences: yet may they so well be
occupied in war, that they may be occasion of great good, and a great
hynderer of many harms. For when houses are ready to be burnt, impotente
persons, poor women and children ready to be slain: they may save what
the list, and preserve an infinite number of things, that a man at home can
do no good in, nor none but the Soldiour in the feelde, has power to comfort
and succor. And for certain I know Soldiers of that disposition, that has
been occupied in these honest actions: when some helhoundes have been spoilyng
and murtheryng, and found by their folly and over great cruelty, a
dispatche of their own days, and peradventure the terrible wrath of God, and
damnation to their souls.

My Prince may be well served, and the enemy not always to the vttermoste
persecuted: the lesson that Saint Ihon Baptist gave the soldiers, may
suffice for this matter, and carry men's minds from violence, and doing
wrong, to quallifie fury, and maintain right, with a regard to the innocent,
that ought not to be touched, for the offense of an ambicious leader, or one
whose faults the ignoraunte may not answer. This poincte though simply it
is passed over, may contain a large volume: and is to be looked into with a
divine spectacle, and a Christian consideration.

Then if the soldiers (as few there are in number) be honest, and is to be
proved, they are not to be reproved: it follows that honor and reputation
accompanies those soldiers, and that a singular privilege and liberty, may
be had for those that have such regard of their Fame, that they will do no
any one thing prejudicial to their credit, in the compass of which regard
is knitte, valliaunce, modesty, pity, and hope of an other life to come:
when the affairs of this world shall duetifully, and honestly be finished.

And for that the reader hereof shall not think, but that great Princes
thought their Soldiers to be honest, and men that were worthy the making of
(whose doings and regard did argue, and show a special hope of an other
place to go to, or a certain fame and eredite here to be maintained) I will
show you as I have gathered by translation, how triumphant kings and princely
potentates, did ordain set down, and deliver a law and rule for Soldiers.
By the which they had honor, liberty, and prerogative above, and beyond the
Commoners, or common course of people. The translation I speak of is not so
long and tedious, but bryngyng willing minds to hear and know the truth,
you may read, if laisure permit, and you peruse that follows.

First you must mark (and make a good note of) that Heraldes were at the
beginning Soldiers, and were called aunciente Knights, as well it seems to
be true: For they (I mean Harraldes) being brought up in war, beheld who
deserved renown, and had by their authority and experience, a power to give
Arms and sign of honor to those, which for well doing in feelde or public
state, did merit remembrance, which power and place of the Harralde does
plainly express: that from the feelde, or honorable offices at home, sprung
up our gentillitie, and generation of gentilmen. For as every man's blood in a
basin looks of one color: and when Adam was created, and a long while after,
men were all a like. So virtuous acts that shines to the heavens, has made
them to be honored and advanced, where vicious livers, and bloudthirstie
wretches were accursed of God, and hated of man. And had a mark set upon
them to be known by, and be a testimony to the world, that they were not
worthy of honor, and were appointed to reproach. Let Caine that killed his
brother Abell (by an unjust war) be a witness in this behalf.

Eneas Siluius does derive Heraldes of ab Heroibus, of noble men: For Heroes
were aunciente Knights, otherwise called Soldiers, and an Herald signifies
Centonicum vocabulum (videlicet) and old manne of Arms, or an old knight,
but at this day (said Eneas a long while since) certain servile men, feeble
and weak messengers, which never have played the soldiers, do profess
that office. The privileges and offices of the Herauldes in ancient time, to
this day continuyng nevertheless. And the first aucthour of them was
Bacchus, which India being conquered, did call the^ by this name: I absolve
you of wars and trauaill, and will that you be ancient soldiers, and to be
called Heroes. Your office shall be to provide for the Commonweal, to try out
the original of causes, and to praise the wise: you shall call for great
rewards, in what place or country you shall come. And the kings shall give
you meat and apparel. You shall be most honorable to all men. Princes shall
offer unto you many things, and shall license you their apparel. Credit
shall be given to your sayings, you shall abhor lies. You shall judge
traitors and aduouterers: These infamous persons ye shall punish: and in
every nation you shall have liberty, and sure egresse and regresse shallbe
unto you, if any man shall gainsaie any of you in word or deed, let him dye
with the sword.

Alexander the Great has annexed to these Privileges of noble men, after a
long season, that they might use Purple, golden and beautiful garments. And
that they should bring in princely and notable Arms at every place, in any
country or Region soever it shall be. If any man shall repulse these without
respect, or secretly defame in word, he shall be accounted guilty of death, and
deposition of gooddes. And so the same Eneas does say, Thucidides, Herodotus,
Didimses, Magashones, and Zencphon together.

Thirdly, then Octauian Auguste, the Romain Monarche being established, has
beautified them on this condition: Who so ever (said he) has played the
Soldiour with us, the space of ten years, and be of the age of forty years,
whether he be horseman, or else footeman, he shall have his wages, and
afterward be absent from wars, be a noble man and old Soldiers. No man
shall forbid thee the City, the Markette, the Church, Hospitality and
house: no man shall impute any fault to thee, thou shalt be discharged of
that blemishe or burden: no man shall ask any thing of thee, if thou make
fault in any thing, only look thou for Caesar's vengeance: for what
filthiness men shall impute. Let them fear thee being a judge and corrector.
Whether they be private, or Princes: what soever thou say, thou shalt
affirm, and no man contrary. All iourneis and places shall be free and plain
to thee: let thy meat and drink be in the houses of Princes* and take daiely
of the Common treasure, wherwithall to keep thee and thine house. Marry thou
a wife of comely beauty, and esteem her above all other. Whom thou will
check and reproach with infamy: thou shall say this man is an infamous
reprobate. Arms, Ensigns, names and ornaments of noble men bear thou. Do
what things become kings, and what thou would do or say in every place
and Nation, make mention of it: if there be any injurious person, let him dye.

And last of all Charles the Great, the name of the Empire being translated
to the Germains, after the conquest of the Saxons and Lombardes. Caesar called
Augustus, has rewarded them with this honor, saying: My Knights, you noble
men, fellows of kings and Judges of faults, live after your labor, without
trauaill, provide for kings in a common name. Take away vice. Favor women.
Help Children. Keep council of the Prince, and of him ask your apparel,
and stipende: and if any deny, let him be accounted presumptuous and
slanderous. If any shall do you injury, let him acknowledge himself guilty
of empairing the Empire. But take you heed least you defile such worship, and
such privilege, gotten by just trauaill of war, either by drunkenness,
baudrie, or any other vice: neither that we give unto you, should redounde unto
praise, or peace, which is to be taken of you. If perhaps you shall exceed
us, and our successors Kings of the Romans for ever hereafter.

These before rehearsed word for word, as I might I translated out of
Latin, findyng therein a marvelous commendation of Soldiers, and so is
thereby to be perceived, that in all ages, times, and public gouernementes,
Kings and mighty Monarkes, took care as much for their men of war, as for
their commonweal: and to bring the^ in heart if any despair or mislike,
should grow through flacknesse of lookyng unto. The Princes of their princely
benyngnitie, and mere good will borne to Marshall people, invested them with
titles, names, and honors, such as always pluckes up man's courage, and
procures thousands to valliauncie and service. For who will not venture boldly
a season, when they know for ten years toil and hazard, he shall be honored,
sit at ease, live without danger, and remain in a perpetual privilege:
neither subject to the malice of leaude people, nor worldly want, whose
plague persecuteth many millions of men, and throws down in the duste the
praises of such, as otherwise should shine like the Sun, before the eyes of
all nations.

And as those Kings and Conquerours many hundred years ago, ordained by
decree and virtue of a Law, that Soldiers should be made honorable, and
possess great contentation of mind* So fell it out from time to time, their
services were considered. And that Soldiour like king and triumphant conqueror
King Henry the eight, having trial of Soldiers and a warlike heart: to show
the honor belongyng to that profession, and to follow his noble
predecessors. Made a Law as ye may read in the Statutes, that Soldiers
might wear what they listed: And further to the comfort of all men of
war, he left no one worthy soldiour unrewarded, in what place so ever of his
dominion, or affairs the Soldiour had been employed.

In France, our near neighbors makes so great accounte of Soldiers (namely
those that they call Soldado Vetche) that the greatest Dukes or Princes in the
feelde, Court or Town, encounteryng a Soldiour, salutes him with courtesy,
takes him to his Table, and uses him with such entertainment and reverence,
that it is a world to behold: And when service is to be seen, either in
battaill, or at an assault. The greatest Duke or noble man, thinks him self
happy to be joined with a known Soldiour: and commonly both old and young
of their nobility, are foremoste in the fight, and last that will retire. It
is a thing incredible among some ignorant persons, to be told how
Soldiourlike, and manlike in all poinctes they behave themselves, and how
little account they make of life: when death must be sought by service, and
thereby their honor and liberty of Country, is to be preferred.

The Spanyardes, a Nation not inferior to any yet named, join so in amity at
their meetyng, make such courtesy, and show such fastenesse of freendshippe
(especially among soldiers) that every one in presence embraseth his
companion, and in absence, lettes fall good report of the absent. Yea, their
love and constancy by custom and ceremonies, knittes them in such an union,
that no stranger can separate: and they give so great place on to an other,
that it is hard to know by their gestures and vsages, which is the better of
them. And they have their own soldiers in such a likyng, that no people in
the world, shall be suffered to reap any piece of their glory.

The Italians Soldiers of great antiquity, and of no less vallue with most
humility and Civil manner, enterchaungeth their talk: yeeldyng for one gentle
word, twenty good terms, smothe speeches, and philed phrases. And happenyng
to come together, either in service, or otherwise: they agree like brethren,
and depart without quarrel. And their great men and mightiest in power, if
they repair where Soldiers are, shows them selves of little authority, as
a man might guess by their courtesy: Refuses to take any thing upon them,
where the Marshall man approaches, and seems to be at the disposition of
such as have served, so great is the reputation of a soldiour among them.

The Scotts men, a stout and manly people, beginning to take a savor in
the war, seeks sondrie soiles to serve in: and have great delight to be in
the company of soldiers, and prove them selves worthy of commendation, in
any place they repair. And for that they would become famous, and attain to
some experience and credit, they shun no kind of service that is offered:
and all the sorts of gentilitie among them, esteems much a Soldiour. Which
is a sign that at the length, soldiers will come to their ancient dignity
and admiration, where the sound of Dromme or Trompet may be heard.

Now to speak of our own Nation were superfluous, (although many have served
well, and sondrie are yet in the excersices of war) beeause I have named
before diverse things, wherein our country men have won desired fame and
renoume, yet for arguments sake, and to enlarge this volume. Further matter
may be treated of, neither hurtful to the hearers, that favors well
doing: nor hateful to any when nothing shall be touched, but that which is
necessary for the advancement of virtue.

Our sovereign Lady by Gods providence (to make up the matter) I bring for a
testimony of great regard to soldiers, considering whom they are she has
helped, in some sort and respect, and what good things have passed among
such Soldiers, as her highness heard well of, or had intelligence given her
to understand, the worthiness of those that had well deserved. Do but
examine how many since her noble reign, of Soldiers have had Leases, gotten
livings, been preferred to gouernemente, and gone from Court with full
hands, that began with empty purses. And then tell the world openly, what
secret suites were passed, and what open wrong they do them, that bountifully
bestowed good gifts, where any good cause appeared. Admit some by the
report of their friends, stole away the benefits from the fountain hedde:
yet look to the rest of things that worthily fell out, and you shall see the
best sort of Soldiers worthily rewarded, and nobly used. What care we
though some silly souls, or serviceable Soldiers watch at receipte, or are
not spoken for by mean of some hinderars of good hap. Yet since other some,
and many in number have found good Fortune (say what they can) at her
highness hands that now remains Queen over our Country, we can not but
confess that the candell is in, and not burnt so far, but may give a
gracious blase and a new light, to lighten the minds of Soldiers, and such
as sit in the comfortless shadow of dark despair.

So to make short and prove for the purpose, Soldiers in times paste have been
set by, and dearly esteemed, and presently in all places of the world
embrased and made of. From whom sprung Herroldes, the erectours and publishers
of gentilmen, and all true fame and honor did rise: as for example, a Knght
made in the feelde, especially for service sake, has much more to rejoice of,
then he that at home is called to worship, except in causes of government, and
honorable offices, which are to be prefarred before al other dignities and
calling. Chiefly for that our whole public state and Princely order, dependes
on their wisedoms without the which order, and Majesty of rule, the Civil
would become savage, and the world would wax wild: so that the beasts in
the feelde, and the people in the Town, should sone for naughty manners be a
like in condition.

Now here is to be noted, that Soldiers in old time of ten years
continuance, being forty years of age, was suffered to live quiet, and bore
the title of honor. Then reason will grant, that who has served thirty
years, without reproach or shame (and in a dangerous world and mischeef) may
claim by right a pention of the Prince, and stipende of the common threasure.
But what and if some of good birthe and hauior, have been much more then
thirty years a follower of the wars, and never out of warlike exercises all this long season. And yet are as new to begin the world again, as they were
the first day they came from their Cradell. For any prefarment, favor of the
Prince, or countenance and commodity of their country. Such Soldiers may
say, they were borne in an unhappy season, or found but cold friends in
time of regard, and trial of good Fortune.

The affection of this world is led with such likyng, (and the cunning of
the wily can so finely currie favor) that he that never came nere the danger
of the Cannon, with lokyng big, and tournyng up his mouchachose, makes men
believe he is a Devil, who fearyng the monster will do some mischeef. And
carried away by affection (for the goodly show this kill Cow has made)
speak for him where goodness is to be gotten, and so a swadde or a swirnpipe
is called a good Soldiour (and goes away with credit and living) when he that
wantes this cunnyng, and yet lackes no courage nor vallue lives unrewarded, and
consumes his days in sorrow.

Yet some hold opinion, it is but hap that helps, and neither cunnyng nor
desartes that compasses good livings, and attaines unto benefit. Full bare
and poor is that argument and reason, and men of such opinions are as
blind as a beetell: to believe he is happy that has no worthiness in him,
and he unfortunate that lacks no virtues. But the world is most ignorant
and much to be blamed, that helps a shadow to great substance, and lettes
the worthy shift for their living that deserves reward. And they are not to
be excused, that by a color of hap, aduaunceth the victous person, and
favors not the forward Soldiour, and men of virtuous disposition. For gold
and silver are known by their weight and goodness: The flower by the smell:
The horse by his pace, and every other thing is tried and made of for his
vallue. And must the merits of men be subject to hap, where men do help
men, and are the iudgers of man's doings: that case is to cruel, and that
hap is accursed gotten by such blindness, and purchased by such parcialitie.

In Rome where noble minds were marueilouslie extolled, yet when diverse men
came to be prefarred: every Senator a part had so many followers, that one
would hinder an other: And look who the best people favored, the worste
sort would hate. And look who followed Pompey, was misliked of Julius Caesar,
and so by this faccious dealyng many great Soldiers, Eloquente Orratours, and
noble members of the Common weal, were put of from post to pillar. And few
that were worthy of cherishyng, found good chance, or possessed any part of
the hap, that they justly might claim: by which frowardness and misery of
the time, is plainly to be proved, that there is no hap certain. For manne
him self is the maker of hap, and the marrer thereof: even as his lust is to
like, or his heart is bente to loathe. For hap could do nothing at all among
them, their affections were so far a sonder, and they haled such several
ways, that their followers were left in the lashe, or failed of their
footyng. Then speak not of happ, for God and good men are the distributars of
desired Fortune, and the only causers of that which betideth, and must fall
of necessity on some men's Shulders, as in the book of Boethius de
consolatione, is manifestly to be tried.

Now leave of hearing of hap, and note how nobly the Romans used their
Soldiers, namely those that at any time had succored a Citizen of Rome: and
taken him out of the hands of his enemies. For such Soldiers as had done
that service, was crouned with a garlande or hat, made of the leaves of Trees,
as I find written in Pliny the xvj. book the fowerth Chapter, the cheifest
whereof that serves for my purpose, I have translated out of French. Pliny
bryngyng many great aucthours to affirm his saying the matter follows.

The greatest honor that could be dooen to a Soldioure, was to Croune him with
a Croune called Ciuiques, and likewise of long time this Croune Ciuiques was
due unto Emperors, in sign of clemency. For since the civil wars had
harmed the Rnmains, it was thought a singular good deed, to let a citezen live
in rest and peace. Likewise there was no Croune compared to that Croune: For
those that were given to that Soldioure, that was first at the breach, or
first on the walls, or rampars of the enemies, was not so honorable, no,
although they were of gold, and thereby were more rich. We have seen says
Pliny in our time, two great triumphs for the Sea service, the one was of
Marcus Varro, (the which Pompey did croune, for having defeatted the Pirates,
and making the Sea clear of Thieves) the second was of Marcus Agrippa, which
Caesar did likewise Croune, for having defeatted the Siciliens, and purged the
Sea in like sort of Brigandes and Robbers.

At the first foundation of Rome, Romulus did Croune Hostus Hostilius with a
garland of leaves: because he was the first on the walls, at the taking of
Fidena. Now before a Burgoies should at any time enjoy this Croune Ciuique, he
must rescue a Roman Citezein, and kill the enemy that led the citezen away
prisoner. It must be likewise that the enemy did hold and possess the place,
that same day that the Roman Citezen was rescued in. It is necessary that
the manne which has been succored, should confess the same before the
people: For a Soldioures own witness in that behalf, serves to no purpose.
And furthermore it is required, that he which was rescued, be known to be a
Burgois of Rome. For if one do rescue a King, that comes to serve the
Romans, he does not merit for the same the Croune Ciuique. In like sort, if
one do rescue a general of an army, he gettes no more honor therefore, then
though he had rescued a simple Citezen. For they which established this
ordinance had no regard, but to the conservation of the Citezens of Rome, who
so ever they were. The Privilege of this Croune shall be to give power, to
wear a Hatte of broad leaves, as often as he pleased that had been once Crouned
for his well dooyng. Further all the Senate had a custom, to rise out of their
places, and to do honor to them that have had this croune, when they go to
see the common plays and pastymes. And it is sufferable and permitted, that
they shall sit in a seat near the Senators. And they shall be exempt from
all Civil charges, not only them selves, but their natural Fathers and
Graundfathers: and now behold touching their Privileges, there was one
Cicinius Dentatus, according as we have said, Crouned fowerteene times. And
one Capitolinus had six times been Crouned, for he rescued Seruilius, then
general of the army: not withstandyng Scipio Affrican would not suffer them
to give him the croune Ciuique, for succouryng his Father in the journey of
Trebia. O ordinance worthy of immortality (says Pliny) that assigns no
other praise for such great works, then this great honor, which surpasses
all other warlike crounes.

This far goes the very words of Pliny, and many (other ancient aucthors
that I could rehearse) in the commendation of men of war, which neither in
Tholomeus time: Artaxerses days: nor any of the mighty Monarkes long reigning
before, could be forgotten, but were so honored, that laws and orders was
only devised, for the enlargyng of their land, and stirryng up their noble
minds.

Yea, Soldiers and Herrauldes had power to denounce wars, in so much as the
aunciente Romans: who were the Fathers of all Marshall affairs, and
conquerours of the world, held this for a most certain rule.

Nullum bellum iustum esse nisi pro rebus unjust ablatis and quod fecialis
Romani antea denunciabant. Which rule and order of the Romans, for the power
and honor of soldiers and Herrauldes: declares they are of great dignity
and calling, and may compare by this their authority, to be no whit inferior
to the best sort of gentlemen.

You may read in like manner, that there was a man among the Romans, that
merrelie, or paraduenture in contempt, put a Croune Cinique upon his own
hedde: and loking out at a great window into the streate, was espied, And
thereupon apprehended, and brought before the Senate: where he was judged
presently to be put to death, for touching and abusyng that Croune Ciuique.
Which was ordained for the wearyng only of an honorable Soldiour, and for
such a one as had been by deserte, Crouned with triumph and solempnitie in
open audience. So this foolish manne (albeit he might mean but little harm)
was had to the place of execution, and there lost his life, to the great
terror of those that rashely meddle with things, that becomes them not: and
to the great honor of those that are advanced by virtue, and wins with
courage, the wearyng of this Croune called the Croune Ciuique.

Now coming down to this present age, in the time of our peace, where
Soldioures have nothing to do, there is enough spoken (and peradventure to
much) for the Soldiers commendation, yet let me lead you a little further in
that case. For now is to be proved what degrees of Soldious (having served
long, or borne any office of credit) are gentilmen, and may unrebukable be
bold, to take that name and title upon them. First you have heard, that
seruyng ten years honestly and truly, he is not only paste his
prentishippe, but also above a journey manne, and ought from all iourneis to
be spared. As a man might say, (though improperly compared) a good free horse
after his long labor, and many great iourneies is to be ridden but seldom,
and kept in the stable till extreme necessity requires: and then is to be
used gentillie, least his stiff limbs and old body deceive the riders
expectation. So a soldiour coming to this age and perfection, or being paste
the iollitie of youth and youthful actions: ought to be provided for, and may
without presumption plead for arms, albeeit he never gave none before, and
can bring no great proof of his house, gentry, or dissent, and though he be
the first of that house, stock, and name that gave Arms: his beginning is
allowed of all our aunciente writers and Princes, and shall put his adversaries
to silence, when in that poinct they seek to deface him.

I remember once I saw and heard an Italian (vceyng in the Emperor Charles
the fifth his Camp) so stand on his reputation, that when a mean Gentleman
quarrelled with him, and desired the Combat, he answered he had been (
Soldado Vetche) an old Soldiour, and had borne office, and passed through
sondrie offices by order: and that the gentleman was but a young man, and but of
two years experience in war, and far unmeet to make challenge with him,
that had passed so many steps of honor, and places of credit. But said the
Italian to his adversary, go and do that I have dooen, or pass through the
like, and when thou haste mounted up, and trodden on every step that I have
passed: come to me and I will fight with thee the combat. But to say I will
stoop so low, and base my self (as a Lord may in fightyng with a Ruffian)
beyond the compass of my calling, I will not, nor no Law of Arms can
command me. The matter came in question before the Prince of Orrange that now
is, and the Duke of Sauoye yet living, and the challenger had a foul disgrace
in the audience of a multitude: and the defendaunte had a reward of five
hundredth Crounes allowed him by the Emperor, for preseruyng his honor and
estimation so much. This was done and openly seen, a little before the siege
of Renttie, and stands for a good record. Then an old Soldiour is a
gentleman, both worthy to give arms and colors, and mete to be borne
withal in causes of quarrel.

An other proof for the maintenance of my matter, I saw at the siege of
Leeth, a gentlemant of great courage and birthe (called master Ihon Soutch)
quarrel with Captain Randall, then Maiour of the feelde. And master Soutche
did urge through ill words and stout language, Captain Randall very
far: which might have moved any man living. But Captain Randall, in a
manner used those words that the Italian had dooen, before expressed: and
going further on in communication, commanded the Soldiers to lay hands on
master Soutch, and swore he would execute him, and learn all other by his
boldness, to know their duties. And when master Soutch was stayed, well
quod Captain Randall since thou haste challenged me, I will not use my power
and authority over thee: But by the faith of a Soldiour, when I am out of
the Sergeaunte Majors room I will meet thee, and make thy heart ache for those
words thou haste given: except thou repent before of thy lewd demenour.
Master Soutche having disgested, and wisely waighed this matter: being talked
with all of the Capitaines in the Camp, came like a gentteman on himself, and
acknowledged his fault most duetifully, and with great repentance: for
which submission of his, he was the better though on after.

This shows and declares, that an aunciente Soldiour and Officer has a great
Privilege, and may not be compared with, nor offered any injury: because he
carries the admiration of the people, and the honor of the feelde.

Ye shall find written in Spanishe, and the language of the Portugal (which
Portugailes found out the East Indians) that there was a mighty King of
Calicute, and many other Kings in the Indians, whose Soldiers were all
Gentlemen, and did live ever on the stipende that the King allowed them. And
those Soldiers had many Privileges, and titles of honor, and stood so much
on their reputation: that they would not touch a housbande man's hands, nor
suffer a Rusticall fellow to come into their houses. And the housbande men
were bound when the Soldiers go in the streates, to cry with a loud voice,
to make place for the Soldiers. For if those gentlemen did come, and bid the
common people go out of the way, and they do not obaye their commandment
therein: it was sufferable for the gentlemen Soldiers, to kill those obstinate
and proud people. And furthermore, the King could not make Gentlemen: if they
were not borne of some noble stock, of the race of Soldiers. They could not
take their weapons, nor enter into any Combat, before they were armed
Knights. They must at the age of seven years, be put to learn to play
with all weapons, and to the end they should be perfect, their masters do
hale their arms very far out (thereby to stretch their limbs) and afterward
they teach them such fence, as is apt for that purpose. They did by an
ordinance and custom of theirs, honor and salute their Masters that had
taught them at the weapons, (which were Graduates and cunnyng men) where
soever they met them in the streate. They were bound two Months in the year
to plie their schole, and take a lesson at their Masters hands. By which
reason they were very skillful of their weapons, and for that cause they
greatly esteemed them selves. They could not be Knighted, but by the Kings
own hands, who asked the^ before he laid his hand on their heddes: if they
could observe and keep the custom, and ordinance of gentlemen Soldiers, and
they said, and answered the King. They minded to take that profession of
arms upon them: and so the King caused a sword to be girded about them, and
after embraces those gentlemen so Knighted, then they did swear to live and
dye with him, and for him, which oath they well keep and observe. For if
their Lord were slain in the war: they would feight to their last breathe,
and kill him that had slain their King. Or if at that instaunte they could not
bring their purpose to effect, they would watch and spy out a convenient
season, for the performaunce of their promise and oath. And undoubtedly some
of the^ would revenge their Masters death. They had a great regard to their
duty and endeavor. They thought nothing so precious as fidelity, and their
Princes favor. They cared not for life: so glory might be gotten by their
death. They served most faithfully under them, that gave them entertainemente.
They spared nothing, but spente liberally. They applied their only studies,
for the mainteinaunce of their King and Country. They would not suffer any
dishonor, nor offer any injury. They thought it a double death, to lose
their good name. They made no account of their meat, money, sleep, or ease:
and little esteemed their own lives or persons, when they should make proof
and show of their manhood. Their wages and stipende was so much and so well
paid, that every one of them might live gallantly: and the meanest might
keep to wait on him, a man or a boy. The law was that they might not
Marry, and yet had lemmans and women appoincted by order, which they kept and
used well, and all quarrelles was avoided by that means. For they might not
company with their women, but at certain seasons appointed. Thus they past
over their life time, without the care and trouble of wife and children. They
might forsake upon a good cause, any of their Lemmans. And their women might at
their own wills forsake the men. All those that accompanied these Soldiers
were gentlewomen, and of good birth, but might not be married to any person
after she had been at the Soldiers commandment. And because many men by
their often chaungyng, happen to have the company of one woman, they fathered
not any child, though it were never so much like the^: and therefore their
brothers children, did always enherite their lands and goods. And this law
that those gentlemen Soldiers should not marry, was made by a king, that
would not have a man of war, to fix his love on a wife and children, nor
thereby to wax feeble Spirited and effeminate. But the King ordained, because
these gentlemen, should have no woma^nishe manners nor minds: that they should
have all things at their wills, and live in such liberty, as no one thing
might draw them from noble service, nor commau^de them to servile drudgerie.
And because they should be the more animated to live in noble order, and
encouraged to serve well: they were Priuileged, that no man might emprison the^
for any cause, nor they might not be put to death by any mean of ordinary
Justice. Howbeeit when one had killed an other, or did sleep with a Country
woman, or did speak evil of the King then reigning. Then would the King
having true and just information of the matter, make a writing, and send the
same to a hedde officer, commaundyng him to cut in pieces the offendour,
where soever he was found. And after he was dedde, there should be hanged
about him the Kings writing, to show the people wherefore he suffered: but
no Law nor justice could touch him, before the King had justly condemned him.

So by this liberty and honor that Soldiers had, is well to be seen, that
none but Caesar might meddle with men of war. And it seems this liberty
was fetched from Alexanders days, who called his old Soldiers noble men, and
gave them noble Privileges and rewards: to cause the world that did follow,
to augmente their renown, and spread their fame to the highest heavens, that
have been valliant on earth, and noble of mind. Which great forsight of
Alexander, and other great Princes to advance Soldiers: has made men more
like Godses, then yearthly creatures, and dooen such good to the world
thereby, that there is no world, but will make of men of war, and give
place to the goodness of those, that strive by stoutnesse of heart, and labor
of body, to enlarge the limits and bounds of his country.

The effect of this above expressed, was drawn out of Spanishe, and remains
among Christians, as a matter worthy notyng, though Infidelles did observe
them.

Now though a man have had charge, and borne a number of offices: yet the name
of an old Soldiour beautifies his title. But yet particularly I will go
through the offices, as breefly as I may, and therein show who may justly be
called gentlemen among them. A Collonell, a Captain, and Ensign bearer. A
Lieutenaunt, a Corporal, a Sergeante of the band, and an old Soldiour though
he never bare any office, are all gentlemen, grantyng and allowyng that none of
the Officers, were made for affection at home. But had their beginning by
service in the feelde, and are known of good courage and conducte, and well
experimented in Marshall affairs. The rest of other officers, that have noble
roumes and places in the Camp, needs no setting out: for all men know
such officers as are chosen, (and made by the most noble in any government)
are not to be treated of, for that every Soldiour gives them their due honor
and place.

You may not look for at my hands, the original and discourse of all
gentlement, albeeit I go as far as I dare in that behalf. For I love not to
meddle with thanklesse labor, and would be loathe to roue beyond my reach
and knowledge: in a matter that my betters, as yet have not dealt withal. For
a doubtful attempt, brynges a dangerous construction: And with drawyng a
strong Bow, a weak arm waxes weary. He offers him self to the hazard of
many an evil tongue, that puttes any pen to the paper, in a talkatiue
world: which shootes privy boltes at every open Mark, or plain meaning
mind. And commonly those that least good can do (rather then beeidell)
will work most harm, with findyng of a fault, and forgyng an offense,
rather committed of ignorance, then penned of a set purpose. When a company
of passengers commes to a foorde, when the water is frosen all over: if a bold
spirit to make the passage free, break away the Ise, and so slippeth in the
water, his fellows will but mock him, and leave him over the shoes: and yet
the issue must be broken, or passage is denied. It were therefore
conueniente, that every Jack scorner should make his own way, or when he
would feed, should crack his own Nutte. If such as adventure a danger, be
dangerously dealte with, bid thee blunte hedded babbler learn more cunnyng,
or fall in the hazard. With lookyng on a book that pleased me well, I have
lighted but a candell, and now if any have a torche that can give greater
light, bring it to the vewe, and I will honor it with verses. My blase is but
a Bonfire to call out the neighbors: but such as come with garlandes, shall be
welcomed with a thousand salutations, and be called to the family of Fame.
Where all studious and painful honest writers are regestered, and remain with
immortal remembrance. So now being finished my opinion, and work of the
matters of war, (saving a matter meet the notyng for Irishe affairs and
gouernemente, and Flaunders trouble) there follows a silly treatise of
Callamitie, which shortly seems to prove that affliction makes men happy,
and prosperity neither brynges forth any good fruit, nor is a ready mean to
show a sound tree, or a man void of corruption. Thus gentle reader I adresse
thee to my further labors, and readyng of my discourses.

Finis.
And abstracte of the authority, and entertainemente, that was given and
committed by the honorable sir Henry Sidney Knight, Lord Deputy of Irelande:
to sir Humfrey Gilbert knight, during the time of his continuance and service
in Munster, in Irelande. Written to show how that severe and straight handely
of rebellious people, reformes them sooner to obedience, then any courteous
dealyng: because the stiff necked must be made to stoop, with extremity of
Justice, and stout behavior.
THe said Lord Deputy by his Commission dated the xiij. day of September.
Anno do 1569. made him Collonell of the men of war in Munster, and Governor
of the same Province, leauyng then in his company, and under his government,
Captain Ward, and Captain Shute, either of them having under their
leadynges two hundred Soldiers footmen: and he himself having to his private
band a hundred horsemen clothed in Motley, part whereof served with
Harquebusses, and part with horsemennes staves, Master James Crues was at
this service.

Sir Humfrey had authority of Marciall law, generally committed unto him,
as well for the execution of any within the limittes of his Commission, as for
the annoyance of any offendour by fire and sword, or any other kind of death,
according to the quallitie of his or their offenses: as otherwise at his
discretion. And to cease upon the Country for the victelyng of his
companies. With diverse other articles set down in his Commission, more
largely then tofore had been committed to any other in that Province.

For his entertainemente as Collonell there, he had six and twenty shillynges
eight pence per diem allowed him.

And for his horse band as Captain thereof, eight shillynges per diem.

The order and course of his government.
FIrst, wheresoever he came to do her Majesty service, before he attempted
any thing, he proferred her highness mercy to the Rebels, were they within
Holds, or in Camp: sendyng to them messengers, with offer of pardon both for
body, gooddes, and lands, if they would presentely yield, which if they
once refused, although it were with never so mild an answer, or that they
did but so much as throw a stone at the messenger, were he but a horseboye,
he would never after by any means receive them to grace, but would subdue
them by the sword or he departed, how dearly so ever he bought it: which
done, he caused every creature of them, of all sorts and ages, to pass by
the sword without remission. Accoumptyng the Princes mercy so sacred a thing,
as that it ought to be taken when it is offered, and not to be had when it is
asked.

Which course of gouernemente grew so well to be known to all men in the
Country, that at the length no Ward, Castle, Forte, or Fastenesse, would
shut their gates against him, if he sent to sommon them by a horseboy* For
they knew his determination to be such, as that if they once refused mercy
being offered, and yielded not presently they must resolve them selves to
dye, manne, woman, and child: if they could not for ever withstand him, by
means whereof these commodities ensued.

First, this his resolute and irremoueable determination toward them, bredde
such an universal fear and terror as that thereby very many yielded
without blows, bloodshed, or loss, either of their parts or his.

Also it gave him such expedition in his services, as that thereby he
recovered more Fortes in some one day, then by strong hand would have been
won in a year, respectyng the smalnesse of his company. And the gainyng of
time, was one of his cheifest cares, both because he had no prouition of
victailes for his people, but pulled it as it were out of the enemies mouth
perforce. And also for that he (his company being so few in number) not
knowing how to have supplies: could not bear with the loss of men, to the
winnyng of every petty Forte.

He performed all his actions, after such an open known course, and manner, as
that he would not grant grace to an offendour at any manner of request,
contrary to his resolved course, so as every manne knew whereto to trust.

He further took this order infringeble, that when soever he made any ostyng,
or inrode, into the enemies Country, he killed manne, woman, and child, and
spoiled, wasted, and burned, by the ground all that he might: leauyng nothing
of the enemies in saffetie, which he could possibly waste, or consume. And
these were his reasons that persuaded him thereto, as I have often heard him
say.

First the men of war could not be maintained, without their Churles, and
Calliackes, or women, who milked their Creates, and provided their victualles,
and other necessaries. So that the killyng of them by the sword, was the way
to kill the men of war by famine, who by flight oftentimes saved them
selves from the dinte of the sword.

Also he held it dishonorable for the Prince, to practice with Rebels to
accept her Majesty's mercy: And therefore, he did always seem to care
least for the submission of them, whom he chiefly desired to have become true.
And yet by this course of government it happened, that their wives and
children, whom they dearly loved, were Ambassadors to bring that to pass,
which he disdained to seem to desire, or to be willing to accept.

He never would parley with any Rebel, nor thereto permit under his charge,
saying always that he thought his Dogs ears to good, to hear the speech
of the greateste noble manne amongst them, so long as he was a Rebel.

Also he never received any into protection, but by their own great, and long
suites: and that with promise first made to perform these things followyng,
without which he neither did, nor would by any entreaty be brought, to
receive them to grace.

First (of what estate, condition, or degree soever he were) at the first
coming into his presence, he must fall down on his knees before the said
Collonell, and there knelyng confess himself a traitor, and to have deserved
to be hanged, and so desire her Majesty's pardon: after which sort there came
unto him, the Earl of Glankar, the white knight Mack Donawothe, the Lord of
the great Wood, and diverse others Irishe Lords which I omit. To which
kind of humility, and submission, he drove them for this cause, that they
might thereby wonder the more at her heighnesse greatness: of whom he
endeavored in their hearynges to speak as much honor as he ought: Although
not so much as her Majesty deserved. Declaryng unto the^ how that he him
self was but a poor gentleman, and that the fame his authority, proceeded
but as a silly branch of her highness gouernemente, and that received from
the hands of a mean subject (his place reserved.)

Secondly, he should be sworn to be true, and faithefull dueryng his life
to her Majesty, and her successors, and to all such as should from
henceforthe (under her highness and her successors) have the care, and charge
of that Country. And this he did, to the end that their consciences (if they
had any) might be a clogge to them, if they should infringe the same.

Thirdly, for performaunce of things before spoken of, every one should be
bound in a Recognizaunce, and that in as great a sum as the said Collonell
should seem good, which ordinarely amounted unto so much, as very nere
counteruailed the value of their goods and lands, or at the least was much
more then they were able to pay. And this policy he had therein, that it
might lie always in the Prince, Deputy, or other cheef officers, thereby by
color of Justice, to lay any of them by the feet, for forfaityng of their
bands (which he knew they all would do) and so by that means prevented a
mischeef, before they could commit any further act of great danger. The
total sum of the Recognizaunces taken by him within his charge, and
certified under the hands of the Majors and Touneclarkes of the Cities and
Tounes within that Province, amounted unto -- 244182. l. 4. s^. 5. d. q d.

Lastely every one should put such pledges in hand (for the keepyng and
performyng of all the Articles aforesaied) as the said Collonell would
demand, which he did to prevent them thereby, that they should not dare to
offend. For the choice of his pledges was on this sort, he took not only
those, whom the chief Lord loved best: But rather those whom his followers
of greateste force, held derest either by blood, or fosterage: to the end
that they should forsake their Lord, or persecute him, if he attempted any
thing to the iniuryng or indaungeryng of their dearest beloved. All which
pledges he left in hand within the Cities of Cork, and Limbricke at his
departing from thence.

Farther, he never took pledge (if he were of years to speak) but by his own
consent, and that upon this condition of all parts. That if he for whom he
lay should become a Rebel, and should refuse to come to the said Collonell,
or other chief officers, when he should be sent for: that then the pledge
shall dye for the offense of him (so disobaiyng) that he lay for, and the
other when he might be taken: And in this matter none of them durst pass
through his fingers, for he always observed his orders, and course of
gouernemente irremoueably, not making himself subject to any persuasion.

Moreover he held this general rule, that what soever offendoure was taken he
died, or had his just punishmente without redemption. Affirmyng himself to be
of the opinion, that the noble Captain Lamacus was of, who said, Quod nonest
bis in bello peccare. And they which formerly did most hurt, after they were
received to mercy, he had in greatest estimation, being persuaded that they
had most value in the^ to do good service, if they would apply it well.

His manner was that the heddes of all those (of what sort soever they were)
which were killed in the day, should be cut of from their bodies, and
brought to the place where he encamped at night: and should there be laid on
the ground, by each side of the way leadyng into his own Tente: so that none
could come into his Tente for any cause, but commonly he must pass through a
lane of heddes, which he used ad terrorem, the dedde feelyng nothing the more
pains thereby: and yet did it bring great terror to the people, when they
saw the heddes of their dedde fathers, brothers, children, kinsfolk, and
friends, lie on the ground before their faces, as they came to speak with
the said Collonell. Which course of gouernemente may by some be thought to
cruel, in excuse whereof it is to be answered. That he did but then begin
that order with them, which they had in effect ever tofore used toward the
English. And further he was out of doubt, that the dedde felt no pains by
cuttyng of their heddes, according to the example of Diogenes, who being asked
by his friends, what should be done with him when he died, answered in this
sort: Cast me on a dunghill quod he, where unto his friends replied, saying:
The Dogs will then eat you, his answer thereto was thus why then set a
staff by me: Whereunto they answered, you shall not feel them, to whom he
again replied with these words, what need I then to care.

But certainly by this course of gouernemente (although to some it may seem
otherwise) there was much blood saved, and great peace ensued in haste. For
through the terror, which the people conceived thereby, it made short wars.
For he reformed the whole Country of Munster, and brought it into an
universal peace, and subjection, within six weeks: leauyng at his coming
from thence James Mack Morres as a wood Kerne, accompanied only at the most
not with above seuentene men: who at his first coming thither commanded
many a thousand. Which reformation, and establishemente of the Countries
peace there performed, presently came from thence, and so left his charge
there with sufficient pledge, bond, and paune, for the good behauioure of
every Lord, and Captain for them selves, and their followers, refusyng no
duetifull service ever since.

An abstracte of some of his particular services.
EMongeste many others, these perticulare services followyng he did in person,
of which only I have thought good to make rehearsal of these few, omittyng
the rest.

First with 150. footmen, he seruyng then a private captain, under the
leadyng of master Edward Randolphe then his Collonell at Knockfargus, he
stood firmly in the plain feelde, charged with four thousand footmen, and
six hundred horsemen of Onyles company, and there killed and hurt of the
enemy about two hundred, having of his company in all not above thirty
hurt and slain. This service was done for the rescuyng of Captain Wilforde,
and Captain Ward, who although they ventered them selves farther then reason
would, to cause certain disordered Soldiers to retire, stirred thereunto
through the tender care of the Soldiers safeties: They did so valiauntly
behave them selves therein, as that they worthily deserved great commendation.

The second service was done by Kylkennie the third of Iulie a thousand five
hundred sixty and nine, where he being accompanied with master Henry Dauels,
a noble and valiant gentleman, now slain by Ihon of Desmond, and xij. others,
went from sir Peter Carewe knight, with pretrnce but to vewe the Rebels. And
yet with that small number, charged he them at the least forty score, before
all the rest of his company: the rebels being then in number about twelve
hundred, as it was reported, and standing then in battaill raye. The said sir
Peter Carewe, and one Appesley Lieutenaunt to the said Collonell coming next
after him, accompanied with the horsebande of the said Collonell, and a
certain of master Captain Wingefeeldes soldiers, who were that day in the
vauntegard, amountyng in the whole to the number of a hundredth and twenty
horse. Captain Malbe, and Captain Bassenet followyng in the rereward,
either of them having under their leadynges fifty horsemen. In this charge the
said Collonelles black Curtall horse, whereupon he then served, was very sore
hurt under him in eight places.

The third service was done by Kylmallocke, the xxiiij. day of September
1569. wherewith his own horsebande he scirmouched with three thousand rebels
at the least, the Earl of Glanckar being then there amongst the^ in person
with diverse other Lords and Capitaines of countries. In this scirmouche all
his company were beaten from him, saving one Tadcastell, a Soldiour of his
own band, who standing with him in defendyng of a Forde, was in the end
slain. And he him self being left alone, and enforced to defend the same,
kept it a great while against very near thirty horsemen, James Macke
Morres, R^wrey, Macke She, the cheef Captain of the Desmondes Galliglasses,
the Lord of the great Wood, Pursell Suppell, Edmonde Sites Dani, with diverse
other gentlemen emongst them. Also in this scirmouche his black Curtall horse,
of whom I spoke of before, was hurt in diverse places of the body, and was
shot through the neck with a Harcabushe. And the said Collonelles Targatte
was stricken through with diverse darts, besides many blows on his Armoure,
but in person not hurt. Whereat the Irishe wondered so much they made
sondrie songs and Rimes of him (and his black Curtall horse) imaginyng him
self to have been an enchaunter, that no man could hurt ridyng on a Devil.

And here is to be specially noted, that in all the services before spoken of,
and at most of such other services as were done by the said Collonell in
Munster, Captain Ward and master Crues showed them selves very foreward,
and valiaunte. And therefore in that respect they have deserved commendation,
which in nowise is to be forgotten.

The said sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy, invested the said Collonell with
the title and honor of knighthoode, for his good service on Neweyeres day
1569, and so came he into England, where he has remained a while the most
part in Court: Since that he served the Prince of Orrange, in the cause of
Religion in Zelande and Flaunders, where being geneall of two thousand
English: he had for the entertainment of his own person in wages and other
allowaunces, very near ten thousand Marks per Annum, besides very large
allowaunces for all the Officers, Capitaines and Soldiers under his regimente.

At an other time sir Ihon Parret being as lord Justice in a Province of
Irelande, behaved himself so nobly, and used such severe Justice, that no one
Lord nor other under his charge, durst any way offend him For he nether
granted pardon (but upon merueilous great cause) nor would give ear to a,
parley: But always proceeded in such a manly manner, and stout resolution of
mind, that he was both feared and beloved. And so much desired of good men
to tarry in the country: that the badde sort to this day, are aferd to hear
his name rehearsed. He was such a scourge to the wicked, and such a comfort
to the worthy. Whose particular services (if laisure presently served me) I
would publishe to sir Ihon Parrets great glory and commendation.

Finis.
A Mirrhor for rebels to look into, where the death of one Roorie Oge in
Irelande (whose life was always without order) does show that the reward of
vice is ever open shame, and a foul end.
IN an other season of Irishe services, and trial of such as are doubted, a
practice was drawn by a stobburne and stout Rebel called Roorie Oge: For the
betraiyng of Captain Harryngton, and one master Coesbie, and albeeit
Captain Harryngton had been in notable and dangerous service, the space of
ten years before, (where many practices were to be seen and avoided). Yet
this drifte of Roorie Oges was so cunnyngly handeled, no former experience
might preuente it: So that Roorie Oge by this cautell and traitorous manner, had
his purpose brought to effect, and did what he pleased with Captain
Harryngton, vsyng him cruelly with all manner of rude handlyng and
entertainmente. Fast locked to a post every night a great season, and at
length the English Capitaines being moved with this cruelty, found a devise
to beset the house, where Roorie Oge haunted: and the traitor seeing him self
in danger, came in a rage to Captain Harryngton, and gave him twelve great
wounds, where he lay locked to a post, and so left him for dedde, the
English Soldiers hearing captain Harryngton call for help, were thrustyng
into the house: But Roorie Oge most stoutly ran out among them, and by a
desperate adventure escaped through the thickest of the throng, and did much
hurt after. But at this presence the Captain was brought away all to be
mangeled and hurt: and all those that were found a live in the house, were
slain and put to the sword, in so much that the wife of Roorie Oge was in
like sort dispatched of her life. For which act many foul murders and
other cruelties, Roorie Oge committed. But when that Captain Harryngton was
healed, he persecuted Roorie Oge so hardly and so often, that he put him
diverse times in danger to be overthrown. Master Parcker as I heard say,
Lieutenant to Captain Furs with his valliaunt Soldiers, recovered
Captain Harryngto^ out of the hands of his enemies. And to be short, a
means was found after long services and dangerous attemptes, that Roorie Oge
him self was entrapped, and taken in a Net and stale, that he had made and
laid for an other. The manner whereof was, that Roorie Oge being desirous to
betraie the Lord of Vpprosserie, did draw a drifte (by one, that could
finely handle the matter) that he himself should seem to fall in danger, and
so be delivered unto my Lord of Vpprosseries hands, who notyng the device
(giuyng no farther credit to the tale then need required) armed his men
privily in two companies, and made as though he would follow the fellow,
that came to bring about Roories drift, and coming where Roorie had lodged,
pursued the enterprise, and seemed to follow the advice of him that came to
practice. And by chance and good fortune, the two companies mentioned of
before, had environed Roorie Oge ere he was ware, and thereby he was defeited,
and had the reward of iniquity by the self same means, that he was wont to
serve others. A notable just judgment of God, and an example worthy the
notyng.

Now after this, and for many good causes and pieces of service, Captain
Harryngton was made Knight, by the honorable Sir Henry Sidney, then Lord
deputy of Irelande. And when he gave up the Sword, Sir Willyam Drurie was the
Justice, in whose time and especially in the beginning of his gouernemente, was
many things to be dooen, that might show a Marciall mind, and express the
worthiness of a noble governor. For then one sir James Fitz Morris (a great
practisien with the Pope and other Potentates) entered Irelande with seven
Ships, bryngyng with him both Soldioures, and other people to disquiete a
state: Yea, and had such a number of persuasions, for the troublyng of a
Common weal, that this Fitz Morris drew to his side, a multitude of
licencious and lawless people, in so much that the company grew so great,
that sir Ihon of Desmonde (a man of good birthe, and ill disposition) joined
him self with that party, committyng an execrable murder before he began to
reuolte, and slew an English gentleman, that had long before been his freende,
and used the murder so hainously, and against all natural kindness, that
every man's heart that thinks thereon, abhorres the remembrance thereof. For
under a pretense of amity, Sir Ihon of Desmonde gatte his friend in a trappe
(which freende had dooen him great service and pleasure) and so suddenly
steps unto him, and gave him a mortal blow, notwithstanding the followers
of sir Ihon, were not willing to go about such a murder. But when Ihon of
Desmond had begone the broile, the bloodshedde and Butcherie followed, not
only on good Henry Dauelles, but also on others as innocente as him self of
any such slaughter, and unmerciful dealing. Well these things, and an
infinite number of strange matters (set a broche by James Fitz Morres) might
have appalled the spirit of greater personages then I speak of. Yet the
honorable and Soldiourlike sir Willya^ Drurie, in most assured hope of
victory, made hedde upon the enemies and prepared, with the help of the Earl
of Kildare, and others very honorable (and of good calling, loyal subjects
in Ireland) to withstand the great force and fury of Fitz Morres: Which at
that season waxed so warm and extreme hot, that sondrie became cold in
good will, that were thought to be fervent in the service of the Prince. But
the might and force of a rightful quarrel and the ready diligence and
forewardnesse of a good governor, so plucked up the hearts of those that began
to droupe, that one hundred of the English side seemed a thousand, and five
thousand on the contrary part, proved nothing in effect. For the hearts of
rebels trembles, where the Princes power is presented, and the wits and
purposes of savage people, goes a Wolle gatheryng: when the civil Soldiour is
certainly grounded in a manly determination. As it seemed by all those that
followed the Lord Justice, and their noble success of service does argue
evidently, that trothe and courageous Soldiers of God, are never forsaken,
and rebellious minds are doubtful of life, destituted of grace, and
uncertain of every thing they go about.

Fitz Morres in this manner as you have heard, landyng and fortisiyng for his
most surety: left no way unsought, that might annoye and hinder the hope of
the Englishemen, and in many kinds of practices excelled, and waxed strong as
he thought: And as diverse affirm he was stout, valiant, and of knowledge
sufficient to encomber a sound, and a whole Country. But in fine, it
happened upon some oversight of Fitz Morres (or set purpose of God) that his
cunnyng failed him, his force was but ill, and his fortune worse. For in the
middell of his traitorous triumphyng, he tasted the right recompense of
rebellion, and was slain in the feeld, his hedde brought into Cork Town, and
his body and reputation, buried in the grave of reproach and infamy.

The Lord Justice had by this time, or in short time after, received some
succor and aid out of England. And sir Ihon Parret as Admiral of four of
the Queen's Ships, master Willyam Gorge, master Nicholas Gorge, master
Gilbart York, Captain Peers, Captain Awdley, Captain Hind, accompaniyng
him as Capitaines appointed for that service. Sir Willyam Morgan, master
Pellam, master Bousser, master Broncker, master Willyam Norrice, master
Crofttes, master Ihon Soutche, and many other lusty Capitaines, and Gentlemen
of good regard, were in like sort appoincted for the service of Irelande. But
what was dooen, and the rehearsal thereof, I commit to those that lives to
Regester, and keep in memory men's labors and services hereafter. Which
writers in giuyng life to matters, that time may wear out of mind: are not
only well occupied, but likewise makes good Soldiers imitate and follow the
noble footesteppes of those that went before them: by which means Gods
glory is advanced, and our Countries honor is vpholden and worthily
defended.

Finis.
A small rehersall of some special services in Flaunders of late, part whereof
were in the time of Don Ihons government and the rest being done in the
present service of the Prince of Parma, now governor of Flaunders.
THE remembrance of a book dedicated to the right honorable Sir Frances
Walsyngham touching the troubles of Flanders: moves me again to put pen to
Paper in that dehalfe. Breefly to begin where I left (which was a matter of
Don Ihon) and proceed a little in the doings of the Prince of Parma
presentely in action and place of great matter exspected. And because my most
desire is to advance the Soldiers of England, as well as to publishe the
services of foreign countries, I omit many things that strange Nations
have been exercised withal. And declare somewhat in the favor of mine own
countrymen, that serve and have served under the Prince of Orange, and States
of the Low Country, meaning not to meddell with matter of State (that passes
my reach and capacity) but familiarely to treat of such things, as the
common sort of people do carpe upon, and is sufferable to be written of. As
much to delight the reader that searches for novelty, as any other cause that
moves me to this labor, and rehearsal of service.

The houge and great armies, the long continuance of troubles: the passages
and and discourses of manyfolde miseries, and the open Plague, and disturbaunce
of poor afflicted Flaunders, I refer to the unsearchable wisdom of the
Almighty, and the grave judgment of the world. And hearing the certainty of
some scirmouches, and services of late: I follow the trothe of new matter,
that falls next into my memory.

You have heard, and the world can witness, that Don Ihon before his death
(being desirours of fame and victory) sought and practiced all means
possible, to come to his purpose: and knowing where and in what order the
states lay, and what straites were kept by the pollecie of Mounsire de Bussie,
General of the Camp for the States. He determined with a full resolute mind,
manfully to attempt some exploite, that might amase the Prince of Orranges
side, and pluck up the courages of his own people, that lay a long season
idelly, from dooyng of any great enterprise. And so therevppon Don Ihon in a
manner gave to understand (as by the sequel was perceived) that he would visit
the camp of the States, or win such straites from them, as should be much
to their discontent, and his great advantage.

In the year of our Lord 1578. the wars being then at the hottest betwixt
the estates and the King, (the estates having a great puissant army in the
feelde, under the conduicte of the Grave of Busy. The King having also an
other under the leadyng of Don Ihon his base brother.) It happened the first
of August, the enemy to visit the army of the states, who lay then
entrenched in the feelde, nere unto a Town called Reminant. The Army being
composed of diverse nations, both horsemen and footmen: there was one
regimente of English of twelve hundred, under the leadyng of the Collonell
Candishe, and in his absence his Lieutenaunte Collonell Richard Bingham. The
said Lieutenaunt and no other General officer of that Nation, being
commanded to the feelde by the General of the states, led forth the whole
number of shot that was under his charge viz. six hundred. The leaders under
him of the regimente, were Captain Laukynges, Captain Fitz Willyams,
Captain Edwardes, the Lieutenant Paddon, the Lieutenante Dalton, the
Liutenante Chubbe, well accompanied with diverse other worthy gentlemen and
officers. Being thus appointed with direction, to leave in a sure guard upon
the next Mount to the trenche, and with the rest to make hedde to the
enemy, and to entertain him as he should see cause, offered at sight of the
eye, keepyng evermore the straight on the right hand: and Steward with the
Scotts on the left hand, having now placed a sufficient guard upon the
Mount, and sent Captain Fitz Willyams farther forth by a quarter of a mile,
to assure them of an other ground and strength of advantage. He receives
commau^demente again from the General, that he should leave the Mount, and
draw his forces to the Church, which stood about an English Mile from the
Mount, and upon the said straight whereupon he presently left the Mount,
leauyng behind Captain Fitz Willyam to guard the place of advantage, where
he first left him, being a place of great importance. And with the rest
he makes way to the Bridge, where he left the Lieutenaunte Paddon, with
Chubbe and their companies in guard of the place: and to stand fast for a
releef, to those that he led more foreward to the Church. Being now arrived
at the Church, with Captain Liggins his Lieutenant Dalton. And Captain
Edwardes with a three hundred shot, he sends up to the Steeple two of his
Soldiers to discover the enemy, who presently showed that they might see the
fair Hethe, which was yet half an English Mile further, and upon it the
whole power of the enemy in battaillions, both horsemen and footmen: and
further that they marched in for both the streightes. The Lieutenante not
reposing to much trust in the two private Soldiers, leaped of from his
horse, and went up the Steeple him self, where as soon as he had discovered
the enemy, and perceived him to make in, for both the streigtes, he
presentely at his coming down, commanded Captain Liggins to stand fast
with two hundred shot at the Church, and taking with him the Lieutenaunt
Dalton, Edwardes, Finche, and Straubrige, with diverse other gentlemen officers
with two hundred shot. He makes hedde to the straight, where he found the
enemy coming fast on to enter the same. Who forthwith disbanded certain
shot, led by the aforesaied Dalton, and Edwardes, and enterteined them with
the scirmouch so sufficiently, as he forced them to give ground, and to retire
toward the straight, which Steward had in guard, so far that in the action,
he brought him self betwixt the enemy and the Scotts, who mistakyng the
company, gave them from the Hedge where they lay, such a volley of shot,
as made them to lose more ground, then ever the enemy could have done. The
enemy in the mean time, perceiuyng that, (and fought upon a retreat) came on
with great fury, being supplied with fresh nombers: But could not for all he
might do, force them to aba^don the straight, till such time as certain
English men that were within the Closses to discover, brought word that
the enemy had entered the straight upon the Scotts, which was very true. For
even at the instant the fire was seen to arise in the village, and the whole
forces that were to enter, betwixt the water and the English companies, to
retire them selves unto the Hethe again. The Scotts making good their fight
upon the retreat, the Lieutenant was likewise driven to do the same, which
if he had not, the enemy had cut betwixt him, his company, and the
trenches. This being well perceived by Captain Liggins, who was as is said,
left at the church for a releef by the Lieutenaunte: the Captain presently
advanced him self, and was now come half the way, to the succor of the
Lieutenaunte, and to prevent the enemy, and join him self with the forces of
the Lieutenant. They altogether retire unto the Church, and perceiuyng that
the enemy came on apace, the Lieutenaunt leaves Capitain Liggins, and Dalton
his Lieutenaunt, at a reasonable ground of strength to entertain them: and
he himself rides back to the bridge, to fetch the releef for Captain
Liggyns his retreat, which releef was led by the Lieutenantes Paddon and
Chubbe, where he found it of more strength then he thought of. For he found
his brother Captain Bingham come forth with all the shot of his company:
being so willed by Captain Palmer the Sergant Mayor of that regiment, who
commanded him from his ward.

The enemy seeing the straight of that way, and that their other forces
prevailed more upon the other straight, forsook any longer to attempt the
same against the English: and retired them as they might on the side over
the Closes, to join them with their other forces, which had even now passed
the streighte, which the Scotts had in guard. Who all together made hedde up
to the hill, and so to the burnt house, then fired by the Scotts in their
retreat: who at that instaunte forsook the feelde, and retired them all into
the Camp. Not far from which place was Captain Fitz Willyams, to whose
turn it now came. The Lieutenaunte perceiuyng the enemy to be advanced, as
near the Trenches as he him self was. Commanded his troops to march with
all speed toward Fitz Willya^s to bring them selves altogether on the hedde
of the enemy, and betwixt them and the Trenches. Where at his arrival he sent
the Lieutenant Dalton with fifty shot into a close, to beat them on the
flancke, and him self with the others, dealte with them on frunte. Here was
Dalton with his encountered, and two or three of his slain, and of the enemies
as many.

At this time came in Captain Fludde, one of master Morgans companies, and
was the first that came in of the eleven Ensigns, to the great comfort and
encouragement of the other power, that were of master Norris his Regimente.
From the time that the Lieutenaunte General of master Candishes regimente,
first entered into scirmouche on the far Hethe, until this time were passed
two hours, and from his first going forth three.

This Captain Fludd had his march on the rereward of master Norris his
regimente, which was even now all entered into the Estates Camp, and was
their first arriuyng to the same. After that Captain Fludde had delivered
diverse volles of shot, they retired to the hille having spente their powder.
In this scirmouche which was very well maintained, by the forces of master
Candishes Regimente, as also now by some of the other, was slain the Captain
Liggins, and one master Shilton, and master Sa^des sore hurt, whereof not
long after he died, and master Wingfeelde who recovered, with diverse others
hurt and slain. About this time came in Captain Gill, Lieutenaunte of
master Norrisses private band, accompanied with certain squadrons of shot
of the said band. After this came in Captain Salesburie, with diverse
troops of master Ihon Cobhams, and Captain Aumond, with the shot of his
own company. As also Captain Cromwell with some of his own company, and
diverse other gentlemen: as master Frances Fourder, master Anthony Ellis,
Captain Erryngton, all which Capitaines and gentlemen, behaved them selves
very sufficiently, and with great valor and courage, joined them selves
with the Capitaines and companies of master Candishes Regimente, who as you
have heard, were there long before, and never departed the feelde, but had
always their releef of powder brought unto them into the feelde, by Smithe the
Provost Marshall: who received the same of Palmer they Sergeaunte Mayor, who
was left within the Camp, to provide such necessaries, as also to govern
the Trenches of the English quarter, which Captain Markain had in charge,
with the armed men of that Regimente, where he remained and served all that
day. As time had passed a two hours more in sore scirmouche of both sides,
master York came into the feelde (who had been busy within, about the
division of their quarter) for the eleven Ensigns, which as you have heard,
were that forenoone arrived. To whom the Lieutenant master Byngham showed the
abuse of Soldiers, that were of that Regimente, who would not be retired, nor
obaye his commandment. Master York answered, that he had then little to
do with them, upon which master Bingham demanded for master Norris: to
whom he meant to signify their disorder and disobedience: As these speeches
passed betwixt them, they saw the whole force and power of the enemies Army,
that were within the straight, to move and alter their present state, with
sound of Trompet and Drom, presentyng and aduaunsyng them, both horsemen and
foot men toward us: whereupon the Lieutenante demanded of master York
what it might signify, either to charge us in gross, or else to make their
retraite, being doubtful which of these two, the enemy would forthwith
put in use, the said two gentlemen to preuente the worste, and to assure
the^ selves, and the state of the whole Army, thought good to possess them
selves of a hille, or ground of advantage, which lay very near the enemy.
For which ground these gentlemen forthewith made for (and also master Roger
Willyams came in on their left hand to the same) who had not long before in
the feeld, before the Viscount of Gant and the rest, most valliauntly
encountered with a Spanyard, and as worthily acquitted himself of the same) at
their enteryng or chargyng for the Hille, they made signs that their forces
should follow. Who being arrived and possessed of the ground, descended from
their horses to encourage the whole nombers and troops of our Nation to the
service to follow, which they began to do very fast. The first that came
in was the Captain master Roger Byngham, accompanied with diverse Gentlemen
and Soldiers, as master Huzey, master Knight, master Temple, with many
more: The other brother came in upon the higher ground, more near the Hethe
with a fifty or sixty, with him, some of that band, and some of others, with
which the said Captain incontinent entered into scirmouche with the enemy
from the Hille, and the corner of the Heathe to their forces; which were
placed all a long under a Hedge. This scirmouche was so well maintained of
both sides, that they grew very near the one to the other: and diverse
slain on both sides. As the actions passed in this heat of shot, the horse
of master York was stricken with a bullet, through which he was forced to
forsake the Hille or place: giuyng a note thereof by word from him self, to
the Lieutenaunte. Who fearyng least the going away of that horse, from the
Hille inward would stay or discourage those, that were coming into their
succors or aid. Sent one of his men to his brother the Captain, willing
him to fight or deal warely upon a reteate: And leaped him self to horse, to
hasten and bring them in, which by this means or charge he doubted of, and
were coming even in this mean while: The enemy charged with great fury
Captain Bingham, and the rest that were with him, who most worthily choose
rather to sell his life dearly, with the slaughter of some of his enemies,
then in vile and disorderly sort to retire, yet made he an orderly retreat
into the high way, in which there came up on the left hand, a great troop
of the enemies, who environed or cast them about: with this the Lieutenaunte
came in with succors, who was encountered with the said enemy twenty paces,
before he could ariue at the Captain: and was so hardely charged, and
ouersaied with number, that he was forced to fight pelle melle in a retraite,
all a long under the Hedge, till he came to the elbowe, or bought of the
cloase, where Captain Edwardes, the Lieutenaunt of master Cabendiches
company came in to him, well accompanied with the shot of that band, with
the aid of which the Lieutenant General charged the enemy again with a
great fury and courage, forcyng them to a maine retraite even to the Hille,
or corner of the Hedge, where they findyng their fresh reserved troops and
strength, charged us again the second time, with greater fury then before.
For it stood them in hand to give us our filles, that they might make their
retraite with saffetie, forsyng the Lieutenaunt again to a general retraite:
upon this second retraite came in the chief General of our Nation, Master
Norris, to whom the Lieutenant adressed him, being then extreme weary, both
in body and mind, for the doubtful estate of his brothers, and the other
gentlemen, as whether they were taken or slain, which he signified forth
with to the General master Ihon Norris. Who being fresh and lusty,
endeavored himself most worthily, in commandyng charge of all hands, with
which the enemy was again repulsed to his ordinary guard of strength: being
brought to this state: there began again a hot scirmouche betwixt them, in
which was neither sword nor powder spared. The enemy seeing the great courage
of the English, who would not leave them, but were hard at their heels: was
doubtful how to make his retraite with any assurance, thought good in
policy to give us a maine charge once again, with as great fury as they
might. And this was the third time, and the last that they persed our Nasion,
in which they forced us further then ever before, even to the corner of the
cloase, next to our Trenches. At which place came in Capitain Fitz Willyams
with a reasonable good troop, who the Lieutenaunt commanded to charge on the
enemy, and promise do follow him in the back as he did, but as he came to the
elbowe of the cloase, he met the said Capitain coming about, sore beaten,
and all the place from that to the Hille, employed with the companies of both
sides in fight of pelle melle, with diverse encounters of many worthy men of
courage upon this occasion or fight, we stood longer then in any other
before. Here they gave us so much as we were well content, (after we had
forced them to retire) to take a pauce on it. Attendyng the coming of the
Collonell Morgan, who was set forward from the trenches, with a good troop
to our succors. And truly though he were not in the feelde, yet did he very
worthy service within the Camp, in giuyng order for us to be supplied in
diverse cases: As also in fastenyng and assuryng the minds, of a number of
fearful strangers. Who had their wagons and packes all ready trust to fly,
only restyng upon the assurance of our Nasion. In this mean while the
lances of the enemy had passed the strait, in their retraite back again:
and lay at the mouth of the strait toward us, seven or eight companies of
Harcabuses on horseback, to deal with them that would attempt to pursue
them. Their footmen that had been so long in action with us, seeing their
retraite prepared for, and their time come without sound of Drum, stale
away over two or three cloases, till they paste the crossewaie, that went
toward the strait on the right hand. At this crossewaie they had placed a
relief of shot, which was employed against master Norris, and the rest
that followed him. From this crossewaie, and corner which was a ground of
strength: they delivered a volle in bravery, and somewhat in policy more
then to hurt, on the instant of which volley of shot they took their heels
over the Medes and ditches, and never turned till they came to the far
Heathe, where they found the Lances, for their guard: who presentely
conducted them into the Army. And themselves, made the rereward with the
shot on horse, that lay yet more behind at the mouth of the strait,
toward our trenches, as I have showed you before, over two or three cloases
they were paste, before we could learn of their fearful retraite. Yet were
there diverse lusty fellows of ours, that were in with the hindmoste, and
took some prisoners.

The Prince of Parma coming to the gouernemente of Flaunders, after the death
of Don Ihon (whose vallue is waighed by the wisdom of the world) began
pollitikely and manfully to use his authority: For so the case required,
considering diverse Governors bearyng the Torche before him, and he with a
little Candell must either follow their steps, or go the course his own
light should lead him. And being wearied with worldely affairs (though young
of years) sought sonderie ways to ease the burden of his breaste, both by
policy and causes, that hap hazard might bring to good perfection) and so
bendyng his study and spirits, about some dangerous adventure, and noble
attempt. He first made a show, as though he would have besieged Antwarpp
(bryngyng a power on the spur, to amasse the world) and in that ronnyng
camp amused their wits, that saw but into the outward shows of ordinary
causes* and therewith all when the brauado was made toward Antwarppe (on
which town the whole State depended) and some of the Prince of Parmas men
went, and ventered very far, yet sieve of English and others a number
scarce worthy hearing.

The Prince of Parma retired, and immediately upon good direction and order,
besieged Mastricke, a marvelous strong Town subject to no evil, but
misfortune or man's policy. Which Town showed it self so well and
worthily, that I must needs (without any great intelligence of every
particular services) write of the notorious matters, that fell out during the
time of the siege. And for that the noble minds, and great courages of men,
delights in doing great things, and hearing of mighty matters. It is reason
in aunsweryng their hopes and judgments, to delate a little, and make a long
discourse, of these Marciall affairs. For such a noble behavior of Soldiers
on both sides, may not be forgotten, nor be left bare and naked, from the
roebes of renoume, and remembrance of the world.

The Spanyardes and others what soever, that served the Prince of Parma, made a
stout and gallante approach to the Town of Mastricke: In which attempt,
they of the Town were tried and found, both able to resist, and willing to
defend. Their scirmouches and manner of war, did to the vttermoste show,
there was no faintness of heart, nor lack of force, to withstand a stout
enemy. For every Minute of an an hour, they offered as much bravery and
bold courage, as any people that ever were in our days, did abide the siege:
set Haddyngton aparte.

Well, now the Spanyardes placed the Camp in good order, the Country near
about in subjection: the Munition ready, and all necessaries for a siege
provided for, the Battery was planted, and every Trenche guarded and looked to,
in the most warlike sort and manner might be devised. Notwithstanding they of
the Town made many sallies, and issued so often, that it was thought, neither
their courage was to be daunted, nor their Town to be won.

But the Prince of Parma myndyng only victory, and perswadyng nothing but
hazard of life, or danger of body, framed his Soldiers to such a resolution
of mind, that they thought neither vamures of earth, nor walls of brass
might keep them from their desired conquest: with which resolution in the
face of the shot, and lapps of their enemies, they lighted very often, yet
scambled out of peril, as the present mischeef would suffer, and every man
might make shift for him self.

There was to be seen between these two people, such stoutnesse of mind,
and practice of wit, that nothing was forgotten, that might give grace to the
one, or bring good fortune to the other. So in this sort a long season was
spent, and no small charges bestowed, greatly to the disquietnesse of both
the parties, and wonder of their neighbors (far or near) that daiely gaped
for news, and were fed with such reports, as the packettes unfolded, and
the Posts would make brute of.

And all this while they within the Town hoped for succor, and their enemies
without, were but to withstand any power should approach them: And made a full
accoumpt, either to give battaill, or win the town they had besieged. The
Battery was plied, the Cannons went of, the wildefire was flong, the engines
of war were occupied, the soldiers were ready to assault, and the Mine was
thrust full of poulder, to blow up the walls, and all the cruelty and
terror that could be invented, was speedily set a broche, too make the
murder and bloodshed the more. The people of Mastricke had made a counter
Mine, and in the time of the assault, sieve the woorkemen under the earth, and
defended their walls most manfully: which was assailed with such a fury
and courage, as though a mainy of Gyauntes, had set upon a few children: or a
multitude of Wolves, had run upon a poor and simple flock of Sheep. But yet
for all this fury, and dreadful manner of approach, the Soldiers assalted did
show the^ selves so valliant, that the assailantes were forced after long
fight (at the pushe of the Pike) to retire, and shrink from the breach, and
with great loss of many a noble Soldiour, turn their faces from their
enemies, and draw them selves from danger, to the sauegard of their Trenches,
and gardyng of their Camp.

This first assault was so stoutly withstoode, that a long while after the
Town took some rest: But the Spanyardes waiyng not their lives, and waxyng
angerie for this repulse, made sonderie sharp approches. When many legs, and
arms, by mean of the Mines five up in the air, as though a tempest or whirle
wind, had blown a few feathers, or gotten under a loose bundell of Straw:
yea, the Mines at one time were so terribly set on fire, and shaked a pieces
(by a number of barrells of powder) that you would have thought it had
Thondered, or the world had been at an end, and the Judgment day had been
come. So pitifully the bodies and heddes of people five about the feeldes,
for thereby the Clouds were dimmed with gloumyng smoke and smother. A sight
most dreadful to behold, and as a man might say, a very hell upon earth,
where diverse bloody wretches and Ruffians do dye, without any hope of
heaven, or regard of God.

Well, in this miserable manner and plight, the people of Mastricke continued
full many a heavy day and week, and yet always the greatest loss fell on
their enemies part, who nevertheless became so venterous and hardy, by this
their hard Fortune: That they were in a manner as desperate, as wild Bulls,
that neither cares for Dogs, nor shunneth no danger. And in deed the Prince
of Parmaes power, were become such Tigers and Lions, that they thought no
force could resist their fury, nor no people could match them in courage and
valliauncie. Such was the greatness of their minds, and desire of worldely
fame and glory, the only sturrer up of stoutnesse in a Soldiers stomach,
and the principle poincte that a man of war cares for, and holds in
reputation.

And in this pride and gallaunce conceipte of doing what they pleased, they
made no more of the loss of half a score Ensigns of men, then of a
handful of Rushes, or a trusse of Hey. For when a thousand, or two thousand
Soldiers were slain at the assault, or at any piece of service, they erected
new bands, and furnished old places with a present supply of such Nations,
as would enter into wages, and though the long liyng in the cold, and keepyng
of the ca^pe, made both horse and manne stiff as a stake, and a weary of
Winter weather. Yet would they set such a show, and bravery on the matter,
as though they had gone about some Summer May game, or a Christmas pastyme,
walkyng and sportyng before the Town they besieged: as they had ron at the
Basse, in a pleasant piece of ground, and goodly green Meadowe. The manner
whereof and boldness of that behavior, made the lookers on that were in a
pittefold (and peepyng out at a hole by stealth) think of strange devises,
and have many busy Bees in their heddes.

Now it happened through long besiegyng, many assaults and great Batteries,
that the people of Mastricke were so well acquainted with mischief and misery,
that each thing was welcome, that Fortune (by Gods appointment) had sent, or
by any occasion fell out. But always with wisdom, labor, and policy, they
prepared to defend and provided a net and cunnyng trappe to deceive their
enemies, and when they thought least of a Stratagime, they should fall in
danger, and pay many a life for their pastyme. So the day approached of a
most terrible assault (when the Town was threatened to be won) and the
Camp stood in battaill, the horse men were mounted, the bloody Ensigns
were spread, and the Drommes and Trompettes sounded a slaunghter, and the
Alaru^ was given. Then toward the breach the Spanyardes began to march,
where they were received with the poshe of the Pike, and the bullette of the
Harcabooze, and fought withal very nobly, a marvelous great season, in so
much that the Spanyardes were likely with much loss, to retire and be driven
back. But as a great storm beats down mighty Trees: And a strong stream
drives feeble fish before it. So the power of the Spanyardes pearssed through
the breach, and entered the Town, and possessed a great plotte of ground,
(which in deed was undermined) and even as they thought all had been their
own, fire was given to the train of powder, and two or three thousand of
the Spanyardes side, were blown as hye as the highest wall in the Town: and
thereupon the soldiers of Mastricke gave a lusty charge on their enemies, and
so drove nombers out at the breach, some with burnte faces, some with broken
arms, some with haltyng legs, and very few free of hurt, or vnmangled in
some one place or other: and he that spedde best returned with rebuke, and
escaped a blodie Butcherie. A heavy sight to behold, and a thing that Harlam
often times before, had offered the duke of Aluaes Soldiers. But those that
are bente to go about worthy enterprises, refuses no hazardes, nor waighes
nothing but the worthiness of manhood, and honor of their Prince, as here
you may perceive by the Prince of Parmas Soldiers, who no terror nor
tormente, could turn from attemptyng the assault.

But yet after this broile and hard encounter, they made more curtchie and
took better aduisement, before they went in hand with so great a hazard,
and so dwelling upon devises, and restyng on such policies as might supprise
the Town: They made many signs of assaults, and occupied poor people with
diverse imaginations, whiles they went about a Mine, and so to creep in through
a cave, and get into the Town by a Cloister, and house of Religion, which
Mine covertly handeled, they brought to pass (albeeit many times a cou^ter
Mine was made against them) and having done that served their purpose for to
enter, and give a general assault, they gave the Alarm, and approached the
breach (forgettyng not to arange their battles, for the States had a power
near them, and were likely to have given an Alarm to the Camp) and whiles a
few bands made hedde to the breach, and a general assault had besette the
Town round about. A great company being in the Mine began to show them
selves, and to sound Drommes and Trompetts, at the backs of those that
defended the breach, who lookyng behind them, and espiyng the Ensigns of the
Spanyardes, betook them selves suddenly to flighte, and leauyng the breach,
ran over the bridge to an other piece of the Town. But the thronge was so
great, and the fear of death so much among the common people, that all
amassed, and paste hope of life, stood both man, woman, and child, that never
saw the like conflicte, nor could not shift for their lives. So some flange
down weapon, cast of their armor, held up their hands to the heavens, smote
their woeful breasts, and kneeled before the face and feet of their enemies,
criyng for mercy, where little was to be found. And some ran into corns,
Churches, Hospitalles, and among Religious persons. But they rather found a
sword, then succor, and destruction sooner then comfort, and happed in their
hands, that sought both blood and victory: and had no more mind of mercy
(for a season till victory was certain) then the cruel Tigers have when they
preye, and feed on little Lambs) thus having victory at will, and the town
in subjection. The Spanyardes followed so fast after the fleears, and fearful
discomfited people, that one of them ran over an other: No one could neither
help his self, nor succor his neighbor. So that wives with children in their
arms, and armed men being become children in crauyng of mercy, were all a like
served. Where upon is to be judged, that yeldyng in extremite brings death,
or utter servitude, and hazardyng life for liberty, the sword may either
make place to escape by, or suddenly bring the dispatche that riddes men from
misery, and puttes them from the rage of a tyraunte. For in fightyng each
party stands in doubt (by which a manly mind is not conquered) and in
yielding the one part is master, and the other made a captive, and
peradventure a servant to captives, that neither can show spark of pity,
nor dragme of good mind. Wherefore in assaults, in battles, and matter of
fury, manhood is to be used (of him that is most in hazard) and mercy not to
be hoped for, when manhood abides the vttermoste of Fortune, and has done
their enemies the greatest despite they can work.

Thus followyng the poor people in Mastrick they were clean void of courage,
or shifte to help them selves withal. The Town was taken, wherein some
English men were found, which were left a live of a band that served,
whereof one master Brook was Captain, who was sore hurt ere he did yield:
and whose company served all that siege so stoutly, that the Spaniardes feared
them more, then double the number of the rest. Albeit the rest of Soldiers
generally were given to stand to their defense: and so well defended the
Town, that was sharply assaulted and besieged, as I have not heard of. So
that it is hard to judge, which of the two sides deserved most honor: the
matter was so manly maintained on both the parties, with such a resolute
mind and determination, to win liberty, or lose life.

There were after this siege some other services, but none so great: nor none
of them I mind to treat of as yet, for that I have bente my study, to
pleasure the Readers of my book, with other fancies, and variety of matter.
The change of matter, and manner of writing thereof, I hope shall rather bring
delight, then breed weariness. For that which does presently follow, is
set out purposely with a number of devises to occupy time withal, and
pleasure them that has any good disposition toward the work.

FINIS.
A description or discourse, that declares how that by tastyng of miseries,
men become happy: written for that Soldiers always bears the burden of
Sorrow, and suffers more calamity then any other people.
GOod readers, for that calamity and combersome chances, do seem
intolerable too bear (and for our first fathers offense, they are the
burdens of life, and companions of man till the hour of his death) I being
often charged with the heavy fardle of misfortunes: have taken in hand to
treat of a troubled mind, and show what blessedness and benefit to the
body and soul this worldly infelicitie brings.

As the common afflictions of mankind are many in number, and seem at the
first feelyng so irksome and weighty, that few can suffer them, or support
them. So a multitude of miseries accustometh the mind so long, in the
sharpness of sorrows, that a sound judgment is made the more able thereby,
to abide the brunte of troubles: and attend for a short season a remedy of
mischeeues, by proof the trothe of this is tried. For let the laboryng manne,
or ordinary porter (that daily carries great burdens) be often used to lift
up packes: he shall better bear a great Logge, then an other that is fine
fingered, shall be able to heave a small piece of Timber. And there is none
that labors so sore, but is sure at one time or other, to attain to rest
and commodity. So that all sorrows are to be compted, but a sharp sause to
season the appetite, and bring the sweet and delicate dishes in such order,
that it glutte not the stomach.

And now to consider how all pleasures are possessed, and profittes take
their beginnings. The very issue and original of those yearthly commodities,
springes only from continual care and pain: and labourious vexation of body
and mind. The greatest glories, and cheifest seats of honor anywhere, are
gotten and compassed by this kind of calamity, and the least or most spark
of man's delight is maintained (and at the length enjoyed) by the mean of
studious labor, and painful exersices.

But herein to be breef, pain and labor is the portion appoincted for man in
his pilgrimage, and they that are most persecuted (so they be not tempted
above their strength) are most to be thought in favor with God, and happiest
among men: if heavenly graces and correction, be measured by the yearthly
vessailes of vanity, that we carry about, which without correction and
refourmyng, would grow so full of filthe and corrupt manners, that they
neither could hold good liquor, nor serve to any good purpose.

Do you not behold that the purest metal, with ill lookyng unto, becomes
full of cankers and ruste: if it be not scoured, rubbed and roghly handled,
his beauty decaieth, and the worth and vallue of it is little, because it
has lost his virtue and estimation. So man's corrupt Nature, were it not
serched with sonderie instruments (that takes away the dedde fleashe, and
touches the quick) would putrify, and wax loathsome to the whole world and
to the creature him self, that bears it in his bowelles. And for the auoydyng
of such an inconvenience, calamity must be tasted, and troubles are
necessary, for the keepyng clean of a spotted conscience, and frail body
puffed up with Pride, and vanity of curious conceits.

And so I prove adversity, is the brynger home of good spirits, and gentill
wits, that wanders after worldly follies, and ronnes a gaddyng beyond the
bounds of measure, to the utter confines of danger and destruction. Yea, a
little trouble and tormente, produces great goodness, and brings forth
noble books, and goodly works, which the liberty of life, and wantonness
of pleasure, denies and hinders. As a thing that draws manne from the couetyng
of Fame, and true searchyng of immortality.

Man's prosperous estate breeds but idelnesse, nourishes vice, contempnes
virtue, and banisheth good studies and learning: albeit some one among the
ritchest, at one season or other, may look on a book, favor writers and give
good speeches of well dooyng. Yet seldom comes any great work from their
hands that are in prosperity. And none in a manner but the afflicted, did at
any time hither to, yield benefit to their country: and generally knowledge
the universal world. Let Socrates, Plato, Aristotoles, Cleantes, and a
number of poor Philosophers (ye princes of education) be witness of that I
speak, from which Philosophers, the sowres of noble Arts and Sciences did
spryng, and abundantly flow.

The body pampered, bedecked with beauty, full of ornaments, and set out to
sale like fleashe in the Shambelles: Either would be bought quickly, or will
be tainted in hangyng too long in the wind. So that as horses do wax
reistie, for want of good usage: and cleanest things takes corruption, by
lack of lokyng unto (in season). Pleasure and liberty in process of time,
makes a man wild, if callamitie tame not the body, and bring the mind in
willing subjection.

Sorrow, sadness, and other passions of this world, that comes by common
causes, puttes the wits and judgment to such a plonge, (secret shifte and
pollecie) that all the senses openly makes a muster, to defend the estimation,
and upright body from falling, to the which assembly comes Patience,
Reverence and Modesty, that the matter is so well taken, injuries are putt up,
and wrongs that have been offered, works in a wise hedde, a world of
devises, wherein virtue gettes victory.

To bear the comfortable Cross of persecution, is the true badge of
blessedness, whereby the servant is seen to follow his master, and all the
vices of man be maistered, or reformed by the crossyng chances of this world,
and virtuous operation of callamitie, which miraculously works the
distempered mind as the hot Furnace tries out the Gold, and the warm fire
bringes in temper, and makes soft the hard and coldest Wax. A divine secret
to them that are chosen, and familiare example to those, that glories in
worldly felicity who knows the natural causes of yearthlie things.

If a man might ask, wherefore was manne made, sent from the highest
dignity of pleasures, to this low dongion of sorrows, and base soil of
servitude. It may be answered: Adam was thruste out of Paradise, for offense
he had committed, and for that he was formed out of the earth, on the face of
the earth he should get his food and living, as a vessel ordained to bear
all manner of liquour, that is put into it: and as a Creature condemned to
taste and feel torments, sorrows, and troubles: wherein man sees Gods mercy,
and his own infirmities. And refusyng to bear and suffer, what is laid upon
him, he seems to hold an other course then God has appoincted, and so
seeks that he can not attain. For since the earth was cursed, it never could
bring forth but cares, and greef of mind: The only fruit and painful
portion, that was from the beginning, prepared for all Adams children and
posterity.

Now some will reply and say, that the rich and wealthy of the world, that
may wallow and toumble on their treasure: Have builded such bulwarks against
the assaults of fortune, that no troubles can touch them, nor make them
yield to the common callamitie of our life, but who soever so thinks, is
utterly deceived. For riches is not gotten nor kept, but with much care and
labor, and where it is possessed, it brings danger, dread, disdain, and a
thousand euilles with it: Temptyng manne to riot, and lascivious living, and
leads the soul to perdition, by a number of infinite follies, except a
special grace do uphold it, it ronneth headlong into hell, and looks
seldom unto heaven. And commonly when men do grow rich, they surfette so
often with Bankettes or bibbyng, that they are full of diseases, and so
shortens their days.

Which liberty of life, and boldness in abuses (that sprynges on abundance,
the root of disorder) puffes them up in Pride, pampers them in pleasures, and
blinds so their judgments, that they neither can se who deceives them,
nor find out the right way of heavenly felicite. And yet the flattery of
one, and falsehoode of an other about them, breeds such business, and
raises such storms (where quietness is looked for) that the ritche man's
house is never without blonder, brabble, and braulynges. So that under the
calmeste shows and ciuillest manners, lurketh terrible tempests, and fearful
suspicions, which in that kind is a domestical callamitie, and misery
incurable.

And so all the iollitie and po^pe of the earth, (enjoyed by enheritaunce, or
purchased by fortune) are accompanied with pain, enterlarded with dolloure, and
mixed with unquietness, and may be compared to a rotten painted wall, that
under fair colors, has many a foul frette, which deceives the eyes of
them that looks on it: or gives those a great overthrow that leans against
it. But this is no proof that riches is cause of sorrow, but this rather
shows, that sorrow, care, and many misfortunes does follow riches, and
poverty (so it be not bare indigence) is void of hazard, free from fortunes
mutabilitie, and coumpted most happy, in comparison of the goodness that
belongs to a blessed life.

God, in beholding the vices of many, and sees some bente to esteem villainy,
or offense: does cut of their days by sudden mischaunces (or on a set
purpose, through the Divine power) because their evil shall not hurt the
good. And regardyng the other sort that will, or may amend: leaves them to
the touch of their consciences, with good respite and laysure to repent,
sendyng them misery, trouble, and disquietnesse only as a restraint and
bridell, to pluck them from vices. And so callamitie may be accounted a
precious purgation: and prosperity may be judged a Pestilente disease,
which increased, or begone by disordered life, is rather to be called a
callamitie, and sickness of the soul, then a health of the mind, or good
renown to the body.

Many great personages, being overcome with the casualties of this world, and
mutabilitie of fortune, have after their fall into persecution, taken all
things in good part, and made but small ado, nor account of their state when
adversity approached, and been often times as glad to use the liberty of
mind, in a servile sort, as they were well pleased, when their bodies took
most pleasure, and had the world at commandment. For of necessity storms
follow calmes: and calamity either last or first, does visit an yearthly
vessel. For some come to Kingdoms from prison and induraunce, and some fall
to misery from wealth and honor, Dyonisius was glad to keep a School, after
he had lost his Empire, and Andronico of Athens when his Country was subdued
by the Romans, was feign to serve sondrie miserable Masters: and after led
a Lion about Rome, to the end of his days. But though I brought a Tyraunte
and an Infidel, to show that calamity must be tasted: so could I rehearse
many Christen princes, that calamity has touched, and made the^ as happy by
those crosses they have borne, as some others are blessed that makes boaste,
that have never suffered torment.

Calamity is like a suplyng salve that heales a sore Canker. A precious
preservative, to keep the head from fury of folly. A gentill medicine to
reform an infected conscience. A bitter draught of drink: that pourgeth a
stout corrupt stomach: A sour sirope or sauce that seasoneth a lewd
appetite. And the sweet Salt of man's felicity, without the which no life
can be well seasoned.

Who feels himself afflicted, has cause to conceive he is not forgotten
(where favor is most to be desired) and he that is let a lone, to follow his
own pleasure, walks as a casteawaie, and has nothing to rejoice of. For his
badde spirit leads him to destruction, and his good Angel has forsaken his
company, which is a sign he is given over, to his noughtie inclinations, and
is suffered to slide or fall down right, when the afflicted by a special
grace, is kept from stomblyng.

The Horse that finds the Bridell cast in his neck, ronnes out of order
about the wild feeld: And such as loves lewd liberty, and will not be
brideled, good order ronnes from them, and foul reproach waits at their
heels. And if they chance to happen in any hazard, the sodainnesse of the
mischeef breaks their heart, or the wonderyng of the world, makes the wicked
a weary of his life. But such as calamity by custom has reclaimed, takes
adversity, as a qualifier of cursed conditions, and being content to kiss
the Rod of perturbation, are made children of promise, and inheritours of the
land they have long looked for.

So blessed be those babes then, who in the troble of their souls possesses
quietness, and makes a count of calamity, to be the perfect way and mean
to felicity and good happ. The feelyng of such a scourge and visitation,
lately sent a man that I knew (who gatte great benefit by his trouble) made
me write this little triflyng treatise of calamity. So fare thou well good
Reader.

Finis.
A pitefull complaint, in manner of a Tragedy, of Seignior Anthonio dell
Dondaldoes wife, sometime in the duke of Florences Court: Translated out of
Italian prose, and put into English verse.
YOu wives that wish, to live with worlds renown,
And wisely way, the worth of precious fame,
Come hear the voice, that gives a woeful sown.
Come hear her tale, that dare not show her name,
Come Country youth, come noble courtly Dame.
And mark my words, whose woorks in wondryng days,
With double blotte, redounds to my dispraies.
From tender years, till twenty two were paste,
I nourisht was, at pomp and pleasures papps,
But who can tell, how long our joy shall last,
For greatest calmes, comes often to Thonder clapps,
And sweetest hopes, do change to sowrest happs.
O tickle time, that wanders swift as wind:
With hear before, and bare and balde behind.
No gripe nor hand, can take sure hold on thee,
Thou flittst so fast, and leaves the world at worst,
Look what time bryngs, time takes away you see,
Good time is blessed, badd time we hold accorst.
Time hurtes them often, that time did help at forced,
Look what we have, when youth is most in prime:
That shall we want, in age by course of time.
My freashe delites, do fall and fade like flower,
The blossoms gaie, from beauties budds are gone,
Our state of life, does alter every hour,
As pleasures pass, come sorrows pasyng on,
The world it self, is like a rowlyng stone.
And on such wheels, our tomblyng happs do run:
They slide as swifte, as shadow in the Son.
Whiles careless wit, does carry youth about,
(To sportes and plays, that does from pasty meries)
The merry mind, is void of fear and doubt,
And all the powers, are glad to please the eyes,
But when wild hedde, or wanton waxes wise,
The weighty thoughts, that deep foresight retains,
Bryngs troubled sleeps, and breaks the quiet brains.
In childishe days, I made no count of chance,
When friends took care, to match me to their will,
So hopyng long, good happ would me advance,
I kept me free, from wedlocks boudage still,
But parents wise, that had good worldly skill.
With open checks, rebukt the causes cheef:
The more they sturde, the greater grew my greef.
As when a sore, is rubbde and handled hard,
The less it heales, because ye touch it near:
O fathers grave, if that you took regard,
How that with checks, you use your children dear:
(Or in your moodes, you would some reason here)
They should be ioynde, where they great joy should have,
And you of them, enjoy the thing you crave.
But wilful men (that wealth may wrest awrie)
Will force poor babes, to marry or to morn,
What father will, the child may not deny,
He hurts his shins, against the prick shall sporne,
When match is made, it is paste time to torn.
When silly Lamb, is to the slaughter led:
The Butchar braggs, the simple Sheep is dedde.
And yet in deed, twere better childern smarte,
(And match in time, as cause and matter moves)
Then childrens choice, should break the fathers heart,
Or breed debate, as wilful marrage proves.
Short is the joy, of them that longest loves,
When want comes on, and woe begins to wring:
For lack is thrall, and slave to every thing.
Love is not now, as love has been of old,
(A game some babe, to dandle on the knee)
Love cares for naught, but land and baggs of gold,
That keeps both man, and horse in stable free,
They have no wit, that other lovers be,
Wealth master is, and porter of the gate:
That lettes in love, when want shall come to late.
Well as it was, my friends could do no good,
My Fortune bore, the swaie and ruled all,
And I full long, on will and freedom stood,
Till flesh and blood, must needs to fancy fall.
And then though hap, and worldly wealth was small,
I lighted where, I likte and loved well:
And where I voude, for term of life to dwell.
My choice was likte, for many gifts of grace,
He had, though wealth, sometime was not at will:
And for his sake, in many a noble place,
I welcome was, and purchased favor still.
My candell blasde, like torche on top of hill,
And for content, of mind where love does rest:
Mine own poor choice, might pass among the best.
Long liu'de we thus, at home and eke abroad,
When kindred clean, in deed forsook us both,
What burden fell, I helped to bear the load,
And glad in world, to taste how Fortune gothe.
The mind I had, to God and sacred oath,
Made me refuse, no trauaill for his sake:
Whom of free will, I choose to be my make.
The seas we sailde, the land we rode about,
The Court we saw, the Town we dwelt long in,
The feeldes we walk, the gardains gaie throughout,
We went unto, where many a feast has bin.
We could not sincke, for hap held up the chin,
He prosperde well, and look what God had sent:
With loving wise, at home the same he spent.
He took great pains, to come by that he had,
And trauailde sore, through many a foreign soil:
To bring that home, that makes the household glad,
And keep the wife, and household folk from foil.
And I took care, that nothing went to spoil,
And look in deed, what things that I did lack:
Was seen in face, or found upon my back.
The world might see, I went in garments good,
Though small I brought, to him as I confess:
I spent him much, and at great charge he stood,
Which bryngs strong hearts, sometime to great distress.
But never that, might make his love the less,
For look how he, his likyng first began:
In fine for trothe, he proud the self same manne.
I could not sleep, but where in bed he lay,
I could not eat, but where he satte at boorde,
I could not laugh, when likyng was away,
I silent satte, gave he but half a word.
Ill news of him, struck me with mortal sword,
His mind and mine, did draw so in one yoke:
The self same fitts, he felt where of I spoke.
Full seven years, this constant course we kept,
Though often times, there happened household iarrs,
And trattlyng tales, that in between us crept,
Made many wounds, where yet remains the skarrs
Yet always peace, took up our braulyng wars,
And we did seek, to salve each others sore:
And pass old greefes, and think thereon no more.
Sweet is that peace, that patcheth up great harms,
Sharp is the war, that tears a house in twain:
Woe worth those words, that brings in braules by swarms
Dark be those clouds, that always threatens rain.
Curste be the cause, that breeds woe and pain,
And dampde in hell, those subtell spirits shall be:
That council gave, to part my choice from me.
Well as our chance, together was to join,
And dwell long while, as here in breef you hard:
So hap came on, (through hope of wealth or coin)
And drew my choice, where he might be prefarde.
To wars, and I, that had a great regard,
To him that time, when I his mind did know:
Gave my consent, that he to wars should go.
With sighs and sobbs, and bitter tears among,
We parted tho, with promise suerly paste:
That one should here, from other ere twere long,
And sadly so, we seured at the last.
His goods, his gold, his friends both firm and fast,
He left me then to comfort me with all:
But nere a child, as Fortune so did fall.
He paste the seases, and sent me tokens still,
And money such, as might supply my need:
And for to show, his faith and great good will,
Long letters large, he made that I might reed.
Of promise paste, and to come home in deed,
But to what end, should serve this businensse great:
My mind was toernd, warm love had lost his heat.
A new fine man, both young and apt for change,
I chose, and clean, forgot my former joy:
And in a while, I was become so strange,
As hagard Hawk, that takes in hedde a toye.
And flees from Lure, and waxes nice and coye,
My wedlock now, not hearing of these news:
Made no haste home, till I was oer the shows.
Yet knacks I wrought, to blear my housbandes eyes,
I made a brute, be blown that I was dedde:
When that he heard, he did his life dispies,
And so forsook, sleep, rest, and taste of bread,
He rent his hear, he sadly shook his head,
He walked the woods, and shunned all repair:
As one would be, deuourd with foulls of chair.
He daiely bledd, when little food he took,
He would not come, where women were in place:
And he so lean, and like a ghost did look,
That Death it self, was seen amid his face.
A noble Earl, as he beheld this case,
Brake with the man, that thus tormented was,
And so in sports, the troubled time did pass.
But Ague fitts, and sickness followde on,
That in poor plite, came home my housbande thoe:
Not lean in purse, but bare and near the boen,
The body weak, was worn with war and woe.
And yet full sound, as all the world might know,
His limbs I saw, but I so nice did wax:
There was no flame, of fire might come to flax.
For I could weep, and quench by connyng art,
The hottest love, that ever housbande bore:
And so two years, I played a Foxes part,
Which ere I dye, I may repent full sore.
My housbandes bed, I shond, and furthermore,
I fainde I had, a sickness let it go:
I never mind, that folly forth to show.
A finer trick, to compass that I sought,
I played through slight, and castyng figures trim:
To my good man, a bastard girl I brought,
And from my friend, presented her to him.
He saw thereby, the flood run oer the brim,
Yet kept it close, and said nothing at all:
Till out by chance, might further matter fall.
And always would, my housbande tell me plain,
I did him wrong, to keep me from his bed:
But I could use, him in a pleasant vain,
And make him soon, forget that he had sedde.
My door was locked, how ere I laid my hedde,
My maids and I, kept solemn cheer alone:
How ever plain, poor housbande made his move.
Two years this wise, I shifted Cards full clean,
Till housbande spied, a letter of my hand:
Whereby he found, what folly I did mean,
But I was bent, against my deed to stand.
So faest him down, and swore when all was scande,
It was not mine, but as he soundly slept:
To his bedds side, my maied and I we stepped.
And heaude him up, and so from bolster than,
We took his purse, wherein the letter lay:
When that we had, we left the silly man,
As saffe as he, that sleeps in cock of haie:
Well, when he looked, in purse the other day,
And found my fraud, and falshed as it was:
Out of the door, in fury did he pass.
Yet came again, that night and so fell sick,
(The cause whereof, sone after you shall here)
Full long he lay, and touched so near the quick,
That he was like, to bye that sickness deer.
But when on foot, he stepped and all was clear,
He badde farewell, false wife God send thee grace:
Thy wicked ways, makes housbande give thee place.
I saw how world, would wonder on this act,
And straight new tales, on housbande began I raise:
With forged lies, and railyng reasons rackt,
That still should sound, unto his most dispraise.
I fainde one while, he used wanton ways,
With every maied, that he might touch or see:
And then he was, to sick a soul for me.
Then poor he was, I said to cloak my pride,
When this serude not, I swore the man was madd,
And in his rage, would beat me back and side,
So every day, a new device I hadd.
To make the world, believe he was to badd,
And at the length, when all I had was sold:
My maied and I, go try the world we would.
So shuttyng door, and trussyng up my pack,
I flang from home, not biddyng friends farewell:
But I had not, no sooner tournde my back,
But housbande heard, how all this matter fell.
And yet a lone, a while he let me dwell,
Till that he saw, I was so far paste shame:
I caerd not what, became of honest name.
In deed the house, where I my residence made,
With lusty ladds, was haunted every owre:
And I had those, that well could toss the blade,
To take my part, if housbande began to lowre.
His friends were weak, and I with strongest power,
Began to brag, and threaten him full sore:
And had preparde, a bloody band therefore.
I sought to bring, my brethren to this braull,
But they were wise, and would no quarrel take:
And puttyng of, the harms that might befall,
They wisely wrought, a freendly peace to make.
But ever I, good council did forsake,
And thought to make, my housbande hide his hedde:
Or practice still, till he poor man were dedde.
Yet in a mood, when least I looked therefore,
He came and told, me all was much amiss:
Where at I cried, alas and loud I rore,
For neighbors help, who quickly hearing this.
Came thrustyng in, as often the manner is,
How now good folk, quod he with bended brow:
Twene man and wife, dare you be sticklars now.
No in good faith, quod they and so retierd,
But still I looked, for other succor there:
And for that thing, that housbande then desierd,
I took no care, I meant a further fear.
To bring him in, yet maied in giuyng ear,
To honest words, fell down on knees at last:
And pardon craved, for privy knaurie paste.
My housbande then, forgave her and took leave,
In hope my mind* would gentill wax thereby:
But I that meant, my housbande to deceive,
In better place, began a greater cry.
Where women were, that marked my weepyng eye,
And though in deed, I had been handled ill:
So stayed me there, perforce among them still.
My housbande swore, I should receive no harm,
And home again, I should be saffely brought:
But I had taught, the women such a charm,
They would not then, depart from me for naught.
That could be said, thus he like wax was wrought,
And tempred so, that home without his wife:
He went away, the more my shameless life.
When shamefaste looks, forsook my modest face,
I waxt so bold, I blushed no more then block:
Then clapped on robes, of gaie vainglories grace,
With colors fair, to paint a foul black stock.
Yet calde I was, a Hen for each good Cock,
A morsel sweet, a whetstone fine forsothe:
To set on edge, on every dainty tothe.
I card not how, my housbande murthred were,
By Magicks force, or any Deulishe art:
I shonde his sight, and presence eurie where,
As one that lodgde, disdain in hateful heart.
And still I played, full many a silthie part,
To rid him hence, and take away his life:
Who God preserude, to plague a paltryng wife.
And for to hide, those brain sick prancks of mine,
I had a knacke, to break the matrage band:
And so a dragme, or draught of poison fine,
I did devise, to happ in housbands hand.
And as that cup, on tables end did stand,
With fervent thirst, he came and so it raught,
And in that heat, drank of the mortal draught.
When guilty heart, should make my face to blushe,
I braude it out, in silks and Veluetts gaie:
And caerd not what, world said of me a rushe,
For I took time, ere time would wear away.
(At graceless games, and many a shameless play)
And sowyng seeds, that Nettle flowers brought forth:
I reapt but weeds, or thistles nothing worth.
I ruffled long, when housbande barely went,
And facest him out, in streate or civil town:
My friends did force, the man to stand content,
It was no boot, to strive or swear me down.
For I had made, the world on him to froune,
And raisde a brute, that he was bedlem madd:
Thus lo of him, the conquest still I hadd.
My haunt was such, among the noblest sort,
That I was calde, a sober Sibill sage:
And worthy wits, would build on my report,
For I knew how, to flatter eurie age.
And always wrought, to make my housbande rage,
Whereby his life, in hazard, hard might fall:
And I the while, run clean away with ball.
I loud not one, but lusted after all,
The puddell foul, was fittest for a gigge:
The Fountain fair, did drink like bitter gall,
In filthy mudde, I wallowde like a pigge.
About the streats, was gaddyng gentill rigge,
With cloes tuckt up, to set badd ware to sale:
For youth good stuff, and for old age a stale.
A loving look, could make a Gudgeon bite,
A five dugard, could fetch in scolles of fish:
A cunnyng knacke, could stir up cold delight,
A glittryng girl, could feed a wantons wish.
And who does not, desire a dainty dishe,
Whose sugared taste, breeds secret eger mood:
That feign would feed, and finds most fearful food.
I could in streate, besturre and stretche my limbs,
As though some sprite, were ^^der outward show:
Who angleth not, for fish that smothly swimmes,
At pleasant mark, who does not bend the bow.
Small shaftes are shot, at many a carraine Crow,
Then if fair birds, do happ to come in way:
Blame not the Hawk, that maks of foul a may.
Not beauty here, I claim by this my talk,
For brown and black, I was God bless the mark:
Who calls me fair, does scarce know cheese from chalk,
For I was formde, when Winters nights were dark.
And Natures woorks, took light at little spark,
For kind in scorn, had made a mould of Iette:
That shone like cole, wherein my face was set.
Three years I stra^ed, like waffe that waxes wild,
Two more at least, I lay from housbands bed:
And all this while, I used him like a child,
For at no time, I neither wrate nor sedd.
Ne sent to him, such toys I had in hedd,
That stomach stiff, thought not to stoop a whit:
For stubborn Colt, in teeth had got the bit.
He let me run, oer hedge, oer hill and dale,
And would not pluck, the raines of bridell back:
I could tell why, but thereby hangs a tale,
Would make me blushe, and show of grace great lack.
I had my will, whiles all thing went to wrack,
What needs more words, I ran so rude a race:
I never thought, again to turn my face.
What slight scapes free, from subtell searchyng hedde,
What wit works not, to serve lewd women's wiells:
What practice flies, the foil of stained bed,
What is not won, with words or worldly giells.
What will not yield, and ^^^ne where Fortune smiells,
What time is lost, to gain that women crave:
And all proceeds, from wa^ward will we have.
If that we love, the fury lasts not long,
If once we hate, ^ut malice has no ^^lde:
If that we mind, to offer housbande wrong,
We want no wit, the quarrel to defend.
Our stubborn heart, has rather break then bend,
And custom has, among us made such lawse:
That all our sex, will take one part and cause.
And where the flood, and stream of strife does run,
In comes the Tide, of daiely troubles great:
Yea where a storm, or braule is once begone,
All bitter blasts, repairs and breathes out heat.
The eyes will stare, the face will froune and sweat,
The tongue must clapp, the hedde will shake and nodd:
And heart with in, has clean forgotten God.
Friends must be wrought, with blades to band it out,
Fose must be whippt, and scourged in their kind:
World shall be toste, and turned round about,
Still to maintain, the mischeef of the mind.
Tale bearars then, shall lie within the wind,
To bring badde news, and set the house a fire:
That flaemd before, with sparks of spietts desire.
My practice strange, can all these plaeggs unfold,
That better were, lappt up in silence here:
To late to call, again that tongue has told,
The wise should sell, their words and worship dear.
But since in world, my self I can not clear,
I will go through, this heavy tale of mine:
That world may well, at wicked ways repine.
Long after this, he heard that I lay sick,
And then from Court, he coms with right great speed:
To comfort me, that was both sound and quick,
To play the Fox, or knave again for need.
But though that time, I would not be agreede,
I took his wine, and sent him so away:
With scorn enough, in sign of partyng day.
For since that time, he never saw my face,
Nor had no mind, to come where was my haunt:
And since that storm, I had so little grace:
In eurie soil, I make my boste and vaunte,
I conquered him, and so I do you grant.
For three years more, I have done what I please:
And lidde at large, in lust and lordly ease.
And these five years, I have done what I can,
By tongue and art, and figuers that I cast:
And eurie way, to shame my plain good man,
Which shame I fear, will sure be mine at last.
I am so learnd, I can play louse and fast,
My skill is such, in Planetts hye and lo:
I ruell the Skies, and Heavens where I go.
Good Fortunes sure, some say that I can tell,
And many things, by figures I unfold:
I say no more, but wish that all were well,
For he that does, this wicked world behold.
Whose Godhed sees, into this massy molde,
Knows well how often, I tread my shue a wrie:
And in what plite, my sinful soul does lie.
And if this God, regard with angry cheer,
The vice on earth, that vainly we commit:
And straightly look, unto my doyngs here,
And like a Judge, in tremblyng conscience sit.
I am condempd, there serus ne force nor wit,
Out is my Lamp, the oil has lost his light:
And my fair day, is tornd to foul black night.
The searchyng hedds, that sifts my manners throw.
Will shrink a side, when I draw near their vewe:
The wievly daems, that sees my blotted browe,
In my behalf, will blushe and change their hew.
The gentill hearts, that others harms does rewe,
Will much lament, my life so leawdly run:
And clean vntwiste, the threede good name has sponne.
The baseste dame (whose faults are borne in breast)
Will scorn to hear, my folly blasde abroad:
The fromppyng flock, at me will make a ieste,
The spitfull swarm, will poult and swell like Tode.
My guilty mind, that bears most heavy lode,
Will sink down right, when world shall talk of grace:
And shame her self, will slubber all my face.
The sober sort, that setts by noble brute,
Will shake their hedds, as they my boldness spy:
The clappyng tongs, will never sure be mute,
Shreawd people all, will show alowryng eye.
But still I fear, the Lord that sitts on hye,
Will look more strange, on me so late disgraste:
Then all the world, that here beneath are plaste.
The Church wherein, both faith and hand I gave,
Shall witness bear, of breach of promise due:
The spousall bed, and marrage day so brave,
Shall make me called, forsworn and most untrue:
The holy book, the old law and the new,
Against my soul, shall sure sharp sentence give,
In other world, where sprite desiers to live.
Let matrons chaste, and modest wives each one,
That falshed haets, and lou's their trothe to keep:
In fury come, and flyng at me a stone,
And let no wight, my death bewail nor weep.
Let days unrest, and dreadful dreams in sleep,
Pursue me still, and bring me to my grave:
Since God and man, I so offended have.
The stepps I tread, shall tell me my offense,
The feelds I walk, shall bring my fault to mind:
The harms I did, in world shall haste me hence,
The wealth I wish, shall waste and wear with wind.
The fame I seek, shall flyng me far behind,
And all good things, that virtues wives enjoy:
At my most need, shall turn to mine anoye.
The wise that ways, my wiells in balance right,
Shall see my wit, want weight and be but bace,
The fool himself, shall find my judgment light,
In making choice, to chopp and change my case.
The poor shall point, at me in eurie place,
The rich and those, that swaie and rule does bear:
With curb of Law, shall bring lewd life in fear.
The friends I had, shall frown and shun my sight,
The foes I have, shall follow me with shame:
The neighbor love, that pleased me day and night,
Shall now draw back, and look on loss of name.
The merry mate, and homely country dame,
And all the town, and soi^e where I was borne:
In Parish Church, shall laugh my life to scorn.
The band once broke, that God himself has bleste,
Bryngs worldly woe, and cursses in by swarms:
The marrage marde, that God made for man's rest,
Turns vpside down, from happy help to harms.
The Bridal bed, defield with loathsome charms,
Breeds wicked smoke, and smothryng sclanders blase:
On whose foul fume, a world of people gase.
The knotte of love, vnknitt by hateful cause,
Caulls greeffs to count, and cries to clouds for aied:
The leuwd contempt, and breach of sacred laws,
Maeks eurie hour, offendour sore afraied.
The fickle faith, that is with skurges paid,
Bidds falshed fly, the plague that is preparde:
For those who looks, to life with small regard.
No rofflyng troop, that swashe and swill up wine.
Can ward the blows, that wrath of God sends down:
No cunnyng knacks, nor knackyng fetches fine,
Can conquer trothe, and thrust him out of town.
No treasons train, can take way true renoune,
No cloud can cloak, the craft that all men finds:
No salve but grace, can heal infected minds.
My hollow heart, has lost the hope I had,
What dropps in now, does doubt and danger bring:
In housbands ears, I spoke that made me glad,
With newfounde friends, I talk that mak's me wring.
The first good will, from virtuous love did spryng,
The last delight, and all that since fell out:
Began on lust, and needs must end in doubt.
Now open streats, by Oule flight must I walk,
And secret nouks, and shifts must shadow slight:
Except I care, not what the world does talk,
And mind to frame, a crooked matter straight.
And then though pride, holds hedde a wonders height,
Shame plucks down heart, and mak's me blushe at last:
But well away, that sign of grace is paste.
Though in the teeth, I have the bridell got,
And that I run, beyond my riders reach:
I dare not sing, in quere to hye a note,
For fear of check, and tuter do me teach.
I play boe peep, least people me appeache,
I seem a saint, when deulishe things I mean:
Yet much ado, I have to carry clean.
O wretched change, that bryngs repentance often,
O bitter sweet, whose taste deceiues us all:
O poisoned lust, that puff's up pride a lofte,
O graclesse game, full farcst with sugared gall.
O trippyng trust, that swiftly giu's a fall,
O spitfull sport, that spends thy youth in shame:
And bryngs thine age, in horror and deffame.
O greedy will, that gains but greef of mind,
O gnawyng worm, that fretts the conscience still:
O wicked art, that striks the senses blind,
O mad device, that tourns from good to ill.
O leawd desire, more hot then Eathna hill,
O beastly bliss, begun on balde confaite:
And does bewitche, them all that bites the bait.
O paultryng play, and pinishe pastyme vain,
O slidyng joy, that sincks where suertie swims:
O perlous toye, and pleasure mixed with pain,
O Peacocke proud, that still fond feathers trims.
O lusty blood, nay wanton loathsome lims,
That stoups to filthe, and costly carrein gaie:
That giu's* badd gold, and stealls good name away.
My merry maetts, and minsyng minions fine,
Speaks fair a while, to win their leawd desire:
But wilely world, can let me starve and pine,
And for reward, can give a floute or flire.
So lead me on, and leave me in the mire,
And blabb all out, that has been closly wrought:
O pranks of youth, O painted thing of naught.
O puddell foul, that seems at first full fair,
O cause of care, and source of sorrow sour:
O deadly hope, and ground of deep despair,
O pleasant weed, and stinckyng rotten flower.
O rauenyng Wolves, that does poor wives devour,
O smilyng thieves, that robbs the chastest heart:
O traitorous tongs, that can play Judas part.
You laid your trains, as Foulars lays his net,
You bosom Snak's, your styng has me undone:
By loving you, at length what shall I get,
When you me loathe, where shall the cast of ron.
Woe worth that wight, that woyng first begone,
Curste be the craft, that causes clamours ^yes:
And vengance fall, upon your staryng eyes.
A plague consume, your songs and suttell suets,
A wildfire catch, your combrous knauishe brains*
A murrein take, your foul untimely fruets,
A cancker eat, your hands and azure vains.
The Haggs of hell, reward you for your pains,
Both pen and ynke, and all that helped des^re:
(And you your selves) I wish in flaming fire.
Fie on your scroulls, and Pistells full of lies,
An Oten straw, for all your stately stiells:
Your frisled hear, and naughty newfounde gies,
Your lordly looks, your simpryng shamlesse smiells.
Your wanton talk, and privy winckyng wiells,
I here bequeath, to Satan and his crew:
Good fellows fit, for such false ladds as you.
You are the frothe, and skum of worlds delight,
The dallyng whelps, that can with feathers play:
Of mischefs all, the mark, the butte, and white,
The iollie Fry, that follows flood each way.
The gallant flock, the stately stars of day,
The busy Bees, that can no Honey make:
But spoilars of, each fruit and flower ye take.
The waityng dogs, that bite before they bark,
The couchyng currs, that snatche at eurie fly:
The figboies fine, that Iuggels in the dark,
The c^nnyng crew, that at receipt can lie.
The sookyng sponge, that draws fair fountains dry,
The greedy hounds, that follows eurie game:
The blott and stain, of each good woman's name.
A robe or ryng, or triflyng token vare,
You give for that, you never can restore*
Then are you gone, you have your wished fare,
In stranger streams, you love to stere your Ore.
If honest wiu's, but knew your prancks before,
They would as sone, see of your suttell hedds:
As by your drifts, go stain their housbands bedds.
In marrage house, is freendly fastness found,
Though fare be mean, content fills up the dishe:
In bordell bower, sweet banketts are unsound,
Though dainties there, we have at will and wish.
At home we take, in worth cold flesh or fish,
For warm good will, does season so she there:
That with small ^oste, we banquet all the year.
A broad we sit, as though we were a fearde,
And scarce dare feed, or talk for taunts and nipps:
At home we rule, in spite of housbands bearde,
And play the Cook, and so may li^ke our sipps.
A broad for naught, our tongue is tame in tripps,
And then great heart, can neither drink nor eat:
Thus dear is bought, a broad our borrowde meat.
Look what is said, ^n home in clothe is lap,
There speech is free, and honest sports we use:
O well a way, that this misfortune happt,
And that I did, my housbande so abuse.
That I have brought, my self into a muse,
Lost home thereby, lost God and good men's prays:
And now must run, a gaddyng all my days.
A plague most fit, for them that use to change,
A scourge wherein, the wrath of God is seen:
A staff of strife, for pilgrim nothing strange,
A bleedyng wound, that mak's my sorrow green.
A sore rebuke, for wits that over ween,
A heavy cross, and sent me for the noens:
To break my will, and yet to bruise no boens.
But since my will, did weaue this woeful web,
That needs must make, a weed for wantons wear:
And that my flood, is like to fall to ebb,
By want of will, that ought low sail to bear.
To punish soul, that else some other where,
Might suffer smart, I vow in hand to take:
A better life, and so false world forsake.
Away proud pomp, and costly garments nice,
Come mournyng goune, and clothe the careful wight:
Away vain shows, and open signs of vice,
Come virtue now, and give my Lamp more light.
Come Summers day, adue darcke Winters night.
I love to live, and look about me far:
When wound is heald, time may amend the scarre.
Away young Fry, that giu's leawd council now,
Away old trotts, that setts young flesh to sale:
Away foul slutts, whose filth did blot my browe,
Away trim tongs, that near told honest tale.
Away bold beasts, whose brabble bred my bale,
Away rude Wasps, you stong me through the breast:
Go hide your hedds, and let me live in rest.
Away wild giggs, that bounceth like a topp,
Away came lours, that faune like whelps for naught:
Away light hedds, that lou's to change and chopp,
Away fine wits, that many mischeu's wrought.
Away slay Snak's, that my destruction sought,
Away false shreaws, that never none may trust:
But such leawd girls, as are begilde by lust.
Away fair speech, that me bewitched to long,
Away foul woorks, that filde my face with blurrs:
Come home poor sense, that led my fancy wrong,
And pack from me, you privy bityng currs.
That sticks still, together like wild burrs,
And where ye touch, ye bring away the wull:
So from fine clothe, pure honest name ye pull.
It Is time to look, how good report was lost,
And prop up house, that now is nere to fall:
A wretched brute, flies through the air in post,
A whirlyng wind, may come and tripp down all.
And though I list, not come at housbands call,
I may not fly, from God and follow man:
That still deuours, like Wolf what sheep he can.
The sweetest wine, at length will wax full sour,
It prou's sharp sauce, that once had sugared taste:
Fond fancies freaks, will fade as fast as flower,
And wantons love, with sports will wear and waste.
When hard in arm's, new comers are embraste,
Farewell old friend, go play you where you wull:
The hawk has praid, the Haggards gorgs is full.
Love stays not long, it is but one years bird,
A foolish fit, that mak's wild wits go mad:
A gallant Colte, that ronneth for a girde,
A lime rod fine, to catch a lusty ladde.
A youthful prancke, that mak's age look full sad,
A merry mate, so long as money lasts:
Good for a flight, then of her bells she casts.
Love tarries not, it is a postyng game,
That has such haste, it goes we know not where:
Now fair and fat, then crooked lean and lame,
Now plays boe peep, now fiskyng here and there.
Now balde as Coote, now trim with fresled hear,
Now gaie and glad, now shreawd and scarce well pleased:
Now sound as Chicke, now sick and sone diseasd.
With dallyng mutche, love will be easly tierd,
When love is cloied, the toil at gresse must run:
When hoof is whole, the hackney may be hierd,
When corn is sold, the markett clean is done.
It ends with hate, that was with love begone,
It may be loathed, that long on likyng lay:
Lust lacks no wings, when love will fly away.
Love must have change, to season sweet delight,
Lou's mind will range, like Spaniell in the feelde:
Love looks like Dove, when she will prove a Kite,
Love seeks to rule, she has no mind to yield.
Love will have scope, love is restrained seelde,
If love lack ought, she shows a lowryng eye:
And then for naught, the babe will pule and cry.
Love must be kolld, and kissed round about,
Love must go gaie, and painted like a post:
Love must be peecst, and patcht with many a clout,
Love is a sprite, a shadow or a ghost.
A needless charge, that seldom quitts the cost.
A practice bought, with many a threede bare purse:
A wretched bliss, that I and mine may curse.
It is the skum, and only dross of youth,
That bryngs both soul, and body in decay,
A kind of task, wherein there is no truth,
A Courtyng trade, that does much craft bewraie.
A wily Fox, a wanton full of play,
A saint to show, a Devil God he knose:
That me betrayed, and made me freedom lose.
The Horse ronns far, that never tourns again,
The beaten child, is learnd to fear the rod:
The double mind, may fall to meaning plain,
They may a mende, that feels the fear of God.
The clouds may clear, that long has threatened rain,
The time ill spent, if reason will redeem:
Calls home wild wits, from toys that are extreme.
Youth tak's his course, and follows fancies freaks,
Age all reforms, and sore repents time paste:
The bow long bent, ye know in process weaks,
Hard things at first, may gentill wax at last.
Who often faulls, is taught to stand full fast,
And few there are, but slieds or falls down right:
In youth or age, our judgments are so light.
When wit is bought, (and folly thoroughly waied,)
An ounce of skill, is worth a pound of dross:
Till body smarte, the mind is never stayed,
Gain is not likte, till we have tasted loss.
Some say each one, is borne to bear his cross,
My heavy faults, now burdens breast so sore:
That hear or hence, I must be scourgd therefore.
Sweet are those stripps, that breaks ne bone nor lim,
(And yet setts sound, the soul and body both:)
Sour are those joys, and worldly braurie trim,
That down to hell, with dampened people gothe.
Sweet are sharp words, that tells leawd life the trothe,
Sour is sweet sause, that cloyes the stomach still:
Sweet are those nipps, that does restrain the will.
The pampred horse, that still in stable stands,
Will ware a jade, if spur ne wande he taest:
The wildest Colt, is tamed by riders hands,
And so through bitte, is made well traind and paest,
All hedstrong things, are not reformd in haest,
But when regard, looks back where blindness went:
The perrill paste, bides pomp and Pride repent.
Great is the scope, that greedy will desiers,
Small gain or grace, does grow by gaddyng out:
With heavy lode, the weary legs retiers,
And hartfull fraught, of worldly dread and dout.
And sure the ground, from whence all vice does sprout,
Is gaddyng geres, that lovs a broad to gase:
Who shame sends home, in great sad muse and mase.
And when in doors, dame dalliance close is (...),
And noets what blot, she did escape without:
She thinks in streate, she put her name to pawn,
Or went abroad, to play the bare banckrout.
Where wanton eyes, did naught but stare about,
Where all a flant, at full like ship with sail:
Fine minions march, as brave as Pecockes tail.
The crooked back, must bolstred be by art,
The taunie skin, must shine by some trim knacke:
The twinklyng looks, for sport must play their part,
The perwicks fine, must curle where hear does lack.
The swellyng grace, that fills the empty sack,
And iettyng pace, with limes stretched out full straight:
To patche out pride, are matters of great weight.
Then fie on all, such trashe and tromprie vile,
That setts forth shaeds, in Sonnie day to shine:
My youth is paste, I can not world begile,
Men will not look, for babes in hollowd eyes.
A witherd grape, hangs now on rotten vien,
From blasted branche, the berrie round is gone:
A doskie glass, is little looked upon.
Wherefore I vow, to wear a sorry veil,
To shroud the face, that feaw or none will like:
And get some shell, to hold in hedde like Snaile,
For former faults, in conscience so does strike.
That I do fear, I shall my self mislike,
If shadows do, not cloak defects I have:
Or death dispatche, and send me to my grave.
Now note my tale, you dames of gentill blood,
Now wail with me, all such as plays my part:
Now let my harms, do harmless people good,
Now bid all wivs, defy this deulishe art.
For my consaite, is such a deadly darte,
That where I go, or walk in any place:
Me thinks my faults, are written in my face.
FINIS.
A heavy matter of a English gentleman, and a gentlewoman, in manner of a
Tragedy: which gentlewoman called her freende the wanderyng Prince.
THE wandryng Prince, which ran the restless race,
Had much a do, to try this froward fate:
And I poor man, that does supply his place,
In pilgrims port, may wail my woeful state.
To Gods and men, the story now I tell,
That judgment have, to mark my matter well:
Both land and seas, as far as wandrer goes,
(And world so wide) my sokyng sorrow knoes.
In native soil, where long I fostred was,
A make I chose, to lead my life with all:
From whom at length, I wandryng Prince did pas,
For causes great, that tournd my sweet to gall.
Suffice to think, some fire did raise the smoke,
That made me fly, and shun from marrage yoke:
Some piuishe pranck, some padde laid in the straw,
That forced feers, thus seurall ways to draw.
A wretched happ, betid's between them twain,
That parts in haste, where long the love was bent:
An open plague, a pinchyng privy pain,
Is felt and found, where such mishapp is sent.
The house decaies, the credit cracks with all,
And down full flat, does each good Fortune fall:
And of renown, the propps and pillars shak's,
And babblyng tongs, there on a wonder mak's.
Let sleep some harms, my muse must now awake,
To blase the broills, that wandryng life did bring:
Who goes from home, and does a journey take,
Full little knows, where does the saddell wring.
Till bityng greefs, bewraies a secret sore,
As soon as man, setts foot on foreign shore:
A mischeef straight, does meet him full in face,
As welcome fit, for men from foreign place.
As strangers here, somtymes have gazers on,
And Crows with Kietts, do seldom well agree:
So home bred birds, from hence no sooner gone,
In country strange, full sone oermatched be.
First finesse coms, and fram's some fashon new,
To catch wild hauks, or cast tame bird in mewe:
Then falshed fliers, and plays the wily Fox,
With gaddyng foot, that fast is in the stoxe.
The traular tastes, more toil then tongue can tell,
More troublous tyms, than trothe may well report:
Wants heuens bliss, and feels more of hell,
Then all the souls, that to this world resort.
The Camel bears, a burden great you know,
The Ass likewise, does not vncharged go:
But neither beast, nor nothing name you may,
Surmounts the pains, of wandryng Prince I say.
My deastnie drew, my days to doleful date,
Desire to see, strange realms bred mine unrest:
For where I thought, in surety saffe I sat,
Far from my friends, I found my self distressed.
In danger often, and fear of mortal foe,
I daiely paste, between the stryng and boe:
No hazard here, on earth that men may find,
But there to me, blind deastnie had assignde.
My life was sought, and freedom lost I long,
Compeld to stoop, where God was scarcly known:
Denied of right, and forste to suffer wrong,
And plainly spoild, of that which was my nowne.
In hockstars hands, where law was made of will,
(And hauocks mouth,) I daiely happened still:
Now drowned in dread, and wishyng greedy grave.
Then feared to be, a servile galley slave.
No help from home, was looked for any way,
All hope was gone, between good hap and me:
In these extremes, thus paste I many a day,
Till God had set, both mind and body free.
And in the end, ere I did homward draw,
At my nowne will, Jerusalem I saw:
And Sipres too, with diverse kyngdoms more,
Which stately seats, I had not seen before.
A mind I had, of further toil then this,
But sondrie letts, in that behalf I found:
And as often tyms, I did my purpose mis,
So lo in fine, I drew me homeward round.
But Fortune wrought, for me such spite at home,
That once again, a broad I must go rome:
I shapt me thoe, a nerar course to hold,
In hope that hap, the hapless favor would.
Now sought I how, to serve my country well,
And framed both wits, and wealth to that delight:
In foreign soil, the wandryng Prince did dwell,
From whence often tyms, to country did I write.
Yea to the cheef, that here has rule and charge,
To whom I showd, some matters full at large:
For which I wanne, great favor and good will,
So long time spent, in right good credit still.
But Fortune fround, at that good luck of mine,
As she was wont, to do by course and kind:
That froward dame, ye know does still repine,
At eurie one, that bears a noble mind.
A dreadful Duke, a fearful prince I say,
Sore matters there, unto my charge did lay:
And clapped me up, in cruel prison fast,
Where long I looked, for naught but death at last.
A leven months, I lay in loathsome sincke,
Where some condempd, abode the diefinoll day:
Some lived in lack, and starved for meat and drink,
Some made great shift, yet could not get away:
Some were had out, to suffer for offense,
Some had small wealth, yet lay at great expense:
And some were rackt, and lost their lims there bye,
And none but glad, to please the Iailours eye.
The fulsome smells, and savors out of frame,
Wear able sure, to burst a Giants heart:
The usage vile, and other greefs to name,
Did far surmount, the weight of common smarte,
The checks, the taunts, and bitter bityng words,
Did cut more sharp, then bloody mortal swords:
The torments strange, that helhounds showed us theare,
Was sure much more, then humain kind could bear.
The world abroad, knows not what prisnars feel,
The bird on bushe, conceiu's no care of cage:
Who sitts a loft, in topp of Fortun's wheel,
Full little knows, the cause of captiu's rage.
Well I sucked up, of this the sweet and sour,
And sought for friends, and so stretched forth my power:
That out I came, and homward once again,
I paste in peace, and escaped a scouryng plain.
Here found I things, as God him self did please,
My wife in grave, and world was altered clean:
Then did I frame, my self to live at ease,
And as I might, to hold a merry mean.
Content with cares, that time had over blown,
Full bent to dwell, and rest upon mine own:
Not looked for chere, in house I kept before,
Those spendyng days, bad spare and seek for store.
But yet small while, I rested here in deed,
But that I hard, of one a noble brute:
A widdowe wise, of gentill race and seed,
And such a dame, as worthy was of suit,
Whose wifely port, and comlie manners grave,
(With shamfast looks, and glance of beauty brave:)
Was able sure, as worlds report did shoe,
To make from tomb, the dedde to speak and go.
Her famous brute, so set my heart on fire,
That fancy flamed, on that I never saw:
And still so hot, did burn this new desire,
That wit confessed, in love there was no law.
A sudden heat, and sure a thing full strange,
That love so sone, could work so sore a change:
To make him like, and namely in the place,
Where lo before, he saw ne shape nor face.
A power divine, or Deastnie drew this draught,
It can not come, of light conceits nor toys:
For as wild birds, in bushe or lime are caught,
And so strange hands! poor silly bird enioyes.
(Through Deastnies lot, that all appoints here,)
So was I caught, I bye the proof full dear:
For naught but smart, as yet thereby does rise,
Such Fortune falls, on men from starrie Skise.
Where Gods do work, men must of force give place,
It happened thus, what needs more words here in:
Me thought in sleep, I saw a strangers face,
A wake I walked, as I in mase had bin.
In house or feeld, all that I did behold,
Presented plain, this noble fleece of gold:
The wandryng Prince, a Jason wished him than,
Or for that fleece, to be a happy man.
In spendyng days, and time of that device,
A chance befell, as blisfull Fortune would:
The preshoes Iemme, and jewel dear of price,
That wandryng Prince, does call the fleece of gold.
At dinner was, where I was bid a geast,
O happy house, nay rather happy feast:
O castle good, where in my Lady satte,
Where but bare vewe, and sight of her I gatte.
My gasyng eyes, no sooner saw this sight,
But straight I said, the worlds report was true:
And in all poincts, she was the self same wight,
That I had heard, and more to say to you.
Her grace so much, did please my inward mind,
That sure I thought, I could not easly find:
So sweet a saint, to serve and honor still,
If boldness durst, present here my good will.
A fear straight ways, possessed my senses all,
Of fitter match, for her then I in deed:
And dreadyng sore, how matters forth would fall,
That I might speak, and others then might speed.
I silent stood, and stole away God wotte,
Yet hopyng still, to find a better lotte:
An aptter time, a season for my suit,
That fancies toil, should reap some thankful fruit.
In watchyng long, and vsyng sleight of wit,
I favor wan, my sorrows to escrie:
But Fortune made, me play upon the bitte,
And want my will, when hedde I held full hye.
I curbed was, and such a mozroule felt,
That in no stay, nor certain hope I dwelt:
Save that access, to her I had sometime,
As on the staire, I durst attempt to clime.
I did not preace, the mountain hye to win,
Nor clime the bows, and spraies of mighty trees:
The valley smothe, I took great pleasure in,
Or goodly ley, where haunts somtymes the Bees.
To suck the flowrs, that pleasant Honey makes,
And ley to ley, I thought to hedge with stakes:
As feeld to feeld, should better sure agree,
Then Sky with earth, or wind and air with tree.
Short season sure, I saw good hope here in,
Sour was the sweet, and sugar tournd to gall,
I sonke where hope, was held up by the chin,
And in despair, I likely was to fall.
This goodly feeld, this ley alone would be,
This soil would not, be hedged in by me:
False Fortune fround, and flang from me in haste,
And with a freake, left faithful friend disgraste.
Who can have hold, of Fortune when he list,
She flitts so fast, and flies somtymes so far:
She will not come, like hawk that stoups to fiste,
When man thinks best, she mounts as hye as star*
And at a brunt, leau's lovers in the duste,
O Fortune strange, thou art of little trust:
O dainty hap, O Deastnie I thee blame,
For thou art she, that tourns to greef my game.
All other harms, and former wrongs of mine,
The scourges great, and plag's of foreign soil:
Were small to this, that Deastnie does assign,
Wherein at home, I take an open foil.
All cares of mind, all cost and charge abroad,
Not half so much, does silly conscience load:
All which good Lord, and all the blame of this,
And ground of greef, God wotte blind Fortune is.
I blame no more, though present death I found,
By this rebuke, and charmyng check of chance:
Yea though by this, I have a curelesse wound,
And scarre remains, where Cupids darte did glance:
In cloked cares, I hide the hurts I have,
And burden bear, till body be in grave:
As one whose ghost, with gronyng waests away,
Whose cold conceits, warm life does clean decaie.
So cease good pen, and bid the world farewell,
No further verse, nor line my hand shall write:
This is my last, this toulls the passing bell,
Of vital breath, and wished lives delight,
This warns the world, and bids the wise beware,
Of doubtful chance, the only cause of care:
O faithful friends, yet shed some tears for me,
That through mishap, my wretched ruin does se.
FINIS.
A Pirates Tragedy, being a gentleman of a very good house: Made at the
request of Master Peter Caroe, Captain of Laughlin in Irelande: and fette
out to show the miserable life of a Rouer, whose wretched desire of other men's
goods, bringes open shame, and a violente death.
WHen slumbryng sleep, with maiger hand,
Can touch mine eyes, that sloth does daunt:
When all my limbs, reposed did stand,
And so some rest, to me did grant.
Me thought I saw, a wretched wight,
With wringyng hands, to make his mones:
He rather seemd a ghostly spright,
That gaspyng lies, and grouelyng groans.
With horie beard, and scorched face,
With poudred hedde, and hear unshorn:
With hackes and hewes, in every place,
He seemed like, a man forlorn.
His sap and sauerie sent was past,
His youthful days, worn in decaie:
His mellowed years, were gone to wast,
His blowmyng spryng, was blown away.
His lips and cheeks, were pale and thin,
His hollowed eyes, were sonke in hedde:
His flesh was frette, naught left but skin,
His marrowe dried, that youth had bredde.
His teeth and gummes, like harowes stood,
His furrowed face, like ploughed land:
His veins did want, their wonted blood,
His sinews shronke, like knottes did stand.
A Sea man's cappe, on hedde he ware,
A slidyng stop, of Friars graie:
A checker Kaep, both thin and bare,
To furnishe up, his queint araie.
A gables end, his girdle made,
His shurte besmerde, with Pitche and Tar:
Close by his side, a rustie blade,
This carle in youth, a man of war.
A Pilotes compass, he did hold,
To show what science he professed:
The skill whereof, had made him bold,
To sail the seas, both East and West.
This wight with faultryng tongue I say,
Began curse the prancks, his youth had played:
And then a loud, withouten stay,
With double sighs, these words he said.
Woe worth the year, the month, the day,
The season, time, and instant hour:
When first I formed, was in claie,
And took my shape, in yearthly bower.
Woe worth the wight, that joined fast,
My parents hands, in wedlockes rest:
Would poison had, been my repast,
When first I sucked, my mothers breast.
Oh would the Nurse, that bound my hedde,
Had brus'd my brain, with bloody pawe:
Or that my Font, had boild with Led,
When I came bound, to Christian law.
Oh would the bands, my bane had bin,
That swadled me, in tender age:
Oh would the cloutes, I battelled in,
Had been bewitched, with Cyrces rage.
Thou cradell that, rockte me a sleep,
I wish thy couche, had been my grave:
And who so taught, me first to creep,
Some vengeance vile, on him I crave.
When I these things, had seen and heard,
And thoroughly waied, this woeful sight:
It me appald, and made afeard,
Yet ruyng on, his wretched plight.
I asked him then, from whence he came,
What cause constraind, him thus to wail:
What life he led, and what his name,
What strange mishappes, did him assail.
Here at a while, he held his peace,
With wringyng hands, he wipte his eyes:
Then my desire, did more increase,
To know the cause, of all his cries.
Why staiest thou thus, why do thou pause,
Thou sprite, thou man, thou grisly ghost:
Why standst thou still, show me the cause,
What troubles now, torment thee most.
Oh marvel sir, no whit quod he,
Muse not to see, me in this case:
I was a man, as now you be,
Which have misspent, my youthful race.
In Ladron land, my birthe I took,
Thalassilestis, once I hight:
Both name and soul, I well may brook,
My life from them, derived a right.
From noble stock, by true descent,
Unworthy I, my race does rise:
Good land I had, but not content,
Desire to clime, did blind mine eyes.
My home and soil, I set at naught,
My mind was bent, to wander still:
To Court I came, and there I thought,
To win both world, and wealth at will.
This recknyng rash, was made in have,
Mine host was absent you may see:
Then reckon twice, least false thou cast,
Thus Proverbs old, do counsel thee.
First look then leap, and do not spare,
Or else thy shinnes, may chance to bleed:
He sure shall reap, the croppe of care,
Of rash attemptes, that sowes the seed.
Who shootes before, he see his mark,
No meruell though, he shote a side:
In seas unknown, who brynges his bark,
Without a compase, saileth wide.
Who climes the Alps, withouten guide,
No marvel though, he miss the way:
In Laberynth, who so is tide,
If Dedall help not, there must stay.
O happy you, that learn by me,
And my mishappes, your harms to shun:
Thrice happy they, that can for see,
The rocks whereon, my bark has run.
In Court thus plast, my self I gave,
With wanton looks, each where to gase:
All Pecokes plummes, appeared brave,
Bewitched I was, with glorious blase.
With hardened heart, I held that haunt,
In hope those joys, would never blinne:
I thought no change, of chance might daunt,
Or stop the course, I did begin.
But hoela sir, it was time to stay,
My brave attire, and wanton braggs:
When all my land, was sold away,
And rents were rapt, on silken rags.
In Court I spent, both wealth and time,
Till want had worn, my credit bare:
Dew for such hedds, as seek to clyme,
Before sure footyng, they prepare.
Some that before, I helped at need,
And saw me sink, thus in decaie:
Did start when they, should stand in steed,
Unsteadfast then, was all their stay.
Such friends may be, compard to Kites,
That carrion corses do devour:
The flesh consumed, they take their flights,
Else where to build, them selves a bower.
A Glass may seem, a gemme in vewe,
Till he abide, the hammers blow:
And Brass does bear, a golden hew,
Till touch bewraies, his guilfull show.
When that my ship, had stronger keele,
They ran their course, with me aboorde*
Now Fortune frounes, they turn their heel.
And scarce can spare, me one good word.
As friendship faild, I fell a pace,
My foes did swarm, with swellyng hate:
Too dear I bought, my courtly grace,
Down reeld the proppes, of mine estate.
O tickell time, that breeds but tears,
O sugared sopps, be spicest with gall:
O traitrous tree, that berries bears,
Whose blossoms gaie, deceiues us all.
As pomp puffes up, the heart in pride,
So plague pluckes down, the hautie mind:
And as the fish, does follow tide,
So men runs after Fortune blind.
I chaste a shadow in the Sun,
And looked for hap, where hate remainde,
And still the faster did I run,
The more I found, my self disdainde.
The hollow world, all hail would cry,
And lead the Lamb, to slaughter so:
And fraud so finely bleard mine eye,
I scarce desern'd a friend from foe.
For such as meant, but mere desaite,
Would make a show, of most good will:
Thus harmless swallowed poisoned bait,
And I deceived, by flattrie still.
Then findyng Fortunes froward face,
That erst was clokte, in crafty cloud:
I shapte to shun, the doubtful place,
That makes the painted Pecocke proud.
For as that bird, in borroude plumes,
Does brave it out, with feathers gaie,
So glorious Courtiars have some rumes,
That does their sick, estate bewraie.
But when world sees, how finesse deals,
It makes small count, of glorious shoe:
So thus I sought, the salve that heales,
Yet found a medsen mixed with woe.
For shunnyng Court, I came to care,
Of things to come, and perils paste:
And put to shifts, through Fortune bare,
A Pirate I became at last.
No mind of birthe, or gentill blood,
Could stay the rage, that Rouers have:
My wits were bent, on worldly good,
And note how I, might credit save.
For squaryng Dick's, and thristlesse ladds,
The wandryng mates, of Tigers kind:
I sought, and so for golden gadds,
To glutt thereby, my greedy mind.
Both Baie and Rode, and harbryng place,
I knew and there, could closely lie:
And stoutly gave, a Ship the chase,
And board what Bark, did please mine eye.
The yielded men, I flang our hatche,
The rich I fleest, the poor I slew:
From friend or foe, my ladd's would snatche,
And daiely seek, for booties new.
The pries and goods, no sooner sold,
But bibbe and quaffe, like Baccus knights:
To Dice and dalliance then we would,
And so make short, long Winters nights.
With braulyng blades, then roiste and cut
Or walk the streats, where dames do dwell:
And boltes we had, for eurie butte,
And those that shot, at rouers well.
Sometimes our coin, could stop a gappe,
And purchase pardon by a train:
But gallows luck, and ropripe hap,
At length was gwerdon for our pain.
In storms and flawes, we strove with Seas,
In calmes we crept, along the cost:
In Summer time, we took some ease,
In Winter often, with tempests toste.
And still afferde, of Princes power,
A theeuishe life, dreedes many doubts:
And they that sought us every hour,
In Creekes and Havens laid their scoutes.
And so at length, we were espied,
And followed fast, and forste to fly:
Then served neither wind nor tied,
For we must either yield or dye.
My mates put all the fault in me,
But that prevailed no whitte at all:
For none of them, from blame stood free,
And our offenses were not small.
So were we sent unto the gaile,
And some trust up, to shorten charge:
And those that could, by suit prevail,
Escaped death, and went at large.
But I in boltes, lay long God wotte,
As one that saw, his end draw nere:
For sure no pardon could be got,
I must needs bye, my folly dear.
My friends forsook me every one,
My foes were glad to see me fast:
My wealth was spent, my goods were gone,
And loathsome life, to long did last.
For I was kept, to wail my sin,
And save the soul, that God had bought:
When out of world, I would have bin,
I did so pine, away with thought.
My cheer was bare, my bed but hard,
My robes all rent, and torn to rags:
And world but small did me regard,
For all my pride, and former bragges.
The day drew on, of my dispatche,
And that this life, I must forsake:
And wondryng world, did owrly watch,
To hear the end that I would make:
Then through the streats, with glaiu's and bills,
In ropes a foot, was prisner led:
Thus captiu's go, against their wills*
Where some that liu's, bewailes the dedde.
Some pity much, man's leawdnesse there,
And sorry are, to see his end:
And some that never law did fear,
By that their evil lives amend.
Some sigh and sobbe, and weep for woe,
Some pray and lift their hands an hye:
And some a heavy face does show,
As they these things behold with eye.
I marked the same, when heart full sadd,
In tremblyng breast, lay pantyng sore:
And where the death deserved I hadd,
My greef thereby encreast the more.
Then to the Clouds, I cast up eyes,
And scorned to look on yearthly moss:
As Soul should mount to sacred Skies,
And leave be low, all worldly dross.
A silly tale, I told a less,
Of sondrie sins, in secret kept:
Some friends in hearing thereof was,
That bitterly, my faults be wept.
But whereto serves all this gear,
I lost my life, by Law and right:
And I must reckon other wheare,
For faults I here accounted light.
Yet mercy may, amend my mis,
And mercy comes, where grace we crave:
When cruel world, most dreadful is,
Of gracious God, we mercy have.
My sadd discourse, is fully told,
O man that do, from slumber rise:
Take pen in hand, and do unfold,
My fall, and therewith warn the wise.
Bidd them beware, that boldly run,
They happen not, in hemppen cord:
As many a mothers child has done,
That never thoroughly fearde the Lord.
Tell Pirates all, what end I found,
And show each sort of men my fall:
That every where, in world so round,
My scourge and plague, may warn them all.
O wretched wight, and freende of mine,
Quoth I, thy fall, I will set forth:
So that the cunnyng people fine,
Do take my labor well in worth.
Then rose I from the sleep I sought,
And in at studdie door I paste:
And there to pass this work I brought,
And sent it to, the Print at last.
So read it as your pleasure is,
The man I knew, and matter both:
And to be short, be sure of this,
This is no toye, but words of trothe.
FINIS.
A Letter sent from the noble Earl of Ormondes house at Kilkennie, to the
honorable sir Henry Sidney, then Lord Deputy, and liyng at Rorke, in
Irelande.
IF wit by Art, could make my pen to flow,
A flood of skill, should answer that I would:
But land left dry, where strems should largly grow
Small water brook's, must silly springs unfold,
A barraine ground, can yield no grain's of gold.
A sorry soil, great store of rubbishe bears,
What need I thus, to trouble tender ears:
With rude device, and words more light then wind,
When sweeter fraies, should utter greef of mind.
Long was my wish, to wait on worthy wight,
Short was the stay, where Fortunes balls rebound:
Some happ may come, whiells men remain in sight,
But absence breeds, in breast a curelesse wound.
And out of mind, it brings a friend I know,
They find the corn, that reaps where other sow:
They catch the cronies, that waits at table round,
They hitte the mark, that still can plie the bow,
Where sail I now, my ship is sure on ground.
May rather lo, I wander on the seas,
And try the stream's, and channells where I pleas:
But tossed Bark's, are weather beaten often,
And shaken sore, with surges so a loft:
They can not come, nor saffely draw to road,
In quiet port, and their discharge their load.
Yet have I been, at Anchor nere the Baie,
And beaten of, the shore in deep despite:
Where meaner shippps, with calm at pleasure lay,
And felt the fruit, of all my hopes delight.
I muse how drones, and dastard dolts in deed,
Dare preace in place, and put their betters back:
Methink's a flower, should sone disgrace a weed,
And vice should blushe, where virtue shows no lack.
Tushe, men can now, clapp on a face of Brass,
And strive by looks, to win the goal and all:
Yet when they spy, their iugglyng in a glass,
They turn their backs, and so forsakes the ball.
Such maskers leaude, would dance in net unseen,
And clime the clouds, where smilyng Gods do sit:
Yet all things are, not as these wod^ockes ween,
Their blind belief, runs far beyond their wit.
And leads their sense, an ace or two a wrie,
What though we take, a Parret for a Pie:
Some birds must chatte, to fill our ears with cry,
And we well pleased, although they tell a lie:
Such are the moodes, and humors of our age,
Where some must walk, according to the time:
What then, world knows, these birds are not it cage,
Nor fears the snare, ne falls in the lyme.
A kind of worms, there be that eats the Nutte,
And leaves the shell, as bare as bare may be:
Some shooters seek, but how to hitte the butte,
And from the white, they wish their shaftes should flee.
For if they meant, true shootyng should be seen,
They would not fall, to roue on every green:
Nor flatter so, in hope to mende their game,
Well some are brought, so far paste worldly shame.
They little care, what side does lose or win,
They neither bette, nor bear a piece of loss:
And in the end, they prove not worth a pin,
For all their craft, and creepyng to the cross.
Let faunyng whelps, and gropars of good will:
Pack with the rest, and search what hap will give,
Some other corn, is grinded at my mill,
Men may not look, by flattrie still to live.
A finer food, finds fancy for his toeth,
But may a man, be bold in blont device:
To tell his mind, and what blind people does,
In weedyng thus, my wits were very nice.
If now I would, not bring a box of spice,
To season that, that wanted salt before:
When fire goes out, yet sticks I have in store,
To mende the flame, though wood be dear of price.
But where the blase, can warm no hands at all,
It wakes the wits, and keeps the hedde from sleep:
And makes him smile, that sees through stony wall,
Like linxe and has, a golden fleece to keep.
Yea Argose eyes, to guard his noble charge,
The care whereof, bereau's the mind of rest:
And holds him in, where others walk at large,
To way this world, in balance of the breast.
A heavy weight, the judgment then does bear,
The merry looks, forsakes the cheerful face:
And sadd conceits, do creep in thought I fear,
And sorrow sour, supplies sweet pleasures place.
I see a change, of countnance trust me now,
As though a mass, of matter moved the mind:
And who so notes, the sudden bended browe,
By outward show, an inward cause shall find.
Of troubled sprite, O leave that of in time!
Those gripyng greefes, and gnawyng worms are naught
Call for some sportes, or read some triflyng ryme,
To take away, the ground of grievous thought.
In such extreemes, fine Christmas games are good,
And Musicks sound, reuiues the drouzie brain:
A tale well told, of merry Robbin Hood,
The wandryng heart, it shall bring home again.
A Fig for those, that stands like stains still,
And stares in face, to feed they know not what:
And wheels about, like horse that turns the Mill,
Yet gain no more, then pretty pusse our Cat.
That seeks for Mouse, when other game is gone,
The witless fool, for Fish may catch a Frogge:
And wantyng flesh, may bite upon a bone,
So to the fire, the lubber bears the logge.
Because his strength, does pass his fellows far,
Now shoot I wrong, I know not where I dribbe:
Except my bolte, do hitte some blasyng star,
Tushe, that's a toye, let Tomkin talk of Tibb.
And move some mirthe, to make the season short,
It breeds good blood, and puffes up Lenten cheeks:
When all is done, men lengthen life with sport,
Some feed on love, as Larkes do live with Leekes.
Some take such thought, they sleep until they snort,
Some never wakes, to do their neighbors good:
Some can not spare, their friends a good report,
Some wade bare legged, to moile for mucke and mood.
Some show good will, yet bear great hate in breast,
Some make small signs, and bidds you judge the rest:
Some seem like ware, that never melt with fire,
Some are as cold, as Ice or frosen Snow:
Some through the nose, do easily draw a wire,
Some plays the sheep, and proves a crabbed shroe.
Some lackes no legs, yet knows not where to go,
Some walks too far, their pace is out of rule:
Some comes to short, of that we wish to have,
Some have as mutche, good manners as a Mule.
Some fannes like whelpe, that still the tail can wave.
In fine this some, may sommond be for naught,
Yet fill they up, the some of basest thought:
More greater minds, there are of finer mold,
Whose hearts disdain, to stoop to base delites:
They shine like pearl, and glitter like the gold,
The noble Hawks, that stains the dunghill Kites.
The worthy birds, that soers in lofty Skies,
The joy of Gods, and glory great of men:
The whippe to fools, and beauty of the wise,
The whetstone smothe, whereon we sharp our pen.
Some such have force, to win a world with looks,
To tear the hearts, out of the bloody breast:
Such yearthly gods, does sit in secret nookes,
And tune the stryngs, of state without a wrest.
And such in deed, are double treble blessed.
No sooner they, pronounce a word or twain,
A silence straight, by listnyng ears we find:
That what we hear, our senses may retain,
And lock it up, in judgment of the mind.
And whiles we note, the sweetness of their frase,
We lose our selves, and carried are away:
From that we were, so standing then at mase,
The feeld is lost, no tournyng face that day,
The feight is done, and broken is the raie.
There is a stone, that draws hard Iron ye knoe,
So is there wood, that water turns to stones:
Then are there men, that govern where they go,
And have a gift, of Nature for the nones.
To daunt the proud, and strike the hautie down,
Believe me now, I knoe who wears a croune:
And when she lifts, to play the Lions part,
Her words a lone, can make men couche by art.
Not for her place, but for her grace is such,
To conquer those, that ought her subjects be:
The self same power, mine inward sprite does touch,
Where rightly borne, the regal sword I see.
For if he speak, that does her place supply,
I yield up all, farewell both sense and skill:
I know each bird, obaies the Egles eye,
No fish in flood, but fears the Dolphin still.
The Lions looks, makes every beast to bow,
The pretty Bees, when that their king does hom:
Attendance gives, in decent order throw,
And in a swarm, together will they come.
If beasts and birds, and fish and Flies do so,
A man were blind, that does no duty know:
Then why am I, so long from Cork you ask,
The cause is known, when to the North we went:
I ever lay, like one that took a task,
Of corn to thrashe, and till the straw was spent.
I had no bed, yea twelve long weeks at least,
I shifted out, and lay as badd as beast.
Then drew we home, from savage country wild,
But Harbenger, no better order took:
I durst not then, complain like little child,
That flings from school, and madly burns his book.
So then for sleep, and ease I began to look.
And left the stream, where fish for place does strive,
But loathe to part, yet glad to lie in sheets:
Because with rest, our days away we drive,
And laisure find, to charm and coniour spreets.
A cunnyng knacke, for shreaude and wicked heddes,
That watch the Moon, and search in gardein beds:
What herbs are good, to make a wild Gose came,
And where and how, the mad dog must be cuerd:
That is no art, but for old distaffe dame,
That looks like witthe, whose practice has procuerd.
A Horse or Mare, to swell and pine to death,
Some say for sport, these Callioghes knows a knacke:
To blow down trees, they have so strong a breath,
What needs more words, a plague take all the pack,
That plays foul play, in house, in holt, or heath.
Let trifles pass, I use some household talk,
And write of state, and how the world does frame:
Much shall they here, that long abroad does walk,
And have some sight, and skill to mark the same.
They say this land, has many sores and greues,
That few or none, do seek to salve a right:
And is so spoield, by Rebels, Knaves, and Thieves,
(And bareleggd Kerne, which setts all goodness light)
That worse and worse, the common wealth does wax,
Why eury hedde, should members badd reform:
And if men please, to take the fire from flax,
The kirnell sweet, should sone be safe from worm.
Though some have sought, their only private gain,
And fedd on fleece, that from the flock did fall:
Yet grace is left, and hope there does remain,
That some does live, to mende the mischiues all.
But to be plain, I hear a woeful cry,
The noyes whereof, resounds through starrie Sky.
The poor that lives, by toil and sweat of brows,
(And nere good tounes, where each man knows his own:)
Can not be free, nor well enjoy their plowes,
They are in deed, with self, so ouerthrown.
In any place, where proudest people dwell,
Whose rule is mixed, with rage and rigor still:
Was never seen, nor felt so foul an hell,
As this good Lord, where waest does what it will.
Such as be borne, as free as we our selves,
And tilles the ground, and dearly paies therefore:
(And for their babes, full truly diggs and delues)
In their most need, we plague and scourge full sore.
Beyond the course, of reason, law and right,
A cruel case, and twice as heavy a sight:
To see the weak, with strongest thrust to wall,
And lose their goods, and not the half but all.
The people say, were coin and liurey gone,
The land would sure, with Milk and Honey floe:
Their trust is now, redress is coming on,
And havoc shall, to hateful harbor go.
Why strive I thus, to thunder in the air,
That never knew, how rain in season fell:
When storms are past, and weather waxes fair,
By heavens bliss, we shon the pains of hell.
When peace bears fruit, and wicked war decaies:
I gage my life, that all thing shall be well,
And world will say, we live in happy days.
No flower at first, can yield a perfect smell,
Till time bryngs forth, from stalk both budds and leaves,
Who seeks for nutts, till hardened be the shell,
The kirnell wantes, and so him self deceiues.
The mynds of men, would quickly have their wish,
And have such haste, of that they do desire,
That often time, without good skill they fish:
Or leapyng dike, they light a mid the mire.
Who will not stay, for weather, wind, and flood,
Shall sail but selde, and see no foreign soil:
It must be time, that does the people good,
As Harvest comes, of labor pain and toil.
To enter thus, in matters of great weight,
Would vex the wits, of riper hedds then mine:
It Is better use, the pen with simple slight,
Then in grave things, to make the frase too fine:
As ynkehorne terms, smells of the school sometime,
So far fetched words, are farsed full of larde:
And paper stouft, with store of stretched ryme,
Does turn again, disgraest without regard.
Else flong a side, or laid in windoe nooke:
As fancies vain, whereon few wisemen look.
There pause a while, God sheeld my labor so,
Were lost my Lord, they cost me further pain:
A mornings muse, a merry freake ye knoe,
A whole nights watch, a broken sleep or twain.
Though trifles come, from hedds full fraught with toys,
Some get great thanks, for pinnes and lases light:
We like no Drone, nor Bagpipe for the noyes,
Nor May poull mirthe, for any show or sight.
But for the sport, and gladness that they bring:
Whose cheerful sound, makes heavy sad men sing,
A noble art, is Music sure I find,
For noble life, that merchant does maintain:
He can make sale, of feathers in the wind,
And sell good cheap, a drousie adell brain:
Yet Music not, compares with merry mind,
For that bryngs blood, to eurie vital vain.
And heaues up heart, from dongeon of despair:
To be as blithe, as bird in open air.
If any glance, of matter be in this,
Past merry mean, yet merry muse it is:
That leads my pen, I swear by heavens blis.
Wherefore in mirthe, I pray you take these lines,
My duty may, excuse my boldness here:
I borrowd not, my words of grave deuines,
Nor of fine wits, that holds small dainties dear.
They came good cheap, from merry nourses papp,
Good chepe they go, where muses favor most:
But dear they are, if writer find mishapp,
Thereby, and world, account the labor lost.
God grant the time, be good when they were sent,
And that each word, be taken as I meant:
The best is sure, and that is most to prays,
They go to one, I honor all my days.
FINIS.
The Epitaphe of the rare virtuous Prince (and toward Impe of grace) King
Edward the sixte.
THe Lamp is out, that lightened English hearts,
Whose lively shoe, and beauty shoen so bright:
And gave such joy, to all our inward smarts,
That well was him, that had thereon a sight.
Edward I mean, which was our king by right.
The golden torche, and candle matutine,
Did blase and burn, within his Christalleyne,
But well away, those looks their life has lost,
Full dim and darcke,
Is now that spark:
That whilome was, the stay of Englandes boaste.
Now Death has dried, this pleasant princely plant,
And hent our happ, an hye above the skies:
Who knows the loss, but those, that feel the want,
Wherefore the tears, distilled from our eyes.
But since this babe, has made his sacrifies.
And yielded up, his life and vital breath:
What can ye blame, but hasty cruel death.
Which plucked the Rose, before his leaves were spredde,
Yet shall his name,
Remain with fame:
And florishe still, although the flower be dedde.
A face so fraught, with favor bloomyng still,
A cheer so chaste, subduyng each desire,
A hedde so ripe, with grace and connyng skill:
A tongue so decked, and cladd in trothes attire,
A heart so meek, and clean deuoide of ire.
An ear so pure, to hear the poor man's cause:
A wit to judge, a zeal to make good laws.
A hand so clear, from blood, look well thereon,
Was seldom seen,
In King ne Queen:
Helas the while, our Lanterns light is gone.
His wit wanne praise, as by his ways apperes,
His virtuous stepps, wan fame among the wice,
His tender youth, did teach the aged years:
His sober life, rebuked every vice,
His words and works, did pass the pearl in price.
His gestures all, if they were graven in gold:
A mirror were, to learn both young and old.
Wherefore the unfit, the earth is for his grave,
His place of reast,
Is Abrams breast:
A worthy tomb, for such a King to have.
Finis.
The Epitaphe of the worthy Earl of Essex.
I Blushe to write, in verse, a matter of such weight,
That makes the hearars shed some tears, and moves sorrow straight:
In grave and statly style, this tale should sounded be:
Too base for such great cause I find, my slender muse and me.
My heart does bleed in breast, my pen in hand does shake,
Mine inward sprits do weep for woe, this sad discourse to make,
But though with heavy news, a while I fill your ears,
The fame I write of this great man, to joy shall turn your tears
Yea great of birthe and mind, and few so great as he,
For daiely through deserts he grew, in greatness by degree:
A Caesar's heart he boar, that never shronke nor quaild,
A courage that against his foes, in all attemptes preuaild.
A hedde that could conceive, as far as cause was found,
A body apt for warlike broiles, where bounty did abound:
Yea for his bounty great, a prince in very deed,
That made no more account of gold, then of a rotten reed.
The noble gifts he gave, a world of worthies wan,
Was never seen, in Britain bred, for bounty such a man.
An Earl and lively Lord, as mild as is the Dove,
Whose courtuous speech and pleasant port, did purchase peoples love.
A friend to all good men, as fast and true as steel,
That would not wagg with worlds abuse, and turn about like wheel
A pearlesse subject sure, that Englandes honor sought,
And card not with what loss of goods, his country gain was bought
Full bent to Marciall feats, a Mars in deed well tried,
Abroad in feeld where men are known, and cowards easly spied:
The care of public weal, lay wakyng in his eyes,
A noble Soldiour framde by kind, in best and brauest gyes.
A house and household kept, so frankly every where,
That all the lookers on would say, some prince was placed there
The Soldiers swarmd like Bees, about his stately gate,
He was a Lantern of this land, and Mirrhour of the state.
In all things that he did, then what a loss had they:
That comes to see his noble shrine, and finds the saint awey.
O friends that honored him, and faithful servant both,
Come weep with me, and show thereby, some sign of your great trothe
For I have lost a friend, and for his sake I vow,
To plant my pen upon his tomb, and rest from writing now
Till I his like may find, which hardly shall be don:
O Essexe of renowned fame, thy race is nobly ron.
FINIS.

