A MVSICALL CONSORT OF Heavenly harmony (compounded out of many parts of
Music) called CHVRCHYARDS CHARITY.

Imprinted at London, by Ar. Hatfield, for William Holn. 5.

1595.

TO THE RIGHT HONORAble ROBERT DEVEREVX Earl of Essex and E^e, V^count of
Hereford, Lord Ferrer of Chartley, Bor^her and Lou^ine, Master of the Queens
Majesty's horse, Knight of the noble order of the garter, and one of her
Majesty's honorable privy Counsel: Thomas Churchyard wishes increase of all
wished honor, happiness of life, worlds good will, and everlasting fame.
A Greater boldness cannot be committed (Right Honorable) than to present
Pamphlets and Poetry to noble Counselors that gouernes a public state,
though in all ages reasonable writers, that kept an orderly compass, were
suffered in verse or prose (so their inventions were not farced full of vanity)
to show good will in the dedication of some honest labors, to such honorable
personages, as was worthy of any good volumes, or in the worth of virtue,
excelled the weight and value of numbers, that neither merits laudation, nor
show no sufficiency to be saluted with a book. But what I see and the world
reports of your Lordship, makes me somewhat hardy to offer a present, yet
simplenes of spirit and want of profound learning, has so muffled my muses,
that they dare not speak, nor I presume to write, nevertheless thinking on your
twenty fold honorable father (my great good Lord) matchless in our world, that
carried in his breast the fear of God, and wan with his life the love of men
(so noble was his mind) I stood nothing discouraged, because a soldier like
noble son of his is left alive, to follow the steps of so stately a father,
and to shine above and beyond the course of thousands in this time, or is
likely to come after this age. To treat of particulars in that behalf, I
should presume too far, and unadvisedly come too short of matter fit for this
cause. Wherefore I am to leave those deep considerations, and drop into the
shallownes of mine own studies, that brings forth a book of the coldness of
charity, because a great noble man, told me this last wet summer, The weather
was too cold for Poets. On which favorable words, I bethought me that charity
in court and all the world over, was become so cold, that neither hot summer,
fervent fire, nor heat of sun could make warm again, in that comfortable
sort as our forefathers have felt it: so my good L. following that only theme
of cold weather (being apt to take any theme) to write on, in as sweet a
phrase and terms as I may devise (putting in the praise of Poets withal) I
smoothly pass over (without bitter speeches) the corruption of this world, and
disguised manners of men, riding by the new fanglenes of a multitude, and not
dashing any ones infirmity, with blot of disgrace, or blemish of credit,
hoping the best sort shall stand pleased with, howsoever the woorst (happily
may be touched) do of mere malice, wrest awry the honest meaning of a plain
writer. For the dutiful regard, toward the purchasing of your L. favor has
so sifted every word and sentence, that no one verse or line shall be
offensive to a sound judgment and good construction. And for that now (by
reason of great age) my wits and inventions are almost wearied with writing of
books (this being one of the last) I took this task in hand, at large to
dilate somewhat of Charity, which would to God I had as great power to revive,
as the world has occasion to remember. Thus ouer-bold to trouble your L. so
long with the reading of so simple an Epistle, I proceed under your honorable
supportation, to my purposed matter, wishing your L. everlasting fame, credit,
and honor, most humbly at commandment,

THOMAS CHVRCHYARD.

AN EVERLASTING MEMORY OF CHRISTIAN comfort to the Queens most excellent
Majesty.
O Grashous dame, in whose grave judgment great
The heavens hie, lies open plain to sight
The earth below, takes from thy regal seat
(In darkest days) his hope and cleerest light.
For at thy feet, a world of woorthies fall*
ELIZABETH, a monarke to them all.
An Empress here, three kingdoms shows us plain
On which three realms, our Queen may rightly rain.
O treble Queen, the sweet and highest part
That we like best, and shrillest voice does sound
The only mean, to show deep musicks art
Where all the skill; of well set song is found.
Grant silly man, a grace that means to sing
Of heaunly love, and of none other thing.
He sings of peace, a song should lull asleep
The fellest feends, and fearful bugs below
Peace charms with words, the wolf that wearies sheep
That neither lamb, nor kid astraie shall go.
For as the hen, her chickens keeps from kite
So charity, does save her children all
From common plagues, and wicked worlds despite
And all the wrath, that from the clouds can fall.
She spreds her wings, to keep her birds from cold
And learns poor chicks, to pick up grains of gold.
This charity, so checkles ore her brood
She scrapes the earth, to make her young ones feed
And freely from, her self does spare them food
She takes in heart, such care for those that need.
If charity, were not the only nurse
To nourish up, each thing that life does bear
This backward world, would grow from ill to worse
And brutish ^olke, would banish love and fear.
Warm Christian love, as long as life does last
Does bide the shocke, and brunt of eurie blast.
And kindled once, in any princely heart
It burns and flames, as hot as Aethna hill
Creepes throw the vains, and nerves in every part
Cannot be quenched, with water, wit nor skill.
A heaunly grace, maintains a heaunly love
Each thing divine, divinely is set forth
Planted like rock, that nothing may remove
Garnisht like gold, or perle of greatest worth.
The charity, I mean is guarded so
And for her says, through fire and air may go.
But what is that, to him that sings a song
^f twenty parts, when he one voice must sound
Presumes to tell, a tale perchance too long
To sacred ears, whose judgment is profound
Sing hie or low, how ere the tune he takes
For one small iar, the song begins again
No shift may serve, for concord music makes
Most harmony, consists in pricksong plain.
Division does, but tear in pieces small
The minnems long, and little crotchets all.
Full softly blows, a quiet calmie wind
A still mild voice, does please the hearers well
No note nor ring, so much contents the mind
As solemn sound, of clear sweet silver bell.
O that my muse, might get so great a grace
As credit win, throw any sound it shoes
I die to see, one fearful frown of face
Where these meek words, and humble verses goes.
Now mirthles song, begin thy new found note
As strange a strain, as any ear has hard
If world would learn, to sing the same by rote
Good charity, should grow in more regard.
Play well thy part, so shall the greatest smile
And meanest sort, of force be pleased the while.
Your Majesty's most humble servant, Thomas Churchyard.

WHat song should please, a sacred princes ears
Which likes no tunes, but music sweet and sound
Weak were my muse, to offer sighs and tears
Where joyful mirth, and gladness does abound
But troubled mind, that rowles on restles ground
In sorrow sings, the secrets of the heart
Because sad man, can sing no sweeter part.
O charity help.
Of charity, that makes a solemn noies
A strange consort, I hope well ^unde I bring
Of heavenly love, that passes earthly Ioies
In formal wise, a true set song I sing
Would God the sound, through all the world might ring
That charity, which each one ought to keep
Might waken now, that long has lain a sleep.
O charity help.
She has bin brought, in slumber sundry ways
With lullabie, as nurse does rock her child
The cradle gaie, of pleasant nights and days
With too much ease, has charity beguilde
And now God wot, the world is waxt so wild
That charity, must needs make each thing tame
That wild discord, has brought clean out of frame.
O charity help.
Pity and ruth, are fled or banished quite
And in their place, comes rigor rudely cled
Godly remorse, is drowned in worlds delight
Good cons^ence fears, that charity is dead
Love looks down, and hate holds up the head
Troth barelie lives, and tretchrie thriues apace
Deserts does starve, and meanewell hides his face.
O charity help^
Franknes is blind, affection dims his sight
Larges is lost, hardness supplies his place
Wrong runs so swift, it ouer-gallops right
Goodness limps down, and halts in many a case
Do well does droupe, or walks with mu^fled face
Virtue and vice, now wrastles for a fall
And so the strong, will thrust the weak to wall.
O charity help.
Stoutnes with strength, strikes flat the feeble force
Down is kept down, and never like to rise
Malice and might, rides both upon one horse
(Sir Packolets nagge, that gallops through the skies)
Judgment grows gross, ore weening wants eyes
Will is a wagge, waste has the wager won
For all the date, of our redress is done.
O charity help.
Loyalty weeps, and flattrie laughes and smiles
Goodwill is scornd, and puts up many a taunt
Poverty is plagude, or ouermatcht with wiles
Plainnes complains, but pride bids him auaunt
Cruelty the curre, with cry of hounds will chaunt
But bandog bites, full sore before he bark
And craft the carle, still iuggles in the dark.
O charity help.
Friendship looks pale, it has an ague fit
Favor is faint, and lame it cannot go
Finenes is false, and full of subtle wit
Faith gives fair words, and breaks promis so
Constancy reeles, and staggers to and fro
Charity must needs, reform these follies strange
That by abuse, does noble nature change.
O charity help.
Duty does die, to drive on devilish drifts
Stubbornes strives, to wrangle for a straw
Cunning long lives, by cusnage and by shifts
Disorder thriues, with neither rule nor laue
People grows proud, without true fear or awe
If suffrance see, these prancks and hold his peace
Goodness decaies, and badnes shall increase.
O charity help.
If charity be, the food or fruit of faith
Where bloomes that tree, where does those branches bud
True charity sure, as wisest people says
Is working still, and ever doing good
Love helps our health, as life maintains the blood
But where no help, nor succor we may find
There charity, is almost out of mind.
O charity help.
If through my faith, great mountains I may move
And can raise up, to life the dead from grave
That withred faith, brings forth no fruit of love
It gains no grace, what ever hope I have
If charity be, the thing which good men crave
God grant that I, and all that hears the same
May sing that song, like Sidrack in the flame.
O charity help.
My humble heart, hopes now but for dispatch
Of life that wastes, away like candle blase
The clock will stricke, in haste I hear the watch
That sounds the bell, whereon the people gase
My forces fail, my wits are in a mase
My corpse consumes, my skin and bones does show
The soul is glad, the body hence shall go.
O charity help.
Truth waited long, on your sweet sacred reign
To catch some crumbs, that from your table falls
I sow in tears, and reaps but bitter pain
That makes sick soul, lie groaning by the walls
Where hands a cross, for help to heaven calls
So sucks up sighs, and sorrow of the mind
As boiling breast, blows fast for air and wind.
O charity help.
My muse does muse, how labor lost his time
And service great, does get so small regard
I never thriude, by prose nor pleasant ^ime
Nor could in world, be any way prefard
An open sign, my thankles hap is hard
Yet numbers of, my very name and race
By prince in court, were called to worthy place.
O charity help.
I am the Drone, that bees beats from the hiue
The ugly Oule, that kites and crows do hate
The drawing ox, that clounes do daily drive
The haples hind, that has the hateful fate
(That wears a^l suits, and seasons out of date)
If destny so, alots men such hard chance
They pass the pikes, that fortune will advance.
O charity help.
My passage is, like one that rides in post
Through water, fire, and all the hazards here
And so draws home, a weary grisly ghost
Whose loss of youth, bu^es loathsome age too dear
Now coms acco^nt, of days, of hours and year
My debts are stald, as often bare bankrouts be
The grave paies all, and sets my bondage free.
O charity help.
The woe of wars, and pride and pomp of peace
The toil of world, and troubles here and there
And churlish checks, of fortune I release
Their heavy cross, I can no longer bear
In pieces small, my scribbled scrowles I tear
So flinging verse, and books before your feet
I crave some crowns, to bie my shrouding sheet.
O charity help.
All hope is gone, of any earthly hap
The axe is come, to give the falling blow
Down flies the bows, the tree has lost his sap
Up to the clouds, like smoke the breath shall go
A silly puff, of wind ends all this woe
O grashous Queen, then some compassion take
Before my soul, this combrous cave forsake.
O charity help.
If nothing come, of service, suit and troth
True man must trudge, and leave his native soil
Abroad the world, to see how fortune goth
In any place, where faith is free from foil
Here with vain hope, my self and life I spoil
First lost my youth, so time and all is gone
Age sindes no friends, nor help of any one.
O charity help.
Of charity, a great discourse is made
Unto an Earl, I honor in this land
It is not hid, nor sits in silent shade
Would God it were, in your fair blessed hand
There lies the notes, as thick as is the sand
And there I sing, three parts in one at lest
And in sweet sound, true music is expressed.
O charity help, or else adue the pen
For I must march, again with marshall men.
FINIS.
To the general Readers.
IF ought amiss, you find good Reader here,
His fault it is, that sings ne sweet nor loud:
When he caught cold, and voice could not be clear,
Because each note, is cloked under cloud,
He cra^d no help, nor stole from no man's song,
One piece nor part, of music any way:
Ne sembreeffe, brief, nor yet ne lark nor long,
For he has skill, in deskant some men say,
And on the base, can make three parts in one,
And set new songs, when all the old are gone.
Though some believe, but hardly that he makes,
These things or that, which seems far past his reach,
Tush though old head, and hand with paulsie shakes,
Let no ill will, plain writers pen appeach:
If you do love, no wrong give each man right:
Rob not the just, of any praise well won,
Way not men's worth, with waights in balance light,
For truth is truth, when all is said and don:
You may as well, say white and red is black,
And Sun and Moon, are steel and marble stone:
As say or think, behind a writers back*
He borrowed that, which he claims as his own:
O give men leave, to father their own child:
Let it be foul, or fair as babies are,
A stubborn boy, a cracke-rope tame or wild,
Begot in haste, and brought up poor and bare:
How ere they be, blind, lame, or shapt awrie,
Ugly to sight, big, boulcho^s, low or ^ie,
Those yoonglings all, the Dad^an not deny,
Are his that sent, those babes abroad to nurse,
(Like orphants weak, that knows not what to do)
With blessings great, and not with parents curse,
That shortens life, and gets Gods anger to:
Children were wont, to bear their fathers name,
Not one durst say, in earnest jest or skorne,
(To hinder child, of spotless birth and fame)
A lawful son, was but a bastard borne.
Both beast and bird, their young ones do defend,
So shall my Muse, maintain that I have pend,
Then bring Shores wife, in question now no more,
I set her forth, in colors as she goes,
Sir Rafe Bowser a worshipful knight witnesses where and when I penned that.

And as she went, like gallant less before,
So other gyrls, as gaie and fresh as rose,
With verse have I, set forth in sundry sorts,
As brave as she, what ere disdain reports,
That humor now, declines for age draws on,
The full tide is, of fine invention gone:
Ebb follows flood, when vital veins wax dead,
Wit wears and wastes, as torch consumes with wind,
When water turns, dry grows a flowing head:
In age each thing, decaies by course of kind:
Yet whiles the oil, in lamp may make a blaze,
Or candell in, the socket shows a light,
On sparkling flame, the cleerest eyes will gaze,
And comfort find, thereby in darkest night:
I yield to time, that like a sith cuts clean,
All that does gr^w, in spring or fall of leaf,
And wish in world, my treble were a mean,
That I might sin^, to ears that are not deaf,
A note should sink, as deep in iugging breast,
As ever yet, ^n sea did ancker rest:
Songs are but likt, as fancies gives them leave,
Both well and (...), as sounds of trumpets are,
Though Sirens voice, the hearers does deceive,
Mine has no charm, but open plain and bare,
As I was borne, so speak I English still,
To lose my pains, and win the worlds good will,
No loss so much, as credit cracked with pen,
Nor gain so great, as love of honest men.
Fare you well.
The Author to his book.
GO now plain book, where thou may welcome find,
Walk throw the world, till frinds do thee embrace:
Let foes alone, obey thy masters mind,
For fear nor threat, hide not a fautlesse face.
Win courts goodwill, the countries love is gaind,
With wise men stay, from froward wits beware:
At plow and cart, plain speech is not disdaind:
Sit down with those, that feeds on hungry fare,
For they have time, to note what thou do say,
Let gallants go, they will but give a gibe:
Or take thee up, and fling thee straight away,
Touch not smooth hands, that use to take a bribe,
They better like, full bags than busy books,
Shun from the sight, of glorious peacocks proud:
Their only pomp, stands all on stately looks,
They glowm and skoull, as tweare a raynie cloud.
Give babbling toongs, good leave to taunt and talk,
Their taste is gone, they often take chese for chalk.
Bid scornful heads, let true-plain^ lines alone,
That harmles are, and came from lowly heart:
Pass not in haste, to people strange unknown,
Least judgment swift, do take on thee the start.
And run beyond, thy reach full many a skore,
Go slowly forth, with thanks come quickly (...):
Bring no rebuke, for that nips near and sore,
Twere better far, abroad thou should not ro^^.
Though thou be blind, yet those that well can see,
If thou offend, will find great fault with me.
Behave thy self, as mildly as thou may,
L^ke messenger, that does his arnd aright:
Thy master must, affirm each thing thou say.
The darkest word, at length must come to light,
Like pilgrim go, and pass throw perils all,
Take well in worth, what hap does thee befall.
Return no more, to me till news thou bring,
Of praise or thanks, or of some better thing:
If none of these, this waiward world will yield,
Trudge from fine town, fli^ to the open field,
Where thou must pass, through thickets full of thorns,
Where pricking briers, and crooked brambles gross:
And never none, s^apt free from sc^^th or scorns,
Or scratted hands, or tearing of his close.
Where eluish ap^s, and marmsets mockes and mose,
And thistles are, seen sooner than a rose.
Yea thou shall come, where nettles are good store,
Whose angry sting, will blisters raise apace,
Slip from those weeds, and come near them no more:
For fear unawares, good words do get disgrace.
The goodly flowers, of court thou needs not fear,
For they are sweet, and meek of nature throw,
There wisdom will, with writers humor bear:
If humbly still, thou can behave thee now,
Thy masters pen, has purchased favor there,
Among the Dames, of fair Dianas train,
Where beauty shines, like silver drops of rain.
In sunnie day: O book thou happy art
If with those Nymphs, thou may be entertaind,
If any one, of them take in good part,
A verse or word, thou have a garland gaind,
Of glory great, for fame her self must sound,
Out of their voice, look what they do pronounce:
Like tennis ball, aloft it does rebound,
And yields great weight, but not by dram nor ounce,
But heavy as, a massy pound of lead,
They wey men's worth, with praises quick or dead.
Yea what they say, of Poets fond or wise,
Of prose or verse, that ripe inuensho^ shoes:
As tw^re a law, the fame thereof shall rise,
And through the world, like coin it current goes.
From hand to hand, and so does passage take,
Preasse thou to them, for they may mend my hap:
If that of thee, some good account they make,
And that in sport, they lay thee in their lap,
Until they list, to read thee eurie line,
Then at welhead, some water draw I may:
For fountain springs, may run clear claret win^,
Whose pleasant sap, gives moisture eurie way.
The nimble Nimphs, that with Diana dwell,
Can quickly turn, the cock and flowing spout:
That thousands shall, bring buckets to the well
And watch their times, till comfort comes out.
Now book trudge hence, bestow thy labor right
Set spurs to horse, that flies in aeir with wings
Mount ore the hills, and rest ne day nor night
Till thou do come, before great Queens and Kings
Then flat on face, fall prostrate at their feet
That may from grave, call up thy masters spreet
Keep thou these rules, this course and compass hold
So may thy grace, convert my lead to gold.
CHVRCHYARDES CHARITY.
WHen labring mind, and weary body both
Is cloid with world, and heart would shake off toil
Before the ghost, to highest heavens goes
And death of life, shall make a wretched spoil
(And man must needs, A well disposed mind, calls many good things to memory.
forsake this soathsome soil)
He takes some care, to make his conshence clear
Of all he thinks, or may imagine here.
First looks he up, Good men have many sweet imaginations.
where soul desires to be
Of life to come, to know what hope we have
And where we rest, in joy from bondage free
So soon as cold, dead body lies in grave
Than ere man leaves, this cruel cumbrous cave
In charity, he ways this world aright
As far as wades, wise judgment, skill and sight.
But finding world, Blind world is fraught with fond desires.
full fraught with fond desires
(A mighty mass, of matter therein lies)
That burns out time, and kindles many fires
Whereon foul flames, and smothring smoke does rise,
He looks thereon, with heavy rufull eyes,
As though some zeal, might move a musing mind
To pity plagues, that man must leave behind.
The poor estate of people is to be pitied.
Who does not sigh, to see the poor oppressed
By rich men's reach, that wrests awry the right
Who will not wail, the woe of troubled breast
Or sore lament, the state of wronged wight
When broad day brings, dark dealings unto light
Who will not rue, our wretched race on earth
That keeps till death, no rule from day of birth.
The wealth hardly won is easily left.
The goods we win, are worse to keep than get
The wealth we lose, robs some of rest and sleep
Our daily gain, will answer scarce our det
We covet more, than wit can warely keep
We slip from hence, as rich as new shorn sheep
And that we leave, in world that well was won
Is soon consumde, and spent with riotous son.
Who parts from world, would wish that were not so
Graceles time runs on rolling wheels.
His charity, commands him so to think
But graceles time, on rolling wheels does go
At whose abuse, our flyring world can wink
Vice cares no whit, if virtue swim or sink
Ambishous mind, and malice meets in one
So that true love, and charity is gone.
Christian love looks to every thing.
Love bids men look, to all things under Sun
Beast fish, and foul, and all we see with eye
But charity, a greater course does run
Because it does, in quiet conscience lie
She looks each where, as she had wings to fly
And houer ore, our doings on this mould
That bridle takes, and will not be contrould.
O then to love, and charity I pas
Whose zeal is great, Zeal is the glass that shows the spots of face.
and charge is nothing small
That clearly sees, (as in a crystal glass)
The spots of face, and inward cankers all
And can in haste, unto remembrance call
Old farn years past, and present things of late,
Whereof a world, of wits may well debate.
Who can hold tongue, Abuse runs over the brim.
to see bad worlds abuce
Run ore the brim, where virtue never floes
As havoc had, hald up the water sluice
Where out at large, great skuls of fishes goes
Poor pashence must, be pleased with painted shoes
Alms deeds are dead, no pity now is last
For all the world, is set on slight and craft.
If poverty, be pincht with plague or sore
He starues for food, adue the man is dead
The sound we seek, the sick we do abore
Full paunch eats all, Full paunch eats up all.
the hungry is not fed
For greedy guts, keeps needy mouth from bred
True charity, and good deuoshon old
By frost and snow, are almost killed with cold.
Would God good works, with faithful honest deeds
Reformd this vice, that spreds too far I fear
And fair sweet flowrs, Fair word^ make fools feign.
were planted for those weeds
That does with fraud, infect sweet soyles each where
Fine words does but, betraie the simple ear
As fowlers pipe; the harmles bird disseaues
That lights on lyme, amid green birchen leaves.
If mere deceit, were banished from our view
Deceit deceaues militous of men.
False dealing then, would blush to show his face
If wisdom did, disdain vain follies new
Old troth in world, would claim his woonted place
But cunning wits, does finenes so embrace
That plainnes walks, like pilgrim to and fro
In wandering wise, and knows not where to go.
Wealths thirst drinks rivers dry.
Wealth has desire, to drink great rivers dry
His scalding thirst, cannot be quenched well
Want pines away, and comfortles does lie
And water tastes, like Tantalus in hell
The needy sort, in dolor daily dwell
The hautie head, thinks skorne to turn his face
And rue the state, of naked wretches case.
The fields and lanes, are full of sick and lame,
Who beg and crave, as loud as voice can cry
A saving world spares nothing to the poor.
But saving world, is grown so far from frame
No great remorse, remains in passers by
Hardness holds back, both bag and bounties eye
So that no ruth, regard nor pity comes
From sparing hands, and graceles griping thombs.
Our prisons all, are pestred with poor souls
Whose yelling noise, a tyrants heart may move
At grates they stand, and look through peeping holes
Prisoners perish for want of comfort.
To purchase alms, and try good peoples love
But penury, does so their pashence prove,
With empty womb, and hungry meatles mawe
They lay them down, on boords or wads of straw.
The silly folk, Many silly souls goes a hungry to bed.
in town or cottage rude
With belly full, do seldom go to bed
And looks as lean, as hawks that ill are mude
Which often be, with crows or carraine fed
How should men give, when charity is dead
For money, meat, and clothing now is bard
From those that need, the world is waxt so hard.
How can full purse, Full purse follows many pleasures.
supply the poor man's went
When trull at home, from sheep looks for a fleece
And master must, be sometimes all a flant
And pretty pus, my dear must have a piece
Whose beauty stains, the fair Helen of Greece
These things are large, and long to look upon
By which cold cause, warm charity is gone.
More reasons rise, to make men hold and keep
The crumbs they catch, from Fortunes table still
For purchesars, The purchesars plucks all from the poor.
do walk when plow men sleep
Their sacks of corn, is seldom from the mill
They take no rest, till thrift bare budget fill
Then lock they up, in chest their golden bags
When beggars trudge, and iet about in rags.
Cold parts men play, Crafty (...) can play bopeep.
much like old plain bopeepe
Or counterfeit, in dock out-nettle still
And for their game, there is such hold and keep
That nothing can, escape their reaching skill
Much have ye won, when got is their good will
It Is lost again, for one small grain of gold
Their charity, is grown so extreme cold.
Cunning raises the price of every thing.
They raise the price, of every thing is bought
On tenter hooks, their ware is stretched out
Seeks all the ways, for wealth that may be sought
As for the wind, a ship is swaid about
And at a trice, they turn the water spout
So from our purse, both pence and pounds they draw
By hook or crook, by wrest or reach of law.
Vittles made dear seldom comes down again.
The rate of things, rackt up does fall no more
Cold conshence takes, all-fish that coms to net
To make corn dear, they hoord much grain in store
So they may win, some care not how they get
For every bird, they do such lime-twigs set
That no bird scapes, if it be slidge to fly
Except foresight, the sudden danger spy.
No rain nor curb, nor bridle holds them in
No law nor rule, nor order will they keep
Sets all abroch, to feed and nourish sin
Wicked wolves deuoures the lambs.
And plays the wolves, with lambs when yonglings sleep
Makes old folks whine, and babes in cradle weep
And makes the rate, of every thing so scant
That some cries out, that never thought of want.
A devilish dearth destroies thousands.
A devilish dearth, is come from dark hell gate
To kill cold hearts, as hands can crush a crab
That blow falls not, upon the proud man's pate
But gives the meek, and mildest mind the stab
Now tell I all, the secrets like a blab
As good to show, a sore whiles wound is green
As let men starve, before the grief be seen.
The love of wealth, The love of wealth forgets all goodness.
forgets both God and man
And who grows rich, sets little by renown
To catch and hold, the world does what it can
With endless care, in court, in field and town
Craft keeps up, plain honesty falls down
Charity is dead, and goodness grows full sick
Wisdom does drowp, and folly is too quick.
Wealth like a worm, eats up sweet kernels all
As cankers rust, runs into iron and steel
Hard closed hands, that will let nothing fall
Wants ears to hear, Hard hands will part from nothing.
yet fingers has to feel
Well all is right, when world runs like a wheel
Round as a top, that scourging can abide
Swims up and down, and follows time and tide.
On present time and muck man's mind is bent Foolish world thinks but our
present time.

On world to come, no care nor eye they cast
What coms with ease, is often rashly spent
And what does hap, in hands we hold full fast
As though our pomp, and pride should always last
Yea thinking all, is ours that we can scrape
And still for more, do greedy gluttons gape.
The many years, Many years and manners alters the kind of man.
and winters past and gone
Has changde the kind, of grace and goodness quite
Our bodies bears, in flesh a heart of stone
That joined is, with faintie liver white
Which never breeds, in breast one good delight
Our noughtie minds, may be the cause of this
That has transformd, all Adams babes amiss.
A golden age is turned to copper and brass.
The golden age, of our forefathers wise,
Is copper now, or worse than any brass,
We quickly can, clap on a new found gife
And wear a mask, seem shadow in a glass
But bring no work, nor great good thing to pass
Make show of much, as art sets tristes forth
That proves a puff, in substance little worth.
Words is the worst ware that ever was sold.
Words are the ware, that each man sets to sale
With phrases fine, bedeckt to blind poor sight
Fair promise first, steps forth and tells a tale
Of bad device, that weies in balance light
For at your need, performance takes flight
And leaves in lake, the fool that words has won
Who paies great pains, for shadows in the sun.
Wealth weighs down every thing.
Wit did prefer, good people well of yore
Wealth now with weights, does wey the balance down
Words and fine talk, leads world the dance before
But neither wealth, nor words wins true renown
For when the trumpe, does give uncertain sown
Men will not then, prepare them for the fight
But rather seek, to save themselves by flight.
Words are waves tossed with wind.
Words are the waves, that welters on the seas
And works a froth, in color white as snoe
Makes thousands sick, and breeds a cold disease
To those that with, such swelling surges go
Inconstant words, with tide will ebb and floe
But fruitful deeds, stands firm and fast as rock
That bides the brunt, of eurie blast and shocke
Fine Macheuill, Marcheuill is now made an English man.
is now from Florence flown
To England where, his welcome is too great,
His busy books, Want of charity has made me loose my pattent.
are here so red and known
That charity, thereby has lost her heat
Poor prisners do, in Ludgate die for meat
Who does for det, in danger long remain
Must fall down flat, and seldom rise again.
Wit takes his toll, The milner will be sure of his toule.
as milner at the mill
Powlseakes the bags, of meal as he does please
Thrusts thousands back, till tricksie tanker fill
Like prentise fine, that feign would take some ease
In deed there is, no fishing to the seas
But what is caught, in conshence should be sold
In market place, that men might credit hold.
No charity, A fine fisher would catch all himself.
is found when fisher feeds
On all himself, and gives his fellows none
Alas poor souls, we angle in the reeds
And catch a frog, when all the fish is gone
Bullhead and loch, lies under little stone
But stones and sticks, will break our nets I dout
Before we bring, a dish of gudgins out.
The great good turns, Good turns are turned to fair holy water.
in court that thousands felt
Is turned to clear, fair holy water there
The scraps are small, that hungry hands have dealt
Spoil cannot spare, the paring of a pea^e
For snatch crust robs, alms baskets eury where
The poor so starues, or knows not what to do
And so I fear, shall silly suitors to.
The father will scarce speak for his son.
The father scarce, will speak for his own son
World waxes mute, when men should do some good
The stream is stopped, where water ought to run
We cast our nets, where fish creepes in the mud
And clime those trees, where bows will never bud
We take great pain, yet no good fruit enioies
For words are wind, and fills our ears with noies.
The soldier consumes himself with grief.
The soldier sits, and sighs to shake off grief
Whose wounds in war, of right claims great reward
Waits hard at heel, but finds small relief
Who least deserves, is always most prefard
Who brags and boasts, blind world does best regard
But some that lost, their blood in countries right
May kiss the post, and bid us all good night.
What charity, is that judge you that can
Who sees these things, so far past all redress
A lip wise world cares little for a man.
When lip-wise world, sets little by a man
What may fall out, of that a fool may guess
Each one shall have, his lot yea more or less
But charity, and fortune differ far
Between them two, we find a mortal war.
The one helps all, and loves a number still
Charity and fortune differ far.
The other hurts, or else prefers a few
And wise men find, no hold in her good will
For she is called, a most inconstant shrew
That with the sun, will waste away like dew
A summer flower, that withers in the frost
Coms softly on, and rides away in post.
As blind of sight, as ever Cupid was
For she looks not, on virtue any way
Nor wisdoms worth, Fortune favors many an ass.
but favors many an ass
For his smooth face, and peacocks feathers gay
But charity is, the only staff and stay
To all estates, for where she stoutly stands
She sets all free, and breaks bondage bands.
Forgiues great faults, and suffers many a wrong
She gives a badge, Charity forgiues and forgets injuries.
that eury christian wears
And in all worlds, her liurey lasts long
It guarded is, all round about with tears
And she her self, a branch of olive bears
In sign of peace, and mercy mixed with grace
That pity takes, of eurie rufull case.
This charity gives, as much as men may crave
And soon forgets, Charity has no end of her bounty.
the bounty she bestows
Takes great delight, the life of man to save
By virtue of, good turns that from her floes
Whose is sent like, the white and sweet red rose
For all her gifts, and graces bears such flowers
That makes poor men, to laugh when fortune lowres.
On charity, Charity gives few words but does many good deeds.
the hungry daily feeds
As lambs and sheep, in fruitful pasture live
She gives few words, where she bestoes good deeds
The more we need, the sooner will she give
As corn from chafe, is si^ted through the sieve
So she tries out, from dust and dross the gold
As wisdom does, the worth of men unfold.
Charity is the (...) and (...) shall be^^sled.
This charity, is first that favor finds
And shall be last, that wins our worlds good will
Begot by grace, and nu^st in noble minds
That stays and stands, upon their honor still
It Is seen far off, as torch is on an hill
Felt near at hand, and found out by the light
Which in dark days, does glad each good man's sight.
When fortunes wrath, has wounded many a wight
She brings a box, of balm to heal each sore
That makes sad mind, and heavy heart so light
It never thinks, on wretched chance no more
Charity conquers every where like a victor.
If charity, like victor goes before
Come after her, proud world with all thy braues
Like conqueror, she triumphs on her slaves.
But well away, and woe God wo^ the while
True charity, is faintly felt or found
She is of late, halfe-driuen in exile
Bad life would drive charity in exile.
Because bad life, lets cruelty abound
The world is full, of hollow hearts unsound
And mercy meets, with ruth scarce once a year
For rigors rage, does show such churlish cheer.
Men go transformed now a da^s.
Men walk abroad, transformd in sundry shapes
More monster like, than babes of Adams brood
Fearful to sight, like ugly owls and apes
That has of kind, no civil humane mood
Tigers in proof, nursed up with woluish food
For silly lambs, that does no butcher fear
They do devour, and in small pieces tear.
Greedy as guls, Some people are as greedy as guls.
and gapes for garbedge still,
Ravening like woolues, that murders sheep in fold
Subtle as fox, that never has his fill
Hedstrong and proud, and will not be controld
Currish as kite, ne gentle young nor old
Such cruel tricks, does alter so man's mind
That long they live, by craft and dies unkind.
Quarrels increase, Quarrels breeds mischief and bloodshed.
and combats have no end
Till blood be shed, and life and land be lost
Some thinks the bow, were better break than bend
On that consait, stands mighty manhood most
But charity, rides then away in post
And leaves in lash, behind her in some part
A heap of harms, and many a heavy heart.
Lust lives by spoil, Lust is a thief and robs us of life.
like thief that robs true men
Desires to eat, the hen and chickens all
Rauine and rage, prouls fast for profit then
So gets some cheat, though it be near so small
But lust is like, an image on a wall
Strike out the cole, that is but black of hue
Fair white and clean, appeers blurd wall to you.
Ore weening runs, beyond the course of wit
Presumpshon then, does set best foot before
And boldness knows, not where to stand nor sit
His lofty looks, Pride and presumption is bold as bl^nde baya^d.
prouokes his pride so sore
But when threed-bare, his bad spun cloth is wore
The world but laughs, to see bald bayard blind
With painted robes, patch up a stately mind.
In cloud unseen, new fanglenes would walk
New fanglenes is easily found out.
But he is spide, by old deep serching sight
Fine filed toongs, like parrets prate and talk
And wonder makes, of trifling matters light
This glorious crew, triumphs in moon shine night
But when clear day, such idols does disclose
World will point out, where eurie shadow goes.
Wilful heads hates good counsel.
Wild wilful heads, that all sound counsel hates
A careless course, of borrowed life does lead
Whose retchles race, still argues and debates
They soon forget, good lessons that they read
But when the foot, awrie the shue does tread
Down goes the heel, yea seam the sole and all
And so unawares, a man in mire may fall.
Ill custom Breeds abuse.
And stumbling often, makes some to snapper still
Use mastrie breeds, and custom pleads a law
Let bridle go, the horse will have his will
Much water scarce, will quench hot fire in straw
A stubborn child, that still does backward draw
Must needs be whipped, to make him fear the rod
So we are plagud, when we forget our God.
Two plagues past th^eatens a third.
Three sundry plagues, the wrath of God does show
The first is past, the second you may see
The third ye wot, the world too well does know
For that cuts down, corn, grass, and highest tree
The angry clouds will never calmie be
Till better life, seaise all our showers of rain
And Gods great grace, brings summer home again
Shame follows pride, Shame follows pride, and deart^ nipped sore.
and death comes after sin
Then famine k^ls, up thousands where it flies
They will take heed, that has well scourged bin
And fall to mend, their lives if they be wise
But in our world, such new found fashons rise
All frames not well, look into each man's ways
Small charity, is seen in these bad days.
When charity, Proud painted posts are rotten in the middle.
proud painted posts plucks down
To God and prince, great honor shall arise
When plainnes thriues, in court and civil town
Old troth will bid, farewell our newfound gise
Goodness will come, and so advance the wise
Dunses and dolts, shall stand beneath the bar
And pride shall blush, that does presume too far.
The least of most, makes most of his bad stuff
So leers and looks, as frighted were his wits
Is never well, Pride alubberly lout, looks like a monarke.
till pride be in his ruff
Than monarke like, on lofty seat he sits
(Whose scornful heart, is full of froward fits)
But speaks no word, for fear that bayard blind
Should plunge before, and yearke at him behind.
The woorst with best, The woorst with h^e heart, compares with the best.
compares and strives for place
As gold and glass, in worth wear all alike
Bears out his brags, with scowling brazen face
That cannot blush, no more than can black tike
He frowns so sore, he looks as he would strike
The crabbish ^arle, so cursed and cumbrous is
Then when he speaks, in school the scholars hiss.
A surly sire swells like a a toad.
The surly sire, sits swelling like a toad
That venom casts, on goodly herbs and flowers
Not pleased well, in house nor yet abroad
Nor seems to have, ne quiet days nor hours
When cheerful folk, does smile this churl he loures
A swarm of such, checkmates a man may see
If stagers come, where fresh fine fellows be.
A stately stalk thinks none like himself.
The stately stalks, that will ne stoup nor bend
Will speak no word, till first ye them salute
Holds head aloft, but down no look will lend
Fair blossomd trees, that brings forth no good fruit
Nay sickles sharp, that reaps up many a suit
Their harvest has, cut down the corn so clean
They leave in field, the poor no grain to gleane.
A crafty crew are wilier than the fox.
The crafty crew, more wily than old Fox
Runs flocking on, as sheep to fold does fly
Takes what they may, and gives but scorns and mocks
They want no wiles, within the wind to lie
Drains rivers up, and drinks great fountains dry
At first rebound, strikes back the tennis ball
(From those that plays) as though they would have al.
Cun^ing lads are ^s quick a^ a ^ee.
The cunning lads, that creepes through auger holes
As quick as Be, seeks honey eury where
Feeds body fat, but cares not for their soles
Their snatching shows, what greedy minds they bear
Who lends the poor, ne loving look nor ear
Brings empty paunch, to mouth up all alone
Skornes and disdain, to fling a dog a bone.
Preferments were, Preferments are not got with shooting toe short.
the marks whereat we shot
But past our aim; and reach those marks do stand
For ere we draw, the bow the game is got
Or else the string, does break within our hand
Our plain prick-shafts, were wont to cleave a wand
But now so blunt, and flat the heads are worn
When archer shoots, lewd world laughs him to scorn.
They hit the white, They hit the white that have good hap.
that never shot before
No mark men sure, nay bunglars in their kind
A sort of swads, that scarce can shoot twelve score
Nor has no skill, to know where blows the wind
Lo thus you see, that fortune is but blind
To give them hap, whose knowledge is so bace
They scarce deserve, a simple pedlars place.
Each man prefers, Each man prefers his servants and friends.
his friends and servants both
The Queens poor men, finds few to help their hap
I pray you who, does speak for plain Tom-troth
Which plies them all, with curchie, knee and cap
His old crab tree, is burnd with thunder clap
Black are the bows, that once grew green and gai^
The rune of time, does threaten his decaie.
How should men live, that have no chinks to spend
Steel now lacks strength, to strike out fire from flint
Hold fast the gnoff, will neither give nor lend
Hope-well can get, Hope well can get no money from the mint.
no money from the mint
All things we have, are set now at a stint
Nip-crust the carle, has crept so near the crumbs
That nothing scapes, from hungry hucksters thumbs.
Serve long spends much and gets little.
Serve long wait well, spend much and little get
May be compard, to walking horse for naught
Brings many men, in danger and in det
For wit and time, thereby is deerlie bought
As when a drudge, all day has truly wrought
And goes to bed, vnpleasd or paid aright
He thinks days toil, brings beggrie home at night.
Who makes haste to amend any miss.
I pray you who, makes haste to mend this miss
The man in the moon, as soon as any one
By which cold sign, true love and charities
Grown now more cold, than ice or marble stone
As dogs do strive, and snarre about a bone
So for good turns, the people throng and thrust
So thick God wot, we know not who to trust.
New natures alters good old conditions.
These natures new, does argue plagues most strange
To come if now, No famine here were had
For as we do, our old good manners change
So world I fear, henceforth will be too bad
When sober men, grows savage wild and mad
Look for small rule, and order here below
Our Judgment day, thereby draws near I trow.
Not one does right, search and you shall see.
Not one does right, with weights when we are waid
All are as light, in balance as a fly
For out of frame. are all when all is said
Both they below, and those that would sit hie
But chiefly such, as use to sell and bie
All sciences, yea all of eury art
Are stepped on stage, and coms to play their part.
Search eury art, Artificers and all are light in the balance.
artificers and all
In charity, behold them as they are
And you shall see, their conshence is so small
That nere a one, for charity does care
Do neither church, queer, court, nor country spare
And tell me plain, what charity is there
God grant these days, true love be any where.
Can plagues cease then, Plagues will not cease till bad life be reformed
when eury living wight
His neighbor plagues, as far as power may stretch
In balance just, not one man ways aright
All use desait, and ly on guard and watch
He lives not now, that can not scrat and snatch
Men are no saints, world is a world to thend
So folly does, his wilful faults defend.
The man of Ind, can never change his skin
Nor yet the cat, of mountain change her hue
So those wild buds, Wild buds brings forth no good fruit.
that ever bad have bin
Can never bear, good fruit nor blossom nue
A bitter taste, will never go from rue
A wicked life, can show no vertous deed
No more than may, a flower spring from a weed.
What keeps good course, Neither world not weather keeps good course.
the weather alters often
The heavens seem, to show some sudden change
The winds wax shrill, and loud they blow aloft
Familiar friends, for trifles gro full strange
Wit waxes wild, whose wont was not to range
So out of tune, each thing is wrested now
Because abuse, corrupts good nature throw.
If summer once, in twenty years grows hot
(Whose warmth reuiues, both fruit and flowers each where)
Cold winters blast, bites near the bones ye wot
Cold pleases few, for cold each one does fear
Why world grows cold, and cold is hard to bear
Neither world nor weather keeps good course.
Cold weather makes, warm conshence cold I troe
So charity, and goodness cold does grow.
Cold weather or world pleases none.
Cold is the air, the open field and town
Then court must needs, wax colder than it was
It seems wise world, cares not for vain renown
As world does come, a Gods name let it pass
Though charity, grow thrice as cold as glass
A warmer time, in better tune may bring
This hard cold age, when comes a summer spring.
Cold air kills sometime sound and sick.
Cold snow is not, so good as luke warm milk
Hot sun does melt, cold frost and cakes of ice
Thick frise surmounts, a thin cloak linde with silk
Furde gown exceeds, cold cloth of preshous price
Warm love lasts long, cold favor grows full nice
With warm good will, we win great wordlie good
The fire burns best, where most ye clap on wood.
Cold love quickly takes leave.
Both flame and fire, goes out in weather cold
Where neither coals, nor wood mantaines the heat
And heat is that, contents both young and old
For in the same, our sweet delight is great
Most men feeds best, with good warm drink or meat
Cold breeds worst blod, and hardly does digest
Because cold things, lies belching long in breast.
Cold fortune kills, Cold fortune kills any man living.
the strongest man that lives
Cold countnance cuts, the throat ere we be ware
Cold poison ^onke, a quick dispatch it gives
Cold cra^^s dries up, the senses where they are
Cold lims wax lame, and breeds diseases rare
Thus cold mars all, then warmth God send us now
That eurie part, of man feel comfort throw.
Cold food is faint, Cold food is comfortles and hard to digest.
unto weak stomachs still
Warm broths keeps health, in perfect sound estate
Warm days we wish, cold bitter air is ill
Cold blasts be naught, sharp blustering storms we hate
Sweetly sun shines, in world early or late
Cold quickly caught, goes seldom soon away
And long cold nights, kills some before the day.
Cold dry hard fro^^, makes thousands seek for fire
Warm meat gives spreet, to either sick or sound
Cold hungry baits, Cold hungry baits may kill a horse.
makes many a horse to tire
Warm clouts and clothes, does comfort eurie wound
No fruit thriues well, where cold does much abound
The warmth does joy, both spring and fall of leaf
Makes dead things quick, delights both dum and deaf
Yea blind and lame, and all that life does bear
Are glad of heat, then cold is out of grace
Cold words God wot, Cold words makes a man desperate.
when meaning scarce is there
Kills many a man, in court or any place
O would to God, warm deeds did show his face
That charity, her whole effect may show
On those that needs, which knows not where to go
A colder season in all sorts was never seen.
A colder time, in world was never seen
The skies do lowre, the sun and moon wax dim
Summer scarce known, but that the leaves are green
The winters waste, drives water ore the brim
Upon the land, great flotes of wood may swim
Nature thinks scorn, to do her duty right
Because we have, displeasde the Lord of light.
Cold words and works makes many a heavy heart.
Cold works, cold words, cold world and al things cold
Shows death draws near, and then a deep cold grave
Such hard cold hap, may make a young man old
Or old gray beard, become a gall^e slave
Well let them loose, that can ne^ in nor save
The state of man, on strange hap hazard lies
As one falls down, so does another rise.
If charity, would once bespread hirraies
As Phoebus shows, abroad his shining beams
Cold winter may bring some summer days.
Or winter cold, would bring some summer days
And rid us soon, from all these great extremes
Then she dies not, but happily sleeps and dreams
Now waken her, that have most power to speak
I have taken cold, and so my voice grows weak.
You whose clear speech, does loud as trumpet sound
And may command, the world, the skies and stars
And rules at beck, the massy earth so round
Sets orders down, and can make peace and wars
And has the force, to break big iron bars
Warm love (...) awaken charity again.
Call charity, fot love once home again
That she may hear, her people poor complain.
My breath but bores, The author^ breath is to cold (...) do any good.
a hole within the air
My date near don, calls for a shrouding sheet
My dark dim days, looks for no weather fair
Mine eyes can scarce, look to my stumbling feet
My wounted muse, forsakes my drowping spreet
My books and scroules, and all that I have wrote
Hides now their heads, as I were clean forgot.
When aged years, Aged years shows death (...) ^t hand.
shows death amid my face
My words are of, small credit in this plite
My hap and hope, is in a better place
Wherefore of world, I plainly speak and write
And ere I go, discharge my conshence quite
To win the wise, and loose the fonder sort
That unto quick, nor dead yields good report.
The wise well won, Labor is well ^^ stowed when wise men are (...).
ways each thing as it ought
Mistakes no term, nor sentence wrests awrie
The fond will read, awhile but cares for naught
Yet casts on each, man's works a frowning eye
This neither treats, of matters low not hie
But finds a mean, that each good meaning might
In all true means, take charity aright.
FINIS.
A PRAISE OF POETRY.
Imprinted at London, by Ar. Hatfield, for William Holme.

1595.

A praise of Poetry, some notes thereof drawn out of the Apology, the noble
minded Knight, sir Phillip Sidney wrate.
WHen world was at the very woorst
And vice did much abound
And for offense the earth was cursed
Yet charity was found.
Among the wise and worthy sort
Who ever had good chance
with treble fame, by their report
True virtue did advance.
The Poets and Philosophers
Stepped first on stately stage
And played their parts with hazards great
In every world and age.
In eury age while wits of men
Could judge the good from bad
Who gat the gift of tongue or pen
Of world great honor had.
Good Poets were in hie esteem,
When lea^ning grew in price
Their virtue and their verse did seem
A great rebuke to vice.
With blunt base people of small sense
They fall now in disdain
But Sydneyes book in their defense
Does raise them up again.
And sets them next Divines in rank
As members meet and fit
To strike the worlds blind boldness blanke
And whet the bluntest wit.
Here follows Histories good store
That much thereof shall tell
If pains may purchase thanks therefore
My hope is answered well.
Amphyon and Orpheus Poets and excellent musitions.
AMphyons gift and grace was great
In Thebes old stories say
And beasts and birds would leave their meat^
To hear Orpheus play.
Liuius, Andronicus, and Ennius.
In Rome were three of peereles fame
That florisht in their days
Which three did bear the only name
Of knowledge, skill and praise.
Dant, Bocace, and Petrarke.
In Italy of yore did dwell
Three men of spechall spreete
Whose gallant styles did sure excel
Their verses were so sweet.
Mar^ot, Ronsa^t, and d^ Ba^tas.
In France three more of fame we find
Whose books do well declare
They beautifide their starely mind
With inward virtues rare.
Go^re, Chaufer, (...) the noble earl of S^^^^e.
In England lived three great men
Did Poetry advance
And all they with the gift of pen
Gave glorius world a glance.
In Scotland find we other twain Dauy Lindzey and Buckananus.

Were writers of good worth
Whose studies through their Poets vain
Brought many verses forth.
In Ireland to this present time They honor and make much of their ^imers.

Where learning is not mich
With Poetry in verse or rhyme
Their language they enrich.
In Wales the very remnant yet In Wales they call their rimers Bardes.

Of Britain blood and race
They honor men of speshall wit
And gives a Poet grace.
Albinus long that rained here Albinus loved poetry much.

Made verses in his youth
And in his age as does appear
With verse auancst the truth.
Among the savage Indians still The rude Indians make much of their rimers.

(Who knows no civil thing)
They honor writers of some skill
Their parents lives to sing.
Among the anshent noble Danes The Danes and Saxons had many poets among them.

And Saxsons long ago
We read of many Poets names
Whose worthy wits did flo.
The grave wise learned men of Greece In Greece their best philosophers at the
first became poets.

Durst never show their art
Till those Philosophers presumd
To play the Poets part.
Some sang in verse, their natural
Thales, Empedocles, and Parmenides.
Philosophy we find
And in sweet songs heroical
Expressed their secret mind.
Pithagoras and Phosillides.
So moral counsels vttred were
In that same self sweet sort
Thus Poets flourisht eury where
As stories makes report.
Torteus.
And marshall matters in those days
Were song and set aloft
So some the art of war did raise
Unto the skies full often.
Sibillas prophesies in verse
Were always vttred well
The oracels of Delphos to
In verse would woonders tell.
Solon that wrate the fable of the Atlantic Island.
In policies wise Solon played
The Poet sundry ways
Good things were better soong than said
Which gaind immortal praise.
Plato a divine philosopher did stoup to poetry.
Plato took Solons works in hand
And played the Poet right
And set that Atlantike Island
Full plain before our sight.
Herodotus.
The Book of Herodotus bore
A famous title fine
(Yea such as none did give before)
Of all the muses nine.
Dominician was a Poet rare Dominician Vaspasians son, as Pliny says was an
excellent poet.

And did therein excel
So many princes now there are
That loves Poetry well.
Three conquerours of mighty power Alexander, Caesar and Scipio.

Gave Poets such a grace
That they would never frown not lowre
On them in any case.
As Plutarke says, Alexander Phoreus wept at a tragedy.
a tyrant wept
A tragedy to hear
Who saw his murthring mind thereby
As in a glass full clear.
Amid a great revolt in Rome Menenus Agrippa a philosopher made peace among the
people in an uproar.

A worthy Poet stood
And told of body and the mind
A tale that did much good.
Two Poets turned a tyrants heart Simonides and Pyndarius made Hiero a just king.

From rigor unto ruth
And wrought him with their wits and art
To favor right and truth.
Nathan did feign a tale indeed Nathan spoke of a lamb ungraciously taken from
his bosom.

To David when he fell
Whereon the king took such great heed
He saw his folly well.
In David's Psalms true miter floes David and Solomon divine poets.

(And songs of Sallomon)
Where great delight and pleasure groes
Are worthy looking on.
Platoes dialog called Ion.
A dialogue that Plato made
Gives Poets great renown
Brings each rare wit to sun from shade
To wear the laurel crown.
Lelius a Roman and Socrates both were poets.
True stories old with new delight
Shall fill your hearts and ^ares
For they of Poets praises write
Their books good witness bears.
James the first that was king of Scotland, and K. James the sixth now reigning,
great poets.
If aunshent authors and great kings
No credit gets herein
Darke-sight sees not no stately things
That does great glory win.
The Greek Socrates put Aesops fables into verse, and Aristotle wrate the art
of poetry.
Pluck up clear judgment from the pit
Of poor espreet and sense
And wipe the slime from slubbred wit
And look on this defense.
Emperors, kings, captains, and Senators were poets, and favored the art.
That Sydney makes, a matchles work
A matter fresh and new
That did long while in silence lurk
And seldom came to view.
Adrian and Sophocles great poets.
He calls them Poets that embrace
True virtue in her kind
And do not run with rimes at bace
With wanton blotted mind.
^f our (...) me, the pa^^ ^ poetry, Robert ^ng of Cic^ll and (...) great
Frances ^ng of France.
All idle verse he counts but vain
Like cracks of thorns in fire
Or summer showrs of sleete or rain
That turns dry dust to mire.
These rural rymes are but the scum
And froth that flies from seas Cardinal Berabus and Bibiena.

Or does from some sharp humor come
That breeds a new disease.
In brain that beats about the skull Famous teachers and preachers, Beza and
Melancton.

And so brings forth a toye
(When musse or moon is at the full)
Of pains or pleasing joy.
Like long wingd hawk, Learned philosophers Fracastorius and Scaliger.
does Poet fore
Ore mountain or hie trees
And loud as cannon can he rore
At each vice that he sees.
His scope as hie as reasons reach Great and good orators Pontanus and Muretus.

May clime in order due
Not to give counsel nor to teach
But to write fancies new.
Of this or that as matter moons And beyond all these, the hospital of France
being builded on virtue, gave poets a singular commendation.

A well disposed mind
That vice does hate and virtue loves
And he good cause does find.
So ruling pen as duties bounds
Be kept in eury part
For when the Poet trumpet sounds
It must be done by art.
As though a sweet consort should play Alexander kept the books of Homer in
(...) his Jewel casket.

On instruments most fine
And show their music eury way
With dainty notes divine.
Menander the comicke poet being sent for by ambassadors of Macedonia and
Aegipt preferred the conscience of learning before kingly fortunes.
Each string in tune as concord were
The guide of all the glee
Whose harmony must please the ear
With music frank and free.
The Poets Lyra must be strung
With wire of silver sound
That all his verses may be sung
With maidens in a round.
Augustus Caesar wrate familiar epistles unto Horace, which Horace in his life
was advanced to the tribuneship of soldiers, and when he died he left Augustus
Caesar his heir.
So chaste and harmles should they be
As words from preachers voice
With spiced speech in each degree
Wherein good men rejoice.
Not farsed full of sollies light
That bears ne poies nor weight
But flying clear in air like flight
Whose force mounts up an height.
And seems to pearce the cloudie skies
Such poets Sidney likes
Whose gentle wind makes dust arise
As hie as morice pikes.
Virgill entering the college of poets in Rome, the rest of the poets there did
more reverence to him than to the emperor, and when he came into the senate the
senators likewise did so.
That lifts aloft the soldiers heart
Who does advance the same
And bends his body in each part
Thereby to purchase fame.
The sword and lance of marshall men
Their Lions courage shows
The poets with their wit and pen
Tells where their fury flows.
They both are known as soon as seen
As things of great import
The one may very far ore ween
The other in some sort.
Stands on his honor sundry ways
And offreth life therefore
The poet seeks no more but praise
As poets did of yore.
Whose words struck dead the stoutest grooms David sung the Liricke verses to
his harp and those ebrue songs consisted of diverse feet and unequal numbers,
sometime in Iambikes running other while.

That ever were in place
And sweeped clean like new made broomes.
The foulest cause or case.
As water washes each thing white
And soap might scour with all
The canker of foul worlds delight
(More sharp than bitter gall.)
So poets with plain terms makes clean
The soulest conshence lives
And by good words from vice does weane
(Through council that it gives.)
The childest wit and churlisht mind Insaphicks swelling again in half a foot
amiably halting.

Lo then how poets may
Both alter manners and bad kind
To frame a better way.
Of heavens and the highest throne Solomon in the gardens of Engadda framed
songs to his harp which then was a heavenly music.

Where God himself does sit
Good poets still should treat alone
To show their flowing wit.
Jeremy wrate his funeral lamentations in saphycks long before Simonides the
Greek poet.
As by their muse they carried were
Beyond our sight or view
Into a fine and purer air
Or speshall climat new.
Where all things are as clean as gold
From furnace to the stamp
So poets should this world behold
And shine as clear as lamp.
Isaias wrate sacred Odes and holy verses, and for remembering the mysteries of
god therein, a tyrant king caused him to be sawed a sunder.
That light does give to eury eye
Which does in darkness dwell
And glory show of heavens hie
To damned spreets of hell.
Which darkness in a dungeon keeps
From sight of virtues lore
Where ignorance in slumber sleeps
Like dunse for evermore.
The song of Sydrack and his fellows in the hot flame was in verse.
Sir Philip Sydney praises those
Whose waking wits does see
The depth and ground of verse or prose
And speaks with judgment free.
Moises by some men is thought the first deviser of verse, and his sister Marie
devised the exa^eter, and by it to have glorified Iehoua.
Of all the matters under sun
Both secrets hie and low
And over them with pen can run
As far as skill can go.
Sift eurie word and sentence well
And cast away the bran
To show the kernel, crack the shell
In pieces now and than.
That eurie one shall taste the nut
Or see where worm has fed
And shoot an arrowe at the but
And draw it to the head.
Like archer that can hit the white Ausonius a french man and poet,
schoolmaster to Gracianus the Emperor was a^ orator and consul of Rome
therefore.

And win the wager straight
With cunning knowledge and delight
And subtle sense and slaight.
Which looks into the world so round
And searches eury place
To see what may be easlie found
Or spoke of each man's case.
To rhyme and roue in retchles sort
He counted revel rash
As whip does make a horse to snort
When carter gives a lash.
So ballet makers does with wind Homer writes that Achilles son of Peleus was
a singular liricke poet, singing and plaing the noble deeds of cheeftaines.

Stir up a hiue of bees
And of the abundance of vain mind
With words in air he flees.
As though it were a thunder crack
That never brings forth rain
But daily threatens rune and wrack
With rattling rumors vain.
Vain commedies that stirs up vice
He did condemn and hate
He holds that babble of no price
That does infect a state.
Linus of Thebes a most ancient poet, he was the son of Mercury and wrate the
course of the sun, moon, and spheres in excellent verse.
Corrupts with words good manners still
Offends both eye and ear
Brings in loose life by customs ill
And takes away true fear
Of God and man, such Poets lewd
Were banished and exilde
Because with foul condishons shreud
Their country they defilde.
Tiberius Nero the Emperor a poet, and Lucan his tresorer a poet on a public
theater they showed ^he tragedy Orpheus.
Good Poets were in eury age
Made of and nourish^ well
They were the flowers of gardens gaie
That gave the goodly smell.
The true forewarners of great things
That after did befall
The joy of godly virtuous kings
And honest subjects all.
Our age and former fathers days
(Leave Goore and Chauser out)
Has brought forth here but few to praise
Search all our soil about.
Adrianus, Augustus Emperor a poet and preferrer of poetry.
Yet of all those that newly wrate
In prose or verse of late
Let Sydney wear (for style of state)
The garland lawreate.
Iulianus Empeperor and Caius Julius Caesar.
His books makes many books to blush
They show such sense and wit
Our dribbers shoots not worth a rush
When he the mark does hit.
His phrase is sifted like fine flower Oppianus of great nobility.

That makes manchet bread
Sweet eury where and nothing sour
That flows from Sydneyes head.
Sweet dew dropped out of Sydneyes quill Sextus Aurelius Propertius one of the
Dedicie.

As rain great moisture shoes
And from his muse there did distill
A liquor sweet as rose.
Aquintesence, Scenica a spani^ knight Neros schoolmaster.
a spirit of wine
Naie Nectar better namde
A breuage for the Gods divine
Of compounds made and framde.
That whosoever drinks thereon Sophocles and Pericles.

Immortal shall be made
His books he left to look upon
When we in worldly shade
Sits mumping eury hour of day ^milius (...), a man of noble parentage.

And scarce knows where we are
Our brains like bucke does stand at baie
Beset about with care.
Of this or that when Sydneyes books Anacreon of Theios with Pollucrates king
of the Samiana.

Calls up a drowping ghost
For whosoever thereon looks
(With worldly troubles tossed)
He shall find quietness thereby
And Christian comfort great
Worth all the treasure under sky
It climes to Jove's hie seat.
A^atus all his life time lived with An^ig^nus.
And sits among the Angels sweet
Where psalms and himnes are sung
And all base humors under fee^
Are out of favor flung.
Lucius Cecilli^^, C^sar, play ^^lo^e.
The poets that can clime the clouds
Like ship boy to the top
When sharpest storms do shake the shroudes
Sets ware to sale in shop.
Cirus the poet treasorer of the Emperor Theodocius, and Apatrician.
Of heavenly things that earthly men
Can scarcely understand
Did not our Chausers golden pen
(That beautifide this land.)
Publius and ^aberius companions with Julius Caesar.
Reach to the sun and highest star
And touched the heavens all
A poets knowledge goes so far
That it to mind can call.
Arian the poet of Periander king of Corinth.
Each wonder since this world began
And what was seen in skies
A poet is no common man
He looks with Argoes eyes.
Ra^ullides with Iulianus the Emperor.
Like Linx throw steel or stony walls
No secret scapes his sight
Of future time and what befalls
In world by day or night.
Claudian^s his tomb^ ^^^ored b^ ^^nor^^s and A^cadius Emperors.
He sees and sometimes writes thereof
When scornful people scowle
And makes of earnest words a scoff
Or calls ^aire speeches foul.
Our country breeds up Poets still
As grass springs from good ground
For there does flourish learned skill
Where knowledge does abound.
Look what our elders wits did sow
Or left behind in heaps
Our age and harvest people mow
Or with sharp sickle reapes.
The seed of sense, fair fruit brings forth
In feeld a thousand fold
And is in value price and worth
More preshous than the gold.
What can be counted foul or clean
But Poets thereon talk
Yet thousands knows not what they mean
When they in cloud will walk.
As from the fountain water floes
(Conuaid by gushing pipe)
So from the pen of Poet goes
Fine words and sentence ripe.
That each good mind may well digest
As sweet as honey sure
His terms are taken with the best
If verse be neat and pure.
As riders whisking wand does fear Aeschiron in hi^ whole military
expedition, ^amiliar with Alexander.

The horse whereon he sits
So wrangling people eurie where
At verses vex their wits.
Masonides honored of Adrian the Emperor.
If any writer touch the gall
In pastime be it sed
Then down coms tressels house and all
Upon the poor man's head.
Yet wise men will good words embrace
And take each thing in worth
And give each word and line a grace
That poets do set forth.
Ariosto liked of all good wits.
Divine du Bartas merits (...)
Most excellent verse he wrate
So sundry writers in our days
Have done full well of late.
In Spensers moral fairie Queen
And Daniels rosy mound
If they be throwly waid and seen
Much matter may be found.
Torquator Tasso an Italian knight and poet laurea^ who departed from oblivion
to immortality this last April 1595. whose memory shall never vanish.
One Barnes that Petrarks scholar is
May march with them in rank
A learned Templers name I mis
Whose pen deserves great thank.
A number more writs well indeed
They spring up newly now
As gazing world their works shall reed
So shall world praise them throw.
But sure my noble Sidneies skill
I never can forget
To him my service and good will
Shall ever dwell in de^.
Of learned lore the only light Mounsiour D^uereux a young Bishop at this day
living in France, accounted now the singular man in Europ for verse and
po^ticall devises.

Which blazed like lamp most clear
And as a star in moon shine night
Could under cloud appeer.
Seemd dim and dark to dazzled eyes
But fair and bright to those
That understood the stately gise
Of learned verse or prose.
Could crack the nut of ^a^ ^hell
And show the kernel plain
For by his works who notes them well
In world he lives again.
The book that does of poets treat Sir Phillip Sidney to appology.

In golden robes so shines
It triumphs still with honor great
Among the best divines.
Which book decked up in trim attire
Of authors wise and grave
In matters of mine own desire
Great light to poetry gave.
And made me write of poets praise
Thus so to starrie sky
My Sidneies honor here I raise
As far as fame can fly.
FINIS.
My next Book comes out shortly: dedicated to my Honorable worthy friend,
Master HENRY BROOK, son and heir to the noble Lord COBHAM.


