A pleasant Laborinth called Churchyardes Chance, framed on Fancies, uttered
with verses, and written to give solace to eury well disposed mind: wherein
notwithstanding are many heavy Epitaphes, sad and sorrowful discourses and
such a multitude of other honest pastymes for the season (and passages of
wit) that the reader therein may think his time well bestowed. All which
works for the pleasure of the world, and recreation of the worthy, are
dedicated to the right honorable sir Thomas Bromley knight, lord Chancelour
of Enlande.

Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kyngston. 1580.



To the right honorable Sir Thomas Bromley Knight, Lord Chancellor of
England, one of the Queen's Majesty's privy Council, Thomas Churchyard
wishes great blessedness of life, continuance of virtue, and perfect
felicity.
AS custom and continuance of time, bredes a law in Nature, and co^uertes
man's mind to many a laudable exercise, so most honorable, the good will
of men is never unoccupied, if either honest labor, or stdious diligence, may
please those great personages, that affection and duty commaundes us to
honor. And as it has bin (through time out of mind) an ancient manner in the
beginning of a new year, to present unto friends (and such as we best
favor) some sign of freendshipp by way of new years gifts: so I trust the
manner so mutche commended among the wise, and so long used with all sorts of
people, (for the purchasyng of good liking) shall excuse my over great
boldness, and make my simple gift accepted. For as I understand, and my
betters far have reported, it is not the valewe of the presents, nor the
ritchnesse of the Jewels that makes our gifts welcome, and bringes the giver
in the good opinion of the worthies in this world: but it is the virtuous
intent of the mind, that makes free passage to that which is presented, and
causes as well little trifles to be esteemed, as great treasure to be made
of. If otherwise the worthiness of things were to be judged, my triflyng
book might blushe in my behalf: and the vain verses therein would rather
argue my disgrace, then further my good fame. And therefore my good Lord,
since every man's gift is received and waied, according to the good will of the
giver: I have this present new years day, presented unto your good Lordshipp
good Chance, and so with this good Chance salutyng your honor, (with all
seruisable duties,) I honor your Lordshipps virtues, and proceed to the
purpose of my matter. The people of this world (whose sondrie wits and
judgments, looks deeply into the devises of the writers in our age) if they
would straightly and narrowly behold, how busy I have bin in setting out books
(and printyng of pamfletts) might paraduenture make a wonder of my wearisome
works, for that many words has bin spent to little profit, either of my
Country, or commodity to my self, because my small learning and capacity,
could never reche to any great knowledge, nor search out the ground of any
profounde seeret or science. But how so ever my works may be construed, my
pen has kept me from slothe and Idelnesse, and little has bin lost by my
study and labors. For friends and fauourars has bin gotten through
diligence: and time has bin entertained in much contentation of mind. And
though it was my Chance to light on a pleasant disposition in making of
verses: (when others happened by Fortunes election on a multitude of
benifites,) yet blessed is the Chance that breeds merry thoughts, and
vnlodes the heart and hedde of a number of heavy cogitations. For though small
ability and simple calling, brings no great reputation and credit: yet it
sits free from the bitter blaste of Fortunes tempests. When the minds of
the mighty are shocked, and shaken with the blusteryng storms of worlds
unstableness. And though my Chance was to trauaill abroad to seek after
Fortune, whiles others at home found themselves happy: yet being so smally
prefarred by Chance every where, I am neither troubled with her mutabilitie,
nor driven to give her thanks, for any good turn she has done me. And yet
my Chance is indifferent, that both in wars and peace (possessyng my little
portion) I have seen thousands depart from this world, and suddenly taken
from their abondance. My chance is to be in court well known, and mutche made
of, though smally considered or advanced. My Chance is to live awhile and
write Epitaphes, Sonets and sedules on many a worthy personage: whiles my life
and footesteps, draws the body to his long home, and leads the restless
days to the quiet grave. And so as Chance has fallen out, and allotted me by a
bond of causes (through the original and ground of all goodness) the pleasure
of pen and the pain of study, even so in like manner I gladly play out my
part on the stage in this toilesome, and tragical pilgrimage, where nothing
eases our labors so mutche, as the sweet contentatio^ of mind. But to what
purpose trouble I your honorable judgment and gravity, with the rehersall of
trifles, or why does rashenesse in so bold a manner, dedicate such a work
(scarce worthy the looking on) to such a worthy Magistrate, whose wisdom
may disdain the reading of so simple a discourse. The trothe is my right good
Lord, this present is offered as a piece of a mean, to pass away the time,
amid great affairs, and weighty causes, which with light matters finds
recreation, and by the invention of pretty devised sportes: the study and care
of commonweal, seems less tedius and troublesome. For the mind wearied
with over long labors, and sad motions of the spirit (that through
continuance, may dull the senses) is sharpened and made better at
commandment, when change of pastymes, with some pleasant exercises has
eased the body, and refreshed the memory: My verses God wot, are void of
such divine virtue. And I wantyng the grace of Mercury, or Pipe of Appollo,
presumes to far to please the ears of Minerua, with the rash sound of
rusticall Music. But though the harmony be not so sweet and delicate, as is
to be wished, the desire to do well, is the instrument only, that may bring
such delight, which may for ever purchase good acceptance. And for that to
the art of Music and harmony, belongs several sorts of parts, to make
good concordance, I have tuned all my notes and songs worthy the hearing,
into one kind of voice and order. Meaning that where many a piece of descant is
to be seen (and some iarres may happen by misliking of discordes) yet a
number of parts soundyng together, may cover the faults and imperfectio^s of
an ignorant Musition. And because in the sweet soil of Salop (in which
parties your Lordshippe was nourished) which seat I honor of nature, and
took some savor and taste of Science in, the gladder are my muses to reverence
with verses, a special spark and spectacle of the country I was borne in,
either with Musical melody, or Poetical pastymes and passages, delated for
pleasure and delight, and dedicated where I desire my duetifull good will may
be embraced. The matters I treat of, are written of such sondrie humors and
subjects, that they are more to be redd for the variety of words, then for
the goodness of the verses: and the cause why and wherefore I dedicate such
a matter to your Lordship, is for that I would be sorry that my days and years
should be spent, with the loss of time, and that my labor and study well
meant, should be forgotten and cast in a corner, for want of the printing. The
strange motions and manner of the writing shows nothing but the nature of man's
fancies, that never continues in one kinds of consait. The occasions of so
many several discourses, rose but on the innumerable devises of the head, that
ever in one point or other, by imagination is occupied. And the whole sum
and substance of that which is written, is but to publish to the world, that
ill is better to be meanly exercised in honest pastymes, then basely bent and
given to barraine slothe and Idelnesse. Thus trustyng your good Lordship will
take in good part, a part of the portion that from the heavens is given me: I
present unto your hands this new year, some of mine old labors and studies,
Printed al bound in one new volume, for such as pleases to buy them. And so
as best becomes me (and duty commaundes) I remain a well willer to your
honor during my life, most willyngly at commandment.

Thomas Churchyard.

Churchyardes Chance.
My Lady of Lennoyes graces Epitaphe.
YOU noble dames of greatest birth,
whose fame to clouds would fly.
On this cold cors with warm good will,
bow down your iudgyng eye.
To see how flesh and blood must fall,
to dust when race is run:
And worldly brute, and honors blaste,
shall end where it begone.
If stately name, or high renown,
might make her body live:
Or Princes blood, to life and breath, might here a patente give.
This Lady had not tasted death, nor felt in sondrie things:
Such crossyng chance, and froward fate, as to her grave she brings,
Was never wight, with troubles toste, so sore and past them so:
For in her breast from tender years, a gulffe of greef did floe.
Scan that which best, can skill of woe, her sorrows were so great:
That when I way a dram thereof, my face and brows do sweat.
But though she found her fortune hard, a stayed mind she bore:
A worthy hedde where sober wit, by heaps lay hid in store.
Her gesture showed from whence she came, her words most grave and wyes
And honors beam, like burning Lamp, did blase amid her eyes.
A presence that could friends command, and hold her foes full mute:
A noble heart where bounties budds, did blome and bear good fruit.
What needs more words to prove a trothe, so rare her virtues were:
That who presumes, to hit them right, may miss the mark I fere.
As you that mourn, are cladde with black, in white her soul does shine:
Transformd from flesh to angels kind, or sacred shape divine.
Where fortunes threate, ca^ do no harm, nor worldly foil she fears
And each good ghost in glory great, does make an end of tears.
Her life my gain, her death my loss, her favor helped my state:
Her last farewell leaves friends behind, to wail the loss too late.
FINIS.
An Epitaphe of sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, late Lord Keeper.
THE lodestarre that good Pilotts likt,
crept under cloud of late:
A sudden storm has knapt in two,
a staff of public s^ate.
Out of our goodly golden Ryng, is fallen a precious stone:
The land that such a Jewel lacks, has cause to morn and moan.
The babes that sees their parents dye, of duty sheds some tears,
But when a Pillar falls down, that countries burden bears.
The common wealth does bide a shocke, and joints in sonder shake:
If not in stead of ancient propp, a new defense we make.
A father to all forward wits, who fostred law and right:
A Sun that shone through highest clouds, yet gave below great light.
Who will not wail that knows the want: well England such a glass:
Shall seldom shine in thee again, as worthy Bacon was.
A flood of sense and sugared sap, came flowyng from his brain:
Ne Tulles tongue, nor Petracks pen, nor stout wise Catoes vain.
May not surmount the philed phrase, and reche of Bacons hedd:
His voice was smothe as Organe pipe, and look what Bacon sedd.
Was held for Law and judgment great, the sentence was so sweet:
The words were of so deep a fetch, and sprung from such a sprete.
He spent no speech nor words in waste, and where his promise past:
Performance hasted out of hand, and followd on as fast.
To God, to Prince, and Justice rules, a great regard he took:
Not on the man, but on the cause, and matter would he look.
Disposde and bente to do much good, but namely unto those:
To whom dame virtues learned lore, did gifts of grace disclose.
His countries care cutts of his days, and brings the^ dim dark night:
That wisely cannot way the weight, and worth of such a wight.
He lives in laud and lantern like, he lastes with blasyng fame:
We die, and world wears out our praise, where shines his noble name.
Most noble are those burning lamps, most clerest light they shoe:
That leaves a torche which gives us light, when hence from us they go.
FINIS.
Sir Hugh Pauletts Epitaphe.
NO verse a vailes, ne tears may serve,
to wail the want at full:
My wits are weak, my words but bare
my pen but base and dull.
To frame in form and stately style,
the lines I ought to write:
I find my muse overcome with cares,
my reason banishe quite.
My hedde so fraught with cold conceits, of news I know full well:
That I had rather cry and rore, and shrillie houle and yell.
Then treat of dreadful deaths despite, who daiely does devour:
The noblest fruits of Natures mould, and pluckes the purest flower.
Death neither looks on men's renown, nor who may best be spard:
But like a Thief stealls life away, and striks without regard.
Not taking those that virtue wants, and fills the world with vice:
But snapps up such that people praise, and world holds most in price.
As lo of late to well was seen, when Paulet left his life:
Forsook his friends, desired the grave, and went from worthy wife:
To live and lodge in lofty Skies, where blessed angels are:
And good men's souls do surety find, and rest from worldly care.
No marvel though our troubled sprits, do make a sweet exchange:
And leaves this sour and bitter soil (and will some country strange.)
To go where Gods in glory sitts, and where our home must be:
Yet in my mind such partyng is, a wonder great to see.
When men by toil and labor long, have purchased such a praise:
Attainde to wealth and honor both (through service sondrie ways.)
And on the sudden leave these pomps, and pleasures here possessed:
As did this knight of whom I spoke, who bore about in breast.
A noble heart a constant mind, a iollie courage great:
A warm good will to common wealth, that never wanted heat.
Brought up in arms and Marciall feats, a master of that art:
Which often in feeld and countries cause, did play a manly part.
As birth was good and noble sure, so all he went about:
Was good and worthy eurie way, and noble still throughout.
In office often, and by his Prince, to credit called still:
In matters grave and things of weight, of deep foresight and skill.
No talker of good Fortune won, nor boster for vain brute:
A tree that seldom blossomde showd, and yet brought forth good fruit
As calm and mild as Summer winds, that never water moves:
And yet as stout to cruel Rites, as gentill with the Doves.
A body apt to bear the brunt, of pains and labor long:
A hedde that could conceive the best, and sone could put up wrong.
A freende that used no fained phrase, and surely one of those:
That dealt with parfite plainness so, he never purchaste fose.
A settled rock a stayed trothe, that no device could stain:
A Paulet yea a pillar too, where Paulet did remain.
An aid to such as wanted help, a father free and frank:
To those that only for good tourns, but barely yielded thank.
What rests more in any man, then was in him I say:
Thus Paulet wan a noble brute, and bore the same away.
Where virtue at the dreadful hour, when trompet sounds a loud:
(Among the cheef and chosen Lambs,) shall sit in sacred cloud.
FINIS.
Sir William Courtneis Epitaphe.
BY death each life is known,
as darkness tries out light,
By life is man made like the Gods,
where life is led a right.
Whiles Courtneis life did last,
his glory hid remainde:
But now he has such rare renown,
as few or none attainde.
The world setts forth his fame, in such a lively sort:
That to the Angels ears above, is blown thereof report.
Which news is lickte so well, the heavens hold them bleste:
When God shall bid unlock the gates, embrace this new come gest.
But though the heavens joy, the earth with tears is filde:
And kind has cause to curse her self, that such a tree has spilde.
By sickness sent in spite, to spoil the spraise and all:
And made grene leaves forsake their bows, ere fruit were ripe to fall.
Me think I hear him say, would God had been my chance:
To hitte on death in open feeld, by chardge of enemies Lance.
Lament ye Courtlike Lords, a play feere lost you have:
Send forth some sighs a long the seas, to sobb upon his grave.
That buried is at Hawne, with warlike pomp and shot:
Which range his knell as is the gise, alas to sone God wotte.
Well, worthy go thy way, how many of thy name:
Are left behind to tread thy stepps, and win but half thy fame.
How should such gifts be graft, without some power divine:
Such virtues dwell in one man's breast, as harbred were in thine.
A Courtney by thy name, a Courtier kindly borne:
A perfect piece not painted out, a coin vnclippte or worn.
One of so right a stamp, that straight did current pass.
In every place of his repair, where sondrie golds were glass.
His face bewraied at first, what hope of him to have:
His works performde that tongue brought forth, his hand full largely gave.
A hedde that often had paste, dame Prudens mustere books:
A countnance as his courage was, no forsed Lions looks.
A heart, storehouse of trothe, a mind no ire might move:
An ear that watched for well coucht words, a grace that gatt mutche love.
His liberal Nature showed, full often to each degree:
Where bounty wants (set birthe a side,) ye can not noble be.
Now better kiss his steps, then at his praise to kick:
Well may men roue about his mark, but none shall hit the prick.
What mournyng makes his wife, that such a housbande lost:
His babes, his men, his neighbors eke, and all the Western cost.
Well geasts, your Host is gone, turn horse an other way:
The shrine is robbde, the saint is fled, where ye were wont to stay.
The sacred godds receive, among them where they are:
With as much mirth as may be made) the sprite yt Courtney bare.
FINIS.
Sir William Pickryngrs Epitaphe.
MY senses slept in rest, the quiet couche I take:
When worlds report with hurlyng brute,
badde sluggishe muse awake.
And whett the blunted wits,
on mournyng matter new:
(A heavy hap, a soddaine chance,)
that thousands ought to rewe.
What fortune is befalne, in world quod I of late:
Is any branch or member hurt, that erst has serude the state.
Or is some sproute decayed, or tree blown done by blast:
That through man's skill and sweat of brows, might grow and stand full fast.
There is quod Fame to me, a worthy wight gone hence:
Now dedde' that late was quick and ripe, of judgment wit and sense.
And Pickryng was his name, whose mind was sure so great:
The noble brows bare witness plain, where ha^mers still did beat.
A man that credit won, by service sondrie ways:
A Tully both with pen and tongue, at proof most worthy prays.
And surely from the Gods, the rarest gifts posseste:
That ever in these drousie days, did lodge in one man's breast.
Look not I should rehearse, what all his virtues wear:
But look amid these worldly happs, how he him self did bear.
When Fortune turude her face, he smothly let it slide:
The want of will at no time could, in looks nor life be spide.
If hap had faunde on him, he changde no chere therefore:
In equal balance stood the weight, of chances less or more.
As wisdom clockte his cares, so stoutnesse stayed his mind:
And custom taught him how to taste, the toiles that here we find.
In learned Platoes rules, good Pickryng pleasure took:
And shonde the world to sort him self, with gladsome golden book.
Among a world of men, in deed few friends he chose:
Yet with a manly modest mean, he could reclaim his foes.
His port and presence such, he was for Court full fit:
And for his grave and deep foresight, he might in council sit.
The life that here he led, gives still sufficient light:
For skillful heads and scannyng minds, to wrest his manners right.
Now has he that he sought, and dwells above in blis:
Where good men's soulls as world they leave, at length shall meet with his.
When Fame had told her tale, I called for paper straight:
And in such verse as here you read, I put these words of weight.
FINIS.
Master Hampdens Epitaphe.
GOOd life is known through deaths despite,
and when to grave we go:
Good life steps forth of shroudyng sheet,
and does our virtues show.
The earth can claim but flesh and bones,
and leave the rest to fame:
The heavens looks, but for the soul,
and world retains good name.
So somewhat man does leave behind, that shines like lantern clear
Note well the same ye mourners all, that stands about this bear.
And do but live as Hampden did, and get that garlande gaie:
And liuell but on that posey sweet, that Hampden boar away.
What living man can make report, he harmde him any where:
So upright was the heart in breast, that Hampdon still did bear.
His heart was just, his hands were frank, his words were meek and mild:
A presence that declarde his mind, was harmless as a child.
A gladsome countenance would he show, when sorrow searched him throw:
Though Fortune frounde, she could not change, his cherefull merry browe.
A pleasant freende, clean void of fraud, both honest true and wise:
In court so loud that now the tears, ronnes gushing from their eyes.
When they but speak of Hampdens name, an offcer liked so well:
Shall never sure from country come, in Court again to dwell.
O happy is that Prince that has, such servants at the need:
And blessed is that land and soil, that does such subjects breed.
Thrice happy is the wife I trow, that such a housbande finds:
And perfect honest is that man, that Hampdens virtue minds.
Good birthe and ancient blood does breed, in noble nature still:
Good manners and good life withal, which wins the worlds good will.
So Hampdens ways did well declare, from whence began his race:
And told what mark he thought to hit, when death bid life give place
Well friend the Gods has granted thee, that thou have sought so long:
A croune of glory for thy life, or else they do thee wrong.
Here we be left in wicked world, and find but few like thee:
Wherefore my sprite through clouldie skies, would after Hampdon flee.
Though thou have run thy race before, I follow on full fast:
And hope above in Abraham's breast, our souls shall meet at last.
FINIS.
My Lady Baggnalles Epitaphe who died at the Nuerie.
Lo here a lady lies, whose life great glory won
A morning Star, a Lamp of day:
that shone as bright as Son.
A goodly glass of Steel,
that scornde to take a stain:
A Mirror that did lively show,
a perfect picture plain.
An aid to strangers still, that staide within her gates:
As noble a Nourse to neighbors all, as freendly to estates.
A spryng of larges streams, a well of wifely ways:
A virtuous dame, that vice subdued, a pearl of peerlesse prays.
A fountain full of faith, her plaiefeere found the same:
In eurie point that did adorn, a comely sober dame.
From native soil she brought, fair lands and friends great store:
And matched with Niclas Baggnall knight, to who^ fair babes she bore.
O Nuerie thou wast once, of this sweet saint the shrine:
And now the soil of sighs and sobbs, and woeful weepyng eyne.
For thou have lately lost, by loathsome Deaths disgrace:
The Lantern gaie, and loving Lamp, that beautified that place.
Hark world how Fame reports, (and Ecco does resounde:)
The hidden heaps of heavenly gifts, that did in her abound.
A happy houswife known, the joy of housbands breast:
A wise and worthy warrant both, to chere each honest geast.
And as she did present, dame Beauty thoroughly still:
So nothing might compare to reach, beyond her frank good will.
To poor a present help, to ritche her house was free:
A foe to none, her nature such, she honored each degree.
Beloved of great and small, as one were blessed from bitthe:
No hurder up of heavy baggs, (the drousie dross of earth.)
But made her treasure house, in clouds and heavens hye:
Where soulls do hugg, and sprits of men, in Abrams breast does lie
Yea all on earth she did, was done to that intent:
And sure no sooner left she life, but thither straight she went.
So now I leave her there, escapt from worldly blaste:
Whiles of her fame, all Irelande ryngs, and shall whites world does last.
Finis.
An Epitaphe of one maistres Blunt, The Lady Pauletts sister.
YOU worthy wives that virtue seeks,
and blotlesse lives do lead:
With bitter tears be dew your cheeks,
when you these verses read.
And look you mourn as matrons do,
whose modest manners may:
By outward woe and heavy looks,
their hidden harms be wraie.
Black gounes and blasyng torches bigg, does bring her to the grave
To whom the Gods when she had life, great gifts of glory gave.
Her housbande houlls and wryngs his hands, as after corse he goes:
And neighbors love bursts out in sighs, and world such sorrow shoes.
As cropp and root of woman kind, were lost and laid full lo:
A gracious life is geste and known, when hence the ghost does go.
Then Blount bedeckt with blessed brute, pass on to heavens hie:
And leave thy friends and children all, behind to wail and cry.
The loss of such a Jewel rare, more ritche then pearl or gold:
More meet to dwell in breast of man, then lodge in ashes cold.
Unfitt for worm O wifely dame! the world has seldom bredd:
A wife of such a worthy fame, and such a noble hedde.
As meek as Lamb of looks or words, of council ripe and sound:
Of heart most mild where humble thoughts, and bounty did abound.
A Nourse of Nurture eurie way, to child and household both:
A Mirror to the simple sort, and fountain full of trothe.
The housbandes joy, the friends delight, the neighbors comfort too:
A willing mind, and ready hand, when she good turn might do.
That feels she now where angels sing, and good men's souls do rest
And where we cease from worldly toil, I mean in Abrams breast.
Where lo I leave her till we meet, full fast our date draws on:
And we the self same stepps must tread, that she before has gone.
Finis.
Master Walter Archer his Epitaphe, an ancient Borgis of Kilkenie
IN beaten Brass, or graven Gold,
a good man's Fame should shine:
Or written fair, with lukewarm blood,
I wish were eurie line.
Of man's renown, for sure to base,
is ynke and paper here:
Or all our art, and skill of pen, to paint their praises clear.
That well deserved whose worthy lives, did show there was small odds:
Between the doyngs of the just, and manner of the godds.
Great is the grace, of them that gaze, on high with stayed look:
And ^ars not so their honest names, be written in the book.
Of life good Lord, yea threfolde blessed, are those that lives upright:
And holds their heads to heaven gates, with deep and secret sight.
Then preace in place, good Archer now, thy blotlesse life is such:
No verse has grace, nor style may reche, to give thee laud to mutche
Thy country rings of thy great praise, thy ways were found so wise:
That from the grave, unto the clouds, thy ripe renown does rise.
Most clean and upright thoughts did dwell, amid thy manly mind
Of tried trothe, thy soil throughout, did all thy doyngs find.
Both Solon and Lycurgus laws, thy Civil manner shoes:
Each word of thine a sentence was, like stood that freashly floes.
A well of wit, sprung from thy hedde, a tongue of temprance right:
A grace to win, and purchase friends, at vewe and present sight.
A Toby to his children all, yea Job for happy state:
A father grave, that well bestowd, the worldly goods he gate.
A Jewel to Kilkenie sure, when town besieged was:
A worthy Burges stout of heart, that could through perils pass.
Of stature mean, of manner mild, and sure as I have hard:
A very shadow of a saint, so shapte in some regard.
His end did show, what life he ledd, his neighbors do record:
He was a plant of special grace, and member of the Lord.
Wherefore dear friends, yt reads these lines, be sure his soul is well:
And he through Christ does triumph still, on dreadful death and hell.
And sitts as safe in Abrams breast, as babe in mothers lap:
Most glad are Adams offspring all, that meets such blessed hap.
FINIS.
The Lord Braies Epitaphe.
Cry out thou world and Court,
and say that lost ye have:
A better Jewel for his days,
then your deserts do crave.
But small ye way the loss,
of him and others eke:
Of whose good nature when ye need,
ye are full far to seek.
Which maks your plague the more, though least ye think thereon:
When often ye wish them here again, that long are dedde and gone.
As Gold from Lead is known, such diffrence is in deed:
In men, and more unlike they are, then flower is unto weed.
Lord Braie declares the same, who was so clear a Lamp:
That few or none my judgment gives, are left us of that stamp.
So current for the Court, so comely in the field:
So right a spark of Natures moulde, has here been seen but selde.
His face did full present, a manly worthy mind:
His words set forth a further skill, then all men's heds could find.
His life could none mislike, his Nature (thoroughly good:)
His hand more freely gave away, then world well understood.
A heart where honor dwelt, a corpse full trimly knitte:
A shape as kind had breathed him out, a hedde where lackt no wit.
O Braie thou borest away, the banner of renown:
Let none think scorn to follow thee, in feeld in court nor town.
I take a heavy leave, of thee and so I cease:
And leave thee flikeryng in the air, before the God of peace.
FINIS.
Sir Ihon Constables Epitaphe.
IN lookyng through these worldly happs,
(so walkyng where I would:)
And waiyng well with equal paies,
the weight of yearthly mould.
I heard a sadd, and privy voice,
as though some fearful spreete:
(In hollow Cave, or vaute of stone)
had spoke from shroudyng sheet.
It badde me look to true report, that Times cheef daughter is:
And set a side all fond affects, which leads the pen amiss.
Thou have quod he for favors sake, praised some thou did not know:
I was thy freende, wherefore in verse, my course of life do show.
These words pronouncst, he silence kept, and vanished so away:
His soul to Skies, his fame to world, his corpse to clotts of claie.
Then to my Muse, I began repair, with heart as cold as stone:
And so with doleful verse bewaield, the death of good sir Ihon.
Who led his life in great renown, and neighbors love with all:
And served the state on his own charge, when prince did please to call
By Northen broils that bred mutche bale, and subjects trothes were tried
His great good will to duties bounds, and loiall faith was spied.
He always stood to rightful things, and would not swaie a wrie:
To any point, wherein reproach, or loss of name did lie.
A freende that was not lightly lost, and did good tournes bestow:
Where cause requirde and librall heart, through bounties springs should flow.
A house he kept of great expense, and daiely at his door:
(With that good store that God him blessed,) he helped to feed y^ poor.
He married twice in noble race, and kept a noble train:
And freely gave good servant Farms, to recompense their pain.
He bare to friends such perfect love, that to the hour of death:
He never failed any one, as long as he had breath.
He had great suites and troubles too, that many sorrows bryngs:
Yet ere he died with worship great, he ended all those things.
He gave good lands, for Scholars weal (as was the ancient gies)
And made an Alms house for the poor, in Halsham where he lies.
All Holdernesse that knew him well, does miss his presence now:
So just and worthy eurie way, were all his doyngs throw.
But when the fruit of tree is ripe, or men be at the best:
Down do they drop, and at the length, in earth with worms they rest.
Yet good men's ghosts, do clime the clouds, and draws where God in trone.
Brings chosen lambs, to endless joy, from worldly care and moan
FINIS.
The fantastical Monarkes Epitaphe.
THough Da^t be dedde, and Marrot lies in grave,
And Petrarks sprite, be mounted past our vewe:
Yet some do live, (that Poets humors have,)
To keep old course, with vains of verses new.
Whose penns are pressed, to paint out people plain,
That else a sleep, in silence should remain:
Come poor old man, that boar the Monarks name,
Thine Epitaphe, shall here set forth thy fame.
Thy climyng mind, aspierd beyond the Stars,
Thy lofty style, no yearthly titell bore:
Thy wits would seem, to see through peace and wars,
Thy tauntyng tongue, was pleasant sharp and sore.
And though thy Pride, and pomp was somewhat vain,
The Monarcke had, a deep discoursyng brain:
A lone with friend, he could of wonders treat,
In public place, pronounce a sentence great.
No match for fools, if wisemen were in place,
No mate at meal, to sit with common sort:
Both grave of looks, and fatherlike of face,
Of Judgment quick, of comely form and port.
Most bent to words, on hye and solemn days,
Of diet fine, and dainty diverse ways:
And well disposde, if Prince did pleasure take,
At any mirthe, that he poor man could make.
On gallant robes, his greatest glory stood,
Yet garments bare, could never daunt his mind:
He feared no state, nor ^aerd for worldly good,
Held each thing light, as feathers in the wind.
And still he said, the strong thursts weak to wall,
When sword bore swaie, the Monarke should have all:
The man of might, at length shall Monarke be,
And greatest strength, shall make the feeble flee.
When strangers came, in presence any wheare,
Strange was the talk, the Monarke vttred than:
He had a voice, could thonder through your ear,
And speak mutche like, a merry Christmas man.
But sure small mirthe, his matter harped on,
His form of life, who lists to look upon:
Did show some wit, though folly fed his will,
The man is dedde, yet Monarke lives still.
FINIS.
Epitaphes already printed, or out of my hands.
THe Epitaphe of King Henry the eight. 1 The Earl of Surries Epitaphe. 2 The
Lord Cromwells Epitaphe. 3 The Lady Wentworthes Epitaphe. 4 The Lord Graies
of Wilt on his Epitaphe. 5 The Lord Poinynges Epitaphe. 6 Master Audleis the
great Soldiers Epitaphe. 7 The worthy Captain Randalls Epitaphe. 8 Sir
Edmond Peckains Epitaphe. 9 Sir James Wilfordes Epitaphe. 10 Sir Ihon Walloppes
Epitaphe. 11 Sir George Peckams first wives Epitaphe. 12 The Earl of Penbrokes
Epitaphe. 13 The Counties of Penbrokes Epitaphe. 14 The Lord Henry Dudleis
Epitaphe. 15 Sir Ihon Pollardes Epitaphe. 16 The Lord of Deluins Epitaphe. 17
The Epitaphe of Maistresse Pens daghter, called Maistresse Gifforde. 18
And many other gentilmen and gentilwomens Epitaphes, that presently I neither
can remember, nor get into my hands again.

Of the fickle faith of men.
THE thoughts of men, do daiely change,
As phansies breeds within their breasts:
And now their natuers are so strange,
That fewer can find, where friendship rests
For double dealyng bears such swaie:
That honest meaning does decaie.
The steadfast faith that friends profeste,
Is fled from them, or little used:
Who has a perfaite freende possessed,
In whom he never was abusde.
Where one is found a friend in deed:
A score there be, that fails at need.
A friend in words, where deeds are dedde,
Is like a spryng, that water wants:
And they that with, fair words are fed,
Do hope for fruit, on withred plants.
But who can judge by vewe of eye:
Where deeds are dedde, and trothe does lie.
For barraine Trees, will blossoms bear,
As well as these, that fruit shall yield:
Whose barcke and branches seems as fear,
As any Tree, within the feeld.
As simply looks the subtell man,
As he that of, no falshed can.
The surest way, that I can find,
Is first to prove, and then to trust:
Wherein affection is not blind,
For proof will sone, spy out the just.
And trial knows, who means desaite,
And bidds the blout, beware the bait.
Without good proof, be not to bold,
If you my council lists to take:
In painted words, there is no hold,
They are but leau's, that wind does shake.
But where that words, and deeds agree,
Accept that freende, and credit me:
For he that giu's, this council here,
Has bought his wit, and freendshipp dear.
FINIS.
Of a Flatterer and a Backbiter.
THe tamest foul, and wildest beast,
that every man may know:
Is sure a subtle flattryng freende,
and sclandryng tongue I trow.
The one bit's sore behind, thy back,
the other blears thine eyes:
And still deceiu's thee to thy face,
with naught but fained lies.
The Dove is meek and tame of kind, but yet a Flattrar fine:
More tamer is, and shows more art, then all the Muses nine.
For he can so transform him self, you shall not see him right:
Though through stone walls like Linx ye lock, or could have Argos sight.
And he that bit's unto the bones, is wild as Bucke in chase:
And hides his hedde most monster like, that dare not show his face.
The Colt that skipps before the dame, is not so light as he:
Malboche has such a forked tongue, it stingeth worse then Be.
Malboche, does lodge the shamlesse clap, that goes as fast as Mill:
Malboche is like a common skolde, that must be chattyng still.
Malboche can creep in credits grace, and Court it too some time:
And make a stale and snare to catch, the simple soul in Lyme.
The mighty Mastiue brought to Bear, bit's not like scolding tongue
A Larum all the country cries, where that loud bell is rong.
And when it has begone a braule, away in haste it goes:
And will abide by nothing sure, for fear of bobbs and bloes.
But though Malbouche do breed much strief, the Flattrar passes all:
For he lies lullyng in the lapp, and like a painted wall.
Full fair and smothe he shoes to sight, when lo a rotten post:
He prou's yet seems a holy saint, and is a curssed ghost.
Well two they are, the wild and tame, that works this world mutche woe.
The wild he hinders honest name, the tame no friend but foe.
But how to spy these monsters out, in deed I can not tell:
Except with wisdoms iudgyng head, ye mark them both so well.
That when they speak and babble mutche, they mean to lay abaite:
To take and trap the harmless heart, in netts of mere decaite.
Now here is taught you how to find, these twain by outward vewe:
Though both of the^ begiles this world, with charms and nifles new.
FINIS.
A good description of a freende.
THe Be does travel long, and wonders pain does take,
From herb to flower, from flower to weed, a honey comb to make
The Ante with no less art, in season due does toil,
And learns us how to help our selves, in this uncertain soil.
So man that knowledge has, to work with wit and sense,
Prouides for harm's that may befall, a buckler of defense:
That neither want nor woe, shall quaill the noble mind,
Nor cast through care, and froward happ, the forward heart behind.
And sure the surest stay, that any wight may get,
Is freendship if in sureties ground, the graffe thereof be set:
Yea so it serves the turn, and salues each sore and greef,
As Honey comb in time of need, is only Bees releef.
And such provision bare, as Ante does make I guess,
At great extremes in eurie point, true freendship does express:
When all these worldlyngs fail, and faith on earth does fainte,
(And pride with poisoned serpe^ts tougs, like Parats prate and paint.)
To freendship may we come, as to a fountain sweet:
That yields fresh water many ways, to quench the thirsty spreete.
And there we may be bold, to drink or draw our sill,
For where the moistness feed's the flood's, the springs are ronnyng stilk
Among the bruitest beasts, and wildest birds that be,
An inward likyng flattly fixte, of freendship shall you see.
Should we then make it strange, that feelyng has to know,
The law and league of blameless love, and judge the friend from foe:
No sure our glory grows, most gaie on freendships ground.
And sugar sweet, are all those fruit's, that springs on judgment sound
When favor makes the way, and letts deserts come in,
And modest manners mild of mode, does wisdoms credit win:
The freendship virtuous is, and like full long to last,
And as a rock against each storm, it stands firm and fast.
This freedship first was bredd, emongs the Gods above,
And fostred since in fleshly breasts, and fed with friendly love:
And so it was embraste, of worthy skillful brains,
Who to this day with care of mind, this freendship still retains.
And more it bears the brute, beyond all yearthly things,
And flees as far as any fame, has power to spread her wings:
And friendship triumph makes, on Fortune in despite,
And marches full amid her face, and so subdues her quight.
No sorrow nor mishappe, no greef nor torment strange,
May frame by force, or froward mean, true freendships mind too change:
For pains with equal weight, do friends imparte and deal,
As though within two private wills, there were a commonweal.
And look what one does taste, the other feels in deed,
And each of them with helpyng hand, supplies the others need:
In mind they meet and match, and talk together still,
When distance of the time and place, denies them of their will.
When furthest of they seem, they join in joy and blis,
And eurie smart that absence breeds, a present pleasure is.
The fraud and finesse now, and tickle trothe in man,
Maks faith and freendship thrice as sweet, as when it first began.
In these dessemblyng days, who finds a freende I trow,
Has found a second Phoenix sure, and needs no further go:
Shrine up that saint in gold, lock up that Jewel rich,
Ye cannot in no measures mean, of freendship make too mitche.
FINIS.
A warnyng from Court.
Look not for deeds, when words driu's of the time,
They reap but weeds, that sowes on barraine ground,
Trust not to age, when youth is paste his prime:
Show not plain face, where finenesse does abound,
Hope not for grace, where Flattrie faunes like whelpe,
But haunt the place, where hope has ready help.
Spend little wealth, where wit and time is lost,
Creep from cold Court, where freendshipps fire goes out:
Match not with Pride, nor lean to painted post,
Seek rather Death, then live in daiely doubt.
Where Envy liu's, and Love is tournde to lust:
Good minds do dye, and world is not to trust.
The Sirens song, deceiu's the simple ear,
The hissyng Snake, giu's warnyng ear he styng:
Great pitts are hid, in water smothe and fear,
The hollow bell, does make the sweetest ryng.
Thus danger dwells, where least the doubt appeers:
And pleasant feelds, do yield most scratchyng Breers.
The plainest folk, are in the roughest soil,
The subtlest hedds, to golden h^ules repair:
Who shuns gaie shows, shall escape from Fortunes foil,
Foul weather hangs, in Cloudie smilyng air.
I can no more, but bid the wise beware:
Of gallant Court, that wears vain glory bare.
FINIS.
Of a Courtiers life, and how the worst sort finds best Furtune.
THis parshall world, prefarres the fained face,
And beats him back, that bears the blotlesse browe:
As one might say, they stand in Fortunes grace,
That worst deseru's, and best can flatter now,
He reaps no Corn, that helps to hold the Plowe.
His gain is small, that labors till he groans,
He bears the load, that has the weakest bones.
The wiely hedde, has wit to watch his hours,
Like Fox and Wolf, that seru's them selu's you see:
The idell hands, that never planted flowers,
Takes Honey sweet, from silly labryng Be.
Though Fauken fair, for Ducke or Partrige flee,
He feeds on Beef, or other baser meat:
Thus are they served, that often do toil and sweat.
Some rouns full swift, yet still the wager loes,
Men have such slight, to tripp their fellows down:
We know not how, the wheel of Fortune goes,
Nor wherein rests, our wealth or right renown.
The tromp of Fame, giu's such uncertain sown,
That badd are good, and good have but badd luck:
In happy things, or gain of worldly mucke.
Next walkyng Iaads, and whipyng horses heels,
Is Soldiers craft, and waityng Courtiers trade:
The one in feeld, both cold and honger feels,
The other here, at home a drudge is made.
Well all is one, to sit in Son or shade,
If happ give all, no matter who does sow:
He reaps most Corn, whose Sieth shall furthest go.
FINIS.
Of words spoken by a great personage.
I Live that dies eurie hour, my glass is nere hand roime,
I fall away as does a flower, that withers in the Son:
O death dispatche my doleful days, defar no time here in,
Good Lachis make thou no delays, my fatal threde to spin.
Thou Clarke I say, that for thy fee, does ryng the careful knell,
Now let me have some help of thee, to toll my passing bell.
If by the way I may provoke, to shorten now my life,
This hand of mine shall strike the stroke, yt sone shall stint my strife:
I muse why God did me create, and breathd life in my breast,
And brought me up to this estate, that nere enjoyed no rest.
Why was I fed with milk so often, and pampred up so long,
Why was I rockt and laid so soft, and lullde with many a song:
Why was not I untimely borne, when Nature had me wrought,
That lives thus as man forlorn, and still consumes with thought.
The Midwife might have cased all this, if strangled had I bin,
Then had my soul been saffe in blis, that now lies dround in sin.
But look what God assignde is done, what should I reason more,
O Lord my God what have thou won, in plagyng me so sore:
What honor can thou have by me, what glory can thou have,
What service can I do to thee, that wishes thus my grave.
And in this plite to dye thou know, so far from quiet frame,
Before I should yield up the ghost, I might blaspheme thy name:
The world disdains to see my wealth, the heavens on me froune,
The earth and air denies me health, and Fortune keeps me down.
The day I drive away with care, the might I wail and weep,
The sighs and sobs that comes unware, does wake me in my sleep:
The food that should my life sustain, I find therein small taste,
My blood dries up in eurie vain, lo how I wear and waste.
Thus eurie thing does change his kind, to work my woe you see,
And nothing seru's me to my mind, I fall in such degree:
Would God my grave, were ready found, my shroudyng shete and al,
And dreadful Death were surely bound, to come when I do call.
Finis.
A description of Desire.
LEd by Desire, a thrall where freedom lies,
Held back by wit, when fancy forward hales,
My greedy will, begiles my gasyng eyes:
Calde home from craft, yet caught in cunnyng stales,
Drawn from my self, and made to others call,
If danger come, Desire is cause of all.
Prepared for flight, my wings are fast in Lyme,
I swim in hope, and sincke with deep consaite,
Deceived by happ, yet learnd by loss of time:
To know the hook, and yet must miss the bait,
But bound and led, a long by sweet Desire,
I scorche or burn, before I feel the fire.
Desire lackes sight, yet leads the senses blind,
And wilful Will, waits hard at Dangers heels,
Good speed full lean, comes laggyng far behind:
Close heart says naught, that all the sorrow feels,
So thus the man, to Death like captive goes,
Led by Desire, that knows not friends from foes.
Our life declares, Desire can take no rest,
In soundest sleeps, it keeps the mind awake,
It is a sprite, that closely creepes in breast:
A privy thought, that Wars and Peace does make,
And whom it leads, it either throws him down,
Or liftes him up, by happ to great renown.
The Soldiour builds, his hope on great Desire,
The Merchant getts, his gain and wealth thereby,
The trauelyng wight, it paies with noble (...)
It heales the heart, that in Despair does lie,
And though some sparks, of vice flee from that flame,
A good Desire, maintains a virtuous name.
Then blushe I not, to yield where force does fail,
Desire does daunt, the strong and stoutest mind,
Where Fancy rules, no wisdom can prevail:
Strive not with stream, nor sail against the wind,
For when fine wit, has done the best it may,
Desire comes in, and leads the heart away.
FINIS.
Of a vicious woman.
AS every lake, and puddle seems sweet,
To greedy throts, that daiely drink do crave:
So unto some, each water is full meet,
To cool their mouths, when any thirst they have.
The worst at hand, contents their geerie fit,
The best far of, is not desirde a whitte.
Good reason why, a pleasure nere at call,
Is better sure, then that we want at need:
When thirst is paste, we wish no drink at all,
When honger comes, then gladly would we feed.
The Hawk once fed, with any kind of meat:
Her gorge is full, Gill will no Partriche eat.
Yet Beef is gross, and hard for to endue,
And carrion Crows, with Phesant is no match:
Though all things seru's, for Hauks that keeps y^ mew,
Yet those that flee, a better pray can watch.
Who says each drink, they have too great a haste:
For Crabbs be Crabbs, and have a bitter taste.
Is Beer and Wine, a like in every case,
Or frettyng Salt, like Sugar any wheat:
Is Porke at home, like Uenson in the chase,
Is Glass like Gold, or Brass yet half so fear.
Are little titts, like Coursers finely made:
No no in deed, a roile is but a Jade.
Are Nettle stalks, like roddie Roses leaves,
May stinkyng Docks, with Gillaflowres compare:
Is dustie Chafe, like goodly filled Sheaues,
Is evil cheer, like pleasant sumptuous fare.
A hongrie bait, a cold repaste they find,
That fruit forsaks, and feeds on the rind.
Then if there be, of worthies many a one,
That serves their will, with dross where gold is cheap:
And for a Pearl, forsaks a precious stone,
And takes the worst, where worthies are a heap.
Now let them blushe, or frown to hear my song:
Theirs is the fault, and I have all the wrong.
FINIS.
Of unsound friends.
THe root not pure, the branches are infecte,
The tree unsound, the fruit and leaves are naught:
The ground not good, the root is in suspecte,
Of every greef, the cause must first be sought.
For break the bows, and clean dispoile the tree:
The root left whole, a greater harm may be.
A sore unsearched, is seldom salued well,
As hatred hid, is hard to heal without:
The Doctor seeks, where each disease does dwell,
And gropes the ground, and so a voides the doubt.
First quench the cause, in flames that does remain:
The straw on fire, the smoke will rise again.
To cut thy hand, when festred is thy foot,
Or prick thy arm, when all thy hedde is sick:
Ye be far of, ye come not nere the root,
Then this believe, ye are not nere the quick.
So though the sword, the simple putts to sack:
The ship you have, and yet the stern you lack.
FINIS.
A matter of fond Cupid, and vain Venus.
IN Peascod time when hound to horn, giu's eat til Buck be kilde
And little laddes with pipes of corn, sat keepyng beasts a filde:
I went to gather strawberies tho, by woods and groves full fair,
And parchte my face with Phoebus so, in walkyng in the air.
That down I laid me by a stream: with bows all over clad,
And there I meat the straungest dream, that ever young man had:
Me thought I saw each Christmas game: each revel all and some,
And every thing that I can name, or may in fancy come.
The substance of the sights I saw, in silence pass they shall,
Because I lack the skill to draw, the order of them all:
But Venus shall not pass my pen, whose maidens in disdain,
Did feed upon the hearts of men, that Cupides bow had slain.
And that blind boy was all in blood, be bathed to the ears,
And like a conqueror he stood, and scorned lovers tears:
I have quod he more hearts at call, then Caesar could command,
And like the Dear I make them fall, that runs ore the land:
One drops down here, an other there, in bushes as they groan,
I bend a scornful careless ear, to hear them make their move.
^he sir quod honest meaning then, thy boyely bragges I hear,
When thou have wounded many a man, as hounts man does the dear
Becomes it thee to triumph so, thy mother will it not,
For she had rather break thy bow, then thou shall play the sot.
What sausie Merchant speaks now, said Venus in her rage,
Art thou so blind, thou know not how, I govern every age:
My son does shoot no shafte in waste, to me the boy is bound,
He never found a heart so chaste, but he had power to wound.
Not so fair Gods quod Freewill, in me there is a choice,
And cause I am of mine own ill, if I in thee rejoice:
And when I yield my self a slave, to thee or to thy son,
Such recompense I ought not have, if things be rightly done.
Why fool step forth Delight and said, when thou art conquered thus
Then lo dame Lust that wanton maid, thy mistress is iwus:
And Lust is Cupids darlyng dear, behold here where she goes,
She crepes the milk warm flesh so nere, she hides her under cloes
Where many privy thoughts do dwell, a heaven here on earth,
For they have never mind of hell, they thinks so much ^n merth:
Be still good meaning quod good Sport, let Cupid triumph make,
For sure his kingdom shall be short: if we no pleasure take.
Fair Beauty and her play feers gaie, the Uirgines vestall too,
Shall sit and with their fingers play, as Idell people do:
If honest Meaning fall to froune, and I good Sport decaie,
Then Venus glory will come down, and they will pine away:
In deed quod wit this your devise, with stra^gnes must be wrought
And where you see these women niece, and looks to be sought.
With scoulyng brows their follies check, and so give the^ the fig,
Let Fancy be no more at beck, when Beauty lokes so big:
When Venus heard how they conspirde, to murder women so,
Me thought in deed the house was fired, with storms and lightnyng tho:
The thunderbolt through windows burst, and in their stepes awight,
Which seemd some soul or sprite a cursed, so ugly was the sight.
I charge you Ladies all quod he, look to your selves in haste,
For if that men so wilful be, and have their thoughts so chaste:
And they can tread on Cupides breast, and march on Venus face,
Then they shall sleep in quiet rest, when you shall wail your case.
With that had Venus all in spite, sturde up the Dames to Ire,
And Lust fell cold, and Beauty white, satte babblyng with Desire:
Whose muttryng words, I might not mark, mutche whispring there a roes,
The day did lower, the Son waxt dark, away each Lady goes.
But whether went these angry flock, our Lord himself does kno,
Wherewith full loudely crewe the Cock, and I awaked so:
A dream quod I, a Dog it is, I take thereon no keep,
I gage my head, such toys as this, does spring for lack of sleep.
FINIS.
This shows the vanity of some hopes.
WHo liu's in hope, does dye in deep despair,
He lackes that looks, how luckie lotts do light:
They feel foul storms, that hopes for weather fair,
And want clear day, that waits to escape the night.
Hope hates his state, and present fit he feels,
And gropes for chance, at churlishe Fortunes heel's.
He shows some greef, that after medson seeks,
And pleads pain, that prouls for pleasure sweet:
Who hopes for food, does go with hongrie cheeks,
And hangs down hedde, as one that wants spreete.
Although Despair, is neighbor next the worste,
Who holds by Hope, is more then half a curste.
Full long the bird, in cage on hope may feed,
The Galley slave, the self same case may plead:
Hope comes to late, to such as stand in need,
The happlesse has, a Laborinth to tread.
In dangers grace, they stand amid the flood,
Full far from help, when hope can do no good.
If haste make waste, and fall on point of knife,
Or sword through heart, unto the hilts dorth run:
In such extremes, what hope is left of life,
Or where in deed, for harms should help be won.
The banks broke down, the stream and flood flies out,
And nothing stays, behind for hope nor doubt.
The prisner may, that is condempde to dye,
For pardon hope, and yet to hangyng go:
A mischeef comes, whils men for mercy cry,
As horse does starve, whils that the gresse does grow.
Hope seru's you know, to heave up hearts on height,
That flat on floer, may Fortune strike them straight.
Finis.
The meetyng of two noble knights of the Garter (si Henry Sidney, and the
Earl of Essex) in Irelande, two miles beyond Dradath the xxj, of September,
and 17. year in the reign of our souerain lady Queen Elizabeth.
AS order is the stay of states, a bliss to eurie age,
A knot of love, a band of peace, a rule yt gouerns rage:
So order drue, two noble wights, that of the order are,
To mete by order as it fell, a sight full strange and rare.
For seide is seen, in Irishe soil, where order does but glance
That ij. which does ye garter were, do mete by such a chance
The one an Earl, a Mars more like, that God of battaill is:
The other such a Mirror known, as Irelande may not mis.
The one has lighted such a Lamp, where on the rest may gase,
Yea all the torches in the land, wax dim where this does blase:
The other has through modest means, and Marciall manners both,
Plucked from warm breast, the peoples hearts, yt bears good will to troth
The brute of these, are blown so far, their names thereby are known
These are no Gemms of foreign mines, but Jewels of our own.
The more that Envy hides their praise, the bigger do they shine,
As clear renown, were shrouded safe, by secret power divine.
In loving league, of well won laud, these lords their liu's do lead,
And through this thanklesse thwartyng world, ye steps of honor tread
Both bent to serve, and fit therefore, their ventures claims the same,
And both for greatness of their minds, do merit equal fame:
A joy to see such jewels join, so thought the lookers on,
A pearl of price, in any place, agrees with precious stone.
The Gods the^ selu's, did make this match, through ordryng things a right.
The heavens cast of cloudie clokes, and clapped on mantells light.
To show how glad the Planetts were, in meetyng nobles twain,
When one the other fetched to town, with such a troop and train:
The season sweet, and Phoebus shone, so clear from crystal Sky,
As world were willing to bestow, on them a welcome eye.
The Prince that has such members here, is happy sondrie ways,
The soldiers that shall serve them both, shall win immortal prays.
The people that by outward signs, an inward meaning knew,
Bade sluggishe Muses whet their skill, on matter worthy vewe:
Then took I pen, and put in verse, these things with great post have
In larger volume look for more, if this be well embrast.
FINIS.
Of my Lord cheef Baron that was.
THe Sittern sweet whose silver sound,
(the sloggards wits awakes:)
Through change and choice, of notes new found,
a pleasant Music makes.
The Lute that best is likte of all, a solemn noyes does yield,
And most delites the cunnyng heddes, that in that art are skilde:
The Harp whose twang and stroke is strange, is used eury where,
His many stryngs and warblyng sound, so mutche delites the ear.
The mild Recorder has a place, where sweet Concordance is,
The Cornet and the Howboies both, may match and sound with this
The Uirginall with quiet noyes, must matched be I trow,
The sliller that the Music is, the better does it show:
But some had rather hear for change, a cherefull ryng of bells,
Who fains the noies does pearce the air, and thonder crack expels.
In elder days when storms arose, and tempests rough did rore,
They loudly rang the halloude bell, for cause I told before.
In tounes of war where watch and ward, is kept with worthy guard
The Larum bell that warnyng gives, in deed may ill be spard:
When Prince remoues the bells they ryng, and at hie feasts and times,
In foreign land a noble noies, is made of bells and chimes.
The blessed birthe day of Kings and Queens, with bells is honored still,
In sign of Princes happy reigns, and Subjects great good will:
A ryng of bells is heard far of, and pleases many a mind,
Now nere they sound, then far they seem, as bloes the gale of wind.
But I delight in passing Bell, for that does plainly shoe,
As one from hence does take his leave, so hence we all must go:
A passing Bell then shall it be, that makes best Music here,
It tings and tolls what we are worth, and sounds in ear so clear.
That each man knows the passing Bell, is best in these our days,
Let Lute and Sutern then give place, and yield to Bell the prays.
FINIS.
Of a noble personage.
THe Son that shrouds, in lowryng cloudie Skies,
Shines clear and fair, when foggie Mists are gone:
The morning Star, that slepes long ere it rise,
Awakes them all, that listes to look thereon.
The hidden gold, in treasure house that lies,
By show of foil, setts forth a precious stone:
The grains of Corn, that deep in earth remains,
Sprouts up at length, and quitts the Plowmans pains.
So hearts oppressed, that heavy are a while.
Laughes greef to scorn, when Fortune makes them smile:
The Bird in cage, must suffer for a space,
Till freedom comes, and makes her prove her wings,
The prisners poor, may purchase Princes grace:
And quench their thirst, where pleasant fountain springs.
The mournyng mind, may show a cherefull face,
When merry cause, a present comfort bryngs:
No hap so hard, no greef so great I trow,
But may through time, convert to joy from woe.
Then sigh no more, O pensive troubled breast,
Who sowes in care, is sure to reap in rest.
FINIS.
A letter in May, sent to Master Henry Knowles house at Gobbyns.
YOur healthful house that holds me here,
with heaps of sweet delight,
(Where Courtlike fare not country chere,
I find, and thereof write:
Makes me forgett the dompishe days,
that hateful soiles did yield,
And feeds my fancy many ways,
with pleasures of the feeld.
For here the birds do chure and charm, as bells of Osney ronge,
Or else the pretty boys of Poules, amidde the clapper song:
Methinke the trees do tremble still, and that the earth should shake
When Nightyngalls in Morning graie, their merry Music make.
For through their throats they thrust their notes, as Organ pipes did sound
Te deum and faburthen sweet, the Quere had chanted round
Here is no noies of churlishe Choughs, nor piuishe chattryng Pie,
Nor screkyng Oule the post of Death, that mak's a fearful cry.
Nor pratyng Paret dare not preace, in compass of this place,
Nor no proud Pecocke comes here, for all his stately grace:
This soil does breed no scornful bird, in whom disdain does dwell
This is a heaven of it self, that stands so far from hell.
No deuelishe mind may nestell here, for fear they scoule and lowre,
This is a pleasant plot of ground, where Gods have bilt their bower
Who made a law on pain of death, that none aproche the seat,
Except his sweet conceited speech, provoke laughter great:
Those hoggishe hedds and lompishe lobbs, that muse on mischeef still
Are banished from this fruitful vaill, to dig at Mauuorne hill.
And yet the dullest dolt that is, may hap to mende his spreete,
If when his grossest humor comes, he taste the nector sweet:
That I have found, for lo here dwelles, a noble nurse in deed,
Who for the weakness of men's brains, she has so fine a seed.
It heales the hedache and the cough, and comforts so the wits,
That man upon the present help, forgetts his former fitts:
This merry medson works in me, a mass of matter good,
It makes me walk, yea eat and sleep, and gather so mutche blood.
That now great gobbins gins to grow, upon my Lenten cheeks,
And legs are filde with fatt and flesh, that was as lean as Leekes:
Which you shall see and well perciue, if long you walk in Poules,
And so I say in taking leave, Adue good master Knowles.
FINIS.
Of the want of will.
THe days delaie, does breed my nights vnreste,
My wished joys, makes heart to taste of woe:
The want of will, torments my troubled breast,
Look what I seek, of force I must forgo.
Held up by hope, thrown down by hateful hap,
I escape a storm, yet slain through thonder clappe.
Tweene two extremes, my life in balance lies,
I feed far of, yet nere the food I crave:
My footyng fails, and yet my mind does ryes,
I lack no hope, and yet no happ I have.
Thus striuyng still, against the stream of strife,
I feed the heart, and wear away the life.
Who weau's his web, like Spider on the spraie,
May wait for Flies, or spend his time in waste:
Who dwelles in doubt, and rests upon decaie,
Stays for good luck, where Fortune makes no haste.
He gropes for smoke, and looks to catch the wind,
That serves in hope, and hateful happ does find.
Finis.
Of two virtuous sisters.
WHen youth was in his prime,
and Pecockes plumes were gaie,
(And lo amid my laughyng eyes,
two pretty babes did play:)
I spoke of merry sports,
that fed my fancy than,
But trackt of time has taught me now,
to be a grauer man.
And judge by just regard, of worldly things the weight,
And learn the wit and sense to see, the deepenesse and the height:
Of each thing under Son, so that in aged days,
I neither lean to leude delites, nor stoop to wanton ways.
If sweet desires are dedde, and lust has taken leave*
And follies freaks are thoroughly fled, that did vain youth disceiue
My speech may credit claim, of all that hears the same,
And I may freely give them laud, by verse that merits Fame.
Then preace in place two Nimphs, that I at Ipswitche saw,
Posses such prays as virtue yields, by sentence of her law:
And for your manners mild, (a beauty to good life,)
I wish that each of you in deed, may prove a worthy wife.
And live to parents joy, and reap renown therefore,
And if unto your own content, my heart could wish you more:
You should not have bare lines, at this my last a due,
But thondryng blast of endless Fame, with prays should honor you.
FINIS.
Translated out of Latin.
TRue wedlock is, true bondage treble fold,
A double greef, of feeble flesh and spreete:
So man is drawn, as Ox in market sold,
That he may be, for endless labor meet.
Who takes a wife, is led in yoke to draw,
And feelyng pain, to pain he yields from birth,
Taking, is caught, and bryngs him self in awe:
And seruyng still, is made a drudge on earth,
The text shows here, who best by marrage winns,
In weary Lome, a web of woe he spinns.
Finis.
A description of the goodness that grows in Cicilia.
WHiles rangyng youth did run about,
as rage of humor roes,
A reatchlesse race I rowsled on,
as water ebbes and floes:
And though through toil my time consumde,
yet trial taught me well,
Here is a place (for all our pomp)
where pilgrims ought to dwell.
But wildness edgde me forward fast, to se these worldly joys,
And greedy mind of glory vain, (that poffes men up with toys)
Badde wanton will run all on hedde, and never look behind:
Till age on youth had clapped his clokes, by cruel course of kind,
Thus haled through the haven mouth, where heaps of hazards are,
Full under sail through swellyng seas, my ship and I did fare:
And passing so to sondrie soiles, I sought some suertie still,
But that was past my compass clean, and far beyond my skill.
For such as seeks in Sillas seas, a saffetie for his Bark,
May drive a midde Charibdes cliu's, and miss the full sea mark:
Well, as my shipp found wind at will, so did I make my sail,
And landyng took in sondrie soiles, when sea room seemd to fail.
So France and Flaunders saw I through, and other lands a score,
Where vessels in the rode might ride, and none might go on shore:
But barely was I vittailde still, and seldom void of want,
(And never found good gale of wind,) as weather were so skant.
It had no will to serve my turn, in all my iourneis great.
Until I cast a better course, and found a noble seat:
That men do call Cicillya, where lo sweet Cipres groes,
And many other precious things, more sweet then Muskie roes.
No sooner sought I succor there, but straight ways had I aid,
As though that Deastnie did decree, my Bark should there be stayed
O fruitful soil full fraught with grace, the dew of heaven fall,
Both day and night like silver showers, upon thy virtues all:
Come wandryng wights yt seeks for happ, in wild deep streams and flods
And se with feelyng sense what gifts, in Cicill grows and buds
I prays the name and bless the plot, and kiss such perfect ground,
That yields such fruit and does in deed, in blessed things abound:
If tongue had art to show at full, the fullness of this soil,
The tongue should work and pe^ should cease, or serve in place of foil.
To set forth fame of land unknown, yet known to skillful men,
And known again to Gods the^ selves, that rules both tongue and pen.
Finis.
A matter of repulce, going to the Sea.
WHen will and wind do jar,
and Neptune proves a foe,
A man may venture far, yet have no power to go:
Admit that Jove do smile,
if other Gods do lowre,
We must abide a while, and watch the happy hour.
For eury God in Skies, a seurall nature have,
And sure great quarrels rise, by suites that men do crave:
Of Gods whose sondrie moods, a mass of matter shows,
Some are the Gods of goods, and where that Fortune flows.
They follow tide and time, and some are Gods of game,
And some in clouds do clime, and flies as fast as Fame:
Some always like the seas, and some the land embrace,
Some lou's to take their ease, and quaff's and bibbs a pace:
Some are the Gods of grain, and flowrs and fruit's likewise,
So now to break my brain, about these Gods in Skies.
It were but labor lost, yet how should people sail,
Or ride to any cost, when hope of Gods do fail:
First prove a courage bold, and go to feeld and fright,
If Mars his love wax cold, ye shall be conquered straight.
Where Venus frounes make love, and see what luck ye find,
If Oelus list not move, in vain ye look for wind:
So many things by name, are ruled through Gods in air,
And Gods good luck do frame, in weather foul or fair.
But Gods do dwell so hye, and I so low remain,
I know not where to cry, nor yet to whom complain:
A greater greef I feel, a fortune somewhat strange,
So swift tourns Fortunes wheel, that still the wind does change.
When I to shipp would go, no sooner turn I back,
But straight a gale does blow, where I the wind did ^icke:
This prou's like eurie suite, that I do take in hand,
For others catch the fruit, when at reward I stand.
My Deastnie is enrould, (O master of Roulls I fear,)
Where wind does blow so cold, there comes no Summer theare:
And though that Son do shine, it giu's but little heat,
Some say worse luck is mine, and my mishap is great.
Thus here in verse I show, what wind does me a rest,
In hope before I go, the wind mill blows at Weste:
Till then my pen shall walk, where I do find good will,
To make my friends to talk, on Churchyardes fortune still.
FINIS.
Of one that for virtues sake honored a friend.
AS freendship is a league of Love,
and shows the heart within,
So some affection is the ground, whereon it does begin
And reason offreth causes why,
such freendship breeds in thought,
Thus reason is the kindly cause, that all these things has wrought.
Some hold opinion fancy works, by secret motions sweet,
A mean to make the honest mind, and faithful friendship meet:
Deserts dare claim no place hereof, for where good turns have past
Small favor comes, and world forgetts, the plain good will at last.
Then reason from affection brought, must needs the cause persuade,
Wherewith the fancy works the web, and so is freendship made:
When man and woman is in frame, and shapt as I have said,
Their hearts prepars a perfect place, where friendship may be stayed.
We see ear pleasures are possessed, or any profit rise,
A choice or likyng knitts the knot, of freendship with the wise:
The judgment does election make, when all affects are blind,
And freendship triumphs in no where, but in a noble mind.
It scorns to dwell with dainty freaks, that flickers here and there,
And flitts as feathers do with wind, and restes no certain where:
The worthy wights that wisely ways, yt weight of mere good will,
Are cheifest mansion house and seat, for worthy freendship still.
But lo a question now does rise, I do demand to know,
Of freendships rule or reasons lore, which may the furthest go:
First freendship marches foremost man, and leau's behind the rest,
Then reason comes in second rank, and seeks to do his best.
Yet freendship is not greater sure, then reason in degree,
For freendship is but very bare, where reason wants you see:
When wit has well conceived a cause, by rule and reasons great,
Then friendship shows this force at full, as fire by flame shoes heat
I know not well which rules most, the reason that I have,
Or else the friendship that I bear, where faith does friendship crave:
Good reason leads my fancy forth, affection yields thereto,
And freendship follows on as fast* as freendship ought to do.
Thus lo my reason and my sense, in frendships league is bound:
Which bondage is but free consent, for freendly favor found.
FINIS.
Written from the Country twenty year ago, to one that poorly remains at
the Court yet.
WHo spends his time, in Court God knowse,
May happ to win, and sure to lose:
For loss is liker there to fall,
Then any happy chance at all.
Yet some cold Courtiars daiely think,
That at the spryng a man may drink:
The Well hedde may be stopped you see,
Then empty must the Bocketts be.
Where many draw, and preace is great,
Or thousands do the Market beat:
There things are skant, and ware is deart,
The more the geasts, the barer cheer.
The Court is like, a Mearmaids song,
That flattereth many people long:
And paieth them with a privy nippe,
First braurie brings a begerly whippe:
And next vain hope, does lead the blind,
To look for that, they never find.
Some set for birds, and catch a Gnatt,
And some does lose, both lean and fatt*
I muse how men, bewitched are,
To sit in Court, to gase and stare.
Each one upon an others face,
May herein rests all the grace:
The Peacocke prides him in his plume,
And does both time and wealth consume.
In pikyng of his feathers gaie,
The Cousloppe not so brave in May:
Is Courtiar is that clapps on all,
Who hopes for Larkes when sky does fall.
Some draws to Court, when all is gone,
And those are called hangers on:
That neither wagies have ne fee,
But thither come to hear and see.
And rub out time with lickyng crommes
That droppeth out of hongrie thommes.
That saues a crust for Kate at home,
And some there be that use to rome:
And prouleth for a pittaunce bare,
Where often empty dishes are.
Some thrusts all into the poke,
And hides Manchetts under cloak:
And many other morsells sweet,
The alms which poor, should have in street.
Is montcht in corners by such mean,
It is no shame to carry clean:
They say that lives by this devise,
I fare as one that flyngs the Dice.
And cast each chance such is my freake,
Yet mind I but of Court to speak:
The Court is place of such repair,
There must be needs Dick shifters air.
Of every sort both good and bad,
At some one time may there be had:
The fauner and the frounyng browe,
The stately stalks that will not bow.
The hollow looks, the hautie mind,
The scornful face, the Bayard blind:
The whisperer and the whinyng Pigge,
The subtell sheep that looks full big.
The counterfaite that seems gold,
The coward and the countenance bold:
The grave, the wise, and worthy both,
All kind of sorts, I tell thee trothe.
Is found in Court, but worst in deed,
So many haunteth there for need.
Thou were as good go hold the Plowe,
As in the Court seek Fortune now:
A thousand gapes for one man's gain,
And fifteen hundredth lose their pain.
Scarce one is helped by good hap,
The fruitful tree, has lost his sap:
There springes but blossoms from the stock,
Each thing is under double lock.
And bounty is so straightly laest,
That franknesse now is clean defaest:
He that can learn us how to spare,
Is our white son, thus runs the Hare.
The dogs may pinche, but seldom bite,
All sience of hope are banishe quite:
The largnesse that in Court has dwelt,
Can neither now be seen nor felt.
Each river ronnes into the sea,
And there the floodes consume away:
And naught retournes to us again.
But little streams and dropps of rain.
I fear the world is at an end,
Then think not thou the Court shall mende:
As world decaies, so Court does wear,
Yet every thing should florishe theare.
Thou fool trust not to noddes and becks,
Nor words that are as dry as kecks:
In Court such things full plenty are,
When Cloak and Hatte, and all is hare.
And to the bones thou shall be worn,
The Court shall give thee but a scorn:
A proper weed to keep thee warm,
God shilde my friend from such a charm.
Let them in Court, go wait and pry,
That have good cause, and lives thereby:
Look to the country that thou draw,
And live in compass of the law.
And love thy Prince, and fear his sword,
And from my house, I send thee word:
It is as vain in Court to hope,
As seek a blessyng of the Pope.
Come let us ride abroad this Spryng,
As merry a heart as any king:
A poor man has that is content,
God knows who lives an other Lent.
Thou see how quickly men be gone,
So thus farewell, mine own good Ihon:
From Court dispatche thee if thou may,
That we may meet ere Easter day.
FINIS.
Of an injury by saunyng friends.
I Sail with shaken Ship,
through swellyng seas to saffeties shore,
And escape the scornful whippe,
that lies in wait to scourge me sore:
And having wind at will,
in scoulyng clouds, I leave disdain,
Yea more by happ then skill,
I beat the bellowe back again.
That would orewhelme my Bark, and swallowe up, the silly boat,
Ere that the full sea mark, had set the tossed ship a flote:
In deed the gale is good, and God that gides, the stern and all,
At ebb has sent a flood, where tide was never thought to fall.
Pack hence ye Pirates proud, the fleet is gone, ye get no pries,
When ship as swift as cloud, from weltryng wau's a lofte does rise
And cutts the waters wild, like sieth that shares, both grass and corn,
In sothe you are begide, to lurk in creeks, and fish for scorn.
When hoffyng sails are hoiste, and shipman has, escapte the race,
Great folly for a Foist, through floodes to follow on the chase:
Your painted Galleis gaie, till caulmes do come, dare stir no ore,
Then crepe close under baye, and hide your heads, when seas do rore.
O busy bablars all, your tattlyng tournes, to trifles still,
And though you bread a braule, the world may se, ye want your will:
I have out saild you clean, and plaste my self in Princes train,
And keeps a merry mean, when you in discord beats your brain.
Wherefore your iarryng parts, does sho from whence your notes does ryes,
Ye want the cunnyng arts, to blind my wits, or bleare mine eyes.
The more you strain your voice, to bring good Music out of frame,
The less you may rejoice, to see how I have found the same:
And so with smilyng songs, I laugh and leave, you more and less,
And put up many wrongs, that time and Fortune may redress.
FINIS.
Of the quietness that plain Country brings.
Among the rustie rocks,
both rough and hard by kind,
Where weather beats, and storms are brim,
for each small blast of wind:
Where spryngs no foreign fruits,
nor deinties are not sought,
Where common pleasures made for man,
are not in Marketts bought.
Where grows no grapes of wine, to glad the griped breast,
Nor stands no bowres to banquet in, young wantons for to feast:
Where people are not fine, nor yet no fools I trow,
But plain as in the two picked staff, and plainly do they go.
I settled am to live, and likes my lotte as well,
As they that have a richer home, or with great Princes dwell:
Now find I each thing sweet, that sour I thought before,
That in times paste did please me most, now me delites no more.
The town and stony streets, I weary am to tread,
The feeld but asks a Motley cote, as homely folks are clead:
Now Frese and Kendall green, may serve in stead of Silk,
And I that fed on Courtly fare, may learn to feed on Milk.
And take such country chere, as easily is maintainde,
No dishe of gift but such in deed, as sweat of brows have gainde.
No platters full of bribes, these mountains forth do bring,
A quiet morsel there is called, a bankett for a king:
To eat and sleep in rest, to laugh and speak from fear,
To be an honest neighbor namde, is all that men seek theare:
No hollownesse of hearts, no hautie ways are likte,
No painted sheathes, no Peacocks proud, yt have their fether pikte.
Are seen upon these hills, nor in the dale likewise,
Where those that dwell in cottage poor, do princely halls despise:
A cruse of cold sour whey, the Sugared cupp does pass,
In gilted boules does poison lurk, that spied is in the glass.
The poor man tastes him self, the Prince dare not do so,
Then better is the sured life, then doubtful days I troe:
Did not Diogenes, set more store by his tonne,
Then of the worldly kingdoms all, that Alexander won.
Did not that might prince, these words with tongue expres,
If Alexander were I not, make me Diogenes:
Since kings would change their states, and holds the mean life best,
Then blame not me where I do like, I seek to find some rest.
FINIS.
Of a fearful Dream.
IF dreams be true, or tokens from above,
Of things to come, by happ that shall a rise:
Or if the Gods, have power men's thoughts to move:
By course of stars, or Planetts in the Skise,
Or fearful slepes, be warnyngs to the wise.
Of sudden happs, that shall betide and fall:
Then sure my dream, no fancy is at all.
At midnight last, when Cocks began to crow,
Within my bed, I started as I slept,
Not well awake, in slomber as I trow:
I saw a wight, whose face was all be wept,
Which softly spoke, but boldly to me stepped.
Who said thou man, these tears I spill for thee,
That love thy foes, and forcest not on me.
But since thy tongue, can knitt and then vntwinde,
And trapp thy friends, whose trust is in thy trothe,
And sekest change, with such a greedy mind:
And so forgetts, thy vow and solemn oath,
Thou made to me, when we consented both:
To join in one, since thou from that do flee,
The Gods grant, I shall revenged be.
But sure thy plague, I pity very sore,
Thy conscience shall, condemn thee eury where,
And like as Caine, his life did here abore:
And where he went, he lived still in fear,
Yea so shall be, the scourge that that thou shall bear.
And then at length, when none shall rid thy pain,
Shall kill thy self, lo so thou shall be slain.
These words so said, she flang out of the door,
With brows ibent, and angry visage read,
Wherewith I rose, and lept upon the flore:
And smote my breast, and hanged down the hedde,
And yet with pain, I crept into the bed.
And gave a sigh, and waked even so,
And then my dream, I rouled to and fro.
And as I waied, how clear yet stood my care,
And saw how dreams, prou's often too true God knowse,
I said no word, but still I lay a space:
Till one came in, and fell to brushe my close,
Then so from bed, a heavy man I rose.
Misdoubtyng still, though yet full clear I was,
Least some ill chance, might bring my dream to pas.
FINIS.
Of a hard world.
Hardness is hedstrong, and will not be hampred,
Larges strait laced, and Pride to mutche pampred:
Spend all with sparyng, is so well acquainted,
That librall free hearts, in shrine may be saincted.
Holdfast will give naught, wealth seems needy,
Well hedde is stopped, full mouths are greedy:
Lean flies are feedyng, that long has been pined,
None may be looked too, till honger has dined.
Standbacke says stoutnesse, let friends be first placed,
Flattrars are faured, and trothe still defaced:
Mean well the harmless, is ever kept fasting,
Do wrong dreeds nothing, the death everlasting.
Fear naught speeds better, then doubt of offendyng,
Mar all that michar, thinks nere of a mendyng:
Conscience can catch all, yet talk much of Jesus,
Need help who lists, ye find few that ease you.
Hye office forgets, lo friends that nere failed,
Time paste nothing thought on, when some wept and wailed:
Seek prays can promise, and swiftly repents him,
When ye call on him, full close he absents him.
New sleights vnsaury, is now the ryng leader,
Old trothe small set by, that was the true treader:
Virtue abused, the world over flows,
What this will come to, at length the Lord knows.
Mischeef thus Master, men bent to such madness,
May change ere we ween, our mirthe to great sadness.
FINIS.
Made against Idell and vain Rimes.
A Pen employed to virtues things,
a croune of glory gains,
But idell verse small profit brings,
the ynke but paper stains:
And fills the world with folly great,
that spryngs on fancies fitts,
Which blotts good name, and dulls the mind,
and does abuse the wits.
The wanton ryme for reatchlesse youth, a pleasant babble is,
Or else a Lantern void of light, that leads poor Lambs a mis:
What shame is this to here how men, has lost their sense for love,
And daiely dye in leude desiers, that does mutche mischeef move.
What fondness can be more then that, when lovers say lo here,
The Gods of my life and death, and ground of gladsome chere:
What blasphemy is it to call, a creature by that name,
Which God himself of right should bear, and best deseru's the same.
Put up your pens you Poets vain, that piuishe rimes do make,
For shame leave of your Venus songs, that keeps vice awake:
Flyng all your Fables in the fire, and follow virtues lore,
That plants the perfect fear of God, where vire was graft before.
His fear kepes kings and kingdoms up, and sends subjects peace,
For bless he but the barrain soil, there each thing does increace:
The feelds do florishe full of corn, the Harvest is full great,
The empty Barnes may plenty cry, and hongrie finds meat.
If men did way what wealth does rise, by fear of God alone,
(And what fair works true wisedoms frams, upon the corner stone)
They would no other buildyngs make, nor ron and gad so fast,
To toys and trifles any where, whose blosomes may not last.
Wherefore away with wanton trashe, such ware is waxen stale,
Shut up your shopps you Printers all, that setts vain Rimes to sale:
And look upon the book of life, and there your cunnyng show,
For all the rest but shadows are, as worthy heads do know.
FINIS.
Of the vanity of youth.
WHen I wanton beardlesse boy,
became first Venus thrall,
My cheeks were smoth, my brows full plain,
and round as tennis ball:
My face well filde with lively blood,
as youth did paint me out,
With curled hear mutche like the grass,
that in the Spryng does sprout.
With Spathauks eyes in forhed set, both graye and gredie eke,
And every member furnished well, there was no thing to seek:
With heart as merry as the bird, that syngs on eury spraie,
With body cled in diverse hewes, as fresh as flower in May.
But all these beuties took their leave, from me a long time sense,
And in their place is come a geaste, I can not tell from whence:
But lodge he does within my bones, they call him Age I trow,
A droupyng snogg that on his back, has fardells full of woe.
Who nill I will I must I bear, and yet it lames me mutche,
My shulders may my fingers curse, when they the pack did toutche:
With sloupyng down to take it up, my youth I have let fall,
And after youth went my delits, and body pleasures all.
For furred garments now I call, that did in Girkin Iette,
And fire must keep me from the Frost, or else no warmth I get:
The blood forsakes the outward parts, and palenesse there remains,
With fevers cold and crampyng stitche, are shronken up my veins.
The skin lies flat on eury joint, unseemly to your sight,
And I unfit for Venus sprots, by day or candell light:
With eye delits I feed my lust, and couetyng desire,
But when I should maintain the flame, I give but smoke for fire.
My hollow looks maks some to laugh, y^ hears my youthful tongue,
When that for age and aching limbs, my knell might well be rong:
I call my reatchlesse years to count, whose recknyng fears my wits
For he that may control the same, within my conscience sitts.
And says my dallyng days are done, as grauer years encreace,
So should I leave my former vice, and all my folly seace:
Whereat I way my short time here, my leude life long abusde,
And to the glass I stepped to see, how youth has me refusde.
As Peacocke then letts fall his tail, that his black feet has seen,
So cast I down my painted sheath, that once was gaie and green.
And welcome say I silver hears, your hoary color white,
Has overcome my youthful years, and quenched my delight.
FINIS.
Written of a gentleman, whose name is in the verses.
MY happ was good, to find a freende,
of such ripe sense and skill,
As could deserne by deep foresight,
the weight of my good will:
The welcome great, for small deserts,
and freendly favor found,
Has shriend my heart in Lambeth house,
and there my body bound.
En roll my name, among those friends, of whom a count ye make
Way well my words, and as you do, of woorks some trial take:
Paies eury promise paste my mouth, and you must look for then,
A deeper draught and higher style, to come from Churchyards pen.
Receive in gree, the offered gift, that New years day brings forth,
(Keep these bare verses as a pledge, of matter much more worth)
And you shall hear the hammers beat, and thompe out other news,
Releef is come to heavy hedde, and comforts now my mewes.
Gone is the greesly gloumyng day, that kept the Son in shade,
Out stepps my hope with sails a flant, that erst no triumph made:
Despair has drounde himself in seas, and as cold courage sailde,
Good Pilotts came and sturde the stern, and so my Ship preuailde.
If Silla and Charibdes cli^es, could threaten my decaie,
Vain were the braggs of rustie rocks, and mountains all I say:
Except the Gods do froune on me, the straits I mind to pas,
Though shipp be forste, to try the tides, where never ship man was:
Hit glads me much, that I shall sail, with wind and weather both*
Enbarkt with those that order kepes, and holds by right and trothe.
Give sea room Lord in storms distress, if any tempestries,
Return I will not till it seems, my bark shall touch the Skies:
Aloufe ye mates, ron from the shore, my voyage hold I on,
Come from your cabbeus soldiers all, ere that the tide be gone:
Encreace your wealth, and work a pushe, whiles others look upon.
Finis.
Non est fides super terram.
THere is no faith, upon the earth,
as faith was wont to be,
For faith with fraud and finenesse now,
has chopped and changde degree:
Faith is a firm and fast belief,
that first from virtue came,
And fraud and finenesse is a wolf,
that looks like a Lamme.
Then where is fast belief my friends, that neither faints nor quails,
But finenesse is not far to seek, and fraud you know preuails:
So as the Psalm affirms and shows, no faith on earth we find,
This hollow world, and hateful days, shows naught but hollow mind:
We stretch out words, as far as wit, and skill of man may reach,
As though in deed a subtell Fox, before the Geese should preach:
But of good works we are so spare, we lay them up in store,
As though they should take leave of world, and should be seen no more.
Thus faith is fled, or tree is dedde, that should bear fruit ye know,
Then trust no bow, that brings but leau's, and blossoms for a show:
Believe no goodly painted posts, that rotten are within,
Believe no fliryng fained face, nor sleeke and smothed skin:
Believe no courtlike kissyng hands, and bowyng body down,
Believe no false dissemblyng brows, that ought of Nature froune.
Believe no oaths nor promise patcht, and peeced with desaite,
Believe not those that feeds thine eyes, with sweet and pleasant bait:
Believe no tune that likes the ear, and does displease thine heart,
Believe not him, on stage that plays, the merry vises part.
Believe no friend that faunes too fast, he means to make thee faule,
Believe no sweet and sugared speech, for therein lies the Gaul:
Believe no more then good is found, for badde is most in place,
And goodness in this graceless time, the people least embrace:
On earth there is no faith God wott, for closely under tongue,
The snake does lodge, the serpe^ts crepe, and there man's heart is sto^g.
I could show heaps of mischeeu's great, that follows man from birth,
But to the wise, let this suffice, there is no faith on earth.
Finis.
Of a disdainful person.
Disdain in thee does spot thee mutche,
Whose blot I see, within thy browe,
No another fault, in thee I toutche:
Of virtues all, thou have inowe,
Then let no branch, of vice in thee,
In fecte the fruit of such a tree.
For swellyng hate, does purches foes,
And fretts the mind, with gnawyng thought,
And harmless looks, embraseth those:
Whose love for gold, can not be bought,
And courteous speech, does freendship stay,
That froward words, does cast away.
Thou see the fire, consumes his heat,
With ragyng flames, that soon are gone,
The green wood smoks, away with sweat:
And warms them not, that lays it on,
So thou with scorn, of angers mood,
But sins thy self, and does no good.
Thou see also, the cankered knife,
With ruste and filth, defaced clean,
What bale beginns, and breeds through strife:
Thou see and know, now what I mean,
By this thou see, which is most meet,
The bitter gall, or Sugar sweet.
When wrath is spente, with ore long spite,
And no revenge, thou haste thereby,
Then shall thou lose, my freendship quight:
A faster friend, then shall I try,
Now whiles thou haste, the choice of two,
Do knitt the knott, or else undo.
Finis.
A letter to master Cressie.
WHere first I footyng found,
and fancy favor sought,
And offered faith with great estates,
a free access had wrought:
I mean among the rocks,
both rough and hard by kind.
Where storms do strive and weather beats,
for eury blaste of wind.
Where grows no Grapes for wine, to glad the griped breast,
Nor deintie heads ne weary bones, finds bedds of Down to rest:
I once again do stay, and lo such harber have,
As wandryng yers and tossed days, amid great tempests crave.
Full long before this time, as Court did me deceive,
In country close among sharp shrubs, I shapt by bones to leave:
But dazeled dum delights, did draw my body thence,
And clean bewitched wild wandryng wits, where I have wished me sense:
Yet as with piuishe pomp, did Pilgrim weary wax,
And knowledge saw the cuttyng curbs, of connyng courtly knacks.
I iudgde what diffrence was, between the mountains hye,
And carpetts fine where flatterers flock, and deep disdain does lie:
And smothely mischeef smiles, yet leaves on Ladies lappes,
And at rebound ere ball come down, can snatch up worldly happes:
The massy mountain great, that mossie mantell wears,
Breeds no such goats nor grinnyng kidds, nor fostereth no such fears.
For there poor people plain, in ragged garments go,
And loves the blunt and blotlesse life, and hates the painted show:
And feeds as they do live, not farest with falshodd fine,
Nor pampred up with French conceits, and mighty Spanish wine:
No craft nor cautell creeps, in cups of cold sour whaie,
For gilded gobblet hides the harms, that glass will soon bewraie.
So said I long ere this, so swear I now withal,
So some have found ere Caesar's days, in goodly golden hall:
O welcome wit well bought, though dear I paid for thee,
Thou bringst for loss of time at Court, in country gain to me.
Where now mine aged limbs, must grace or grave abide,
And Peacocke gaie let fall his plumes, for all his pomp and pride:
And where a harber good, I hope my Bark has found,
Where ship shall still find flood at will, when thousands are a ground.
Finis.
A special trifle on a fickle woman.
WHen pleasure could no more desire, and will his wish had won,
When fancy past the flaming fire, and love his race had ron:
When eury joy yt heart would have, in gladsom breast was found
And nothing lackte that love could crave, to salve a festred wound.
When suites were hanged on ye hedge, and plaints were out of place,
And liking great gave faith in pledge, ye pains should purches grace:
Naie rather when the fruit was had, that grows on top of tree,
And claspyng hand took by good happ, the Honey from the Be:
And eight years trothe was thoroughly tried, a proffe not common sure,
(That any hawk the pearche would bide, or like so long on lure:)
Then fickle freaks made Hagard soer, and shakte of bells in spite,
And plainly meant to come no more, for Gill would play the Kite.
Her friend but past the fomyng seas, and hence a space remainde,
But Gill would needs to take her ease, for pleasure be retainde:
An other where, O judge my friends, what wrong I suffer here,
And let the dealyngs of us both, before the world appear.
FINIS.
Verses written on the Muster that was made by the Pensioners before the Queen.
AS Mars began to bend his browe,
and Soldiers sought for war,
And Vulcane made the armor shine,
as bright as Venus star:
I listened to the Trompet loud,
that sounds a bloody blaste,
And so among the Marciall men,
an armed Pike I paste.
Now whether goes this noble crew, quod I O lively boys,
Leave of said wit such leaude demands, suffice to hear the noies:
Of Drom and Trompet in the feeld, and march without delay,
Be pleased to serve when Prince does call, content thee with thy pay.
On went the clattryng harnes straight, and up to horse we mount,
The Muster master and his clarke, came both to take a count:
Of all the poulls that paste in rank (like Soldiers for the broile,)
And paid them wages by the monthe, that else would live by spoil.
It was an other world to se, the bands how trim they wear,
And eury one in colors gaie, his own device did bear:
Upon the barbs that seru's for shocke, when trompet slaughter sou^ds,
And Cannon shot like tennis balls, in Soldiers lapps rebounds:
A goodly troop of armed men, did pass the Muster thoe,
Which was to friend as glad a sight, as fearful to the foe.
I saw a sacred Sibbell sage, (attired in mournyng weeds,)
Sit sadly in her Cotche the while, to see the fomyng steeds:
That played upon the pleasant Bitte, and bore the hedde so brave,
As though their looks to coward minds, a tremblyng terror gave.
These Palfraies praunced ore the plain, and on their backs did ride,
In warlike sort a worthy band, that well the horse could gide:
Some for devise in fiery flames, were painted finely then,
And so about the smothryng smoke, there was some art of pen.
And some wear all embrued in blood, a badge of war ye wotte,
That Soldiers for reward of toil, in feeld have often got:
Some leaned unto pillars large, some lacked propps to stay,
Some lighted candells at a torche, whose Lamps did burn away.
Some flue with wings as Cupid does, some to the clouds would clime,
Some hedlong fell into the seas, thus lo as served the time:
They drue in colors their device, the show was so set out,
It me amasde and many more, that there did gase about.
But yet I marked a friend of mine, full richly trimde and cled,
Who shone as bright as Phoebus does, amid his golden bed:
He satte all closed in a hope, and leaned on his arm,
As though he feared some outward happ, or felt some inward harm.
And to declare some odd conceit, of fancies fallen in thought,
As he this time was decked in gold, and robes full finely wrought:
The next day after came he in, as he some friend had lost,
For horse and man was thoroughly turnde, to black from gold emboste.
I dreamed on that strange devise, when I came home at night,
And rouled up and down in hedde, the noble warlike sight:
That I had seen the day before, and in my sweuen thoe,
Me thought that Cupid with a dart, gave this black knight a blow.
That pierced through his coat of steel, and stroke him ded withal,
Yet Venus stayed him in her hand, as he to ground did fall:
O bloody boy what have thou done, quod she to Cupid straight,
Thou shall no more be Venus son, (by all the Gods on height.)
I swear, a vaunt out of my sight, this man shall lue again,
Whereat the luke warm blood began, to comfort eury vain:
And gaspyng wide a breath he took, and so recoured there,
I cried a loud amid my sleep, and wakened with the fear.
Lo what it is to run abroad, where Marciall people be,
It makes men dream of buggs and bears, and things that they did see:
Yet suer well worth the lookyng on, the sight was that I saw,
I tell you trothe a few such bands, would keep our foes in awe.
And beautify both court and feeld, and win our land mutche fame,
In happy hour the Pensionars here, did first begin their name:
In happy time the Prince did place, such props about the state,
I say no more in eury case, God give them happy fate.
FINIS.
Written of the Queen, when her highness was in trouble.
MIstrust not trothe, that truly means,
for eury gellows freake,
Instead of wrong condemn not right,
no hidden wrath to wreake:
Look on the light of fautlesse life,
how bright her virtues shine,
And measure out her stepps each one,
by leauell and by line.
Deem each desert by upright guess, whereby your praise shall live,
If malice would be matched with might, let hate no judgment give:
Enforce no fear with wrestyng wits, in quiet conscience breast,
Lean not your ears to busy tongs, which breeds much vnreste:
In doubtful drifts wade not to far, it wearies but your mind,
Search not to know ye secret heart, whose thoughts are hard to find.
Avoid from you those hateful hedds, which helps to heap mishaps,
Be slow to hear the flattrars voice, who creeps in your laps:
Embrace their lou's that wills you good, and sporne not at their prays
Trust not to mutche unto your selves, for tickle are your stays.
How should your seat be settled sure, or stand on steadfast ground,
So propped up with hollow hearts, whose surety is unsound:
Give faith to those that fears for love, and not that love for fear,
Regard not those that force compells, to please you eury wheare:
All this well waied and borne away, (...) long your state,
Continually, with parfite peace, in (...) hate.
Finis.
Verses given the Queen's highness at windsor.
MY pen does quake in tremblyng hand,
as heart discouraged weart,
My mewes me fails, my senses blushe,
my skill creepes back for fear:
To write the verse that duty crau's,
O Lodestarre clear of light,
Whose beauty dims the Son by day, and darks the Moon by night.
Thou wretched man call home those works, ye careless bore thy name
And sift the purest of those lines, this verse of new to frame:
You Poets all of this ripe age, who has the cunnyng brains,
Come moist my dry and dulled pen, with your sweet flowyng veins.
For I write not of yearthly mould, this is some spark divine,
The selfsame Gods as I guess, pleased Parris eyne:
Yea Pallas wit, and Iunoes praise, this Venus leads away,
Th'aple of gold she has possessed, in scorn of who say naie.
Praise not your ladies where she comes, ye courtiers for your lives,
Boste not in little flowryng Nimphs, in maids ne married wives:
Except you mind to answer this, before hye Jove in Skies,
Whose Justice will give sentence sure, against your blinded eyes.
A sacred Queen, a stately port, what need I cloak it more,
Has won the fame of beauties boste, when she least lokes therefore:
And least acount of beauty makes, for lo full deep in breast,
Her virtues blome, her gifts do budde, her heavenly graces rest.
Which is the mark my pen shotes at, if wit may bring about,
To spread her such eternal fame, as world shall nere wipe out:
A further gift shall time unfold, if this may favor find,
As statelier style, and higher verse, shall serve the makers mind.
After this was delivered, all my devises and shows in prograses every where,
attended to no other purpose, but for the honoryng of her highness most
excellent virtues.

Finis.
A New years gift to the Earl of Ormond, given at Kilkennie, when the Earl of
Essex was in Irelande.
AN ancient gise has been,
this day for diverse drifts,
(Among our friends to wish good year,)
and give some New years gifts:
Yea of the meanest man,
the greatest Prince will take,
And none that can conceive good will,
do freendly gifts forsake.
And sure this custom old, in Court full long I kept,
Till close in bosom like a Snake, cold thanklesse hearts were crept:
But when I saw them swell, and look for ritcher ware,
(Yea gape for brauer blossoms gaie, tha^ barrain branch could spare)
I held my talent dear, and set my pen a side,
As one that scornde to sow good corn, and reap disdainful Pride:
Perhapps some judged straight, this was a crauyng kind,
And eager hawk for pleasant pray, did houer in the wind.
I answer those conceits, let it be tried and found,
That ever to the plaiers hands, did any haule rebounde:
Or ever any wight, for twenty years device,
Gave one good turn, or yielded thing, of any fame or price.
Then let me bear the blame, of crauer in this case,
O my goon Lord, who blusheth not, before the niggards face:
To show an empty bag, why all our country knows,
That Carpet knights could never spare, the droppyng of their nose.
And Courtiars at receipt, do lie them selu's as nere,
As connyng dog that draws a suit, and pouleth done the dear:
Then this must noted be, that all the pains I took,
Of faithful mind must needs arise, and not of greedy look.
Which mind awakes me now, to haules a noble wight,
With welcome home, and cry all hail, Achilles Marciall knight:
Yea mighty Mars him self, thy country can record,
When often from feeld thou have retournde, a victor and a Lord,
That land is threfolde blessed, that many such can show,
That prince full saffe shall sleep in rest, that can bid such men go:
To serve, when need requires, though hate would hide the same,
Who well deseru's should well belikt, each man ought have his fame
Each thing ought be esteemd, as lo the valor is.
I know no other name for gold, but gold, then note well this,
I florishe not with pen, to faune or flatter here:
For if I find with baser brute, ye do begin this year:
And noble nature change, and turn to other trade,
An other kind of nippyng verse, be sure, there shall be made.
For virtues sake a lone, I honor you in deed,
So take the gift and way it well, and do these verses reed:
And where the mind is fraught, with any spark of grace,
Redouble that, so Churchyards verse, shall honor Ormonds race.
FINIS.
A touch stone to try an error from a trothe.
IF I may ask, and you may tell,
I pray you let me know,
Why are so few, prefarde in Court,
yet thither still we go:
Why wanders world, where charge is great,
and chance is hardly won,
The ritche and wise, exchange their wealth,
for shadows in the Son.
Why spend they heaps of weighty wealth, for toies and trifles light,
Where times and hours do alter still, and day is tournd to night:
Good diet changde to basest chere, good tourns to badd disgrace,
Good words to tau^ts, good works to wiles, and plainnes finds no place
Come men to gase, and not to get, to spend and not to spare,
To rise with pomp^ and fall in debt, and ruin ere they beware:
That bag and bare reward can court, thee give to keep thoe warm,
But under that cold courtly knacke, there lies a further harm.
To country in thine youth or age, thou must return again,
Where lands are sold, and rents are shronk, in seams of garments vain:
Then tell me what good happ in court, thou founds or left behind,
Naie thou have brought a corzie thence, that nere shall out of mind.
For which the world shall point at thee, when scarce well worth a pin
Young master is for all his pomp, and braury he was in:
In court if Cock be tournd from thee, the spring will ron awrie,
Admit at Well thou will not draw, thou go to please thine eye.
What are the sports and pleasures there, is waityng such an ease,
Is staryng on the twinklyng stars, a thing that may thee please:
Is Flattrie to be followd so, is Finenesse sutthe a saint,
That Plainness must from country go, and learn in court to paint.
O blind belief, and boldness great, that thinks gaie golden hall,
The gladsome seat of sweet content, and worldly glories all:
Who sails the Seas, and sees the waw's, and surges rise a loft,
Will wish amid those striuyng streams, his feet on land full often.
But when big bounsyng bellowe beats, against bare rotten bark,
(And ship is tossed with tomblyng tides, in Winter nights full dark:)
Farewell fresh water soldiour straight, thy heart or gaul is broke,
Thy body would be in a mood, at home by chimneis smoke.
The Court to Sea I do compare, where calm aperes long while,
(And friends that tourns with fortunes whele, in face will laugh and smile:)
But let them once but see the lack, the calmie clouds will lowre,
And brauest speech, and sweetest words, will turn to bitter sour.
He seru's not one, but waits on all, that there would placed be,
And bound he is at beck and call, to hye and lo degree:
Now trudge and trott at one man's heels, then to an other straight,
Not that good happ is got with wit, and favor comes by sleight.
But for one man, has but one voice, and seldom speak he will,
To do thee good except such speech, proceeds of deeper skill:
But my demand is why do thou, that may from court live well,
Desire to change thy heavens blis, to feel the pains of hell.
First all thy sails must be a flant, that ship full wind may have,
Is that no pain to clap on clouts, and make free mind a slave:
Next must thou wait, and stand full still, or turn like wether cock,
Where eury thing that thou do crave, is under double lock.
Then for thy food thou must make shifte, or thrust amid the throng,
Where always those that best deserve, do suffer greatest wrong:
On fasting days, thy purse is plaegde, when triumphs comes adue,
Avoid the preace, the Court throughout, is filde with faces new.
When strangers come, the people swarm, like Bees about ye hiue,
Then may thou not in Court be bold, nor yet with stranger strive:
To tablyng houses hye thee then, so purse does never rest,
And he is at no lettle charge, in Court that speedeth best.
Then tell what brings thee thither thus, perharps fair goodly shose
Whose beauties passes as a flower, and withers like a Rose:
Naie Tom will be a lusty boy, and known for credit sake,
Among the best that of hye hearts, a good a count may make.
Why Court makes not but of a few, and those I say are they,
That holds with Hare, and hunts with hound, and goes with game awey
If that but few in Court do thrive, why do such nombers flock,
Where fortune borrows all they have, and paies them with a mock.
If ten within one Princes reign, the Court does well advance,
Ten score comes home by weping cross, or finds but crooked chance:
A year or two might well suffice, to try what grace will grow,
A longer time but breeds an ebb, where Fortunes flood should flow.
To tarry till our time ronnes out, that none can call again,
Is loss of wealth, and spoil of wit, and break of sleep and brain:
Some happly for thy shape or sense, in Court may make the stay,
But bite not at those baited hooks, whose net fine fish betraie.
Some offers help that lou's great trains, and would be waited on,
Such feed themselfs with new consaits, when old device is gone:
And leads poor yonglyngs like the lambs, yt must go suck the eawes
Seek not in Court for such fine friends, but shrine such saints for shreaus.
Some neither tells what they will do, nor will do aught at all.
Yet gives hope to hapless men, and so letts favor fall:
Among them catch it who that can, as good take smoke from fire,
(Or shadow from the shinyng Son,) as by that way aspire.
Some are not to be spoken with, but those have cunnyng shifts,
To drive out time, and lengthen suits, with long delays and drifts:
Some speak thee fair to suck out sapp, from goodly blouming tree,
So traps the silly hongrie Mouse, whose haste no harms can see.
When thou have spied these sorts of men, and found much labor lost,
Why do thou by thy courtyng thus, with such great charge and cos^:
I ask where many are undone, why do the rest repair,
For them that seeks to be sold, it is no common fair:
Nor common plot to feed upon, if nagge be lean before,
Court rather is a presious place, that still maintains the store.
A private soil to fat a few, that happ has hedged in,
A ground for those that from their birthe, has always happy bin:
The greatest number have great skoupe, and roulm enough at will,
Where they may grossly pike up cromes, or feed on grass their fill.
A dishe and dainty of the Court, no meat for mowers is,
Then why to court does come such preace, I pray you tell me this:
Great nombers have been spoiled there, and few in deed prefard,
But such as world thought best upon, and Gods the^ selves regard.
Full forty years by turn and times, the Court I haunted have,
And still in hope of doing well, I thought deserts should crave:
Now wrote I Rimes, then made I books, then song before the best
Made plays in peace, and for the wars, a soldiour ready pressed.
In eury Prograsse nere the Prince, with some new odd device,
A merry Christmas man at home, not stately, strange, nor nice:
But glad to please and purchase friends, and yet for all these things,
My bells are of, and I abroad, may fly if I had wings:
O gallants gaie when your ritche robes, begins to change their hue,
The Court will hang the head a side, and bid you all adue.
Youth lasts not long, age sone decaies, and goes like candell out,
To fall of leaf each fruit shall yield, that erst in spring did sprout:
But as new parts and plaiers still, stepps up upon the stage,
So gallants to the Court will come, and did in eury age.
But I mutche muse, why people swarm, where surety is unsound,
And few are helped, and thousadns have, much sharp misfortune found.
FINIS.
For the loss of a mighty and noble man's favor.
IF tears may try my truth,
that trickle down my cheeks,
Or if good will by proof be known,
in years, in days, or weeks:
Then do I wrong receive,
where freendship crave I most,
And where in deed with eury storm, my vessel has been toste.
And through the tempests all, my ship has safly sailde,
And yet no seas might hurt my Bark, my hope has so preuailde:
O help you Courtiars now, and Soldiers eury chon,
To wail my plage and present state, my Fortune fled and gone.
And wail this woeful world, wherein most friends do faint,
And namely such as trackt of time, has taught by tongs to paint.
And promesd more by words, then will or work performs,
Such have the kirnells eaten all, and are the greedy worms:
That gnawes the hearts of men, in pieces eury day,
And such have led my shipp alas, a weary wilsome way.
From whence if I return, I shall but wander still,
And find no seas to sail upon, that may content my will:
Fie on my country soil, there is no surety found,
A chancelesse race mine age must try, amid a doubtful ground.
Here have I hoiste my sail, as hie as wind can blow,
Here had I friends whose nodd or beck, a world may overthrow:
And still my staiyng staff, did stand by one alone,
Whose gentill heart is now become, as hard as Marble stone.
To me the case is such, the mischeef so is mine,
When I am worn unto the bones, he letts me starve and pine:
And letts me sinck or swim, or shift by sleight of brain,
As though my hedde so game some were, to set on eury maine.
Thus freendship feeble grows, and men can causlesse change,
And will this day familiar be, and wax to morn full strange:
I will go fish for Fate, through floods and salt sea foam,
And rather dye on wretched rocks, then perish here at home.
Among my chefest friends, amid my native soil,
Where never erst in any point, I suffered blot or foil:
Where all the world may see, I sucked up many a wrong,
Where well away the ritche may think, a poor man liu's to long:
Where let my truth be tried, I clame no small reward,
And where if fortune do me right, the prince ought me regard.
FINIS.
Verses that were given to the Queen's majesty.
AS Thonder cracks with horlyng noies,
ronns ratlyng through the Skies,
For fear whereof great flocks of Sheep,
to Fold or covert flies:
Or as the dreadful Judges voice,
of life sharp sentence giu's,
And causes captiu's quake for fear,
that under mercy liu's.
So hearing from your highness mouth, a word of wonders weight,
Like hound I clapped down my ears, and coutcht in kenell straight:
And droupyng in this worlds disdain, that drounds each good desert,
I sucked up sighs as sorrow shapt, to break a blistred heart.
Yet gripyng greef in gronyng breast, bred no such swellyng sore,
But salve of sweet contented mind, had healed long before:
Though nere the dongeon of despair, in darcknesse did I dwell,
And Caron came with careful boat, to row me down to hell.
I held my hands to heaven hye, where hope and help is had,
And so apeald to him above, that heavy minds may glad:
Fear not quod he of froward Fate, that fast on people fauls,
Nor shon not (for a cottage poor) the princely golden hauls.
In Court thou shall thy credit seek, for she who scepter bears,
Shall show thee favor when I list, and look upon thy tears:
Her judgment tries the gold from dross, and where does virtues bud,
She frankly speaks and freely giu's, and flings forth worldly good.
When he that rules the hearts of kings, had told this tale to me,
To court I came for cause well known, and knelyng on my kne:
At closet door where Prince does pass, to prayer mildly than,
I found by words and gracious looks, I was a happy man.
O blessed be that cherefull browe, where Phoebus beams did shine,
And everlasting light remain, amid those blessed eyne:
That like the stars or Lamp of day, that blaseth broad in Skies,
Does drive dark clouds and night away, when blostryng blasts arise.
And as there burns great gifts of grace, in her like candle clear,
So God uphold her blessed face, among us many a year.
Finis.
A rebuke to vain lovers.
WHy art thou bound, that may be free,
Shall reason yield, to ragyng will:
Is thraldom like, to libertee,
Will thou exchange, the good for ill.
Then must thou learn, a childishe play,
And of each smart, to taste and prove,
When lookers on, shall judge and say:
Lo this is he, that ^^u's by love.
Thy wits with thought, shall stand at stays,
Thine hedde shall have, but heavy rest:
Thine eyes shall watch, for wanton ways,
Thy tongue shall show, thy hearts request.
Thine ears shall hear, a thousand naies,
Thine hand shall put thy pen to pain:
But in the end, thou shall dispraise,
Thy life so spent, for such small gain.
First cast the care, and count the cost,
And way what fraud, in love is found:
Then after come, and make thy boste,
And show some cause, why thou art bound.
When that the wine, has run full low,
Thou shall be glad, to drink the lies:
And basse the flesh, full often I know,
That has been blown, with many flies.
If love and lust, might never cope,
And youth might run, in measures race,
Or if long suite, might win sure hope,
I would less blame, a lovers case.
But love is great, with hot desire,
And sweet delight, maks youth so fond:
That little sparks, do prove great fire,
And bryngs free hearts, to endless bond.
We se where great devotion is,
The people creep, and kiss the cross:
Wherefore I find, less fault with this,
Though fondlyngs gilde, a bridells bosse.
The fool his babble will not change,
Not for the scepter of a king:
A lovers life, is nothing strange,
For young men seeks no other thing.
FINIS.
Of fained frendshippe.
IN friends are found a heap of doubts,
that double dealyng use,
A swarm of such I could find out,
whose craft I could accuse:
A face for love, a heart for hate,
those faunyng friends can bear,
A tongue for trothe, a hedde for whiles,
to fraud the simple ear.
In humble port is poison packt, that plainness can not spy,
Who credits all and can not se, where stingyng serpents lie:
With hasty trust the harmless heart, is easily hampred in,
And made believe it is good Gold, that is but Lead and Tin.
The first deceit that blears our eyes, is fained faith professed,
The second trap is gratyng talk, that gropes each strangers breast:
The third device is greetyng words, with colors stretched out,
Which bids suspect to fear no snares, nor dread no dangers doubt:
The last and worst is long repair, that crepes in frendshipps lap,
And daiely haunt that under trust, deuiseth many a trappe:
Lo how false friends can frame a fetch, to win their wills with wiles,
And sause their sleights with sugared sopps, and shadoe hurt with smiles.
To sarue their lusts are sondrie sorts, that practice diverse kinds,
Some carry Honey in their mouths, and venom in their minds.
Thus where that custom ^ou^leth men, in vice and foul abuse,
No fear of God nor loss of name, there manners may reduce:
Me think the stones within the street, should cry out at this case,
And eury one that should them meet, should shon their double face.
FINIS.
Verses that wear given to a most mighty personage.
O Pearlesse Prince, if pen had purchased praise,
My part was played, long since on public stage:
Since Leaden world, disdaines the golden days,
With face of Brass, men must go through this age.
Though Poetts prate, like Parret in a cage,
Poor Tom may sit, like Crow upon a stone,
And crack hard Nutts, for Almonds sure are gone.
A Fig for verse, and filed gallant styles,
Whose romblyng noyes, but thonders in the air:
For pleasant words, procures but scorns and smiles,
Or clokes cold showers, in calmie weather fair.
My spised terms, are dround in deep despair,
Young wits has run, old Churchyard out of breath:
And babblyng books, has ridden Rhyme to death.
Both Prose and Rhyme, does go a beggyng now,
And Finenesse fraes, so savors on the school:
That learning leanes, unto a rotten bow,
And Science walks, but like a ridyng fool.
Yea tongue and pen, are both to weak a tool,
To work for gain, in greedy world God knows:
Where Fortunes flood, to needless river goes.
Some drinks their fill, yet mak's the world believe
Well hedde is dry, where water freely glides:
When poor men weep, such laugh within their sleue
And smothly look, yet wisely watch their tides.
In brimmest storms, their Barks at Anchor rides,
When fire would burn, so snatche the coals away:
If favor were, in trial as it seems,
The noble Court, a lone were Churchardes stay,
The fountain hedde, where bubblyng springs do play,
Is fittest place, for tree but newly cropped:
If Cock would run, and Conduit were not stopped.
Who stands below, and looks till Apples fall,
(And hopes to eat, that others shakes down:)
Is like to catch, a shadow from a wall,
Or watch a ball, that never giu's reboune.
Constrainde to cry, to her that wears the croune,
I wait mine hour, or foerst to part the land:
Thus helpless man, seek's help at Caesar's hand.
FINIS.
The lovers of the world.
I See their sleights, and secret science,
That sues to serve, and are out cast:
I see those Dames, that draws the lines,
That shutts the netts, when fish are fast.
I see some stand, and crave a look,
Like eager hawks, that watch their pray:
For want of bait, they bite the hook,
Like loving worms, they spend the day.
I see some smile, that makes men smart,
Which liu's vnlearnde, in lovers laws:
Yet with their wits, and wily art,
With fondlyngs food, they feed the Dawes.
Light triflyng toies, will children please,
As well as gold, or presious stones:
The faunyng whelpps, thinks them at ease,
When flesh is gone, to gnawe the bones.
I see thee still, and quiet sort,
When such as I, the sturdie tempest tries:
And yields to shocks, as swellyng surges ries.
More bold then wise, to trouble Casars cares,
With bare devise, and deawe of barraine brain:
But dangers doubt, and dread of further fears,
Bids homely gest, be bold and plie the maine.
Through hazardes great, a gobb of gold we gain,
The Dice must run, and such as light on luck:
May live from lack, and weald this worldly mucke.
The Merchant thriu's, through ventring ship and goods,
(If vessel escape, a flawe or Pirates slight:)
The Soldiers gain, their fame by manly moods,
And winns the feeld, where coward dare not feight.
The suter may, not sleep in things of weight,
But watch and speak, and venture boldly throw:
They come by fruit, that clims the highest bow.
Blind Deastnie deals, the dole when all is done,
Toil reaps but tears, and trothe has empty hand:
In vain the wise, about the world does roune:
For stay of state, that does in Destnie stand.
The hapless then, does build his house on sand,
No pen preuailes, no service winns reward:
Till labors long, by Fortune be prefard.
Where Ladders lack, in vain the clouds he climes,
No connyng helps, nor courage can do good:
At Cannon mouth, then lay down idell Rimes,
And win the rest, by death and loss of blood.
Where seas are dry, in vain we fish the modd,
Where neither suite, nor service gets grace:
Fly from the foil, and give fond Fortune place.
It may be so, amid the most extreemes,
Which sitts and marks, these ianglyng Iayes:
Yet finds game, and goodly sport,
To see such birds, caught in the spraies.
I see them laugh, when lovers lowre,
There doettyng time, has taught them wit:
Who knows what means, both sweet and sour,
Will fly the force, of fancies fit.
I see some sheep, but yet no fools,
Which use to room, among the rout:
Yea skillful scholars, of the schools,
For they can choose, the fairest out,
The Hunter knows, the fattest Dear,
Amid the heard, where game does run:
These men likewise, as does appear,
Among the Stars, finds out the Son.
I see how craft, can cloak his care,
And paint his plaints in paper plain:
As Merchants do, set forth their ware,
And lie full loud, for little gain.
I see how trothe, would tell his tail,
And through he goes among the swarm:
I see how beutie makes a stale,
To take young fry, that thinks no harm.
Mutche more is seen, that scapes mine eyes,
An Argoes were, full rare to find:
This is a glass, to show the wise,
That wilful love, is ever blind.
It thinks it does, it self so shroude,
That none can see, his trade nor trace:
How should he walk, with in a cloud,
When love is written in his face.
Finis.
Of a noble mind.
THe noble mind that scorns to stoop,
at base and wretched things,
As quick as thought, mountes up the Skies,
with swifte aspiryng wings:
Not lookyng down, to dedde delits,
that drounds the wits in dross,
(And carries weak and simple brains,
about with mucke and moss.)
But bearyng heart and hedde so hie, as judgment well may go,
The hautie sprit climes through the clouds, and leau's vain world beloe
I mean the manly courage great, that stoutly strives for state,
Disdains the doltishe donghill Kites, and flies the Fancons great.
And coming once to mountain topp, from whence men se the vale,
A loft it keeps like gallant Bark, that has a bouncyng gale:
Then clap on cloutes and sea room seek, adue the doubtful shore,
In shallowe stream, or rivers small, we harbor ship no more.
To lofty seas whose wawes do work, with each small wind yt bloes
Set course and Bark, that Pilotes sage, may se how fortune goes:
The mind is base that diggs and delues, where Deastnie scorns to dwell
In highest soiles are heavens sought, on earth is naught but hell.
Who holds down head and hangs the groine, a cowards heart he bears,
He dares not look on shinyng Son, that eury shadow fears:
His comb is cut his courage gone, that droupes or takes disgrace,
The medson for a great mischaunce, is merry cheerful face.
The swetest nutts and fairest fruits, from topps of trees we take,
On highest rocks or stately bows, gaie birds their neasts they make
And nere the ground tame dawes do breed, and simple doves you find,
The carrain Crow flies here beloe, when hawk does soer ye wind,
Wherefore let noble minds alone, their course does pass our skill:
Their hearts are filled with pleasant hops, that feeds their fancies still.
FINIS.
Of doubtful hope.
HIs hope is hard, that seeks for fire from froste,
And feeds on flames, of eager fancy still:
And sowes in hope, and reapes but labor lost,
And wishes mutche, and wastes with want of will.
Whose mountyng mind, builds castles in the air,
And heavy heart, lies drounde in deep despair.
O restless race, that like the hour glass ronns,
With grains of greef, and so beginns again:
O fearful Fate, that all good Fortune shunns,
Oh torment strange, that has no end of pain.
O dreerie life, that death disires in deed,
Whose twined state, vntwistes like feeble threede.
FINIS.
Of the flantyng world.
THis world is all a flant,
like Ship full under sail,
As swift to gather as the Ante,
and slow to give as Snaile:
The Ante in Summer time,
prouides for Winters food,
The Snaile as slowly does he clime, so does he little good.
The one learnes man to save, the other slowly glides,
To bid men work as time they have, to walk and watch their tides,
That lesson of the Snaill, is slowly lookte unto,
So that this silly creepyng soul, full little good can do.
And hourders up of wealth, are in the selfsame plite,
Yet does the Ante for deep foresight, man's judgment more delight.
But flantyng late came up, the gise is somewhat new,
The Rainboes colors does it bear, and yet it has no hew:
The glory of the same, ten thousand stains will take,
And scarce the wisest men do know, of flantyng what to make.
He ^lants with others flowers, she brau's in boroude weeds,
But never none could reap good fruit, of such vain rotten seeds:
This flantyng squares it out, and keeps a cruel coile,
But in the end this new found toye, does bring them all to spoil,
On braury it begone, with beggrie shall it end,
This bow is shapte of such a wood, shall either break or bend,
A flant a flant my boys, but flante to far farewell,
Make mutche of world, ye neither come in heaven nor in hell.
The saints disdain your pomp, the Devils fear your pride,
Then purchase Purgatory now, and there let flantyng bide:
So flounce and flant your fill good world should weary wax,
Of strange devise that sturrs the state, to strife through new found knacks.
Finis.
Of a fantastical dream taken out of Petrarke.
THe thing I likte in sleep, I found a dream untrue,
What me mislikt was true, I saw with open eyes:
A sleep I dreamt and thought, my chere had changed hue,
A wake I felt and found, my former greef aryes.
You wakened senses now, why hear you not and see,
Those things I heard and saw, when dreams apperde to me:
What foolish custom keeps, my wretched eyes accurste,
In sleep to see the best, awake behold the worste.
When pleasantly I sleep, a peace was promisde me,
When woefully I wakt, my wars renewed again:
When pleasantly I slept, in bliss I thought to be,
When woefully I wakte, of hell I felt the pain.
If truth annoye me then, and falsehood please me best,
With all my heart I wish, no truth in me may rest:
Since wakyng works me woe, and sleep contents my will,
God grant I never wake, but live by slepyng still.
Thrice happy are the beasts, by slombryng sleep that live,
Six months in quiet rest, with eyes iclosed fast:
I do not say such sleep, a shape of death does give,
Nor wakyng represent, the life that aye does last.
Contrary humors lo, posses my mased mind,
In wakyng death I feel, in slepyng life I find:
If sleep the figure be, of death as most men say,
Come quickly death O death, and close mine eyes in claie.
Finis.
A fancy as an answer to that dream.
SOme feel by dreams more joy,
then any other way,
And those do steal such sport by nights,
they care not for the day:
The sick as well as sound,
has such consaits in breast,
By slombryng slepes, and sweuons sweet,
they dream they have some rest.
The thirsty thinks by dream, he drinks and cool's his heat,
But that I call a cow devise, to quench a fever great:
So love that liu's with dreams, on fancies food may feed,
Yet want as mutche a sleep or wake, as they that starve for need.
If pleasure we conceive, through sight the same does grow,
Then wakyng is the cheifest friend, and sleep a mortal foe:
The eye must first be fixed, ere senses feelyng find,
And so in sleep some watchyng sprite, awakes the drousie mind.
Though body seems to sleep, and takes his ease in bed,
The vital veins are woorkyng still, and soul is never dedde:
Thus prove I that we wake, when sleep beclipps the ghost,
And wakyng wits and stirryng blood, does comfort nature most.
A dream more life does show, then death or lompishe sleep,
And by the motion of such dreams, our soul and life we keep:
So grant I that our sleeps, a wakyng Nature have,
For sleep it self is noughe but death, as bed presents the grave.
Though beast is praisde for sleep, yet man has better mood,
To wake and seek through breathyng breast, to live by angels food:
Then let leude fancy sleep, with beast and if you please,
It is the quick and wakyng muse, that most my sense does ease.
Finis.
A fantasy on fifteen words, endyng all in one letter.
IF freendship faint or Fortune fail,
and flood forsakes to flow,
Yet call for hope to hoise up sail,
a gale of wind may blow:
When sorrow comes and sighs increase,
with wicked worldly woe,
Believe the best of badde mischaunce,
and ease thy burden so.
The child that never felt the rod, may out of order go,
The horse that can no bridell bide, no pace nor train will show:
It Is better friend reform thy fauts, then take rebuke of foe,
The wood yt breaks when it should bend, will never make good bow.
That heart is weak which for small greef, co^sums and melts like snow,
The rose nor flower is nere the worse, that does nere nettell grow:
A man may suffer mutche in heart, though shoe do nipp his toe,
A quiet man may live full long, that dwells in house with shroe.
The Faucon flies a stately gate, in spite of carraine Crow,
Some maks a merry gladsome chere, yet feles great care ye know
Some have a sad and heavy mind, and walks as light as Do.
Thus such as bear a pacient breast, do conquer that they crave,
And those that striu's against the stream, shall seldom pleasure have.
Finis.
Of the strong and the weak.
THe weakest goes to wall,
who wants friends must fast,
They say the strongest will have all,
would God that world were paste:
For feeble force I have,
with world to tugge and toil,
And lackyng tools to poule and shave, I yield me to the spoil.
Of those that spares no slight, nor wit to win their will,
Who seems to make the crooked straight, yet liu's by fleecyng still:
The weak has feeble knees, to clime the clouds ye know,
The strong takes home from the Bees, and seru's his fancy so.
The strong and mighty flood, sweeps all before him clean,
And tourns up dross both sand and mudde, and keeps no kind of mean:
A silly shallowe stream, can do but little boot,
It neither breaks down massy banks, nor tears up trees by root.
The weak is vanquished still, the strong will victor be,
The strong with weak, nor weak with strong, will never well agree:
When sound and sick do like, and cold and heat are one,
Or moss and mucke for might and maine, may match with marble stone
Then strong and weak shall join, till then say naie who shall,
The strong will triumph on the weak, and weak shall go to wall.
FINIS.
Of Youth and Age.
FUll dearly have I bought,
the years that youth has spent,
The longer life the more unrest,
and still the less content:
To see that I have seen, and be a child again,
I would not wish this world to win,
to live and pass such pain.
To skipp from age to youth, who had such scope and choice,
Perchance he would be young to choose, and in the same rejoice:
For children careless live, and fears not Fortunes fall,
When men do dread each posse of wind, yea though the storm be small,
But sure a weary race, these children have to run,
And many sorrows shall they taste, before their course be done.
As in my self the proof, who can not count his care,
Nor learn the rest that after comes, how they shall shon the snare:
The wilful will not learn, they say that knows the art,
Till his own rod has made him smart, and youth has played his part.
The tales of trauled men, are held for fained lies,
Until the strangeness of their toil, be seen before our eyes:
Then t^^e that list to tread, the trace of youths desire,
And they that feels the flames to hott, I know will fear the fire.
I wish them well to speed, that will such fancies cheap,
And God the^ grant when age does come, some better corn to reap
Then I whose youth consumes, with weary wanton ways,
That has but labor for my fruit, and dumpishe doleful days:
Lo these are all the joys, that from our birthe we have,
The world to toss the time to spend, the earth to be our grave.
FINIS.
Of the short estate of man.
MY restless life, has reapt that woe has sown,
The days tormoile brings home but bitter smarte:
I live with wolves, in savage woodds unknown,
Where Tigers whelps, do feed on harmles heart
O cage of care, wherein no bird can sing,
But dolefu^l tunes, that may no Music show:
And though each man, knows well where greef does wring,
Yet can no life, discharge it self of woe.
Then Hell is here, find Heaven where you can,
In banished bliss, our bodies wander still:
And out of breathe, ronnes wretched sprite of man,
Beguilde by hope, and gaddyng greedy will.
Thus life is death, and death is most desired:
Where labryng mind, with weary life is tired.
FINIS.
The praise of mistres Mabell Brown, wherein virtue is honored.
IF I were Judge, or had the choice,
Of colors fair, to choose the best:
Unto the Brown, I give my voice,
As pearl of price, above the rest.
If men do ask, the cause and why,
I praise the Brown, before the White:
I say what thing, contents the eye,
The heart therein, has his delight.
The Brown or Black, do seldom change,
They still present, a sober grace:
The White and Read, are light and strange
Whose colors fade, and fall a pace.
The Brown is kept, from blott and stain,
When White will soil, by diverse ways:
The Skarlet bears, no better grain,
Then does the Brown, that I do praise.
The whitest mark, is often desierd,
The fairest flower, rests nere vnsmeld:
The Brown is, of few requierd,
The darkest dye, is worn but seld.
By which I prove, the thing most used,
Through many hands, may be infecte:
Wherefore I may, be well escuesde,
To praise the Brown, without suspecte.
Although the Lilly be full fair,
The sent and taste, is not so pure:
The pleasant clouds, within the air,
Do often hide, a stormy shower.
What Apple has so sweet a taste,
As has the Pippin Black and Brown:
Wherefore this color I have plaste,
Of worthy same, to wear the croune.
FINIS.
Of wandryng and gaddyng abroad.
Draw home betyme, ere Youth take leave
and Age upon thee grows,
And do not thou thy self deceive,
with hope of worldly shows:
Whose po^pe does naught but please thine eyes
with that thou can not have,
And carries the like cloud in Skies,
to that should be thy slave.
What see thou fool in princely hauls, that may a poor man eas,
Whose state is toste with tennis balls, and turns with wind and seas:
He courts some while that cart does drive, ere many years run out,
And they that most for Fortune strive, do live in furthest dout.
A thriftlesse son enioyes their store, and therewith serves his lust,
When those are gone that sweat therefore, and trodden in the dust:
What profit bryngs thy weary bones, of uncouth sights abroad,
It wears but feet upon the stones, and does the conscience lode.
Ten thousand years heap up in hedde, and all therein has paste,
And mark each thing is done and sedd, and way the same at last:
And thou shall see it breaks but brain, and breeds but greef in breast,
Thus trauaill needs must lose his pain, when home must be thy rest.
The heart desires the eye does crave, a sight of all things don,
When proof thereof a man shall have, what has our trauaill won:
A triumph but a pagent seems, when paste is all the sho,
All other things that man estemes, man lothes at length also:
Wherefore thou pilgrim too and fro, take up thy trusse in haste,
For time and al things here I know, with thee will wear and waste.
FINIS.
Of fair things and soul, where in a virtuous Lady is set out.
AS God bestowde his grace,
on thee through heavenly skill,
By comely shape and form of face,
and worldly wealth at ^^ll:
So people do suppose,
(that bears an upright mind,)
Amid thy noble inward breast,
dame Uertues gifts are shrinde.
For God makes nothing lame, his woorks so perfect be,
That hidden graces aunswers often, the outward shape we see:
The ritche and precious pearl, that shines to sight ye know,
Have many virtues in the same, besides the outward show.
The goodly glittryng gold, has Nature to restore,
Some piece of health yt sickness brought, by greef consumde before:
The flower whose beauty fair, delites the eye full well,
Is friend by kind to medsons sweet, and sharps our sense by smell.
The ground that smothly looks, bears fruits and herbs enowe,
And yields the Idle Landlorde rent, and feeds the household throw:
Thus from fair things I prove, some goodness men may reap,
And where that beauty budds and bloums, does bounty hord and heap
Else all this goodly world, is but like painted post,
Or as a picture dombe and dedde, that has ne sprite nor ghost.
If Phoebus wanted heat, and did no grace retain,
For all his beams and glory great, he should but shine in vain:
I doubt not but the Gods, has furnished you so well,
That life and good renown can show, where virtue ought to dwell
My pen but mou's your mind, of that ye like to here,
A jewel that the Gods embrace, and world does hold full dear:
(...) that long shall last, whose light shall nere go out,
But burn and blase as bright as torche, whiles breath ye bear about.
If people did but note, what does by virtue ryes,
The meanest wight with wings of fame, would seek to mount ye skies:
Or follow them whose stepps, does each good gift advance,
They know full well what measure means, that leads dame virtues dance,
I leave you to the round, hold on the trace a while,
And as the bell beginns to sound, at Churchyards verses smile.
Finis.
Of an enemy.
NO simple mind may thrive a day,
The suttell Snakes seeks out such slight:
Then look thou arm thy self I say,
With face of Brass, the feelde to feight.
And never yield, the race to run,
Till courage has the conquest won.
Suspecte the worste, and work the best,
And sharp thy wits, to sheeld the harm:
And seek the Serpents in their neste,
Although in hols, the Adders swarm.
When craft is curbde with cunnyng skill,
A simple mind shall have his will.
Finis.
Written in the beginning of King Edwardes reign, which verses are called
Dauie Dicars Dream.
WHen faith in friends bear fruit,
and foolish fancies fade,
And crafty catchers come to naught,
and hate great love has made:
When fraud flies far from town,
and loitrers leave the feelde,
And rude shall run a rightful race,
and all men be well wild.
When gropers after gain, shall carpe for common wealth,
And wily woorkers shall disdain, to fig and live by stealthe:
When wisdom walks a loft, and folly sitts full low,
And virtue vanquishe pampred vice, and grace beginns to grow.
When Justice ioynes to truth, and Law looks not to meede,
And bribes help not to build fair bowrs, nor gifts great glotto^s feed:
When honger hides his hedde, and plenty please the poor,
And niggards to the needy men, shall never shut their door.
When double dark deceit, is out of credit worn,
And faunyng speech is falshed found, and craft is laughed to scorn:
When Pride which pickes the purse, gapes not for garments gaie,
Nor Iauels wear no velvet wedes, nor wa^dring wits bear swaie.
When riches wrongs no right, nor power poor put back,
Nor covetous creepes not into Court, nor learned living lack:
When slipper sleights are seen, and far fetches be found,
And private profit and self love, shall both be put in pound.
When debt no Sergeant dreeds, and Courtiers credit keep,
And might mells not with Merchandise, nor lords shall sell no sheep:
When lucre lasts not long, and hourd great heaps does hate.
And every wight is well content, to walk in his estate.
When truth does tread the streats, and liers lurk in den,
And Rex does reign and rule the roast, and weeds out wicked men:
Then balefull barnes be blithe, that here in England wone,
Your strife shall stint I undertake, your dreadful days are done.
FINIS.
Here ends the book called Churchyardes Chance, and begins an other book
named his Charge: and so in one volume shall follow, his Choice, his Chippes,
and all the rest of his books that here tofore has bin set out, and written
by Churchyard, saving a book of Meta incognita, and some other small volumes,
which can not be bound in quarto, yet hereafter (by Gods grace) shall be set
out in a large volume. Where two thousand wonders shall be treated of, with a
rehearsal of wars and services, dooen in this our present age: which book
shall be called Churchyardes Challenge, dedicated to the noble Earl of Oxforde.
All which works (God willing) shall come forth with as mutche speed as
possible can be made: requiryng the readers thereof, in consideration of the
Aucthours great study and pains, to yield him such good report, as his
good will deserves.

Finis.

