An exhortation to all men to take heed and beware of rebellion: wherein are
set forth the causes, that commonly move men to rebellion, and that no cause
is there, that ought to move any man thereunto, with a discourse of the
miserable effects, that ensue thereof, and of the wretched end, that all
rebels comme to, most necessary to be read in this seditiouse and
troublesome time, made by John Christoferson.

At the end whereof are joined two godly Prayers, one for the Queen's highness,
very convenient to be said daily of all her loving and faithful Subjects,
and an other for the good and quiet estate of the whole realm.

Read the whole, and then Judge.

To the most excellent and virtuous Queen, Marye by the grace of GOD, Queen
of England, France, and Irelande, and defendour of the faith, John
Christoferson her graces Chapleyne, and daily orator wishes a long, a quiet,
and a prosperous reygne with the daily increase of al godly virtue.
Like as there be many and sondrye diseases (most gracious Sovereign) which
chaunsing to a man's body, so sore many times trouble and vex the same, that
they not only put it in great peril and danger of death, but also at length
kill and destroy it altogether: So in a realm or commonwealth (which may
well be compared to a man's body) there are many sore sicknesses, that
oftentimes so grievously noye the same, that if remedy be not found out
betime, they not only put it in great danger of perishynge, but also in
conclusion work the utter ruin and destruction thereof. And as when the body
is sick, Physicians by friends are diligently sought for, and medicines to
cure the sickness be with all speed prepared: So in a realm or commonwealth,
that is with any sore sickness infected, every one that favors the same, is
bounden to seek remedy therefore. For if friends for a private man's sake, will
(when his body is diseased) gladlye take pains both to learn what disease
he is troubled with, and also to get ^ome good Physycke for him, to the intent
he may be delivered from his disease, and restored to his health again, much
more all those, that love their country and the common welthe thereof,
whenever it is with any troublesome sickness anoyed, ought earnestly to
travail: first to know what the sickness is, and then to provide some wholesome
medicines to put it away, yea and to seek al means possible clearly to
del^uer their country from all peril and danger thereof. We read in the
excellent Historiographer Herodotus, Herodot. in his bo^e called Clio, which is
the first book of his story.
how that the Babilonians made a law, that whenever any man fell sick
among them, he should be carried into ye market place, and there lie, to
the intent that he might demand of every one, that repaired thither, whether
they had been troubled with the like disease, and how they were cured and
made hole, so that the sick man lying there, might by the same means, that
they had used, be delivered from his sickness, and recover his health again.
And by that law also every man that came thither was bound both to ask the
man, what sickness he had, and also to show him. if he knew any remedy, that
were good for it. By the example whereof every one, that hartelye loves his
country, and earnestly tendereth the health and welthe of the same, whenever
he sees the body thereof (which lies open before al men's eyes) with any kind
of disease infected* and has learned what the sickness is, and either by
experience, or otherwise can tell, what is good for it, is bound in conscience
to declare it, to the end that his country which is so vexed, may find some
relief, and fare the better by it. For he must consider, that in relieuing
the whole body, he relieueth him self to, being a membre thereof. For like as
when the body is sick all the members be partakers of the grief and pain,
that it suffers: So again when the body finds any ease, the me^bres to find
great relief therein. Wherefore I for my part because I plainly se, that the
body of my country (which I do greatly lamente) has been lately sore
troubled with ye greu^us sickness of rebellion, and as yet perhaps has some
seditiouse folks in it, thought it my most bounden duty to set forth in
writynge such a poor medicine for the relieuing of the same disease, as I
judged mete and convenient therefore. And albeit there be many remedies* which
be noted of learned men and good writers, whereby this grieuouse disease is
wont to be cured: Remedies against rebellion.
as diligent inquisition, that no unlawful assembles be gathered: as grave and
wise counseile, that when such are made they may be shortly by policy
dissolved: as reasonable conditions for the dissoluing thereof to be offered: as
force of arms when as no other means will serve: as due execution of justice
upon all such, as be offenders therein: as taking away of the causes, whereof
rebellion commonly grows: and as that al such, as have rebelled, be spoiled
of their harness, wherewith they defended themselfes in the time of rebellion.
with diverse other such like remedies, yet in mine opinion no more fitter
remedy can there be found, then that seditiouse men's hearts by gentle
exhortation may be thoroughly persuaded: first that in rebellyng they most
grievously offend their lord God, and so put their souls in ieopardie:
secondarely yt they go about thereby to destroy their bodies, which shall
therefore be put to a most vile and shameful death: thirdly that they shall
loose al yt they have, by means thereof, undo their wives and children, and
disfame all their posterity: last of all that they shall be occasion, that
their country shall be most miserablye spoiled, and come to utter ruin: For no
man is so far from al reason (I trust) or so blinded with malice, that will
not either with the fear of Gods plages, or with the danger of his soul, or
with the death of his body, or with the care, that he takes for his wife and
children, or with the loss of his goods, and his good name to, or with the
destruction of his country be moved to take heed always, and be well ware,
that he never adventure for any cause at all to rebel against his prince,
whom he is by God commanded most humbly to obey. And we read in good
writers, that many rebellio^s have been appeased by the good and discrete
exhortations of wise and learned men. For the people of Rome, when they were
gathered together in a hill, Cicer. de (...) ora.
called the holy hill, near unto ye river of Aniene, three mile from the
city, and were fully minded to make rebellion against their rulers, Marcus
Valerius by a wise and an eloquent oration that he made, brought so to pass,
that their hearts were by and by so well pacified, that they quietly departed
every one home to their houses. The like did Lucius Valerius Potitus at such
time, Cicer. de ^^ar. orat.
as the people of Rome had co^spired the death of ye senators: for by his grave
and discrete exhortation, yt he made unto the^, he so handled the matter, yt
their furious rage was out of hand not only abated, but also thoroughly
aswaged. Was not the soldiers likewise of Publius Scipio, Li^i^s decad. ^^
lib. 8.
which made a sore rebellion in their camp, quieted only by an oration made
by the same Scipio? Therefore this remedy of exhortation have I prepared to
relieve the sick body of my country, which is not yet throughlye recovered
of the disease of rebellion, but has (I fear me) even still some rebelliouse
hearts within it, which have need of such a medicine to cure them: most
heartily beseching al my country men to take it in good part, and accept
good will, where as lacks habilitye. For although there be many learned men
in this realm, who for their excellent knowledge and wisdom could much
more connynglye have made this medicine* then I, and so have tempered it with
the goodly pouders of perfyte eloquence, that it should perhaps have
wroughte much more effectuously in the patientes body, and been more able to
have cured the disease thereof, yet none is there, that for the feruente love he
bears to his country. would either more gladlye have attempted it, or more
wyllynglye to his power accomplyshed the same. Wherefore my sure trust is,
that both your hyghnes (most gracious soueraygne) to whom I offer this my
little treatise, and all other your graces loving subjects, for whose be hofe
I have written it, will gentely accept my pains bestowed therein. And if it
so come to pass, that my labor not only be allowed of your grace, as I
doubt not, but also work in the readers hearts thereof such an effect* as I
wish it may, then shall I think that I have received a worthy recompense for
mine endeavor. For neither gain, for which (God knows) I pass not, nor
commendation, for which I look not, moved me hereto, but only the hearty
affection, that I owe to my country, and my bounden duty unto your highness,
who of your bountefull goodness where as I was destitute of all aid and
succoure, has so liberally provided for me, that now I may without care
serve God, go to my book, and do my duty in that vocation, to which God has
called me. Which I beseech God I may do to his glory, and your graces honor,
for whose quiet and prosperouse raygne I shall not cease most earnestlye to
pray my life enduring.

Your hyghnes Chapleyne and daily oratoure John Christoferson.

An exhortation against rebellion.
ALbeit (most dear and well-beloved country men) many things both there be
at this present, and also have been now of late years in this our native
contrie, that would greatly pitye any faithful and true English man's heart to
consider, as our outragiouse misbehauioure in worshyppynge of God, our
abominable blasphemy against him, and his blessed spouse ye catholic church,
our wicked geastyng and raylyng against the holy Sacraments thereof, our
detestable swearyng by all the members of our Savior Jesus Christ, our
presumptuouse hearts puffed up with intolerable pride, our gredy covetousness,
that can never be satisfied, our extreme oppression of the poor and neadye,
our maliciouse hatred one against another, our bribery, extorsio^, and our
false dealinge: for all which (except we earnestlye repent us and amend
betime) God will power down his ve^geaunce upon us, and with some miserable
plages miserablye destroy us, yet nothing is there in mine opinion, that
every good manne ought with weeping tears so sore to lamente, as to remember
such deadly dissension and discord, as of late has been among us, and as yet
is, insomuche, that one cruellye seeks to shed an others blood, and one does
rejoice in an others destruction. Whereby we well declare, that both the fear
of God is banished from us, wherewyth a Christen man's lusts and affections
should be bridled, and charity also, which is ye bond of perfection, utterly
broken among us: for if we feared God, we would not so boldelye break his holy
will and commandment, who has most streyghtlye charged us, that we beware of
sedition and sheddyng of blood. Or if we loved one another, as we ought to do,
we would not one be glad of another displeasure, and one seek another death,
but contrariwise, one rejoice in another welfare, and one study to defend
another, one gently bear with another, and labor by brotherlye love to join
our selves together again, whom discord has so piteouslye torn asonder.
But we fare like a noughtye surgion, that does not go about to cure the wound
of his patient, but lays such playsters unto it, as may encreace it, and so
prolonge the time, to the intent that he may gain more money thereby: for
wheresoever we find but a little sparkell of dissension, we so kindle it and set
it on fire, that it turns into a great flame, insomuche that where as before
it might have been quenched with small travail, now it is almooste impossible
too quench it.

Such folks as go about so wicked an enterprise, Makers of dissension.
do little remember Salomons words, where he says thus. Prove. 6.
Six things there be, that our Lord God hates, and the seventh his soul
does specially abhor: Proud high looks: a lying tongue: hands, that shede
innocent blood: an heart, that forgeth noughtie diuises: feet, that be
ready to run unto mischief: a deceptfull witness, that utters lies: and
one, that sows discord among brethren. Now therefore seeing, that we be
all brethren, partly by reason we profess one faith, and partlye that we all
be borne and brought up in one country, whosoever they be, yt seek to set us
at debate, they hepe up ye hatred of God against the^: for such (as Solomon
has told you) the soul of our lord God does utterly abhor. Let them be
well assured, that albeit they be spared at Gods hand for a season, to the intent
that they may forsake their sin betyme, and heartily be sorry therefore, yet if
they walk forth in their wickedness, they shall be paid home at length for
altogether, and then bewail the time, that ever they were borne: and say with
Hieremye the Prophet: Hier. 20.
Cursed be the day of our birth, and cursed be the time, that our mother
brought us into the world: and wyshe still for death, and shall not dye. This
kind of men does continually travail to make strife, not only betwixt
neighbor and neighbor, betwixt children and their parents, betwixt husbands
and their wives, betwixt servants and their masters, but also betwixt
subjects and their Prince, and encourage them both to grudge at him, to
disobey him, and also to make open war in the field against him. And to
thinte^t that they may move men more easily to such a mischeuouse enterprise,
The words of rebels.
they cloak the matter with a goodly pretense, and tell them, that they intend
nothing else, but to deliver the poor commons from oppression, to restore
them to their old liberties, to cause the fermes yt be enhansed, to be let
for the old rent, and the common pastures, that be taken in by gentlemen, to
be laid open again, and to se that justice be executed in all parts, where as
now money only (as they say) makes a man's matter either good or badde, and
whosoever will speed his suite, must give large rewards, so that the poor
manne, be his cause never so just, shall have a fall. They tell them beside,
that every man is bound to love his country, and to seek for the
preservation thereof, yt the good state of it do not decay by means of evil
rulers and counseylours. As for their Prince (they say) they will dye and live
with him, and they mean no more harm to him, then they do to their own
souls. Be not these I pray you goodly painted words to blind the simple
people withal, yea and able to make men think and say to, that such folk
mean well, and are faithful English men, and tenderly love their contrye?
But it shall be wisdom for every one of us herein to follow the example of the
great wise man Ulysses, who saylynge by a dangerous sea, wherein were certain
mo^sters called Sirenes, Homer. libr. 12. Odyss.
(which were wont with their sweet and pleasant songs to allure the
passengers to approach unto them, and then to drown them and their ships to)
both caused him self to be fast bound to the maste of the ship, and also
with wax stopped ye ears of all his fellows, that were in company with him,
to the intent that neither he, nor they should fall in any peril by hearing of
their sweet voices. For if we suffer our ears to be open, and let such gaye
glosynge words enter thereat, we shall surely be deceived, as they be, that
hear the sugered voices of the Sirenes, and shall run or we beware into
extreme danger, both of body and soul. For these folks because they have
cast away the fear of God, The fashions of rebels.
which works in men's hearts humble and dew obedience to god and their
Prince, and also are either so desirous of honor, or so far forth gone in
obstinat heresye, that they pass not. what wickedness they attempt: they run
forth headlyng to all kind of mischief, and because they love well to have
company, they travail by all means to draw other with them, and to make the^
as mad as they them selfs be: And to the intent they may more easelye win
them, they fall to flatter the^, and so (as the common proverb is) with fair
words would make fools feign, and tell the^ one thing, when they intend
another, and say they seek their wealth, when in deed they seek their
destruction: for it has been a common practice always among ye captains of
rebels, to give the simple people gaye words, and with subtle driftes to entyce
the^ to myschiefe. Therefore let al subjects, when soever they are by any
such cursed counseyle provoked to rebellion, and that they hear ye authors
thereof utter such goodlye fair words to persuade them, think verelye that
those men are the deuyls ministers, and that they mind nothing else, but the
destruction both of their Prince* and their contrye to. But here let us
consider, if their purpose were good, as they would make men believe, whether
they ought to go about by force and rebellion to bring it to pass, or rather
to suffer their wrongs patiently, and pray God heartily to revenge them, yea
and with an humble heart confess, that such plages are iustlye fallen upon them
for their offenses, and earnestly beseech God to pardon them, and to deliver
them from miserye, when his will is: for our lord God says unto all such,
Romans 13
as are wrongfully oppressed, that they must refer their wrongs unto him,
Psalm. 49.
and he will revenge them: And call upon him in their tribulation, and he will
aid and comfort them. But of this I purpose hereafter to speak more at large.
And now will I first brieflye note both in what points rebellion consists,
and also the causes, that move men specially to rebellion, and then se whether
there be any cause at all, that ought to move them in any wise thereto.

There are three points, Three points, wherein rebellion stands,
wherein rebellion against a Prince chiefly does consiste: murmur and grudge
of mind, malitiouse and sclaunderous words, and open force of arms and
violence: Of the first grow privy conspiracies, and misconstruing of all
matters: of the second false rumors, and raylynge libelles: of the third
mortal war and cruel bloudeshed.

The causes that specially move men to rebellion, The causes of rebellion.
as the excellent and great learned Philosopher Aristotell writes, are lucre,
Polit. 5.
loss of goods, honor, dishonor, wealth, fear, contempt, and diversity of
manners or contryes, where unto we may very well add, the diversity of
opinions and religion.

And now to begin with the first cause, and so to come to the rest in order,
those that for lucre and gain make rebellion, Lucre
are of two sorts, either they be poor and desire to wax rich, or else they
be rich, and are not contented but still would have more, and think them
happiest, yt are richest, so that their minds are always unquiet, and care not
by what means they get goods, so they may be satisfied.

Such folks oftentimes do make sedition, thinkinge thereby to come to their
purpose. For the poor trust to be made rich by the spoil of the welthye,
Poor men.
whereupon a great nombre of late years not only in forreyne realms, The
rebels of Neathfolke.
but also here at home among us being blindely persuaded, that all men's
goods ought to be common (which is an opinion most wicked and damnable)
thought they should do god high service, if they ridded al gentlemen out of
the way, robbed them of their riches, and made every man equal with other.

Rich men.
The rich likewise, whose hearts the incurable disease of covetousness has so
sore infected, because they can no otherwise comme by more riches, lay their
heads together, and with folly so flatter them self, that they think with a
little money to make so many men, that none shall be able to resist their
pestilent purpose, and so shall they get more richesse upon one day* then they
had gathered all their life before.

Other there be, Loss of goods and oppression.
yt for loss of gods, as for that they have been, or are with taxes and
tributes sore oppressed, do desperately adventure to make rebellion, and will
either by force ease them selfs of such oppression, and win their liberty,
that they hope for, or else loose all that they have, and their lives to.

Some folks are so ambitiouse, yt all be it percase they be worthy no
honor, Ambition and desire of honor
yet will they seek always possible to comme by honor, and when no way else
can be found, whereby they may acheue their deuelishe desire, run they
headlyng to rebellion, and either with wickedness will they win the horse (as
the proverb is) or else loose both the horse and the sadle to, to their utter
confusion.

Again many there be, that when they have been in great honor, Loss of
honor.
and be either through their own demerites, or otherwise deprived thereof,
are so sore bitten by the stomach, that nothing is there, that can content
them, but they fume and frete, and fare like mad men, in so much yt being
weary of their lives, they care not what become of them, and much rather had
they adventure some wicked enterprise, and therein to dye, then longer to live
in such heavy miserye, and often repete they with them selfs this sentence
of Cicero: Epist. ^a^li. 6. epi. 3
when a man is not, as he has been, there is no cause, why he should desire to
live, and then go they forward in their fra^tike folly, and settinge all upon
six and seven, think to be revenged by trayterouse rebellion.

Certain are there, that wealth makes so wanton, that they wish for war to
prove their valiantness, wealth:
and they count peace to be cause of ydlenes, and that it makes men hodipekes
and cowardes. Therefore (say they) men must have war for the trial of
their manhood. Such folks when they can pike any prete^sed quarrel against
their Prince, they think it but a pastyme to make sedition.

Some also have there been in the world, Fear of punishment.
that for fear of punishment for their offenses committed, became rebels,
and much lever had they to fight it out, then to fall into the hands of those,
that had authority to punish them: and because they were well assured, that
if they were ones taken, they should dye some shameful death, counted it better
to take their adventure in the open field, and rather so to dye with honor
(as they thought) the^ both to be pined in prison, and also to suffer death with
shame.

Sometime rebellion chaunseth, Cont^pt.
by reason that the prince is a person of no good qualities, but is
peradventure deformed, or crooked, or has little wit and less experience, or
is a cowardly caytife and dastarde, or is corrupted with all kind of vice. For
when the subjects playnelye perceive these defautes in the Prince, they
begin to contemn and despise him, and much desyryng to have a change, they
fall to make insurrection, and either by openforce, or privy conspiracy they
seek to rydde him out of the way, trusting thereby to get them a better
gouernoure: for so was both Sardanapalus spynnyng among women slain, Arist.
Polit lib. 5.
and Denyse the less also because he was a dronkarde, by Dion with thaduyse of
the people killed.

Many times also arises sedition, by means that men be of diverse manners,
Diversity of manners and contries.
diverse contries, and diverse sorts of religion: for every man loves him,
that is like in conditions to himself, and hates the contrary: so that
faithful frendshyp spryngeth of likelynes in manners: for whosoever is not
delited with such fantasies as we be delyted with, we can in no wise heartily
love him.

The same happens among such, as be of diverse contries: for it has
oftentimes been seen, that in cities where two sorts of people being of
diverse nations have dwelled, because that one could not bear another, they
have caused notable sedition, as we read of the Troezenians and Achaeanes in a
city called Siba^is, and of the Jews and Gentyles in Jerusalem, and of the
Catanianes and Siracusanes in Sicilie, of the Scotts and Pictes in Scotland*
and of the Saxones and Britones here in England.

The same comes often to pass, when as men be of diverse opinions,
Diversity of opinions and religion.
concerning their faith and religion: for albeit that many other matters make
one to hate another, yet nothing is there. that bredeth so deadly hatred, as
diversity of minds, touching religion: which thing caused many notable and
cruel co^motions in the noble city of Alexandria.

And if it so be, yt the Prince be of one faith, and many of his subictes of
another, although he be never so good a ruler and gouernoure otherwise, yet can
they by no means favor him, by reason of his religion, but sore grudge and
repine still at him, and study always that they can, to withdraw the hearts
of all men from him, and at length when they se occasion, openly rebel
against him.

Thus have you heard shortly the special causes, yt move men to rebellion.
Then let us now well weye, whether any of these, or any other, that a man can
ymagyne, ought in any wise to make men arise and rebel against their Prince
and gouernoure.

If men be poor and neadye, and think they have wrong, because they have no
more good, Rebellion of poor men for iucre and riche^.
and therefore will by force shyfte for them selfs, and hazard their lives
rather, then they will live any longer in such poverty, such have forgotten
God, and do not remember, Prou. 2^
that our Lord (as Solomon says) made both, ye rich and the poor. And this
they must consider, that there be degrees in every common wealth, which be
necessary for the good state thereof: and some be higher, and some be lower, as
it pleases God to appoint them, and the one can not lack the other. For
like as in a natural body there be some members of more excellency then the
rest, partlye for the preservation of it and partly for ye beautifying thereof:
So there be in every realm and commonwealth rich and poor, gentlemen and
simple* rulers and subjects. And every one are placed in their degree. And as
necessary is it for the poor to have men of higher estate to defend them from
the assaults of their enemies, as it is for men of honor to have poor men to
toil and travail for them: for we see, that the high trees in every foreste
do defend the vnderwoode from all stormye and violente blastes. And albeit yt
percace great men sometimes do not defend the poor, as they should do from
wrongs, but rather do them wrong themselfes: yet let the poor pray God to
amend them, and by that means seek for remedy, and not repyne against them,
and so be disappoynted of all remedy. Beside this poor men (me think) should
be right glad of their estate, seeing that they be much more farther from
danger, then great men be, as daily experience does teach them.

Again if they would well weye with them selfs, for what purpose men be made
poor by the hand of God, and that many good folks are pinched with poverty
to prove their patience withal, to thin tente that they may be more perfyte:
and many evil to are punished therewith for their synnefull life to make them
amend, and that god always does all for the best, and makes men either
rich or pore, as he knows is most mete for them, they would patiently
suffer their poverty, and thank God hartelye for it, and of the miserye that
their bodies are bewrapped with. they would make a soueraygne medicine to heal
their sick and sinful souls withal. And if they would learn this one
lesson of saint Augustyne, and practice it, I doubt not, but they should make
their punyshmente medicinable. Super Psalm. 99.
The lesson is this. My son if thou weep, weep with devotion, weep not wi^h
grudge, nor weep not with any token of stubborn pr^de: why wepest thou I pray
th^e? because thou suffrest paynfull misery? That is a medicine for thee, and
no punyshmente: It is to correct thee, and not to dam^e thee: Go not about to
put the scourge from thee, if thou will not be put from the heritage of
heaven, which is prepared for thee. De ue^. Apo. Se^* 28.
And again he says in another place thus: Let not thy pouertye agreue thee,
because thou can find nothing, that is so rich as it. ^or what treasure can
be compared with heaven, which is the reward of poverty? Epist. a^ Heb. ho^
18.
And S. Chrysostom says: None is richer then he, that wyllyngly loves
poverty, and embraces the same with a glad and joyful heart. Therefore let
such as be in pouertye, learn to suffer it patiently, and quietlye bear
such temporal punishment, yt they may be rewarded therefore eternally. And
whenever their deadly enemy the devil does make the^ grudge at their
poverty, and moves them either by robbynge, or by rebellion to seek for
riches, let them remember, that if they either rob their neyghbor, or rebel
against their Prince: first their bodies by the law shall justly be put to
most vile and shameful death, and after their cursed souls, that have
wroughte such wickedness against the express commandment of God, shall be by
most horrible feendes perpetually pyned in hell. But some synful wretches will
not let to say, that for an hour hanging they will not live in care all
their whole life. Such miserable folks I fear me (I pray God they do not)
think that their bodies and souls dye both together, and that there is no
other life but this: But alas they shall find after their departing hence such
a life, or rather such a miserable death, wherein they shall continually dye,
and never be dead, insomuche that they shall most wofullye cry: woe be unto us,
that when we lived in ye world passed, we would never think upon this world,
that was then to come. Wherefore let men that either be borne in poverty,
and so continue, or have been rich, and by their misdemenour are fallen into
poverty, remember these lessons, and so shall they well perceive, that neither
ought they to grudge at their poverty, which is sent the^ for their souls
health, nor go about to spoil, or make rebellion* which be plainly against the
commandment of God: for he says, Thou shall not steal or rob.And saint
Paul says: Romans 13.
That every man ought to obey yt higher powers, because they be ordained of
God: and whosoever withstandeth the power, withstandeth the ordinance of God.
If they then will wythstande Gods ordinance, they wrastell with their better,
and shall be shortly overthrown to their great confusion. For what became of
the beggerye army of Viriatus a thief and a robber? Albeit that they (because
they were poor and looked to get goods by rebellion) wroughte much woe to the
Romans, against whom they rebelled, Oros. lib. 5. Cap. 4.
and sore spoiled the noble country of Spain, yet at length were they by
Fabius overcome, and their captain by the traynes of his own men was
murdered. We read also of a great nombre of slaves, that rose in Sicilia who
being persuaded, yt by rebellion they should both win their liberty, and
also be come rich men, Oros. lib. 5. ca. 9.
made a sore commotion, and sore troubled the country of Sicilye, and some
parts of Italy to, where they had a great nombre to join with them. But in
conclusion they were rewarded accordyngly: for at a town in Italye called
Sinuessa, iiij. thousand of them were killed, and at Minturne an other town in
Italye four hundredth were hanged. Such like luck had the poor slaves, that
rose in Sicilie, when Rutilius was Consul: for when Rutilius had taken
Taurominium and Aetna, two of the strongest holds, that the rebels had to
succoure them, there were slain above.xx. thousand of these slaves and
rebels. The cause of which war (as Orosius writes) was miserable and
wretched: for if (as he says) these slaves had not been resisted, their
masters and rulers had been utterly undone and destroyed. And yet neither
part had any cause to triumph: for both in the great and heavy miseries,
that this war brought with it, and also in the unlucky gain that was gotten
in the victory, even those that wanne the victory, had as great a loss, as
those that lost the field. Wherefore no cause has any man to rebel for
poverty sake, and thereby to make him self rich, saying that poverty is the
way to perfection. (as I said before) and rebellion leads a man to
destruction of both body and soul: who then is so mad, or has so little
regard of his own health, that will forsake that state, which God has sent
him for a remedy, wherewyth to save his soul, and by unlawful means seek for
yt state, that the devil dryueth him to, thereby to damn his soul?

As for rich men if they rebel to increase their riches, Rebellion of rich
men to increase their riches.
their cause surely is much worse then y^ cause of ye poor* which is (as you
have heard) very naught to: for such have no neade at all, as the poor have,
except we call those neadie, that are never contented, and so all couetouse
wretches may be well called neady. But these folks have no neade to seek for
living, because they have enough, or else a great deal to much. And if they
had neade, yet neade is no cause (as we proved before) to move a man to fall
to rebellion. For albeit that gready gaping for gods is dangerous, And all
they that desire to be rich (as witnesses Saint Paul) fall into temptation,
1. Tim. 6
and into the devils s^are, and into many vain and noisome despres, which
drive men down to utter ruin and destruction, yet those that by violence
travail to be rich, shall at length loose their riches, and become pore or
they beware. For the holy Prophet says, woe be to thee y^ spoyleth men by
force, Esa. 33.
for thou shall be spoiled. I^ac. 2.
And Abacuc the Prophet says likewise, That because thou haste robbed much
people, they that shall remain, shall rob thee, And beside this al rich folk
that by reason of their greadye desire are moved to make commotion, should
consider with them selfs. that the government of a Prince is the sauegarde of
all their riches: for when government is taken away, the laws are trodden
under men's fete, and every seditiouse person will do what him lyketh, because
he fears no punyshmente. So y^ robbery then shall be thought well gotten good,
and he that has most if he be feeble and faynte hearted, shall shortly have
leest, and he that has no thing, if he be strong and couragiouse, shall sone
become a rich man. Then is it not better for rich men evermore to beware of
rebellion, and so quietlye to enjoy that, that they have, then for greadynes
of getting more by some mischeuouse enterprice to loose all yt they have? For
he were a very foolish merchant, me think, that when he passes by the sea,
and has a fair wind to drive him to the common haven, where he should
arrive, would leave his common course, and trustyng that by saylyng through a
certain dangerous sea, he should come to a co^trye, where he should find
much riches, and although he were in manner assured, that in that peryllous
passage he should drown his ship and him self to, yet would he adventure,
and so loose all the substance, that with great travail he had gotten before.
Wherefore all they that by rebellion seek to be rich, seek in deed to be poor:
Insomuche that such have no cause, why they should rebel, but great cause
have they, why they should by all means avoid rebellion, both for that they
most grievously offend their lord God thereby, and also that when soever it
chaunseth they stand in danger of loosyng all that they have, and their lives
to. And as for riches, seeing it oftentimes hurts many yt have it, and that
it is a great care both safely to keep it, and godly to bestow it: I
marvel, that men either make so much of it, or will by unlawful means go
about to get it. Augusty. e^^. 140.
For saint Augustyne says, That if we lack worldly riches, let us not by
wicked ways seek it here in this world, and if we have it, let us by good
deeds doing lay it up in heaven. Which thing considered, let all rich men
content them selfs with that, y^ they have, and care more for the well
bestowynge of it, then for the getting of more, and always beware, that neither
by rebellion, nor by no other unlawful means they seek for riches.

But now let us see what cause they have to rebel, that be sore oppressed
with taxes, Rebellion for oppression in hope of liberty.
and tributes, with polling and pilling, with rentes raised, and with pastures
enclosed: such perhaps have cause to complain, but no cause at all to make
rebellion: but put the case that y^ prince be a noughty man, and so sore
infected we the sin of covetousness, that he passes not how he come by
money, so that he have it, and so polleth the people with sore subsidies to
satisfy his insatiable avarice withal, must men therefore being thus piteously
pylled, revenge their own quarrel, and rebel against him, and goo about so
to set the^ selfs at liberty, or rather put their whole matter to god, and
pray to him earnestlye, to be their succoure. For it is written of the children
of Israel, when they were in Aegypte, Exodus 5.
and were with intolerable labor and travail very sore afflicted by Pharao,
king of that contry, how that they went unto him, and complained of their
grefe, and made humble request, that they might be more easily dealt with, but
nothing got they at his hand, but a froward answer: And albeit that they
could have no remedy, yet would they not rebel against him, but went to Moses
and Aaron, and made their co^playnt to them, and said: Our lord look upon us.
and judge our cause: by reason whereof Moses said to god: why lord d^ste thou
suffer thy people thus to be troubled? Then said our lord god to him again:
Exodus 6.
Tell the children of Israel, that I will both lead them out of the paynfull
prison of the Aegyptia^s, wherein they be so sore afflicted, and also deliver
them out of their thaldome and bondage* If men that be under an evil prince,
would earnestly weye this storye, they might learn two profitable lesso^s of
it: one to make their complaynt to ye prince, and humbly desire him to relieve
them, and not by force to resist him, and rashely to rebel against him: another
to commit their matter to god, and complain to him, and trust suerly, that
he will at length deliver them from their trouble, as he did the children of
Israel. Again ye children of Israel, Iudic. 3.
when they were made slaves to Chusan Rasathaun the king of Mesopotamia, and
lived under him in sore servitude the space of viij year, they went not about
to rise against him, and so to deliver them selfs out of bondage, but called
to GOD for help and succoure, and he delivered them by the help of Othoniel.
And after that likewise when they were brought into bondage by Eglon, I^d. 3,
the king of Moab, and lived under him in great thraldom and misery.xviij.
whole years together, they made no insurrection against him, that by that
means they might be delivered, but humblye suited to God for aid: who
mercifully lokyng upon them, delivered them by the hands of Aod, the son of
Gera. Wherefore if it chance at any time, that an evil Prince has the
government of a realm, let the people first make their humble petition to the
prince, and beseech him to be favorable to them: and if that will not avail
them, to seek then to his counseyle, and compain unto them, desyryng them to
give him good aduertiseme^t and entreat him to be good to his subjects: for
oftentimes good counseyle may do much in such a case. And let them never
contrary to gods will and pleasure, either judge of their Princes conditions,
because God is his judge, nor seditiously lift vy their swords against him,
but following the example of the children of Israel, let them wholly refer
their cause to God, and make their humble petition to him to be relieved, and
they shall vndoub^edlye at his hands have remedy. Furthermore it were wisdom
too think, yea and we must neades believe it to, that Princes are appointed by
God: for Solomon says in the person of wisdom, Prove. 8.
which is God him self, That by me kings have their rule. And then to ponder
well with our selfs, for what purpose God has sent us such a wicked prince,
whether through our noughtye life we have deserved to have such a noughtye
ruler, or yt God has suffered him to reygne over us for a trial of our
patience. If we have deserved by our noughtye demeanor to have such one, as
it may well be, that we have, (for Job says* Job. 34.
that god sends a noughty dissembling ruler for the sins of the people)
then let us do penance betyme, and by fervent prayer ask God heartily of
pardon, and desire him, that when he has well punished us, to be merciful unto
us, and deliver us from our misery, and always earnestly beseech him to give y^
prince grace to amend: for so shall we both help to save him, and our selfs
to. Again if such one be suffered to rule over us for a trial of our patience,
the^ leest we loose our patience, and the reward thereof with al, let us patie^tly
bear him, and by patient suffringe increase our patience. Furthermore if be,
that we be by him so sore afflicted, that we can not possibly bear such a
burden any longer, then must we call to God for help and comfort* At which
time without doubt he will say thus: Psalm. 11.
For the misery that the neady suffer, and the lamentation that the poor make
to me, I will now arise. Job. 36.
And so (as Job says) he will deliver us from our oppression. In such
adversity we may not look to be delivered, when we will our selfs, but we
must tarry Gods pleasure, having sure trust, that he will deliver us at length:
for Solomon writes thus. Pro. 20.
Tarry for thy Lord God, and he will deliver thee. Like as the husbandman by
and by after he has sown his ground looks not to reap the fruit thereof in
all haste, but tarieth for a season: So we, when we have made our petition to
god, we must patiently abide his pleasure, and he will surely send us succor,
when he shall think it most convenient for us. Thus by prayer and patient
suffringe shall we obtein our purpose: And not only that, but shall be highlye
rewarded to at gods hand for our godly patience. Therefore all such as are
for a season with sore paymentes or with enhansed rentes, or by any other
means sore oppressed, let them never by unlawful ways seek their deliuerye,
and so be the cause of their own destruction, seeing that they may be well
assured, that by prayer and patience they shall not only have their request,
but also great thanks of god, to whose will they holy betoke the^. For if a
man were set fast in a close prison, and there sore pa^ged with painful
torments, the same man if so be, that he had a sure promise of him, yt had
authority to deliver him, that he should not only come forth thereof at a
certain day, but should besides have some liberal reward to recompense his
greuouse punishment, yt he had so patientlye borne, were he not then worse
then mad, if he would go about either to fight with ye gailour, auenturing
with ye ieoperdie of his life to get out by strong hand, or else to dig up
the foundation of the prison, or to break out, and so perhaps fall in
hazard of hanginge? wherefore whosoever is thus troubled, and longs for the
day of his delivery, let him pass on y^ time with patience for a while, and
take good comfort in his care, because he is assured, that god will at length
mercifully deliver him. But some men will say percase we shall be dead, or ye
day come. It may be so in very deed, and therefore much less need they to
pass for their tribulation. For if death come, then shall they be not only of
good comfort, because they have borne their trouble patientli, but also glad
of their pains passed, because yt then shall they be rewarded for them. Yet some
there be, into whose heads these things will not syncke, but they say still,
why should we be obedien^e to a noughty prince, or why should he have al, and we
littel or nothing? These have not learned S. Peter's lesson, 1. Pet. 2.
that men ought to obey not only good godly princes, but also such, as be
threwed and rigorous. For yt is very commendable, if a man suffer trouble, and
that wrongfully to, because he knows the same to be acceptable before GOD.
Nor they have not read the fable of ye belie and the other members of ye body,
Liu. Dec. 1. lib. 2.
which Menenius Agrippa recyted unto the people of Rome, when as they began
to rebel against the consules and chief rulers of ye city, and were al ready
gathered together in the hill called Auentine, which fable is written in Liuie
after this sort.

At such time as the me^bres and parts of the body did not, as they do now
agree altogether with one consent, but every membre used his own counseyle, and
could speak for himself, the rest of the members much grudgynge, that by
their care and travail al things should be sought and gotten for the belies
use, and that ye belly should do nothing, but lie at his ease in the myddest of
them, and enjoy such pleasures, as they had prepared, conspired, and agreed
together, that from thenceforth neither the hand should lift the meat to the
mouth, nor the mouth should receive it, nor the tethe should chowe it.
Wherefore while as for this displeasure, they went about to tame the belly with
hunger, all the members and parts them selfs, yea and the whole body to, was
in a manner clean consumed. Whereupon it well appeared, that the ministerye and
service of the belie is not idle or vayn, but that it nourishes ye other
parts, as well as it is nourished it self, because it spreads abroad into
all parts of the body the blood, which is cause of our life and strength, and
the same when the meat is digested, is divided into the veins to. Thus
tells Liuie.

Christ's disciple, and I pray God I set at naught all things visible and
unvisible, to the intent I may win my Lord Jesus Christ. As for burning in a
hoate fire, as for to be hanged upon a cross, to be assaulted of wild
beasts, to have my bones all to wrinched and frushed, to have my members cut
all in peaces, to have my whole body gronden with milstones, yea and to have
all the torments, that the devil can deuy^e, to fall upon me, I pass not, so
that I may win my sweet savior Jesus Christ.

Here you may perceive the stout courage of Christ's mighty champion, and
the sore bruntes that he was most glad to abide for the obteynyng of that
heavenly victory. For he knew, that after this sort only should Christ's
souldiars fight. Likewise did the holy and blessed martyr Polycarpus, Eusebius
(...) lib. 4.
when men were sent to take him, and to bring him to the offices of that
country, that he might be tormented for Christ's faith, came down to them,
and with a pleasant and mild countenance talked with them, and commanded a
table, and great plentye of meat to be prepared for the^, and prayed them to
eat and make good cheer: and desired them, that in ye mean season he might
have license to pray. Which done, he did not resist them, nor went about to
prepare a company of men (which he being so well loved in that country, might
belike easelye have done) to fight with them, and so to save him self from
their tormentrye, but most mekely and gentlye went he forth with them, and
after long talk, that he had with the officers, as touching his faith, most
freely and frankely in a great audience of people defended it. Whereupon all
the people cried, this is the great doctor of Asia, the father of the christen
men, and ye destroyer of our Gods. Let him be burned quick. So when the fire
was made ready, he most wyllyngly lowsed his gyrdell him self, and put of his
clothes. And when they would have nailed him fast to the stake: no, said he,
let me alone, as I am. For he that gives me strength, to endure the hoate
flames of fire, will, I doubt not, give me grace steadfastly to stand by it
without any naylinge. So yt they did not nail him at all, but only bound
his hands behind him. That done, he made his feruente prayer to GOD. Which
ones ended, they set the stacke of wood on fire, where was seen a wonderful
miracle. For ye flame of fire like to a sail clothe puffed full of wind,
compassed his body much like a vaulte, and his flesh within was like burning
gold. And there was felt a sweet odor coming from him like frankensence lie
killed, and the other by a conspiracye murdered in the common counseyle house of
Rome. Therefore ambition may be well compared to a viper, whose belly the young
vipers, Aristot. lib. 6. de histor. anim.
that she has conceived, eat out, and so destroy her. For every ambitious
wretch that seeks by sedition to obtain his purpose, when he has conceived
his trayterouse diuises, and goes about to put them in practice, he according
to the vipers example is by the same brought to his destruction. 2. reg. 15.
So did it happen to Absalon in old time which having a very ambitious mind,
sought by all means possible to withdraw the hearts of the people from his
good godly father king David. And standing at the entering in of his fathers
gate, said unto every one that came thither as a suitor: of what city art
thou, or what is thy matter? Which when he had heard, me think (quod he) thou
say good reason: but alas that I were a judge, that al men that have any
matter in suite, might come unto me to the intent, that I might give just
judgment in his behalf. And unto every one yt came unto him, and hayist him,
he put forth his hand, and not only lovingly embraced him, but kyndely kyssed
him to, supposing by that means to win the hearts of the people. Which
done, he gathered a great army, and made rebellion against his own natural
and most loving father, thereby to dispossess him of his crown. But in the
field a great nombre of his men were slain, and he him self riding
through a thycke wood, was taken betwixt ye bows of a tree, and piteously
hanged by the here of his head. So that through his presumptuouse ambition,
which he thought to satisfye by rebellion, he came to a miserable and
wretched end. Wherefore all ambitiouse folks, that adventure such cursed
enterprises, let the^ look for the like, if they take not head, and beware
betyme. For what brought the wretched tyraunte Maximus to utter ruin, but
that in the Emperor Theodosius days, Socrates lib. 5. hist ecclesias.
when Valentinian (to whom the^pire of the West parts apperteyned) was but a
child, he made a sore rebellion, and was in good hope by force of arms to
obtain themperiall crown. But Theodosius the emperor being at the same time in
the East parts, sore agreued with those news, gathered a great power to
fight against this rebelliouse tyrau^t Maximus. And came in all haste to Melane,
where the tyraunte was. Then the souldiars of Maximus hearing of the coming of
the emperor Theodosius, were sore affrayed of the matter, and straight way took
Maximus among them, bound him, and led him by and by to Theodosi^ us. Who
anon after received the reward of his rebellion, unto which his ambitious
heart had brought him. Socra. lib. 5. histor. ecclesias.
Again what a wretched end had Andragathius, an ambitiouse wretch, who by a
privy conspiracy killed Gratianus the emperor? Did he not in conclusion as soon as he heard, that Maximus his master was put to death, lepe into a
river, and drowned him self? We read also of one Eugenius a tyraunte, Socra.
lib. 5. histor. ecclesias.
that in the said Emperors days blinded with ambition, adventured too
conspyre the young Emperor Ualentinians death. And that he might more easelye
bring his matter to pass, he used the counseyle and aid of Arbogastus, a man
mete for such a purpose. These two together wanne with fair words and large
promises themperours chamberlaynes, and made them kill their own lord and
master. Which done, Eugenius obtained thempire of all the West parts.
Wherefore Theodosius as soon as he was certified hereof, taking the matter very
greuouslye (as he had good cause) straight way prepared an army against
him, and made as much haste toward him, as he could possibly. And when the
armies met together, and that Theodosius host was in the field sore
discomfited, Theodosius falling down upon his knees in the midst of the
army, prayed God most heartily to aid and succoure him in that dangerous
conflicte. And by and by all the darts that were cast, and the arrows that
were shot by Eugenius souldyars against Theodosius men, were with a vehemente
wind driven back again upon them selfs: and the arrows of Theodosius
souldyars came also upon the^ with much more violence, wherewyth when Eugenius
see his men sore endaungered, runnyng with all speed to Theodosius, fell down
at his fete, most humbly besechyng him of pardon. But or ever he had made an
end of his tale* he was miserablye slain of the souldyars.

Many mo stories could I recite for the prove hereof, but these at this present
shall suffice* seeing that by these only every man may plainly perceive, that
all those, yt seek for honor by rebellion, come at length to a miserable and a
wretched end. And thereby it well appears, yt their cause is most wicked and
damnable. For commonly whensoever men take any enterprise on hand* if their
cause be just, God will prosper them therein, but if their cause be naught*
then shall they speed accordinglye.

Pro. 5.
For as Solomon writes, Wicked men shall be catched in their own cursed diuises,
and fast fettred in the bounds of their offenses. Put the case yt honor
would make a man good, as it many times does the contrary, should thou then
labor to be good by unlawful means, or rather be good before yt thou might
be better, when thou comeste to honor. Rome. 3.
From we must not (as saint Paul writes) do evil, that good may come
thereof, but we must (as ye holy Prophet David monisheth us) eschew evil,
Psalm. 33.
and do good, and every day ware better and better, and think yt when we are
best of al, we be bad enough. Moreover me think we should rather wisely despise
worldly honor, then wretchedly desire it, both because yt those, yt have it,
many times, if they used not well, are in danger both of body and soul
through it, and also yt whosoever comes to it, by reason of their short and
transitory life, they shall not long enjoy it: Epist. 82.
and beside this, (as Seneca says) Riches, honor, authority, and such like,
which be in our conceit much esteemed, and yet of them selfs be very vile, do
wythdrawe us from that thing, which is certain, and yet have they nothing
in them so gay and preciouse, that should allure our minds so to esteem the^,
but only because we use to set much by them. For they are not praised, because
they be desired, but they are desired, because they be praised.

Now if so be, we be desirous of honor in this world, then seeing (as we
read in Aristotle) that honor is the reward of virtue, let us earnestly
study for virtue, and undoubtedly we shall be rewarded with honor. Let us
fear god, which is the root of wisdom and virtue, and honor shall be given us
without our seking. But if we will walk in the paths of unrighteousness, and go
about to win us honor by wicked ways we shall at length have shame thereby,
and great dishonor. For the Scripture says, Eccle. 10
that the sede of men, that fear God, shall be honored, and such as transgress
gods commandments, shall have dishonor and shame. And who I pray the
transgress and break the commandment of GOD more, then rebels, seeing
that all men are strayghtly commanded to honor their Prince, and obey him?
Thus we see, that honor ought to cause no man to make rebellion, but all those
that desire it, must go the right way to it, that is to say, by virtue.
There were in old time at Rome.i^. temples, the one called the temple of
honor, and the other the temple of virtue: and no man could comme to the
Temple of honor, except he passed thoroughe the temple of virtue. And Saluste
says, Salust. in coniur, ^atil.
yt a good man goes the right way to honor: but a wretch, because he lacks
good qualities, trauayleth to get it by subtle dryftes, and crafty devises.
Therefore whosoever longs to get honor, let him practsie him self in
the schole of virtue, and he shall not fail to come by his purpose.

The same is to be considered of all such, Rebellion for ye loss of honor.
as through their own demerytes, or otherwise are put from their honor. For
if they be iustlye depryued, then no cause have they to grudge or complain.
And if they be wrongfullye, let them commytte their matter wholly to God, and
he will surely revenge them. For GOD reuengeth the quarrel of all those, that
suffer iniurye, psalm. 10^.
and (as David says) shows them mercy, and ryghteouslye judges their
cause.

If they have iustlye deserved such a fall, then the best is to thank God
hartelye for it, and to think that thereby they shall learn to fear God, to
acknowledge his justice, and to know them selfs to, which they percase would
never have done, if such a chance had not happened.

And if they patiently bear their adversity and become better by it, both god
will promot them to honor again, and every good man will have pity upon
them, will love them, much esteem them. and be glad to do for them. So that no
cause have they to be sorry for such a pr^fytable and lucky loss. for as much
as by the loss of transitorye honor they have won them gods favor, and
thereby sure to have eternal honor: yea and whereas before by their
misdemeanour they were so hated, and utterly despised, now they are hartelye
loved of all men, and much esteemed: for albeit that every man, yt is in
adversity, if he patiently suffer ye same, is much pitied, yet men of honor
in such like case are much more lamented. And therefore Cicero says, Orat. pro
le. Manil.
that the misery and heavy chaunses of princes and noble men most of al other
move men's hearts to pitye. Why will then such folks seek any other remedy to
recover their honor, then patience, saying that thereby they shall get them
selfs very honor in deed, whereas they had but the shadow of honor before.
For although that men be honored, yt have great possessions and lands, be they
never so bad, yet those only deserve honor, yt live a godly life, and embrace
all kind of virtue. In which point, if a man be surely persuaded, both will
he be content with a mean estate, what honor soever he have had, and think
to that he lacks no honor, if he have the favor of god, which far
passes all worldly honor. But when a man is put from honor, either that he
has deserved it, or else that ye rulers unjustly so order him, and can in no
wise patie^tly bear it but sekethe to revenge his quarrel by rebellion, then
men that something perhaps esteemed him before, begin to abhor him, and
all ye world, except those, that be his accomplices, cry out upon him, So that
if he be never so noble a man borne, he shall be from thence forth of all men
despised, and his house and familye with all his posterity thereby much
desteyned. For when any of his children after his death falls at words with
any person of estimation, he shall be called by and by a traitors son. Which
word will pearce him to ye very heart, because he perceaueth his stock so sore
dishonored. Which things depely considered, these yt be in such case, if
they have any regard either to their bounden duty to Godward, or to the
safegarde of them selfs, or to the estimation of their stock, must neades
quiet their minds, and content the^ selfs with the state that God has sent
them.

Rebellion ^o^mynge of wealth.
As for those that fall to rebellion through wealth, I neade not to speak of
them, because that either some of the foresaid causes, or else some of those yt
follow, do co^monlye much more move the^, the^ their welthe, so yt with those
lessons, yt partly go before, and partli come after, they may, I trust, be
satisfied.

Rebellion for fear of punishment.
Now as for such, as make rebellion for to avoid any danger or punishment,
when they labor to eschew the lesser danger, or ever they beware, they fall
into the greater. For if they have committed any offense, that deserves
punishment. if so be they patientlye suffer the punishment, and think that
they are worthelye punyshed, then men will pity them, and thank god for them,
and wish them well, and well report them. In somuche, that by their punishment
they shall please God, and recover their estimation again. But such as for
fear of punyshmente, which they have most justly deserved, will spurn against
it, and to avoid it, will make rebellion, where as by patiente suffrynge they
might easelye have made amends, and ^o saved the^ selfs and their estimation
to, now most worthily shall loose both, and provoke the indignation and wrath
of God against them. But if so be they did remember, yt men ought not to lea^e
the^, that have power to kill only ye body, Mat, 10.
but him* that may cast both body and soul into the paynful pit of hell,
they would never for the saving of ye one, put in adventure the loosinge o^
both. Were not he, I pray you, a very fool, yt would rather, then he would
loose one poor penny, loose al yt he has, and for the avoiding of one days
punishment, and yt with out any danger of his life at all, would lie lingeryng
all the days, yt he has to live in a most grievous and paynful prison? Or
were not he well worthy to be sick, that rather then he would take a medicine,
which should put him to pain but for a while, continue in his sickness
still, and at length put his life in ieoperdy thereby? What causes a wise
master of a ship, when he is in danger, wyllyngly to cast out some of his
goods, but that he had lever loose some part for saving of the rest, then
loose altogether and him self to? Wherefore all such as fear punishment, it
is better for the^ with a short punishmente to pay their raunsom, then with
unlawful eschewinge thereof, fall in danger of perpetual punishment. Cause
then have they none, if they well consider, to make rebellion for fear of
punyshement.

Some there has been in the world, Rebellion cominge of contempt
that by reason they did see their prince lack good qualities, or for that he
was crooked or deformed, or that he was a noughty vicious liver, have rebelled,
because they thought by y^ means to get the^ another. But such little
remembered the sayings of Solomon and Job, yt I recited before, of which the
one tells us, that kings and rulers be appointed by God: and the other, that
God oftentimes sends a noughtye dissemblyng Prince for the sins of the
people. For if the prince lack good qualities, it is not our part to find
fault with him, but to desire GOD to send him better. Or if he be deformed, we
blame the work of God, if we disprayse him. For he made not him self, but god
made him. Or if he live vitiouslye, we be bound to pray God heartily, that he
will vouchesafe to amend him, and to send him good counseyle, that may and
will earnestlye admonyshe him. As for to rebel against him, because Gods
law, and the laws of man to do expresselye forbydde it, we ought evermore
to avoid.

But now let us well weye the cause of those, Rebelli^ for religion.
that rebel for religion sake, which is thought to some a most urgent and
weyghtye cause. Here men will say, that if they be constreyned by superior
powe^s to forsake any part of their faith, by which they are well assured to
be saved, that then they must rather obey God, then man: and put their lives
in ieoperdie, rather the^ they will leave their religion. This is very well
said, and every Christen man must so do.

But how should we obey rather God then man, or how ought we to put our lives
in ieoperdie? Must we take the sword in our hands, and play the part, that
Peter did at the taking of our Savior? shall it not be said then unto us,
Mat. 26.
as it was said to S. Peter at the same time, Put up your swords? For
whosoever takes a sword, intending to smite therwyth, shall peryshe by the
sword* Had not Peter, think you, as good cause to defend his master Christ,
as any man has to defend his faith and religion? Yes truly. For if we have
any cause to defend our faith by the sword, then as good cause had saint
Peter therewyth to defend our savior, the author of faith. Why did not the
holy Apostles, when they were commanded, Act. 9.
that they should preach no more in Christ's name, and that they were beaten
for the same, defend them selfs by strong hand, and fight with their
enemies in such a good quarrel? Or why did they patiently suffer persecution,
and went their way, much reioysyng, that they were thought worthy to suffer
rebuke and displeasure for the name of Jesus? It is not in this war, yt men
make for their Lord Christ, as it is in the war betwixt prince and prince.
For in the war of worldly princes, such always get the victory, as either
by force beat down their enemies, or by policye put them to flight. But in
Christ's war, those win the field, that bear away the strokes, and he
that suffers most, gets ye most noble victory. For the blessed martyr
Ignatius, Eusebius. histo. eccles. lib. 3.
when he was conveyed out of Syria to Rome by ten rigorous and rough
souldyars (whom for their crueltye he calls ten leopardes) and was
miserablye torn in peaces by wild beasts* got a more excellent victory,
then ever did either Scipio Africanus, or Pompeius Magnus, two of the most
noble captains of the Romans. And yet did he never either grudge at the
matter, or give them evil words, or lift up his hand to smite either man or
beast, but most fervently desired to be beaten and buffeted, to be assaulted
him self and tormented. For by that means was he assured, that he should
receive at Christ's hand the victorious crown in martyrdom, as it does well
appear by his own words in an epistle, that he wrote to ye Romans, Eusebius
his j^o. eccle. li^. ^.
wherein he says thus. Would to god I had ye beasts, yt are prepared to
devour me, whom shortly to find out is mine earnest desire: whom I shall
flatter and make much of, to thintente they may out of hand devour me. For I
would not they should so handle me, as they have done other, whom for fear
they did not ones touch. But if so be they be loathe to meddle with me, I shall
provoke them to tear me. Pardon me good friends I pray you, for I know, wh^t
is expediente for me. Now begin I to be Christ's

So surely it fares in a common wealth, when as the people grudge, yt their
heads and governors live at ease, and eat up al, as they think, that they
with much toil and travail have gotten, judging him to be an idle and an
vnnecessarye membre, and therefore do they conspire and rebel against him. So yt
thereby it comes to pass, y^ with miserable spoil and cruel bloudshede ye
members of all the common welthe are in short space most miserably consumed and
wasted. Therefore let no man, that either loves god, his contry, or him
self, when as he is oppressed, go about to seek remedy by rebellion, saying
yt both his cause is very naught and that thereby he shall not only provoke
Gods wrath against him, but also put his contry and him self to in ieopardye
of destroynge.

Rebellion for ambition, and desire of honor.
But now there be an other sort, that are so sore inflamed with ambition and
desire of honor, yt they think every hour a day, and every day a year. until
they may win their wicked purpose. They be like to men that be sick of a
fervent burninge fever, which drink still, and ever are dry, and the more
that they drink, the more they desire to drink: Even so it fares with
ambitiouse folk, which if they come to any worshippefull estate, are not so
contented, but labor by all manner of means still to clyme higher: and when
neither by flattery, nor frindshippe, nor liberal rewards they ca^ satisfy
their wretched desire, then fall they to conspiracy, and follow the steps of
cursed Catiline, Salust. in coniur. Catil.
which made men wene, that he minded to reform the common welthe of Rome, and
restore ye liberty thereof, when he intended nothing else, but to put down
the noble and wise rulers of ye city, and place him self and his accomplices in
their honorable rowines. But he was shortly spied out, and by the wise policye
of Cicero clean disappoynted of his purpose. What made Caesar and Pompeye the
great to make civil war, but only ambition? For as ye good historiographer
Dion says* Vide Epit^nen Di^^is in ui^^ Po^peij
albeit that many other causes of that sedition were rekened to be, yet the
very cause in deed was their great desire of honor. For the same writer
reports, that Pompeye would be inferior to no man, and Caesar desired to be
above al men. Therefore caring nothing what became of their noble country, they
thought to try their manhood in civil war. And so was law laid down, and
might was made right, and a roughe soldier was more esteemed, then a grave
counseyler. But both twain had an evil end. For the one (Pompeye I mean)
was miserably at length put to flight, and in conclusion cruellye kensence. At
length, when the officers see, that the fire would not burn him, they
commanded the hangeman to thrust him through with a sword: Out of which wound
there issued so much blood, that it quenched all the fire, insomuche that it
made the people greatly to merueyle. Thus this gloriouse martyr by his patient
suffering won the field, and got a most glorious victory.

Likewise a blessed Martyr, Eusebius. histo. ^ecles. lib. 5.
whose name was Sanctus, when he was with all kind of torments by the wicked
paynems assaulted, to thintente that he should deny CHRIST, and forsake his
faith and that he ioyfullye suffered all, and constantlye stood in his
profession, and thereupon at length had hoate burning plates of brass laid to
his bare naked body, wherewyth his skin was so sore blistered, and bowned up,
that no man could know him, and after that because his enemies purposed to
vanquish him, was tormented a fresh, when his body as yet was all full of
blysters, this blessed martyr I say, gladlye suffrynge all these bitter
bruntes, got a more glorious victory, then ever did the great conqueror
Alexander. For Alexander got only a worldly estimation, ye shortly does fade
and fall. But Sanctus with his paynefull passion won himself such renown and
glory, as never shall perish: Alexander by sheddynge of other men's blood
became a conqueroure. But Sanctus by sheddyng of his own blood got this
noble victory. Alexander had always with him in his wars a great and hughe
host of men. But Sanctus armed with sure aff^aunce in God, fought the field
alone without aid and help of any man. Alexander overcame only his worldly
enemies, but Sanctus overcame both worldly and goostly. So that such as
valiantlye fight in Christ's war, get a more glorious victory in suffryng
the^ selfs, then the most courageous captain of all the world gets in
beatynge of other. Wherefore whosoever will fight for his faith, must fight
after this sort. He must not by money or fair words gather together an host
of men, and so make his party good, but he must by fervent prayer seek for
help and aid at Gods hand, and so prepare him to the battle. He must not
put upon him an helmet of steel, but he must put upon him the helmet of
health.He must not arm him self with an habergeon of iron or silver, Ephe. 6.
but he must arm him with the habergeon of faith and charity. He must not
take a sword in his hand of man's making, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
but he must take the sword of Gods spirit, which is the word of GOD. And
when he is thus armed, he must not rashelye uncalled step forth, and offer
strokes to his enemies, but he must first either moved by the spirit of God,
offer him self, as many martyrs have done, to suffer death, or else be called
forth for the trial of his faith, and then gladly go, and abide most
greuouse and bitter torments, rather then he will deny any part of his
faith.

Thus the blessed and holy martyrs of Christ did always in such a like
case. For those that suffered persecution in the two cruel tyrauntes days
Decius, Eusebius. his sto. eccle. li. 6. and. 7
and Valerian, when the paynems went about by violence to destroy the faith of
CHRIST. they made no conspiraces or rebellions against those wicked princes,
nor put no harnes upon their backs to fight openly in the field with them,
nor intended not by force to withstand their deuelishe diuises, but mekely
offered them selfs to dye for our Saviors sake, and besides they so embraced
their enemies. that tormented them, that they prayed God most earnestly to
pardon them.

So did also ye godly martirs, Eusebius. his sto. eccle. li. 8. and. 9
that were cruelly persecuted by Diocletian and Maximine, two most fearce and
frantike emperors. For when they did se not only their churches pulled down
to the ground, but also many christen men violently hayled and pulled to
worship Idols, albeit that they were sore dismayed with the matter, yet would
they not gather them selfs together, and make rebellion, and by that means
defend both their faith and the^ selfs to, lest they might so loose the
gloriouse crown of martyrdom, yt christ their head captain had prepared
for the^. But when time came, yt they should be examined concerning their
faith, they frelye confessing the same, offered them selfs to be put to
paynfull tormentrye, which they were far more glade to goo to, then any man
is to go to a feast. We read also a very notable story of the inhabitau^tes of
Edessa: Socra hi^stor. eccle. lib. 4.
It chaunsed on a time that the Emperor Valens, which was an heretic of the
Arrians se^te, and bare deadlye hatred agayns^e all catholic folk, came
thither, and commanded all the folks of that city, because they were very
catholic, and hated his opinion, that they should not upon pain of death come
together to pray. Yet they not wythstandinge his commandment the next day
after came to ye church, as they were wont to do. And when the^perours
lieuetenaunt accompanied with a great number of souldiars, minded upon the
emperors commandment to put the^ to death, a pore woman with her child
braste through the midst of the souldyars, purposing posinge to go to the
church. Wherewith the lieuetenaunt being sore offended, called her to him, and
asked her, whither she ran so fast: And she answered, to ye church,
whereunto other folk resorted. Then the lieuetenaunte said. haste thou not
heard, yt the Emperors lieuetenaunt will kill al, yt he shall find there? Yes
verily, said ye woman: and therefore I make have, yt I may be found among
the^. Which when the lieuetenaunt heard, he much maruayled at the madness (as
he thought) of those, yt so notwithstanding themperours commandment, repaired
together to ye church. Whereupon he came to the emperor, and told him, that
they were all very ready and willing to die for their faith. These folks
albeit they were a great no^bre, yet would they make no resistance, but mekely
offered them selfs to suffer death for their faith, and so to declare their
obedience both to god, and to the prince to. Saint Ambrose likewise writes of
the cit^zins of Melane, Ambros. ad Marcel Soro^ ^pi^t. 33.
where he was bishop* that when themperor young Ualentiniane would have had
them to have delivered up their churches into the hands of Auxentius an
Heretyke, and ye rest of his adherentes, they refused to do his commandment,
and yet nevertheless would they not by force withstand or rebel against him, but
went and made humble suite unto him* and said: We come to make request unto
your grace (most noble Emperor) and not to fight with you. As for death or
punyshmente we fear not, but we humbly beseech your hyghnes to be good unto
us. Thus to do, says Saint Ambrose, is mete for christen men, to thintente
that both peace may be sought for, and also the constant mayntenau^ce of
faith and truth shall not for danger of death be given over. Thus writes
Saint Ambrose. Likewise did the souldiars, Socr^. ^istor. eccle lib. 3.
that were of Iuliane themperours guard, of whom a great nombre (among
which were Iouiniane, Ualentiniane, and Ualens, who were Emperors afterward)
when as they were commanded either to forsake their faith, and to do sacrifice
to Idols, or else to leave their ^owmes, and get them out of the court, were
not only contented to loose their rowmes, but also all their goods and lives
to for the defense of their faith. And not ones did they murmur or grudge at
the matter, nor went not about to rebel against Julian, being a wretched
tyraunte, but were right glad to suffer wrong for Christ's sake. And thus all
godly and blessed folks use to obey rather God then man, and are well
contented to dye for the mayntenaunce of their faith: which rule every good
christen man ought always to observe. For when the prince commands him to
forsake his faith, then must he prepare him self to suffer all kind of
torments, rather then to fall from God, and his faith. But if the devil do
move him to rebel and fight against his Prince, and tell him that so he shall
obey God, do him good service, and defend his faith, then let him remember,
that he is commanded by the holy word of God, to be obediente not only to
good princes, but to noughtie princes to, and then let him tell the devil, yt
he lies, because al men are bidden to be obedient by express and plain
words of ye scripture.

Mat, ^6.
And our Savior Christ him self has given us a plain example thereof. For
when saint Peter would have defended him with the sword against his enemies,
he said to him thus: Doste thou not think, that I can make request to my
father, and that he will send me mo, then.xi^ legions of Angels to help me?
Therefore to be obedient, and to suffer for our faith, is Gods holy will and
pleasure. But we never read neither in Scripture, nor in no holy writer. that
we should either for our faith, or for any other cause rise and rebel
against our prince, nor arm o^r self to fight with him in the open field.
For whosoever do so, Romans 13
they (as witnesses saint Paul) seek their own damnation. Yet
notwythstandynge if the prince command any thing contrary to the will of
GOD, neither must we do it, lest we highlye displease God, nor we must not by
force of arms resist the Prince, lest we damn our own souls, but both we
must obey God in styckynge fast to our faith, and we must obey the Prince to,
I mean not in doing his commandment, which is damnable, but in patient
suffryng of paynful torments, that he will put us to, by reason we refuse to
do that, that he bids us. For thus wylleth y^ scripture us to do, and thus
has all good godly men done in time paste, and will do still even to the
worlds end. Yet let men be well ware, We must weye, whether our faith be
sound or no.
and take good head, whether their faith, that they will suffer for, be sound
or no. For many due has herein been sore deceived. We read in Eusebius storye
of Montanus a pestilent heretic, Euse. histor. eccle lib. 5.
that when he and his adherentes were conuyc^ed of their heresy, and so
confounded, that they had nothing to say, they began to boast, that they had
many martyrs of their sect, and that that was a sure argument, that they had
ye spirit of god. Unto whom it was answered, yt that was not always true.
For certain other sects of heretics there be, that have their false martyrs,
but yet for all that we will not agree with them, and say that they have the
truth of their side. For the Marcionites, which do deny Christ, say that
they have very many martyrs. Thus writes Eusebius. Likewise now of late
years, since Wicliffe here in England, Hus in Boheme* Luther in Germany, and
Occolampadius among the Swichers began their he res^es, Our f^^se martyrs.
many have there been in England, France, Germany, and in other countries to,
that stiflye standing in their fond opinions, have been burned at a stake. By
reason where of among them, that favored such false doctrine, they were taken
for martyrs.

But such folks little consider, what saint Augustyne says in an epistle,
that he writes to Festus, as touching the Heretykes called Donatistes in this
wise. What is more wretched, or more perverse, then that men (as the
Donaristes do, which boaste themselfes, that they suffer persecution) will,
when they be punyshed for their wickedness, not only not be ashamed thereof,
but look to be praised therefore. Who truly are so enueygled either with a
marvelous blindness, or with a damnable presumption, that they will not know,
or else they make, as they did not know, that the pains, that the martyrs do
suffer, do not make them true martyrs, ^span; makes no^ martyr^* but the
cause. 1. P^t. ^*
but the cause, wherefore they suffer. For what thank shall men have, as
saint Peter says, if they suffer as sinners, and be well buffeted and beaten
therefore? Then what reward shall those have, that being infected with heresye,
will rather dye, then revoke ye same? But many y^ see the outward conversation
of diverse of the^ the pretensed virtue and holiness, ^he (...) crisis of
heretik^^
the zeal yt they seem to bear to Gods truth, the simpleness, that
appears in their life, the contempt of the world in appearance, the steadfast
sticking in their opinions even to then during of most greuouse torments, do
not only say, but think to, that they be very saynctes, and will not let
openly so to call them. Yet shall it be very necessary for those folks to
take diligent head, lest they be not by such hypocrisy far deceived. For
it is not ye outward virtuous behavior only, yt makes a man perfect and
holy, nor it is not his stiff sticking in error and blindness, that makes
him a martyr. Wherefore such men as pretend such holiness, are most of al
other to be taken head of, ^ heretic of honest life is most peritious.
by reason yt they seming holy to the world, most easelye deceive ye people.
For Origin in an homely upon the.xvi. chap. of Ezechiel says thus.

In my judgment an heretic of honest life, is much more perilous and
noisome, and his doctrine has much more authority then his, whose noughty
life does defile his doctrine. For he that leads his life in vice, can not
easelye allure the people to heresy* nor can not by the shadow of holiness
deceive the simple hearers* But he yt is given to perverse doctrine, and is an
enemy to the doctrine of health and salvation, and yet for all that is of an
honest and sobre behauioure, intends nothing else, but to apparel him self
with the cloak of an honest pretense and a sobre life, and to cover his
craftye diuises with it, to thintente he may the more deceive his hearers.

Therefore let us most diligently beware of heretics, that be of honest and
ver^uous behavior, whose life percase y^ devil rather then God, has so
formed and framed. For as fowlers lay bates to allure birds wythall, to
thintente they may more easelye catch them, so the devil has a certain
pretensed honesty, that is to say, a snare to deceive men's souls withal* to
thintente that by such honestye such meke behavior, and such righteousness,
he may more easelye catch men's souls, and by false preaching bring them into
the snare. For the deuyill fyghteth by diverse subtle traynes* to the end that
he may destroy mankind.

Thus writes Origene of the prete^sed virtue of heretics. The pretensed
co^s^antie of heretics
Which as he advises us, it is necessary for us to eschew, lest it at the
length deceive us. Now as for their earnest sticking in their lewd opinions,
is no ^ause, why any man should the* more credit them. For we read of diverse
anabaptists, which is a sec^e of heretykes as (...) as the (...) which have
suffered sond^y kinds of sore torments, yea and death to, rather th^n they
would refuse their adhominable heresy. Joan. Gastius de Anabap^^ staru^ erro.
lib. 1.
For in a city of Germany called Passakia, eight of this see^ were burned upon
one day, and abode the ^^hole flames of fire with such patience, as they made
all men* that were present, to wonder at the^. Among whom was one man, that
had two sons burned with him, whom he most earnestli exhorted, y^ they
should never for fear of the fire, nor for the intolerable pains, yt they
suffered therein forsake their opinion. And often recited unto them the
martyrdom of ye blessed Machabees.

Again at a certain place beside the river of Rheue, ^iue Anabaptists in
their floryshinge age, for their heresy were cast into the said river, and
drowned. Which when they were led to their death, In the same bok^
not ones shranke at ye matter. At Basile likewise two chief ringleaders of
this sect, when they were led through the city, and beaten with rods,
cast their eyes upon him, that bette them, with a merry countenance, and
exhorted him stoutly to do his office in that behalf. For we (said they) most
gladly do suffer for christ and the true understanding of his word in
baptism. Now then whe^as we see folks suffer great punyshement with such
wonderful patience, and pretend that they suffer for gods word, shall we
say by and by that such be martyrs, and take example of them to stycke to
heresye, and so cast away both our bodies and souls? No no god forbid, y^
any christen man should do so, and through the noughtye example of the deuyls
false martyrs, become as mad as they. For if constante and patiente suf^^yng
were ^noughe to make martyrs, then should Turks be martyrs. For we read of
certain Turks, Joan. Gastius de erro. Ana baptistar.
that had burned a good part of Transilu^n^^ and VVulachi^: which were taken
prisoners by Chrystenmen. Who when as they should be put to execution, and be
beheaded at (...) they were offered their pardon* if so be they would forsake.
Mahometes law, and become christen. But never one of them would take y^ offer,
but most stiffly standing (...) their wicked profession, willingly went to their
death. Wherefore let no man, either when he feeth an heretic fly out of his
country, because he will contynewe in heresye, or is banished for the same,
say yt he is a confessoure, and suffers persecution for y^ truth, or when he
sees him gladlye go to the fire, and patiently suffer it, say yt he dies a
martyr, and that twentye thowsande will rise of his ashes, but let him be right
sorye in his heart and lamente, that the devil was so great with him that he
could make him suffer the hoa^e flames of fire for his wicked opinion, and so
led him streighte to the ^eruente flames of everlasting fire. And let him
exhort al men to take heed betyme, how they enter into heresy, lest their
goostlye enemy lead them so far forth in it, that they shall never turn
back again from it. And let neither such sufferynge of heretics, nor their
pretensed holiness by any means deceive us. Nor let us not think, that any
such things, how gaye soever they seem in the sight of some men, can in any
wise avail the doers of them, because they be done not only against the
church of God, but also without the circui^ie and unity of ye same, and be
contrary to the catholic faith thereof.

For if such folks would bestow all that they have in helpinge the poor,
No good deeds anay^eth, y^ are done without the catholic church.
or if they would tame their bodies with fasting and abstinence, or if they so
loved their neighbors, that they would be content to suffer death for their
sakes, or if they were so earnestly bente to prayer, that they would not cease
to pray continually, or if they had such a zeal to preach, that they would
most diligently occupy them selfs in that behalf, yet should they bestow all
their travail in vain, if so be they have forsaken the catholic church, and
the true faith thereof. De fid. ad Pet.
For. S. Augustyn says, that neither baptism, nor any works of mercy can
profit a man with out the felowshyppe of the catholic Church. De baptis lib.
4. contru. donat
And in an other place he says, that those works, that appertain to the
Church, if they be done without the church, they avail nothing to our
salvation, because that with out the unity of the church of god, there is no
salvation at all. The blessed martyr saint Cyprian writes likewise, Desimpli^
pralat.
as touching ye same point thus: Such as are gathered together without
Christ's church, think they, that when they be so gathered together, that
they have Christ with them? All such, if so be they be slain for confessing
Christ's name, the blottes, yt they be defiled with all, are not washed away
with the effusion of their blood. For the heinous and sore sin of discord is
not purged from them by suffringe a paynfull passion. No man can be a martyr,
y^ is ^oute Christ's church.
And a martyr can no man be, yt is not in the church. Nor no man can come to
the kingdom of Christ, which has forsaken the church, that shall reygne
with Christ. Then best it is for every man, that minded to be saved, if he
fall in trouble for his faith sake, first to consider depelye, whether he be a
member of Christ's church, Faith is to be tried and how.
and then to weye well, whether his faith agrees with the catholic faith or
no. And in weying thereof let him not stick only to his own judgment, which
may sone deceive him, but follow the iudgeme^te of those, whose doctrine has
ever from time to time been by the whole church of God well lyked and allowed.
The spirit to be tried.
And beside to try ye spirit, wherewith he is moved, whether it be of God, or
otherwise. Which may in deed be very easily tried. For if it be of God, Gods
spirit.
it will not resist the authority of the church, nor labor to disanull the
same, but will always submytte it self thereunto, as to the true spouse of
Christ, and gladly embrace the doctrine thereof, as the doctrine of health and
salvation. The devils spirit.
But if it be the deuilles spirit, it will then contemn the authority of the
Church, and will travail to tread that under foot, and lewdly oftentimes
belie it to, and rage and rail agyanst the godly order thereof, and blaspheme
the blessed mysteryes and sacraments therein, and call fasting and praying
superstition, and call all them work wongers, that meddle with any such matters
And presumptuously will take upon it to judge of the deep secrets of the
scripture, and despise the doctrine of the old holy fathers and doctors of the
church, and will say yt they were men, and both might and did err, and that
men must believe and read nothing but scripture, and allow none interpretation
thereof, but such as they gather the^ selfs by conferringe place with place,
and that every manne ought to be his own judge in yt behalf. Such a spirit
of al those, yt be me^bres of Christ's catholic church, and purpose so to
continue, and be saved at length, is to be utterly avoided, lest like a snake,
when it has ones gotten in the head, it draw the whole body after it, and
so be the destruction of all them, that receive it. For such a spirit will at
length move men to disobeye their prince, if he be a godly catholic man, yea
and openly to rebel against him. And hereby it may easelye be perceived, yt it
is not the spirit of God, because it stirs men to fight against God. For
whosoever makes war against his prince, he makes war against God,
forasmuch as the prince is (as I said before) appointed by God. And like as if
a worldly prince should ordeyn an officer, and give him full aucthoritye to
examyne causes, and to execute suffice under him, whosoever should withstand
this officer, and go about to fight with him, should be worthily taken for a
traitor, and should have, as he had deserved. So truly seeing, that God
has appointed the prince to be his officer and minister of justice here in
earth, what man soever rebelleth against him, is a false traitor to God, and
except he repent betime, he sha^^ receive the reward of a traitor in hell.
Besides this the foresaid spirit may be well known by the doctrine, that
comes from it. For the doctrine there of is full of pride and presumption, The
doctrine of y^ devils spirit.
full of hypocrisy, full of blasphemy. It is also contentiouse, stubborn and
impatient, it is licentiouse and carnal, it is for the most part grounded
upon lies, and blind ignorance. The doctrine of God. Iac. 3.
But the doctrine and wisdom that comes from heaven, (as saint James says)
first it is pure, secondarelye it is peaceable, and beside it is gentle, and
obedient: it is also full of mercy and good works: it will not judge other:
finallye it is simple and unfeigned. Therefore whensoever we be tempted to
receive any new doctrine, New doctrine how it is to be ^^eyed.
let us weye well not only who are the teachers thereof, and whether it self
have the qualities of the wisdom and doctrine, that the holy Apostle says,
comes from heaven above, but also what fruits spring out of it. For if we
perceive both ye ministers thereof to be good godly men, and favorers of
Christ's catholic church, and also* the doctrine it self to be peaceable,
gentle, obediente, and mercyful, and finally that it bring for the such
fruytes, as saint Paul calls the fruits of the spirit, Ga^. 5.
that is to say, Charity, joy, peace, long suffrynge, gentleness, goodness,
faith, mekenes, and temperaunce, then may we be bold to embrace it, as the
doctrine of GOD coming from above, and to frame our faith, and believe
according to it. But contrary, if not only the doctrine, that is taught us
to be busye, unquiet, headye, dysobediente, and cruel, but also the ministers
thereof be high minded, presumptuouse, enemies to the church of Christ,
raylers and gesters, lewd in their preaching, and morelewd in their behavior,
authors of carnal liberties, and maynteyners of the same, yea and beside this,
if the fruits of their preaching be such, Gal. 5.
as the blessed Apostle Paul calls the works of the flesh, that is to
we^e, adu^utrye, horedo^e, filthiness, wantonness, worshpppynge of Idols,
witchecraffe, hatred, strife, emulation, anger* debate, dissension, sects
envy, murder dronkennes, riotous ba^kettyng, and such ^ike, then must we
think* that such doctrine is sowe^ abroad by our deadly enemy the devil, to
poison our souls withal. And we must be well ware, that we taste not
thereof, lest it seminge to us pleasant and sweet at the first, work in us
at the length a sour and sorrowful effect. For if we be ones infected with
it, hardly shall we be delivered of it. For it is a common saying in England,
that frenzy, heresy, and yelousie are hard to be cured. And if it remayn
still within us, it will in conclusion so corrupt our selye souses, that they
shall be in danger of death everlasting. Therefore let every man that loves his
soul, and is desirous to save it, take heed of perverse doctrine, and neither
lean to much to his own will and judgment, lest thereby he be foul
deceived, nor adventure to stick fast in the defense of a false faith, and to
ieoparde both body and soul therefore. For if he stand in it to the shedding
of his blood, although he please him self never so much therewith in this
life, yet shall he not fayl to receive the reward yt is prepared for obstinate
blindness in another life. Of such folk there be two sorts: Two sorts of
stubborn heretics.
one that has spiced consciences, and of a folishe fervent zeal, yt they have
to their fond opinion, being persuaded, yt they be in a truth will rather
loose al yt they have and their lives to, the^ any thing relent in their
prete^sed truth. And no merueyle it is, forasmuch as both they be so with
presu^ption blinded, yt they will follow no man's judgment, but their own. and
also so wedded to their will, yt they count all other men's counseyle vain
madness and folly. By means where of they judge lies to be truth, darkness to
be light, lewdenes to be learning, fantastical folly to be perfect wisdom,
blasphemous babbling to be pure preachinge, vain words to be wise reasons,
pestilent heresy to be wholesome doctrine, just punishmente for the same to be
persecution, obstinate stubbornness to be patiente constancy, and death for
false faith to be martyrdom. So yt they may well say by reason of their
incurable blindenes these words of the holy Prophet Esaye. Esa. 59.
We have looked for the light, and ^o here is darkness, we have sought for
clear brightness, and have walked in cloudie mistes, we have groped for the
wall like blindemen, and like folks that have lost their light, we have
touched the same. We have stumbled At noo^^ day, as though we had ^^^ked
light, and have been besette with darkness, as though we had been dead. For
who, I pray you, seeks more for the light of truth in appearance, then these
men do* Yet when they have long looked for it, Truth is only in ye church of
God.
they find it not, because that where it is, that is to say in the Church of
God, they seek it not. Therefore after their long sekyng* they may well say,
lo here is darkness. They seek also the clear brightness of the Gospel, but by
reason they take a wrong way to come to it, they never come near it. For all
such folk leaving the high way of the catholic faith, do take the pathe of
pestilent heresy. And when they are ones well entered into their iorneye* The
bywayes of heresy.
they find many bywayes, and one says this is the way, and another says,
that is the way, and the third fyndeth the third way, and every one takes
his own way, in so much yt after they be gone out of the high way, they
never mete together again, nor never one of them finds the (...) truth of
the Gospel, that he seeks for, except God send him grace to return back to
the high way again. For they that intend to come to the clear light of
the truth must follow thexample of the children of Israand The way to truth.
say as they said to the king of Edom, Number. 20
we will go the common high way, and turn ney^her on the right hand, nor on
the left hand* By which common high way is understood the way, yt leads
a man to truth and life. And if a man know not this way, and that one tell
him this is it, and another tell him that is it, how shall he then do ^o
learn it. The guide to truth is the catholic church.
Sure guide has he none, but only the holy catholic church, ye true spouse
of Christ. Therefore let him learn the way of her, and then shall he not
fail to go right in his iourneye.

Again that sort of men, that I a little before told you of, like blindemen
they grope for the wall, whereof Christ is the corner stone, but they never find
it. And sometime they stumble upon some piece of it, but they never come within
in it, by reason that they will not ones open their eyes to find out the door,
that leads a man into it. Yea and if there come any good manne to the door,
and spy them thus sometime gropynge, and sometime stumblynge, and bydde them
open their eyes, and come to the door, they go forth gropinge still, and tell
him, that they see very well, and that he is blind hym^elfe, and move him to
come to them* and grope as they do. For they fear nothing, but that at length
they shall find out the true door. Thus for ought that any good charitable
man can do, they will not leave their groping, till in conclusion they percase
stumble upon some peuish wicket, Wicliffes wicket.
such one as Wicliffe made for his church, when he had forsaken the church of
Christ. And then think they them selfs well spedde, and believe that that is
the true door, where in deed it is but a very wicket made only to wind men
into the mayse of heresye, in which they shall be always seking, and never find
end, saving the woeful end, that the wicked fend leads al them to, that
have forsaken the common way of the Catholic church, and walk still forth
in the perilous paths of pestilent heresye.

Another sort is there, The second sort of stubborn heretics.
that because they have either by preaching, or else by writing setforth and
maynteyned heresye before, they will stick fast to it, lest if they should
recant, and return home to the catholic church, they should be taken for
light and unconstant men, and so loose their estimation. Be not these very wise
men trow you, that albeit they know, yt the truth is against them, and that
they have labored by all means to subdue the same, yet nevertheless
forasmuch as they will seem constant, they will not receive the truth, but
stand stiflye in their opinion* and rather suffer death both of body and
soul, then they will acknowledge their error and blindness? Might not the
Prophet Hiere my speak unto them, Hiere. 5.
as he did in old time to the Jews after this ^orte. Hear you folyshe
people, which be hartlesse, and have eyes and see not, and ears and hear not.
For these folk both see and hear the truth, and yet for wilful pride will
they neither see it, nor hear it. They be very like to a folishe man, that
goes a iourneye, and when he has taken ye wrong way him self, and caused
other to follow him to, at length albeit he perceaueth* yt he has gone amiss,
yet nevertheless will he hold on still, rather the^ turn to the right way
again, because he will not ^eme to his company to be deceived. But such folk
forgette (I think) that for the saving of their worldly estimation, they
shall loose their estimation with God, and so fall in danger to be damned for
ever. But if so be they should repent their folly, and return to the catholic
faith, of whom (I pray you) should they loose estimation* which they study
so much to save? Of none in deed, save only of those, that be blinded, as
they be. What great loss then shall they have, if they loose the estimation
of such, as be naught? Me think rather, that they should much gain by it.
For like as a merchant that gets a great deal of gold for a little lead,
wins much, and waxes very rich thereby* so those that for loosing the
commendation of evil men, win the^ selfs the praise of good men, has
undoubtedly a great au^untage. Why do they not follow the example of Hector,
Ci^er. in epist. ad Catone^. li 14. epist. (...).
which said, that he was glad to be praised of him, that was a man worthy of
praise him self. If they would so do, what a great comfort then should they
conceive in their hearts seeing that they might be well assured, that both all
good godly men would much commend them, if they mekelye acknowledginge
their error, would be sorye for it, and God himself to, would be gracious
and merciful to them. By means whereof, they should not only increase their
estimation in the world* but also save their souls, which should otherwise
have perished.

Therefore for such a faith, as they hold, let neither the^, nor no man else,
that either fears GOD, or loves his own soul adventure to suffer death.
And if they be troubled for it, and peradventure shut up in prison, let
them not then glory in their fetters, as though they were Apostles, and write
letters of comfort one to another in an Apostles style after this sort, Grace
and peace be with you from god our father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, nor
let them not exhort one another to stick fast in their fond opinion, and
say good brother in the lords name show your self now to be the true
minister of god in maynteyning his holy word, nor let them not craftly cover
their contagiouse heresye with such a gaye colored cloak, lest they both
deceive them selfs, and a great many mo to, for whose souls they shall make
answer, but let them call to remembrance the words of saint Paul, that he
writes to the Corinthians, which be these: Such false apostles are crafty
workmen, 2. cor. 11.
and fashion them selfs to be like Christ's apostels: and no marueyle is it.
For satan chaunseth him self into the form of an Angel of light. Therefore
it is no great wonder then, if his ministers fashion them selfs like to the
ministers of Justice. And when they have throughlye weyed these words, let
them mark well, whether they be not such like them selfs, as saint Paul
speaks of, and so spying at length their wrong faith, let them never stand
longer in it, nor think that they are wiser then all the world beside, but
like good children with weping tears return to their mother the church,
humbly ask her spouse mercy, and desire him to pardon their folly. For
except they do thus, let them never look to be Gods children.

Because that as saint Cyprian says, Cyp^lan. in epist.
no man can have god his father, excep^ he take the Church for his mother.
Now then seeing, that for such a fond faith no man ought to put him self in
any trouble, much less ought he to make rebellion for the maynteynaunce of
it. For if it be true, (as we have proved before) y^ for the sincere and true
faith of Christ no man may without danger of damnation adventure to rebel*
then much less ought he for a false faith to rebel and rise against his
prince. Wherefore when as for any cause that can be ymagined, our adversary the
devil, the aucthor of discord moves us to rebellion, let us then remember,
that no cause is there* (as we have declared before, for which a man may make
rebellion, and so shall we always vanquishe the devil, be obedient to our
prince, and therein obey god to, and finally eschew the deuelishe and
detestable crime of rebellion, which brings all those, that adventure upon it,
to utter destruction and ruin. Now most dearly beloved contrye men, seeing
that hitherto we have both opened the causes, that commonly move men to
rebellion, and also proved, that for none of them, nor no other beside them,
men must rebel, it shall be well done hereafter to consider likewise the
causes. which have now of late made men to rebel against our most
gratiouse soueraygne Lady the Queen, and to give all men warning to take heed from hence forth of such a wicked and cruel enterprise. The causes of
(...) rebellion.
Wise men that have well weyed this matter, reken two causes specially, that
made men this last time make rebellion: One, to deliver our country from the
oppression of strangers, as it was reported, and another to restore again
Luthers lewd religion, which god and the Queens highness had lately banished
out of the realm. Which two causes may be well referred to the causes declared
heretofore, seeing y^ in effect they be included in them. Yet forasmuch as it
is necessary at this present particularly to speak of them, I shall hereafter
set them forth at large, to thinte^t that al men's hearts may be the better
quieted in that behalf.

The first cause was only a cause pretensed, and was thought to many men
somewhat reasonable, and thereby was not a few deceived with the goodly colowre
thereof. For when the simple people heard, that the head captain of this
rebellion, intended nothing else, but to stop the Spanyardes from entringe
into this realm, and to bring to pass, that no foreyne prince should mary with
the queens highness, lest we should by that means (as he said) be made
bondemen and slaves contrary to the nature of all English men, and that he
loved the Queens grace and all her subjects, as his own life, and sought
nothing, but yt should be to her honor, and the commodity and wealth of the
whole realm, they thought it was a good godly purpose, and were by and by
persuaded therewith, and said that there was no man, that was faithful and
loving to his country, but he would be glad to spend his blood in such a
good quarrel.

Thus were the sely folk, that knew not the very cause, why this rebellion was
made, by this subtle pretense foulye deceived. And like poor birds* that in
a great snow can get no meat, with this bayte were (or ever they wiste)
catched to their great confusion. But put the case. that this had been their
intent in deed* should they therefore have gone about to make rebellion, and
where as they be commanded by GOD to obey the Queen, their most lawful
head and gouernesse, should they rule her, and in a matter wherein every body
both by Gods law and man's has free liberty to do, as him lyketh, should
they by force like rigorouse tyrauntes, co^strayn her to satisfy their
fantasies, in that behalf, and to marry whom they would appoynte her? Who
has so much authority (I pray you) in making other folks marriages, as
the pare^tes have in marryinge of their own children? And yet for all that,
they may not compel them to marrye, whom they list, but they must have their
consent therein. (...). 24
For so did Laban and Bath^ell, when their daughter Rebecca should be sent with
Abraams servant to be married to Isaac, saying thus. Let us call the gyrle, and
ask her mind. And when she came, they asked her: Will thou go with this man?
who answered: I am well contented to go. Therefore seeing the children, which
ought to be at the parents commandment, must agree and consent to their
own marriage, shall not princes then, to whom al subjects are bound to be
obedient, be at liberty to appoint their own marriages? What marriage i^.
And again because ye marriage is a ioyninge together of a man and a womanne
freely and lawfullye made for the bryngyng forth of children, how can it
freelye be made, when either the man, or the woman is by force constrained
thereunto. And lawful matrimonye can it not be, except it freelye be made by
the full consent of both parties. Super Mat. hom 32.
For S. Chrysostom says* that carnal copulatio^ makes not matrimony, but
the will and consent of the parties. Then forasmuch as both by Gods law and
man's it plainly appears, that matrimony can not be good, except it be made by
the free consent of the parties, let no true subject think much, that the
Queen's highness has bestowed her self, where she lyketh and loves. No no
every one that loves her grace heartily, will be glad that she marieth such
one, as she may hereafter take pleasure and comfort in. If her grace should
have married one that she could not have fantasied, it should so sore have
agreued her, that she would have wished to be out of the world. And besides
that, it should have been occasion of contention betwixt them, whereby God
should have been hyghlye displeased. Cap. 3.
For wheresoever (as witnesses saint James) is envy and contention, there is
unstableness and all wicked works.

Over this if we would thoroughly weye, How the Queens marriage came to pass.
how this marriage has been brought to pass, we should have cause much to
marvel at it, and not to grudge against it. For when as the Queens hyghnes
was by the Parliamente house most humblye sued unto, that it would please her
grace for the quietness and comfort of the whole Realm to take an husband,
she was in wonderful doubt with her self, what she might do in y^ behalf.
And great pain had she to apply her mind and fantasy that way, seeing that
her grace had now so many years lived a pure virgin, and had great pleasure
to live so still, and so would have continued, had it not been that by Gods
goodness she might in lawful marriage have issue, (for which it is our
bounden duty earnestlye to pray) to the intent yt all her loving subjects
thereby might be satisfied, and the whole realm preserved in peace and
quietness. And therefore seeing it was a thing most expedient for us, that her
highness should marri, she forced her self contrary to her own fantasye
thereunto. And to the end that God might assiste her godly intent fell to prayer,
and most fervently called upon god (seeing that for our sakes she should marrye)
that it would please him to put her in mind of such one, as his glory might
be anaunced by, and all her subjects have good cause to rejoice in. For as for
worldly pleasure, whice folks commonly take in marriage, she nothing passed:
but her care was only to marry with such one, as might through his singular
virtue please god, through his great wisdom help well to govern this
realm, and for his noble lynage be occasion of much honor and quietness to
our country. As for beautye, strength of body, talnes of personage, and such
like, to those had her highness no respect at all. Therefore while her grace
made this godly and humble petition to almightye god, came there into her
remembrance this noble prince of Spain. And sone after were ambassadors sent
from the emperors majesty for that self purpose. So that it well appears,
that the first motion of this marriage came of god, without the counseyle or
advise of any man. And we must also consider, that the hearts of princes (as we
read in the Proverbs of Solomon) be in the hand of god, P^o. ^.
and that he moves the same that way, that him likes. And then howsoever the
matter seem in our syghte, we ought to judge the best, and think that God
by his heavenly wisdom has done it for the best* and we must heartily pray
him, that his will always may be done in all such matters. For as he is the
gyuer of all other good things, so is he most specially of a good marriage.
And that may we learn of Solomon, Pro, 1^*
where he says: An house and riches are given us of our parents, but a wise
wife is given of GOD. Therefore it is every good man's part earnestly to pray
to almyghtye God, that seeing that by his providence (as we verelye trust) this
noble marriage is made betwixt such two princelye personages, it may please
his goodness so to work in that behalf, as may be to the aduaunceme^te of
his glory, to both their honors, and hearts ease, and to the commodity and
quietness of our country. But it was maliciously and falsely reported not
long ago by the rebels (as I told you before) that the Queens Highness
would have married a stranger of set purpose to make us slaves. And they did
not let to say beside after this sort. Shall men suffer this, The Kentishe
rebels words.
or shall we have our heads thrust under a strangers girdle, and become his
bondmen? Or shall we suffer our wives and daughters to be rauyshed by vile
velaynes? What true English heart can abide this? And being thus vaynely
persuaded, rashely without any further delyberation fell they to open
rebellion, and did much like, as the Jews did in old time* which through ye
counseyle of Judas Gaulanites rebelled against the emperor of Rome. Iosep.
de anti. li. 8. ca. 1.
at such time as Qui^inus a senator was sent by the emperor into Syria and
Iudaea to sesse these countries For this Judas Gaulanites (as Josephus tells)
having a companyo^ much like him self joined with him, moved the Jews to
rebellion, and told the^, that this sessinge was for no other purpose, but that
they should grant them selfs to become bondemen and slaves: and therefore he
exhorted al his contrymen to defend and maynteyne their liberty. For so (said
he) should it come to pass, yt if they had good luck, they should not only
enjoy their own goods in much prosperity, but also being establyshed. in
their possessions, get great praise for their manhood. And that they must not
look to be helped at Gods hand, except that withal they would study to help
them selfs. The rascold people were glad to hear this, insomuch that thereby
they were much moved to adventure this their wretched enterprise. Who for
desire of lucre under the pretense of defending their liberty so much
troubled their whole countreye, as it is not well able to be told. For where
soever they came, they murdered men, and robbed them and without respect
killed, as well friends as enemies: and al such as were noble and notable men
they rydded out of the way. And while as in a furious rage one slew another
among them selfs, foreyne enemies did invade them, and great dearth and
famine befell among them. This tells Josephus. So that whosoever will
compare these two rebellions together, shall easelye perceive, how both they
them selfs by their detestable enterprise wroughte their own destruction, and
God sent his vengeance upon them beside, as a scourge for their frantike
madness. Wherefore if we will save our souls from damning, save our bodies from
killing, save our country from spoiling, and avoid the great vengeance of
god, let us from henceforth beware of rebellion. And surely persuade our
selfs, that our gratiouse Lady and maystresse the Queen, because she is the
humble hand maid of God, elected and chosen by him to rule and reform this
realm, which was so far out of order and ^rame, will go about nothing but
that shall be to gods glory, and the wealth of all us her loving subjects. For
all her delight and pleasure is, to see gods glory auaunced, and this her Realm
recover the honorable state, that it has been in time past.

Now then consideringe her godly purpose in this behalf, it shall be every
good man's duty every day to pray heartily for her, that she may long live,
and reygne over us* and whensoever any enemies go about to assault her, most
willingly to spend our goods and lives to in her defense. As for her
marriage, let us (as I said before) refer the matter to God the author thereof,
and to her own wisdom, which has chosen it. For if we should rebel therefore,
we should not only seem to be w^^er the^ god, that (as we verily trust) has
made ye marriage, but also to know better then her grace, whom she should
most love and like. Now where as some percase both has said, and as yet do
say, that this noble prince of Spain is a stranger, and therefore both they
themselfes grudge at the Queen, because she has married him, and also make
other by their noughtie persuasion to grudge likewise, herein surely they not
only declare their lack of knowledge, as touching their duty and obedience
to her grace but also displease almyghtye god her defendour. Therefore it should
be very well done for all such to call to memory a storye, that is written
in holy scripture* as concerning the like matter. We read, how that Marye
and Aaron did sore murmer and grudge against Moses, Number. 12
because he married a wife, which was a stranger, and borne in Aethiope. With
which their grudge God being sore agreued, smote Marye with a leprosye,
insomuche that by reason that she was so greatly infected with it, she seemed as
white as snow, and was in danger thereby to be destroyed. Do we not think
that God now is just, as he was then, and is as sore offended with our
murmuring hearts against the Queen, as he was then with theirs against
Moses, and will punyshe our wickedness, as well as he did theirs, and the more
that we grudge, the more greuouslye will he plage us* Why then seeing we have
no just cause of grudge, do we not leave our grudging, for fear that we so
d^^please god, that he will not only smite us with the horrible disease of
leprosy in our bodies, but also punish our souls with everlasting fire.

And albeit ye private grudge that one bears toward another, does much
provoke gods wrath against us, yet the grudge, that we bear toward our
prince is much more greuouse. (...). 14
For when the children of Iraell murmured against Moses and Aaron their
rulers, because they ^eared to be destroyed of the inhabitants of Iurye at
such time, as they should enter into it* and wished yt they had died in
Aegypte, God was so sore displeased with their grudge* that he said to Moses,
I will distroye them all with plage and pestilence, and make thee a ruler over
a greater number of people, and much more valiant. Again when they went from
the hill called Hor, Number. ^^
and were with their long travail sore wer^ed, and by reason thereof much
muttered against god and Moses, and said, why have thou brought us of out
Aegypte* that we should dye in wilderness, god sent among them fyrye
serpents, which sore tormented them, and killed many of them insomuche that
they came to Moses and said. We have ^ore offended in that we have spoken
against GOD and the^.

Therefore all they that for any cause grudge against the queen's grace, let
the^ look for such like plages, if they do not amend, and let the^ learn by
these examples to lay away their grudgyng hearts, and mekely to acknowledge
their folly, to ask God mercy, and to say with the children of Israel, we
have grievously offended, for that we have murmered against thee, O Lord, and
against our most gracious Queen. And let them neither secretly in their
hearts grudge against their Prince, nor openly in their words speak evil
by her, but follow the counseyle of Solomon, ^ap. 1.
where he says: Keep your selfs from grudge, which au^yleth nothing, and
temper pour tongue, that it sclaunder nobodye. For all they, yt either in
their hearts conceive any malice toward ye Queen, or grudge at her, or utter
evil words against her, are as well to be committed rebels, as those that
bear harness against her. For these be the three special points (as you
heard at the beginning) wherein rebellion stands. As for their muttering yt
they make for her marriage, if they knew, how the Prince of Spain is unto us
no stranger, but one of the blood royal of England, by reason that his
father the emperors Majesty, That the prince of Spain is to us no stranger.
that now is, both by his father side and mothers comes of the Kings of
England, they would perhaps (as they have just cause) lay it aparte, and
both thank god hartelye, that has vouchesaued by his divine providence to
bring to pass, that such two noble personages, coming both of one stock and
lineage, that is to say, of the most valiant and famous Prince King Edward
the third, should for thauauncement of ye noble blood of England be joined
together in marriage, and also be very glad in their hearts to know, yt
such a noble progeny, as themperours is, has spronge out of the race of the
kings of England, but to the intent that it may plainly appear, yt this is of
an undoubted truth, I shall set forth, as it were in a table for all men to
look upon, the lineall dyscent both of the Queens Highness, and also of the
said prince from King Edward the third, which lineall descent have I
gathered partly out of the stories of England, and partly out of the stories
of Spain, to the intent that the truth thereof should thoroughly be known to
all mean

Hereby may we well perceive, that the Queen's grace takes no stranger to
marry with, but such one, as both by father and mother comes of the royal
blood of England, and now at length is called home, as it were to his
natyue country, insomuch yt no true English man has any cause to grudge at
the matter, but great cause has he to merueyle at the wonderful providence of
god therein, and heartily to thank him to, that he of his goodness both has so
auaunced the noble blood of England abroad in the world, by raising up
thereof so many noble princes to govern his people, and also now in the end
has sent unto us a noble prince of ye same blood to be joined in marriage with
the Queens hyghnes, to the great honor of our country and all our
comfortes. For what can be more honorable for us, then to join with such a
prince, whose progenitors have been for their noble acts renomed throughout ye
whole world, and for their singular virtue most hyghlye promoted? For many
noble victories have they gotten, many countries have they subdued, and
always by their force and policy defended the state of Christendom against
our mortal enemies the Turks.

And because they were so much esteemed for their excellent virtue, vj. of
their family* that is to say, of the house of Austria, has been of late
days chosen to be emperors. Of whom two were called Alberte, and other two
Frederike, the.v. was named Maximilian, and the.vj. Charles that now reygneth.

Or what ^an be more comfortable to us, then that the Queens highness should
have a Prince to her husband, that comes of such a noble stock? Who although
he was borne in a strange country, yet to us, because he comes of the royal
blood of England (as I said before) neither is, nor ought to be taken, as a
stranger. And if any man doubt of this, let him peruse the cronicles of
England and Spain, and he shall find my words true. Again if we fear him,
because he was borne in Spain, let us call to remembrance the two most famous
and notable Emperors of Rome, Traian and Theodosius the great, both
Spaniardes borne. Who being promoted to the Empeyre, so, while they raygned,
did govern the same, as ever since of al men in all ages, they have been most
highlye commended*

Let us beside read the lives of the Kings of Spain, and we shall perceive
very many of them to have been of such wisdom and virtue, and of so
synguler good qualytyes* as they may be thought able too match the Princes
and rulers of any other countreye beside. But now some do say, that the
Spaniardes be so proud and high minded, yt no man can well away with their
behavior. And ye same report oftentimes in other countries has gone upon us,
that we were both proud and stubborn. But put the case, that diverse of them
and of us to were such in deed, shall we by and by judge all the rest to be of
the same sort? Such perhaps of both twain as lack wisdom, be for the most
part of that condition. But surely they, that be wise, be al so sobre,
discrete and gentle. For wisdom always works such effects in those, that
has it.

As for the prince him self, he is not only wise and sobre, but also of a very
gentle behavior.

And good cause surely has he to be so. The princes quali^ies.
For both has he an excellent wit of nature, and also a father of singular
wisdom to learn at* yea and grave counseylours continually about him, whose
sage and sober advise he is always ready and willing to follow. And nothing is
there, that more declares a man to be wise, then that he will stycke to much
to his own fantasy, but gladly both hear those, that be wise, and also
follow their counseyll. Now that he is of gentle behavior well appears in
that, that all his subjects so harth love him, and are very loath to lack his
presence, which thing they have of late well declared. For when it was known
among them, yt he should come to marrye our queen, albeit they much reioysed
in the marriage, yet they much lamented, and took great sorrow for his
departinge, by reason yt he has at all times in all points so gently behaved
him self toward them, and therefore they had rather have dyed, then yt he should
have departed from them. Three special virtues of ye prince.
And three special virtues god has given him to win men's hearts withal,
liberality, mercy, and patience. For both to noble and mean men, to gentle
and simple, to rich and poor he is so liberal, that all, that have to do
with him, have great cause to bear him good will. And again if any man
offend him, if he be sorry therefore, he is ready to pardon him, and mercyfully
to deal with him. And in these points he is very like to our most graous
Soueraygne the queen, As for his patience that is so singular, that for the
same he may well be compared with the sage and famous philosopher Socrates.
For those that perfitely know him, report yt no displeasure, misfortune, or
aduersitye can move him, and that no man has for any cause seen him at any
time angry. And although that al other virtues are in a Prince very
commendable, yet none is there, that is so much to be esteemed in him, as godly
patience.

Wherefore seeing this noble Prince of Spain is garnished with such goodlye
virtues, as ye Spaniardes have good cause to lament for his departing, so we
English men have just occasion to rejoice for his coming. By means whereof
we shall be joined in sure amity with two or three noble countries* Spain,
Flaunders, and the rest of low Germany.

And great commodities has this realm always received by trafike had with
these countries, as al they, yt use the trade of marchaundise beyond the seas,
can very well show us. For what a benefit is it for this realm to have free
liberty to co^ueye such things from hence thither, as we have plentye of,
and to bring in those again from thence hither, that we have need of? Over
this our country hereby shall greatly be strengthed, and well fortified
against our aunciente enemies, who are very sore displeased with this noble
marriage, because they fear, that from henceforth they shall not be so able to
work us displeasure* but that we shall be more able on the other side always by
Gods help not only to defend our selfs, but also to give them an
overthrow, and to revenge their malice against us. Wherefore seeing that our
enemies are so sore a grieved with this marriage, it is our parts, if we love
our country, to be very glad of it. For our enemies evermore are sorye for
our commodity, because yt whatsoever is hurtful to us, they much rejoice
thereat. For men for the most part are naturally inclined to be glad of their
enemies harms. Then let us not be sorye for that, that our enemies are sorry
for, lest we seem to have the same affection, that they have, and so to hate
our country, but because they be sorry, let us be glad, thereby declaring,
that we heartily love our country.

Let us follow the Spaniardes example in rejoicing for this marriage. Who at
such time, as sure tidings were brought into Spain, as touching the same,
they were all so glad of it, as though they had received some ioyefull
tidings from heaven. Which their great gladness they well declared at the
coming thither of our Ambassadors, whom they received with such great
honor, with so singular gentleness, and wonder full joy, as the like
heretofore has been very seldom heard of. Why then do not we the same, and
show our selfs ready with as glad hearts to receive them?

If perhaps our love toward them be so cold, that it does nothing move us
thereto, yet let either the honor of our own countreye, which we owe
specially to regard, or else the commodities* that we shall receive by them,
some thing move us in this behalf.

And such as at the first can not frame their fantasyes so freely to do it, as
it would be done, let them yet at the least dissemble and bear them fair
countenance unto such time, as they shall have cause by reason of their gentle
behavior, both to like and love them. Again sythen that the friendship and
amytie of their country is so necessary for us, me think, that we should both
be right glad of them, and also much rejoice in that, which is cause
thereof. And truth is it (as Herodotus writes) that no one region or country
is there, Herodot. in Clio.
that has not oftentimes need both of the aid of any other, and also of the
commodities thereof.

Wherefore such folks, as are not contented with such a noble marriage, may
be rekened little to consider either ye wealth of their country, or the Queens
honor. Again the conditions of the marriage, which be expressed in an Act
of Parliament, made only for that purpose, are so honorable and so commodious
for England, as all Englyshemen, that favor their country, are greatly
bounded to give God hartye thanks for such a marriage. And there be also
such provisions in the conditions thereof for ye good and quiet behauioure of
all those, that shall come in with the said noble Prince, that no man has
cause to fear any trouble at their hands.

Let us then behave our selfs toward them, as it becomes us: And no doubt
but that we shall find such gentle friendship in them* that we shall have just
cause to love them, and gently to entertein them. And besides this no strange
thing is it, that the queen marries with a foren prince. For it is the common
practice of all princes of the world in a manner to join marriage for the
most part with foreyne princes, both for to make sure friendship betwixt
realm and realm, and also for the commodities that comonlye ensue thereof.
Yea and good stories make mention, that the like case, that the Queen's Highness
marriage stands in, has oftentimes in other realms been seen. For Isabell
daughter too John king of Castle, that was brother to Henry, when as her
brother Henry died without issue, Tarapha. de orig. reg. Histo.
and that she was crowned Queen of Castle, by and by was joined in marriage
with Ferdinand ye.v. king of Arrago^, and so was those.ij. kingdo^s that
marriage made all one. Which Ferdinande so well and wiselye governed those
countries, that al men both heartily loved him, and greatly also commended him.

Beside he expulsed out of that part of Spain, which is called Granade, the
Mores that had by force holden that country seven hundredth years. And over yt
he thrust out a great number of Saracenes and Turks, and banished with the^
their false faith, and after builded goodlye churches to the glory and honor
of God.

Marye also daughter to Charles, Duke of Burgundy, being heir to her father,
was married to Maximilian themperor a forreyne prince. Who was for his
excellent wisdom and virtue much renoumed, and for his noble acts wanne
him self in the world great honor.

Isabell likewise daughter to Ferdinande king of Castle and Arragone, after her
brother John's, and her eldest sister Isabels death, being the heir to the
crown of Castle and Arragone, was married to Philip Arch. Duke of Austria, a
forreyn prince to. Who so noblely governed those countries, that all the people
thereof did greatly honor him, heartily love him, and most humbly obey him.

And many other such like marriages have been made in the world, which have
had so prosperouse success, that not only the parties, that made them, took
much comfortes therein, but also the countries, wherein they were made,
received always much honor and commodity thereby. Therefore this marriage of
the Queens highness ought not to seem strange to any man, because the like in
other realms has oftentimes been made before. Again many marriages have
been made at sondrye times, (as both our own cronicles, and the cronitles of
Spain do testify) betwixt the noble country of Spain and us, and good
success have they had, and much frendshyp by means thereof has grown
betwixt us and them. And both the realms have much reioysed therein, and
waxed rich and welthie thereby, insomuch that al good men and such as
earnestly tender ye good and prosperous estate of our country, these causes
well considered* will reken us happy, that only God, as it appears, has thus
honorably provided for us, and has by this means renewed the old amity and
frendshippe, that has been betwixt England and Spain.

But now as for those that rebelled of late, albeit yt they pretended, that
all their grefe came of this marriage, and got them a Spanishe cloak to cover
their cursed deuyse withal, and so showed them selfs disobedient to God and
unkind to their prince, yet meaned they nothing less. For a man may be bold
to say this, yt if the prince of Spayn had been a fauorer of heresye, and given
to such fond fantasies, as these folks were themselves, howesoeuer he had
been qualified otherwise, they would never have made rebellion for the matter,
but with most glad hearts have received him, hoping thereby to have recovered
their abominable and blasphemouse heresye again. But because he is a
catholic prince, a fauorer and defendour of Christ's church, and son to the
Emperors majesty, who always has most earnestlye maynteyned the catholic
faith, they could not abide him, nor in no wise hear of his coming, fearyng
that thereby their wicked heresye should be banyshed out of this realm, and
all the preachers thereof from thenceforth might put up their pypes,
wherewith they had (as Mercurye did with Argos) not only brought the people a
sleep, Old. Metamorph. lib. 1.
but also afterward put out their eyes, and made them stark blind.

Therefore the very cause of this last commotion was religion now by God and
the Queens highness brought again to the old aunciente order and state, The
very causes of our last rebellion.
appointed by Christ's catholic Church: against which these rebels dare so
deadlye hatred, that they had rather have lost their lives (as many of them
have done) then to be brought to receive it.

And because they minded to maintain their wicked heresye still, they purposed
like most miserable and cruel wretches by force of arms first to put down
the Queens Highness, to deprive her of her crown, to rid her and all her
faithful counseylours out of the way, and then to have set up such rulers
and counseylours, as would have set forth heresye a fresh. And after that all
the dispersed brethren, that be of heresies guylde and fraternity should have
repaired together again, and broched the dregs of their deuelish doctrine to
the people, as they had done before. But god, whose glory they minded utterly
to desace, whose handmayden they had contrived cruelly to kyl, whose true
servants they fully purposed with fire and sword to persecute, suffered them
to run forth headlyng to their own destruction, for when as they hoped
surely to have their purpose, and came even to the very point, suddenly god or
ever they were aware, lift up his mighty hand against them, and in a very
moment vanquished them, and gave them into the hands of his faithful seruante
our sovereign lady the Queen. Who while the field was in fighting, was
feruentlye occupied in prayinge. And when as tidinges was brought her, that by
treason all was lost, she like a valiant Champion of Christ nothing abashed
therewith, said that she doubted not at al, but her captain (meaning thereby
our savior Christ) would have the victory at length, and falling to her
prayers again, anon after had she word brought her, that her men had won
the field, and that Wyate her enemies Captain was taken.

So that hereby every man may evidently see, that God would not suffer either
such a virtuous Lady, and a pure virgin to be destroyed, or his catholic
faith, which he had of late by her so graciously restored, to be by thenemyes
of his church with violent force overthrown. Which thing he well declared
likewise in the wonderful fall of the late Duke of Northumberlande, who
rebelled both against the Queens highness, and also against Christ's
catholic Church. Which two miraculouse victories are sufficient to make al
men take heed, as they rebel either to destroy the true faith of our savior
Christ, or against such a godly head and ruler, whose great godly virtue
may well be perceived in that, that she never goes about any weyghty matter,
or attempteth any great enterprise, but first enters she into her pryuye
closet* and there upon her knees prays god most hartelye, that he will of his
goodness assiste her in that she entendeth, and so bring her purpose to pass,
that the same may be to his glory and the welthe of all her subjects.

And whenever she falls into any trouble or danger, she fails not to do
the like* so that men may well think, that having god on her side, as both she
most earnestly prays to have, and also it plainly appears, that she has,
she shall be always able to give her enemies an overthrow, and say with the
holy prophet David, Psalm. 26.
mine enemies that troubled me are discomfited, and has catched a fall. But
alas what hard hearts have those, that if she were but a private woman, being
so gentle of nature, so virtuous and so merciful, could draw their sword
against her* and go about to shed such innocente blood? For albeit that
all bloudeshedde is cruel and horrible in the sight of god, yet the sheddynge
of so a pure virgyns blood, is of all other most cruel and detestable. For
both men's ears vtterli abhor to hear it, and god him self is most
greuouslye offended with it.

Do we not read of cruel paynems, that when they had gotten the vpperhande of
their enemies in battayl, and murdered many men therein, always had compassion
of the the women, and virgins specially, upon whom they would lay no violent
hands. As it is written of Alexander the great, Plutarchus in uita Alexandri.
who when he had ouercomme Darius in the field, and taken two daughters of
his, because they were virgyns, he had pitye upon them, and very mercyfully and
gentelye entreated them, and with most friendly words and great honor
enterteyned them. What should christen men then do with such as be virgyns,
should they, if they were their dedly enemies, go about to shed their blood? No
no they should spare them, and for pure pitye they should pardon them to. For the
Children of Israel were commanded, Deuteronomy. 20
that when they beseged any city, they should first offer peace to the
inhabitauntes thereof. And if they refused it, then should they kill all the
men, that were found within it, the women and young tender babes always
excepted. So that seeing al women were excepted, the virgins by this
commandment in the dangers of war, were always kept harmless.

Then forasmuch as virgins, that be our enemies children, must have mercy
showed them, how should men use those virgins, that never offended them, that be
their friends, yea that most hartly love the^? Or after what sort should we
behave our selfs toward our gratiouse Lady and maystresse, a most pure and
perfect virgin, who loves every one of us as her own life, who most
carefullye trauayleth to enriche us, and set us at quiet. Who desires to live
only for our wealth and commodity. For to dye were much more acceptable to
her, (as she says oftentimes) then to live in this miserable and wretched
world.

Which earnestlye considered, great cause have we to adventure our goods,
lives, and lands in her highness defense, and to do, 2. Re. 15
as one Ethai Getheus did to king David, when his son Absalon rebelled
against him.

This Ethai when he heard of David's trouble, repaired to him with speed. To
whom David said: Why come thou from thy place and mansion? Thou comeste
but now, and art constreyned to go forth with us. But it is best for thee to
return home, and take thy retinewe with thee. And for thy gentleness and
fidelitye toward me, I pray GOD requite thee. To whom answered Ethai. As
true as God lives, and as true as your grace lives, wheresoever you shall
become, there will I your servant be, and take such part, as you shall do,
and with you to dye and live.

Such hearts ought al faithful subjects to bear to their Prince* that they
uncalled should most gladly offer their service, when occasion serves and be
well contented to adventure their lives in such a good quarrel, and so to
tender their head and governor, as the child is bound to tender his mother.
And were not he to be counted a cruel wretch, that would kill his own
mother* as did Orestes? Then seeing that our noble Queen is to every one of
us, as a most tender and loving mother, how miserable a man should he be, that
would ones lift up his hand to destroy her? For albeit that it is a most
heinous and detestable act for a man to shed his own private and natural
mothers blood, yet much more heinous and horrible is it for one to go about
the destruction of her, that is ye mother of a whole realm. And we should
herein follow thexample of the simple bees, which so tender their king and
gouernoure, that if he have missed his way, they will diligently seek for him,
smell him out, and follow him to such time, as they have found him. And when
he waxes old, and is not able to fly, they bear him upon their backs, and
if he dye, then depart they al from that place. Does not nature herein teach
all subjects to tender and love their prince, as the poor bees do their king?
And besides this we ought to consider, that she is the anointed of God, as all
lawful Princes and governors be, and that we are commanded in scripture,
that we lay no violent hands upon the^ that be anointed. psalm. 104.


And herein ought we to follow thexample of the holy Prophet David. Who when
he was persecuted by king Saul, 1. Re. 24
and constrained for safegarde of his life to fly to rocks, and there to hyde
him, and all his retinewe in a den, and that Saul entered into the same den
to do his natural easement, and that David's men said to him, that now the
day was come, that GOD had promised before, that Saul should be given into
his hands, went to Saul, and did no more, but priuelye cut away the edge of
his cloak. And yet his conscience was so agreued for that deed, that he said
to his men.

GOD be merciful to me, and suffer me never to lay hands upon my Lord Saul,
the anointed of God. For I swear, that as surely as God lives, that I will
never lay my hand upon him, being the anointed of God. But he shall for me
dye either by the plage of God, or by natural death, when his day comes, or
be killed in battle. God forbydde that ever I should ones stretche forth my
hand to hurt him, being Gods anointed.

Such a conscience had David, and so he ynouse an offense thought he it to
lay hands upon him, that cruellye persecuted him, and was his deadly enemy.
But alas what a sore troubled conscience ought such folks to have, as minded
cruellye to murder their most gratiouse soueraygne Lady the queen, who so
hartelye loved them, who was always so careful for them, and tendereth their
welthe and commodity no less, then her own? How unkind folks be those, that
hates her, that loves them, and goes about to reward kindness with kyllyng,
and to destroy her, that studieth always possible to save them? These men
remember little the words* that God said to Cain, when he had killed his
brother, Genesis 4.
The blood of thy brother cries up to me from the earth. Wherefore thou shall be
accursed upon the earth, which is opened and has drunk up thy brothers blood.

And in another place he says: Gene. 9*
Whosoever shedeth man's blood upon earth, his blood shall be shed. And albeit
that the killyng of every private person is horrible in the sight of god, and
is never fusfred unpunished, yet the killing of a prince is much more
detestable, and those that adventure that wicked act, escape not at length
some miserable and wretched end. For what became of Abimelecke, ye (to
the intent, Iudic. 9.
that he might be king him self) killed his threscore and ten brethren,
that should have ruled and reigned in Siche^ with him? Was he not at the last
miserablely killed by a woman? For when he assaulted a tower, and came to the
gate thereof to set it on fire, a woman having in her hand a piece of a broken
millstone, hurled it down at his head, and therewith dashed out his brains?
Thus was this wretch rewarded for his wretched enterprise. Came not the like
punishment upon those, 2. Re. 2. 2. Re. 4.
that killed Isboseth the king of Irael upon his bed, as he was slepinge?
whose head afterward they brought to David, thinking thereby to get thanks at
his hand, because then he should be king over all Israel. But David highlye
displeased with the murder, commanded his men straight way to kyl them, and to
cut of their hands and fete, and hang them over a ponde in Hebron.

What need I here to recite you the storye of Achitophell, 2. Re. 17
who when Absalon rebelled against his father King Dauyd, said unto Absalon
thus:

I will appoynte my self.xij. thousand men, and this night will I pursewe thy
father King David, and I will set upon him now, being ^ore weried, and
faynte. And when all his men are sledde from him, and he left alone, then will
I kill him.

But to what conclusyon came this coursed counseil and cruel intent of his?
when as David had escaped this danger by means of pryuye messengers, that
were sent by certain secret friends of his, Achitophel perceauing, that his
counseyle was not done, got him home to his house, and like a miserable
wretch hanged him self. And so was he most justly plaged for his rebelliouse
and cruel divise. P^lydore Sir Thomas More knight in ye life of king Richard
the third. Edward Ha^ in the first year of king. Richard the third.
Or what shall I need here to call to memory a story written in our own
cronicles of king Richard the third. Who when he was Duke of Glocestre,
because he would be king him self, put the children of Edward the.iiij.
which were the true and lawful heirs of this realm into the tower, and
after like a most cruel tyrant, caused them to be smored betwixt two fether
beds? But what became of him after? Was he not within short space slain in
the field by king Henry the seuenthe, and so justly rewarded for the cruel
bloudeshedde of those innocent children? Therefore let no man, that either
kylleth the anointed of God, or else purposes to kill him, think that he
shall escape unpunished, but let him assure him felfe, that though he avoid
danger for a season, yet shall he at length be paid home with double
punishmente. And let him learn by these examples to eschew such an heynouse
offense, and whenever he is by the devil provoked thereto, let him pray to
God (as David did) and say: Lord be merciful to me, and suffer me never to
lay hands upon my Soueraygne, nor to contriue any traiterous diuises against
the anointed of God. For so shall he disappoynt the devil of his purpose, and
save him self from peril of perishinge. And if the devil will not thus cease
(most loving country men) but still stir up our hearts to make rebellion,
yet let us consider, that what cause soever he puts in our heads, and
laboreth to make us believe, that it is a good cause, we ought never to believe
him, both because that whatsoever he tells us* it is but a lie, by reason
that he is the father of lyinge, and also that no cause is there at all, for
which we may iustelye make commotion.

Yea and this will I say, that if ever we English men had cause to be quiet,
and to love our head and ruler, now is the time. For those that be poor, if
they be by any manne wrongfully oppressed, the Queens pleasure is, that they
shall have justice, and recover their right. Or if they be rich, she is glad
of it, and wishes that they, (so that it be by honest means) wax more rich.
If they be gentlemen, or men of honor* they may be assured to continue in
their state and degree, so that they do their duetye to godwarde, and bear
always a faithful heart to their prince. But some percase will say, that
justice is not so dewly executed, as it ought to be: And that money and
frendshippe makes of a badde matter a good, and of a good matter a badde. And
that there is as much bribery, and taking of rewards (which is a pitiful
hearing) used now a days, as ever was.

All this may be true, and yet the Prince nothing to be blamed therefore. For
seeing yt her grace has so often exhorted all such, as be in authority and
office to minister justice without partiality, and to beware always of taking
of bribes, if any cause be unjustly determined, or any bribes taken for any
matter* she is discharged thereof, and the burden lies upon their backs, that
is the ministers of justice, and whose hands are replenyshed with brybes and
rewards.

Therefore sithen that her highness trauayleth by all means to see every man
to have his right, and doubts not by Gods help, if God send her life, to
redress things that are out of order, and so to provide, that all her loving
subjects shall have a prosperous and happy life under her, me think, every
one of us should most hartelye love her, wyshe her long life and good health*
pray God to assiste her, and to send her strength to vanquishe her enemies,
and not to hate her, not to wish her death, not to rebel against her, not to
seek her blood, as men of late have done. For then might a man* that heartily
loves both her grace, and us, say thus very well in her behalf unto us.

Most dearly beloved country men, what cause have we to hate our most lawful
lady and maystresse, placed by god in the government of this realm, and by
all our consentes established in the same? What goes she about, that should
so agreue us? Does she not, as much as lies in her, labor to auaunce the
glory of god, which is the especyall office of every good Christen prince?
Does she not travail to defend Christ's true faith, whereby every one of us
trusts to be saved? Does she not maynteyne the Catholic church of god, and
the laudable ordinances thereof?

Does she not seek always possible to bring al those that be infected with
heresye, to their dear mother again, y^ spouse of Christ, whom they had of
late utterly forsaken? Does she not study all that she can to save us both body
and soul? Yea and she hartelye wishes every one of us as well to fare* as
she would her self. And such is her goodness, that she provides rather for
our profit* then for her own. Beside this she by all means sees the good
laws of this Realm to be duly observed. She gives also most straight charge
to al her officers to execute justice. She monisheth all them that be in
authority, to beware of briberye, and taking of reward. And she exhorts all
the clargie of this Realm to be diligent in doing their duties. She moves
the nobility, y^ they be gentle unto us, and that they by no means go about
to hurt us, or with fines and in co^mes empouerish us? What would we have her
highness to do? She laboreth for us, she lives for us, and she rules for us.
For else why should her grace take the intolerable pains, that she does,
but for us? She breaks many a sleep, that we may sleep quiet lie. She takes
much care and anguishe to avoid us from care. She tosseth and turmoyleth her
self, to set us at ease. She takes no pleasure in this life, but only for
our commodity. For what cause should she desire to live* seeing she has such
a paynfull life, but only to save our lives? Or why should she not wish to
be gone out of this miserye, and to be at rest with our Lord and savior Jesus
Christ* but that she would feign, or she went hence, deliver us from misery?
Her highness is appointed by almightye God to govern us. For what purpose I
pray you? To seek her own pleasure, to satisfy her own lusts, to study
for her own private welthe? No no she knows that God requires of her, and
of all Princes likewise, that they feed the people, that they norish them, that
they promote the good, and punish the badde: That they love their subjects,
and look diligently to them. If we did considre, what greuouse cares, what
broken slepes, what fearful dreams, what doubtefull counseylles, what storms
and troubles she has for our sakes, we should have just cause hartelye to
thank her grace, that she would leave the quiet state of life, that she was in
before, and take this unquiet state upon her, that she now lives in.

Plutark.
There was a king in old time, that cast down his crown upon the ground, and
said these words to those, that were present with him. If a man perfectly
knew, and with all well considered, what sorrowful cares are under that royal
crown, he would never take the pains ones to take it up. Therefore think this,
that the pains be hers, and the pleasure is ours.

Then how unkind, or rather how hard hearted are we, if we go about to reward
her kyndnesse with displeasure, and to be ungentle to her, that is so gentle to
us, to fight against her, that laboreth to defend us, to seek her death, when
she seeks our life, to co^triue like cruel wretches to destroy her, seeing y^
her highness so earnestly trauaileth to save us. Of late we were in bondage and
god has delivered us by her. We were oppressed with all kind of misery, and
god has most graciously looked upon us. We should have been made like pesauntes
of France, yt is to say, velaynes and slaves, if god had not had compassion
upon us through her. And yet does her highness challenge no part of the praise,
but refers it all to god, who specially deserves it. We were before every
day afearde to loose all yt we had, and stood in danger thereof, but now may
we quietlye rest, and think that we shallbe assured to enjoy our own. For
oppression is banished by justice, and right takes place by the law. What
cause have we then to grudge at her grace, to conspire against her, to lift
up our swords as cruel wretches to murder her. Alas what a deadly malice
have we in our hearts, to desire her blood, saying that she sore sygheth and
lamenteth, if any of us miscarye? But some will say perhaps. that her marriage
does displease them. Why so I beseech you? Does not she entende to enriche us
thereby? Does not she travail (as you have heard before) to get much honor to
this our country again, Which has (as David says) been a mockinge stock
to all other countries about it? Psalm. 43.
If her grace knew, that any displeasure should come to this realm by her
marriage, (for so he^ grace said openly in ye guylde hall in London) she would
rather never marry while she lived. For God did marrye her (said she) to this
region, when she was anointed and crowned our Queen. And as he is an evil
hus^ande, that seeks the wives displeasure, so is he an evil ruler, that
works the woe of his subjects. Therefore be we well assured, that she neither
does, nor entendeth to do that, that is like lie to hurt this realm, or to
hinder the commodity of any inhabitant thereof, but much to auaunce it, and
by Gods help to reduce it to the old estate* and honorable estimation
again. As for strangers we need not to fear. For if they do any injury to
any subject of hers, they shall be punyshed by the laws of this realm, as we
be. And if they behave them self gentlye, as it is very like that they will,
we shall have cause to love the^ to join friendship with them, and to make
much of them. For so shall we deserve thanks both of them* and at gods hand
to, who wylleth us that we offend not, or hurt any stranger. And if her
grace marrye after her own fantasye, me think we should bear with her, if we
love her. For if she should constrayne any of us to marry one, that he could
not love and like, he would be little contented with it. Wherefore let us content
our selfs with that, that she does in this behalf, and pray God heart lie,
that this her graces marriage may have such success, as both God may be
pleased therewith, and we receive benefit thereby, and her highness take
comfort therein. We have been well pleased in time past, ye her noble father
should marrye strangers, and have joyfully received them. Wherefore we might
(me think) be much better contented with her graces marriage, seeing that the
noble Prince that she marries, albeit he seems to be a stranger, yet because
he comes of the noble blood of England (as you have learned before) is in
deed no stranger. And again that our Lord God only moves her thereto for
her comfort (as we trust) and all ours to. But I fear ye the matter ye we
grudge at, is not the marriage, but her faith and religion, in ye mayntenaunce
where of she has always from her tender age hither to constantly stand: and
minds by gods assistence to continue in the same to her lives end. For it is
not a faith newly invented, and set forth of late days* but begone by Christ,
taught by his Apostles and their successors, confirmed with the blood of all
holy martyrs, established by ye consent of al good godly writers, and
universally received of the whole Catholic church of Christ. Which earnestlye
to stick to* she fears not: by which to be saved, she doubts not: and
which constant lie to defend, she cease not. And be we well assured, yt she
would not forsake it (as her highness has oftentimes both in word and deed
declared) if she knew certainly, yt she should loose the crown of this realm
therefore, and her life to. For whosoever they be that leseth any thing for gods
cause and his true faith, they shall wyn a hundredth times more for it, and be
glad of their loss for such great g^ynes. And this would her highness neither
say, nor do, except she knew suerly the truth to be on her side* and that god
is pleased therewith: Which he has well declared unto her highness in these two
notable victories, that of his goodness he has sent her of late. If she had
been an aduersarye of his truth, and of his holy word, as some folks report
her, he would never have so aided her, and so mightly always against the
assaults of her enemies, defended her, But thus much may her highness say
without boaste, because it is not for her own glory, which she nothing
regards, but only to declare gods goodness toward her yt she has* as becam
the poor handmayde of God continuallye since she was a child, from time to
time embraced both our Savior Christ's doctrine, which is the door unto
truth, and the catholic faith of his church, which is the staff^ of
salvation, and so loved both twain, as she did little esteem worldly honor, or
life either in comparison of them. For whenever she was either by gentle
exhortation, by fair promyses, yea or by threatenyng (as sometime she was)
moved to forsake the catholic faith, and to leave of the godly ordinances of
the church, she never would relent, but setting all worldly things at
naught, and carynge nothing for the malice of men, myn^ded rathe^ to dye for
the defense of her faith, then to live in honor with the forsakynge thereof.
And this has her grace done not of her self only, but by thassistence of
Gods grace, who has always aided her. And mercifullye accepted her poor
service herein, and has both favored her therefore, and so will do still, and
not forsake her, as she fears not, and daily she besecheth him hartelye, that
he do not: And not only her, but al other that embrace the same faith, because
it is y^ faith of his blessed spouse the church* whose lips be sweter to her
husband Christ, Cant. ^*
then honye combs. Whose tongue is as pleasant as milk and honye. Therefore
most dearly beloved country men) this cause, why we ought specially to
love her grace* because it is for our souls health, let it not be occasion to
hate her. For if we knew surely, as she does* what pleasure we should have
in it, what profyt we should take of it, and what danger we should avoid by
it, we would most harteli thank her highness, who by gods help had brought
us again to it. But the mystes of the cloudy and cursed doctrine of Luther and
his adherentes have so dimmed our sight, that we can not se it, and some of us
there be (more pity is it) that will not se it. But I pray god we may shortly
se it, and return unto it, and say with David, we will go into the house of
god, ^^al. 121.
which is the Catholic Church. Approach unto it, and GOD will approach unto
us, because he is within it. And fear GOD, and he will favor us, and be
obediente to her grace, our lawful prince and gouernesse* and then she will
not fail most tenderly to love us, to labor and travail for our wealth and
commoditye. And albeit that some of us have of late murmered against her, yet
let the example of other that did so before, and are plaged by gods just
judgment for their greuouse offense, be a warninge for us to take heed. And
let us obey her, not for fear, but for very love. For in deed to punis^e us is
her great grefe, because she would that the least here of our heads should
peryshe. Therefore let us not force her grace to that, that her nature does
abhor. Nor give her occasion to say, as her noble progenitor king Henry
the.v. said after y^ rebellion made against him by Richard the Earl of
Cambrige, Polyd. lib 22.
and Henry the lord Scrupe, and Thomas Gray after this sort.

Consider, said he, the rash folly of these folks: they persecute me, who
night and day to thuttermost of my power enforce my self to profyt the commonwealth: And to that end I toil and travail contynually, and study always,
that I can, to do good to al my subjects, and think my self borne for that
purpose. But I pray god, that there be never one among you, whose trayterouse
heart I may worthily blame, and say, that he had rather have me distroyed, then
his contrie to be in good state preserved, and in honor increased. These
words said Henry the.v. to his subjects. Which I trust verily hereafter we
will never give our* gratiouse Queen occasion to say. But contrariwise, much
to commend us to rejoice in our obedyence* to take comfort in our peace and
quiet behauyour: Which shall be acceptable to god, thankeful to her grace and
very profitable for our selfs to.

Now then (most dear and loving contrye men) seeing that we are well assured,
that our most gratiouse lady the Queen by reason of her godly virtue, wherein
she excels, and for the great fervent love, that she bears to eueri one
of us, she will thoroughly perform these things, we have great cause to give
god most heartily thanks* y^ sent her unto us, and has so graciously delte
with us for her sake. For it seems, that as God said to the children of
Israel in King David's time, 2. Reg. 5
I will by the hand of my servant David save my people of Israel from the
hands of the Philistians, and all their enemies, so says he now to: I will
by the hand of mine humble handemayde Marye save my people of England from
the assaults of their enemies. If we were oppressed by her, if we were spoiled
through her means, or if we were cruellye handled at her hand, then might men
have something to say. But no such matter is there. For her grace is so gentle,
so buxome, so merciful, so liberal, of so god lie conversation and excellent
virtue, yt if she were among Turks, Saracenes, or Jews, she would
undoubtedly win their hearts, and cause the^ both hartly to love her, and also
to be ready to defend her. How ungentle then may we be thought, yt can not
love such a gracious lady, and with glad hearts be obedient to her? But the
very matter of al our grudge is (as we were told a little before) her catholic
religion. Which how good and godly it is, we may easily perceive, if we
compare it with that, that has been now of late years among us.

It is grounded upon the consent of al christ's catholic church, which is the
sure foundation of truth. The Other is grounded only upon the consent of a few in
corners, and yet never one of the^ agrees with another. The religion yt the
Queens grace maynteyneth, is fiftenne hundredth year old: this new religion
is scarcelye two hundredth years old. The catholic religion is, and has
been universally received througheoute the whole world: This of theyrs has
been received but here and there in a few places, and of all the world beside
condemned. And Vincentius a good holy writer thinks, that these be the
special points to try religion (that is to say) the auncientnes of time, the
universal receauinge of it, Vincent. lib. aduer sus prophanashae resum
nouirates.
and the whole consent of the church. For thus he writes. In the catholic
church we must take diligent head, that we stycke to that, which is in every
place, always, and of all men believed. For this in deed is catholic* as the
word it self does plainly declare, which verily conteyneth al universally.
But this shall we do, if we follow the universal faith, and believe the
auncientnesse of time and the whole consent of Christ's church. And now for
the universal believe, that shall we follow after this sort. If we think that
faith to be true, which all Christ's Church throughout the world does
confess. As for auncientnesse of time, that shall we follow, if we in no wise
go from the senses and interpretations of scripture, that we manifestli know to
have been commonly used and allowed of the holy and aunciente fathers. The
whole consent of Christ's Church shall we follow, if we submit our selfs to
the ancient determinations and sentences either of all bisshops, priests, and
doctors, or else at the lest of al most al. And the same writer a little after
teaches us how to know a true christen Catholic man thus. He is a true
catholic man in deed, which loves gods truth, his church, and the body
of Christ: which also prefers nothing, that is to say* nether any one man's
authority, nor love* nor wit, nor eloquence, nor knowledge of philosophy,
before godly religion and the faith catholic, but dispising all these, and
stickinge sted fastly and surely to his faith, thinks that he is bounden to
hold and believe only that, ye he knows the catholic church of old
universally to have holden and maynteyned. And let him suppose surely, that
what new and strange doctrine or order soever is covertly and craftly brought
in by any one man, either beside the minds of al holy and godly men, or else
utterly contrary to them is brought in, not for to increase men's devotion and
religion, but only to tempte them with all. Thus by the words of this godly
author, who wrote above a thousand years ago, we may easily perceive, what
sort of religion men ought to follow. Again the authors of the catholic
religion are the apostles, and their successors: As Ireneus, Justinius martyr*
Cyprian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origene, S. Hierom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustyne, S.
Chrisostom, Basil, Gregorius Nazianzene, Cyrill, with infinite many mo. The
authors of this new sect, are Wic^ffe, Hus, Luther, Oecolampadius, Zuinglius,
Bucer, Bullinger, Calvin, and a great rabble beside. The authors of Christ's
true religion were Martyrs, confessors, and holy saints all: The authors of
this new religion were Apostatas that is to say, such as had been monks and
frears, which broke their vows, cast of their cootes, became like lay men,
married nonnes, called them wives, and so lived in abominable inceste. The
authors of the catholic religion were ^^ke, gentle, lowly, full of virtue, and
godly conversation, despicers of the world, and the vanities thereof, chaste,
avoid of ambition and covetousness, given all to fasting, prayer, and almose
deeds. The authors of our new doctrine were proud, stubborn, presumptuous,
of small virtue, and that only in appearance, lovers of the world, and much
delited with the pleasures thereof, lecherous, and carnal, gready of honor,
and of gettyng of goods: slack in praying* more slack in fasting, and
altogether negligent in good deeds doing. For they thought fasting was
Poperye, and prayer superstition, and good deeds to avail us nothing at all.
The authors of the catholic faith and religion were careful for peace,
desirous of unity, favorers of obedience, and maynteyners of all good order.
The authors of our late religion, were causers of war not only bitwixt
prince and prince* but also bitwixte princes and their subjects, breakers of
the unity of Christ's catholic church, sowers of sedition, workers of
disobedience, and bryngers in of al confusion and disorder: captains of carnal
liberty, and defendors of the same. Of these.ii. sorts of me^ whom ought we
give more credit to trow you? Shall we better trust Wicliffe, that because he
could not come by the Bisshoprike of Worcester, forsook Christ and his
church, and became an heretic: or holy Ireneus, who for the mainteynaunce of
Christ's faith and his church forsook both his Bisshoprike and his life to? Or
shall we better believe Hus, that was a professed frear, and had vowed
chastity, obedience, and wilful poverty, and after brake all, became a
married manne, and preached heresye in Boheme: Or S. Cyprian, that when he was
a young man, was taken in love with a young woman, and after most earnestly
repentyng him thereof, lived chastlye all his days, and ended his life by
martyrdom? What shall we say to Luther that lewd lyinge frear, who because he
could not obtain the prefermente of a pardon, which he would have had
thorderynge of, laid away his cote and his honestye to, passed not a pin
for ye breche of his vow. And then began he to babble and rail against the
authority of the church, and the Sacraments thereof* And anon got he him
self a (...) Nonne, so that men looked, that Antichrist should have been borne
betwixt those twain, because that it had been said of old, that Antichrist
should be borne betwixt a frear and a Nonne. And here in folks were not much
deceived: For albeit that Antichrist him self was not borne betwixt the^, yet
they brought forth a forerider of his, called false doctrine, which has
poisoned a great many, and prepared their hearts to receive their master
Antichriste. Shall we then trust better this licentiouse limitour, then S.
Hierome, that commends unto us chaste life and virginity, and lived him
self all his life time in perfect chastity? But to compare them one by one*
it were to long, and yet not necessary. For you may learn by these what the
rest be. Look upon the lives of both sorts, and you shall find the one to be
corrupt, sensual and vicious the other to be pure, sobre, and virtuous.
Consider their doctrine. The one is perniciouse, lewd, and carnal, the other
is wholesome, substantial and godly. Read their books, and you shall perceive
in the one blasphemye for blessing, railing for reasonyng, and malice for
modesty. And in the other, reuerente speaking, sound knowledge, and an humble
spirit. And this is certain, that whatsoever this new erroniouse writers
have, that is good, they have taken it out of the old writers. And whatsoever
is naught, as the most part is, that is their own. Therefore if a man purpose
to learn virtue, to learn good knowledge, and to learn the truth, let him
read the old writers, and he shall be satisfied. For as Plantus says, that old
wine and old comedies be best, so may we well say, that old writers far
excels the new, by reason that the one sort are, as it were pure fountaynes,
out of which these other being like rivers, are derived and drawn. And
Cicero writes, y^ it is great folly for a man, ^^ Acad. ^^^st.
that may come to the fountaynes, to (...) to the ryuers. But scarcely may we
compare these new noughty writers to ryuers, because they be more like to
standing pooles. For the longer they continue, the more corrupted they seem,
and moo fo^kes they infecte. But a river the longer that it runs, the better
is it purged, and purges other things withal. Now then seeing, that this late
religion and sect came out of these new fangled writers, I much maruayle, why
men, that mind to be saved, will so much esteem it, and put their lives in
ieopardy for it. If a man would well way it, he should easily perceive it to be
naught, by reason of ye noughty fruits, that are sprung out of it. Let our
own country only be taken as an example herin. A discourse of ye fruits, y^
sprong^ of our new religion in England. Division from the catholic church.
When sensual lust of the body, and self will, (two mete mates for it) had
ones brought it into this realm, the first thing that he took in hand, was to
cut us of, and divide us from the whole universal church of god. And where
as we were in deed but a member before, it would make us a whole body, and
join thereunto such a head, as the like in all the world has never been
heard of, in so much that our church became as monstrouse, as ever was
either Chimera or Centaurus, that the Poets speak of. Which ones done, every
man (as Esaye says) waxed wise in his own conceyte, Esa. 5. Presumption.
and so presumed to search for the secret mysteries of GOD. For as soon as
they had the scripture translated into English (albeit very untruly as it well
appears! in a great number of places, then begone they, Socrae. histor eccles.
lib. 2.
as the Arrians did in Constantius days, to reason and dispute, and every man
thought his own judgment best, and every day in a manner would he have a new
judgment, and contemn al other folks judgment beside, and say that the
holy fathers and writers aucthorities was but men's traditions, and that they
all were oftentimes deceived. As for to seek any doctrine of God at their
hands, it should be but folly. For every manne was taught by the spirit of God
said they: And so rekened they them selfs, that they were well enough
learned, and that they were able to expound the holy scriptures of God of
their own brains. And when they were ones thus persuaded, The title of a good
judgment
they were called men of a good judgment, which was a great commendation at
that time: a goodly title to cloak their noughty purpose withal. But how good
a judgment was it, I pray you, that judged badde to be good, vice to be
virtue, and contagiouse heresye to be wholesome doctrine. It is an old saying and
a true, that blind men can judge no colors. But verily this is as true. that
blind ignorance can not judge of sound learning. Would we not call him a
Physician of a noughtye judgment, that would when he had seen a sick man's
water, that were sore sick in deed, say that this man is not sick, but he is
I warrant you hole and sound: So when we heard in time paste a new brother
say, that a presumptuouse ignorant fellow, was a learned man, and of a good
judgment, might we not well say again, that such a man's judgment was to
be much mistrusted. For he that would tell me, that a man, that had a pockye
face, had a goodly fair visa^e, might not I say to him, that he were foul
deceived. But what if he would bring another as blind as him self, to say the
same, then had I good cause to say, as a good homelye servant said ones to
his master, that would needs bear him down in a false matter, well master
well I will not say you lie, because it be comes me not, but never the less
I wot, what I wot. If a man had got him self this goodly title, that he
was of a good judgment, then if he were very ignoraunte, he should be called
learned, if he were but a fool, he should be taken for a wise man, if he were
but a very babbler in deed, he should be taken for a ready witted fellow: and
were he never so lewd in behavior, yet should he be counted a right honest
man. For this good judgment, yt I spoke of, was a cloak to cover all noughtie
conditions. More over a watcheword had they, yt they might be known from
other. For then would they not say, our lord save us, as al christen men use to
say, The lord
but ye lord save us. Whereby they would be known to have a several lord of
their own. And albeit that S. Paul very often uses this speaking (our Lord)
to declare that all we Christen men do serve one Lord and master, Our lord
and that we be of one household, yt is to say, of one church, insomuche that
we may most conveniently say (our Lord) because we be all children of one
father, and servants of one master, and knytte together with the bound of
charity, yet would these folks never say (our Lord) which they said was a
papisticall term, but (the Lord) which declared the^ to be favorers of gods
word, as they thought. And this term was so universally used, that the poor
beggars had got it by the end, by reason that begginge thus (for the
lords sake have pity upon the poor) they thought the sooner to speed, and
you shall hear it of many of their mouths as yet. Nevertheless the term of
it self is good and godly, if it be not abused for such a noughty purpose. For
the holy Scripture both in the old testament and the new to, very often
speaks so. But surely for all christen men, when they speak of god, it is
most conueniente to say, our lord which is a term of mutual love, concord and
unity. When they had ones learned this wacheword then began they to talk of
the liberty of the gospel, and to exhort men earnestly to embrace the same.
But what was this same liberty of the Gospel, Liberty of the gospel among
our new brethren what it signifies.
was it ought else, but the liberty of the flesh? For the devil their
master had taught them this lesson, that they should give to wicked diuises
godly names: as to call carnal liberty, Godly names for wicked diuises.
the liberty of the Gospel: abominable heresye, true doctrine: scripture
falselye interpreted* Gods word: an^ arrogant spirit, the spirit of God:
bold presumption, a godly zeal: a blasphemouse raylour, a worthy preacher:
books full of heresye, good godly books.

And what followed this licentiouse liberty? Fasting abolished
Was not the^ al fasting abolished? Would not men then, as Eustathius did, an
heretic condemned in a general counsel holden at Ga^gris, Socra. histor
eccle lib. 2.
break all fasting days appointed by the church, and some would fast upon
the sunday, and upon fridaye, which has ever since Christ's time been duelye
kept, instead of fasting they fell to delicate fedyng, and instead of
chastising the body, nourished it with deynteouse meats, and so made it well
at ease? And if they had had but mean simple cheer all the weke before, that
day would they have their capons, coneys* chekins, and such fine meats to tame
their bodies withal. And whosoever would not thus do, he favored not Gods
word, as they said, but was enemy to the truth, and a papiste to. And they
would bid men to dinner upon the fridaye, to thintente that they might allure
the^ to eat flesh. For if they could ones bring them to yt, they thought
they would wax shortly favorers of Gods word (as they termed it) that is to
say, of their heresye. Was not this (trow you) a goodly memory of Christ's
payniull passion, Why we fast upon the Fridaye.
yt he upon the friday suffered for us? were not these folks well contented to
subdue their carnal lusts as yt day, and to offer up to god the sweet
sacrifice of fasting and prayer, thereby to give him most hearty thanks for
the greuouse torments, and sorrowful death, that he suffered as that day for
our redemption, for which end the catholic church of god has most godly
appointed that day always to be fasted? No no, where such good cheer was
kept, there was small remembrance (I fear me) of Christ's holy passion. For to
think thervpo^, was to sour and bitter sauce for such sweet and pleasant
meats. Was not this a goodly means to make the flesh obedient to the
spirit, and to prepare men's hearts humbly and reverently to serve their lord
god? Hereof came it to pass, Married priests.
that lecherous priests, that loved no fasting, said: they must needs have
women which they called wives. For it is not possible (said they) for a man to
live chaste. That might be truly said in deed of them, that sought not the
means, whereby to live chaste. For seeing that fast they would not, and for prayer
they cared not, and for study they much passed not, which be special helps
to live chaste, no marvel was it, though they were provoked to leave their
chaste life, and fall to wiuing. But if so be they had tamed their tykkell
lusts with often fasting, and called upon God by earnest praying, they should
never have fallen to such fond folly, for which they are now at Gods hand most
justly plaged. And I pray god, as they be worthelye plaged, so they may
humblye acknowledge the same, and with weeping eyes ask God mercy betime, that
a greater plage fall not upon them at length. Let them consider their wicked
act in marrying, and their abominable inceste and aduoutrye therein, and
beside that their noughtie doctrine, which they have taught since they had
women, and how that they would not let to preach what men would have them,
because they had now gotten their purpose. And men that were the^ in greatest
authority, (perceauing their folly) thought they should get the^ to say what
they would, when as ones they had given them license to marrye. And because
these lewd priests should not lack company, the devil moved such religious
folks, as were of an ungodly conversation, Religiouse folks married.
yt when they were ones set abroad, and had cast of their cowles, they should
seek al means possible to satisfy their sinful lusts. Whereupon many of them
became preachers of this new doctrine, and made the people believe, that
licentious living (as I said before) was the liberty of the Gospel, to
the intent that the breaking of their solemn vows, which they had made to god,
their taking of women, whom they named wiued and their voluptuouse pleasure,
which they most earnestly sought for, might be well lyked and allowed of the
people. For like as those, that be delyted with cardyng and dysing, much
travail in persuading other, that they intend nothing, but honest pastyme,
and that pastime is necessary for all men to drive away fantasies withal, so
these religiouse, that I speak of, when they had tasted of the cup of
carnal concupiscence, they told men, that they sought nothing, but the
liberty of the Gospel, and following the fotesteppes of their master Martin
Luther, became as stowte and stubborn Apostatas, as ever he was him self. And
these were the great pillours of our new English church, whereupon men
grounded their faith, and upon whose backs they hang their salvation: whose
names I could rehearse, if it were necessary, and whose licentiouse living I
could easelye describe. But both twain every man in manner knows without any
tellyng. And I pray GOD, as they know them, so they may take heed of them, and
as S. Paul warns utterly fly from them, yea (and as they have good cause)
sore repent, that ever they knew them. When these folks had gotten this
fleshly liberty, then heresye went forward apace. But if they well weye, how
many have been deceived by them, and how sore, except they repent, they shall be
punished for every of them, they (me think) should have good cause to put sack
cloth upon them, and to lie them down at the church door, as one Grebolius
did, and pray all men, Socra. lib 3. histor. eccles.
that enter in there to tread upon them, as being unsavory salt. And after in
open audience to confess their false doctrine, that they have preached, and
willingly to recante the same, and give all men warning to beware of it, and to
return to their mother the Catholic Church again. And thus both to pacify
Gods wrath against them, and also to bring all such to the sure and sound
faith of the Church, as they have through their wicked preachynges utterly
divided therefro. Moreover has not this carnal liberty brought to pass
likewise, that men that abhorred fasting, being delicately fed, would to
satisfy their wanton lusts, be divorced from their wives, yea and after marry
again, Folks divorced did marry again.
their wives being as yet alive? And had they not masters, that would teach
them this, and preach the same openly, and make books in maynteynaunce of
such abomination? Which masters told them, that there were two sorts of
fornication, for which men or women might be divorced, one carnal, and another
spiritual. Carnal, as when the wise had committed aduoutry with another man, or
the husband with another woman. Spiritual, when the woman* or man was a
papist, and an enemy to Gods word, as they called it. For which two kinds
of fornication men and women to. might lawfulli (said these iolye masters) be
divorced, and marry again. So that both the husband, whenever him list,
might at his pleasure cast of his wife and take another, and also the wife in
like manner take another husband. Was not this very wholesome doctrine, I pray
you, and mete to be preached in pulpittes, set forth in books, and the
authors thereof worthy to be compared with Saint Paul (as they were of many)
for their famous preaching? God give grace to all christen people to beware of
such masters, lest by them they be led or ever they be aware* straight to
the devil the great master of al such mischeuouse doctrine: of which as he is
the first father and founder, so all they, that either teach it, or embrace
it, shall in conclusion, except they earnestly repent, be partakers with him of
the painful pit of hell. Besides this, it would pity any good man's heart, to
think, what disorder and disobedience came of this liberty. Discord and
disobedience.
Would not the servants control their masters, and tell them, when they were
chekked for leaving their business undone, Disobedience of servants to their
masters.*
yt they had been occupied either in reading gods word, or in hearing some
sermon, yea and so godly lessons had they learned, since they had tasted of
this new doctrine, ye very few of their masters could after trust them. And
if ye master were a catholic man, and one that feared god, then would his
servant, if he were of a contrary judgment, handel him like awarde, and in
manner make a loute of him, and do his business as he list, and when he list,
and let it be undone, if he list.. For the master fearing, that he should
have displeasure by him, durst neither put him away from him, nor ones as much
as rebuke him for any matter. After the same sort did children order their
parents, Disobedience of children to their parents.
wives their husbands, and subjects their magystrates: So that the fete ruled
the head, and the cart was set before ye horse. For children when they had been
brought up in schole a while with some lewd Lutherane* then would they write
letters to their catholic parents, and exhort them in the lords name to
leave their papistry and blind ignorance, that they were in, and fall at
lenght to follow gods word, and gladly to receive the truth. And if the
parents would not follow this their childishe advise, straight way would they
not let to talk with their companyons, and tell them, that their parents were
blind papists. Yea and make a merry mockinge stock of them, and lay: my
father is an old doting fool* and will fast upon the friday, and my mother
goes always mumblinge on her beads. But you shall se me of another sort, I
warraunt you. For I will never follow no such superstitiouse folly, nor walk
in the Papisticall paths of my parents. Were not men well at ease, trow you,
when they had bestowed a great deal of money upon such graceles graftes, who
neither feared god, nor reverenced their parents? Thus did men's wives to, that
were become systers of the new fraternitye, Disobedience of wives to their
husbands.
order their husbands. For where as the husband did not favor their sect,
then would the wife no longer go to schole with him in silence, 1. Tim. 2
as Saint Paul byddeth her, but would boldlye fall to teach him, and tell him
of his duty. 1. Cor, 14
And many of them were offended with Saint Paul, that had commanded them,
that they should hold their peace in the churches. For gladly would they have
preached, if they might have been suffered, as some of the^ nevertheless did in
corners. At which time also ye devil, for ye better furtherau^ce of heresy
piked out two sorts of people, that should in tauernes and innes, at
commentables, and in open streets set forward his purpose, as well as false
preachers did in the pulpet: that is to say, minstrels and players of
enterludes. The one to singe pestilente and abominable songs, and the other
to set forth openly before men's eyes the wicked blasphemye, that they had
co^triued for the defacing of all rites, ceremonies, and all the whole order,
used in the administration of the beissed Sacraments. Then the scripture being
in such folks hands, was sore studied not for amendment of life, which they
never minded, but partly to maintain their loud heresye, wherewith they were
infected, partelye to control the priests, whom they had in great derision,
and partlye to find fault with other, when they had any occasion at all. For
if a man were a good virtuous priest, he had been better a great deal to have
lived among Turks and Saracenes, then among this kind of folk: mockyng of
priests
by reason that whenever they met with him in any place, they would ask
him: Now sir John where find you your Mass in scripture, or who gave you
authority to make god? As though the priest by his own power had made
Christ's blessed body in the holy Sacrament of the aultare, and not the holy
word of God. And then would they say beside, it is pity, that any such
popish wretches lives, ye thus have deceived Christ's flock. But now I
warrante you must you turn your tippet, and lay away your old mumpsimus, and
shut up your portesse and your Mass book to, and put away clean your
purgatory Masses. You must now old fool go to schole again, and learn a
new lesson. And again whenever they see one of his cote walk by the
street, they would whistell and hemme at him, and say, go walk in a mischief
you bald headed knave. Yea and as yet this maliciouse mockers cease not in many
places, when they can spy a priest, to play the like part. But think you,
that such mockers shall not at length be plaged for their tau^tinge of Gods
ministers, even as the children were, that mocked Heliseus the Prophet? 4^
Reg. ^
These children that I speak of, as Heliseus the anointed Prophet of God,
went to Bethell, came forth of the city, and mocked him, saying, walk up you
bald headed horson, walk up. Who loking back, and seeing them, cursed the^ in
the name of GOD: and by and by came two beeres out of the foreste, and tore in
pieces two and fourtye of them. Therefore let all men take heed, as they mock
the priests and ministers of God, whom they are bound to reverence both for
Christ's sake, Luc. 10.
which says, Whosoever dispiseth you, dispiseth me, and also for their office
sake, which is so necessary for all men's health and salvation: And let them
remember no more, but this one example of Chrysostom, Lib 3. de ^^g. sacer The
dignity and auchtoritye of priests,
who writes thus. If a great prince would give this authority to one of his
servants, that he should deliver out of prison, whom he list, and whom he
list shut up in prison, would not all men, and that not without good
cause, both fear him and reverence him to? How then should men honor the
priests, which has authority by Christ, king of all kings, committed unto
them to lowse men's sowles out of the fetters of sin, and again to bynd them,
as they see occasion? And the same writer says in the same work, that we can
neither at our coming into the world become Christen without them, nor at
our departing out of the world, receive the blessed sacraments of the
altar, and aneyling without the^. Which things considered, let no man, ye
either loves Christ, which is the high Priest of all, and the author of
priest hode, or loves his own souls health, and purposes to be saved, mock
the priests, lest they be worthelye punyshed therefore, but reverence them, as
Gods shepeherdes here in ^arth, to whose cure men's souls are committed. And
although they see some of them either lack good knowledge and learning, or to
be light and lewd of behauioure, yet must they not contemn the office for
the men's evil living. For if the officers under a Prince be of noughtye
conversation, we may not for that say, their office is naught and disobeye the
officers, but as the princes officers humblye obey them, and as evil lyuers,
heartily pray God to amend them. But to return to the Lutherans liberty, y^
we talked of before, was not al things through it brought so far out of
order, that vice ruled virtue, Government turned vpside down.
and folishnes ruled wisdom, lightness ruled gravity, and youth ruled age?
So that the old men's saying was herein verified, that when Antichrist should
come. the roots of the trees should grow upward. Was there not beside such
deadly dissension for our diversity in opinions, Dissen^^^on for opinions.
that even among those, that were most very dear friends, Hatred and
malice for opinions.
arose most greuouse hatred. For the son hated his own father, the sister
her brother, the wife her husband, the servant his master, the subject the
ruler. And in every house, at every man's table, in every corner, in every
street, at every tavern and inn, Unreuerent reasonyng of Gods word.
at all times was there such vnreuerent reasonynge of Gods high mysteries,
that those that met together fre^des, departed enemies, and sometimes were at
daggers drawyng for the matter. And then you should have heard, thou Papiste,
and thou heretic. And in a small number of years it came to pass, that no
neighbor could love another, no man do for another, no one agree with another.
Thus was the members of Christ's Church by such deuelishe discord, The
members of Christ's Church^ ^o^ne asonder.
miserably rent a sonder. Which thing deeply to think upon, would make any
charitable man's heart to blede. For if we should se before our eyes a man's body
first to have the head cut of, then the fingers and toes, then the hands and
fete, after the legs and arms, then the bowelles piteouslye pulled out of
the belie, and last of all, the rest of the body being thus mangled and
maimed, cut in small gobbets and pieces, would we not think it a sorrowful and
lamentable spectable to behold, and count these folks very cruel butchers,
that thus cruelly had handled it? How much then ought we to lament, when we se
ye church, Colloss. ^
which S. Paul calls ye body of Christ* thus by debate and strife rufully
rent, and so ma^gled with mischeuous heresye, that the beauty thereof is in
manner utterly defaced. Might not we well say thus with the holy prophet
Hieremye. Hier. 14.
Let our eyes never cease from wepinge night nor day, because the virgin and
daughter of my people is wonderfully bruised, and al to broken in pieces, and a
most miserable plage fallen upon her. But now to make a brefe rehearsal of the
other noughty fruytes, yt came of this loose liberty, begone not the authors
of it first with the basest ceremonies in the Church, The basest ceremonies
(...) taken ^waye.
and abolished them they could not tell why, and after went forth still even
to the greatest mystery of our faith, and at length made up their mischief
with the taking away of those. For first they did forbid holy bread and holy
water to be used any longer, Holy bread and holy water what they signifye.
two very godly and lively ceremonies: the one to put us in remembrance, that as
those pieces of bread be all of one loaf, so we be all members of one body, ye
is to say, of the catholic church, and kni^^e together in one faith and one
charity: the other to cause us to call to mind the passion of Christ, with
whose blessed blood we are sprinkled and washed from the fylthines of sin.
And then they commanded Images to be plucked down in every church, Images
pulled down.
which put us in memory of the holy lives of confessors, martyrs, and
virgins: yea and they were not so contented. but they would have the Image of
our savior Jesus Christ likewise spitefully to be hurled down, Christ's Image
hurled down*
and either with fire to be burned, or with instruments broken all in pieces.
And some sinful wretches were there, that dug up, Crosses in high ways
why they were set up.
and ouerthrewe the crosses in high ways, which were set up, partly to
make men that passed by, remember Christ's death and passion, and partly to
show them the right way, that knew not the same. Who I pray you would think,
that these folks bare any good affection to our savior Christ, which could
neither abide his Image, nor the wholesome Sign of his cross. For like as if a
man should come into the kings palaice, and first rashelye pull down the
kings arms, then break them in pieces, and after tread them under his fete,
no man would suppose, that such one loved the king, but that he were a rank
traytoure, and worthy to suffer a most shame full death, so if a man should
enter into a church, which is as it were Gods palaice in earth, and there
pluckedowne violentlye Christ's own Image, and either break it, or burn it,
and set up the kings arms instead thereof, because he would make him a
God (as Caius themperoure did in the holy temple of Jerusalem, where he caused
his own Image to be set up, and would be called a God, and that the temple
there should be named the temple of the goodly new Iuppiter Caius) I believe,
that no good Christen man would judge him to be Christ's friend, but a
wretched heretic, and an arrende traitor both to our savior Jesus Christ,
and also to his blessed spouse the Catholyke Church. But truly great
merueyle is it, that such folks are not so plaged for their abomination, as
was Iulianus Apostata, Sozomenus histo. eccle. li. 5.
which pulled down the Image of our Savior Christ, and set his own Image
in the place, where it stood. Which Image of his was anon after with a thunder
bolte, cut in sonder even by the myddel, and hurled down to the ground, and
he him self to sor his wickedness came at length to a miserable and cursed
end.

But for what purpose was this done, trow you, of our goodlye Gospellers? Was
it not done only to put Christ and all his holy saynctes clean out of
memory, as they were in deed (more pity is it) with a great many. For why
does many men desire to have the Images of their dear friends painted in
tables, and honge up in their chambers, but because they would not forget
the^, either when they be absent, or else when they be dead. Does not a lively
image I beseech you, make folks remember the man, that is represented by it
better, then a bare naked white wall? or when a man comes into a house, and
^yndeth the Image of King Edward, whether does he then more remember him, or
when he goes into another house, and finds no Image of him at all? It was
wont to be said, that such as were the kings very fre^des, would have ye
kings Image in their howses, both to make them remember their duties toward
him, and also to declare their good will, that they bare him. But our Image
breakers be like the Jews, the deadly enemies of our Savior, Ware Image
break to be like the Jews.
which can by no means abide any Image, either of Christ, or his Saynctes,
but they babble and rail against them, because they would have Christ and all
his blessed Saynctes clean put out of memory.

After this was procession abolished, Processio^ what it signifies.
which is a common prayer for the whole church, and by which is signified,
that we be all Christ's souldyars, and having Christ's cross, as a banner
going before us, do fight together by prayer against our goostlye enemy the
devil. And here withal were censynge* candelles, ashes, and palms clean
taken away, which be not domme ceremonies, as the devils ministers call them,
but very lively and godly ceremonies. For censinge signifies ye offering up of
the pleasant odor of godly prayer, Candels what they signify.
and thereat the priest desires of God, that the prayers of all that be
present, may ascend up into his sight, as the sweet odor of frankensence.
And bryghte burning candels betokens Christ him self, which (as S. John
says) is the true lyghtes that illumineth every man, Joan. 1.
that comes into the world. And so the good godly manne Simeon upon
Candelmasse day, when he met Christ in the temple, and took him in his
arms, said: Now Lord thou let thy servant, Luc. 2.
according to thy promise, depart in peace. Because mine eyes has seen the
savior of the world sent from thee. Whom thou have prepared in the ^ight of
all people to be a light to the gentiles and paynems, and great glory and
renown to the people of Israel.

So that by our candels bearyng we declare, that our very light Christ, is
come to lyghten our souls* which were darkened with ye black clouds of
foul filthy sin before.

Again when we are marked with ashes in the foreheade, Ashes what they
signifye.
we are plainly told therbi, what we be. That is to wete, nothing else, but as
Abraham said, Gene. 12
very duste and ashes. And remembrynge the same, have good cause to lay away
our pride, to become humble and meke, and every day to think upon our
end, when as our bodies shall become vile worms meat, and all our goodly
beauty be turned into dust.

Now as for bearing of palms, Bearyng of palms what it means.
that is to put us in remembrance of Christ's coming to Jerusalem, when as
the people cut bows of the trees, Mat. 21.
and cast them in the way, where he should pass, and that as we be glad to
straw palms in the way* where Christ's most blessed body is presented, so we
ought to garnish the house of our souls with sweet flowers, and first wash
it clean with ye clear water of holsom penance, and then straw the pleasant
Psalms of perfect faith and charity in it, with a sure hope of gods
promises: and so prepare it, yt it may please our savior to say, Luc. 19.
as he said to zacheus, this day must ^ rest in your houses. Withal they took
away creping to the cross upon good friday* Crepinge to ye cross
whereby every man declares his humble obeysaunce to Christ: and as Christ our
savior as ye day humbled him self to ye death of the cross, Philip. 2
(as S. Paul" says) so every christen man in remembrance thereof does humbly
crepe upon his knees to the Image and sign of the cross there to do worship
to Christ, ye died for him upon the cross, and to give him most hearty thanks
for the redemption of al mankind, which was done by him upon the cross.
Halowing of the foute.
Then was forbidden also the halowing of ye font, which even from the Apostles
time had always been, (as it appears by Tertullian, Basile, and other good
writers) with great reverence observed, because it is so necessari in ye church
of god.

And therewithal went away all the other rites and ceremonies, that are used
upon Easter even. When al these godly ceremonies were ridded out of the way,
then in a furiouse rage like men beside their wits, fell they to pull down
the holy aulters, Aulters pulled down.
where our Saviors blessed body was wont to be consecrated, and the same
there offered up, as a most pleasant sacrifice to God the father.

And to make up their maliciouse mischief withal, plucked they down the pixe,
The pixe
wherein the very body of our lord and savior was reserved and kept. And some
vile verlettes, to thintente they might do the Devil their master better
service, hurled the same blessed sacrament under their fete, and certain of
them would not let to say, as the Jews said to our savior hangyng upon the
cross. Mat. 27
It thou be god, save thy self. But such shall be well assured to be at length
most miserably plaged, as the Jews were, except they betime repent them of
their abhomible wickedness and blasphemye. After this was the most holy and
blessed sacrifice of Christ's body and blood in the mass taken away, The
Mass taken away
wherein is commen prayer used for the whole catholic church of Christ, and for
all states that be in it, and the very passion of our savior is there lyuelye
represented, partli by the godly ceremonies, that be used therein, and partly
by the decent apparel and vestimentes, that the priest wears in the
celebration thereof. For all the clothes that Christ did wear at his blessed
passion, The priests vestimentes what they signify.
as the purpel robe, that was put upon him by the Jews, the cords that he was
bound withal, the clothe wherewith they covered his eyes, when they bette him,
and the white garmente, that he was cladde with, when Herod mocked him, are by
ye priests vestime^tes represented. For the Ammesse, The Ammesse.
yt the priest puts upon his head, represents ye cloth, wherewith Christ's
eyes were covered, when Pilates men buffeted him, and in mockage badde guess,
who smote him, as we read in the.xxij. chapt. of S. Lukes Gospel. The white
lynnen albe, The (...)
that he puts next upon him, represents the white garmente, wherein
Christ our savior was cladde, when Herod mocked him, as it is written by S.
Luke in ye xxiij. chapt. The girdle yt the priest puts about him, The
girdle.
represents the whippe, wherwt Christ was bette by Pilate, as we read in
ye.xix. chapt. of S. John. The stole yt the priest puts about his neck,
The stole
represe^teth ye cord or rope, wherewith our savior was bound, when he was
bette with whippes as S. Mark declares in ye xv. Chapter of his Gospel. The
fannel, that the priest puts upon his left arm, The fan^^t.
represents the rope, wherewith the Jews did bind our Savior Jesus, when
they brought him before Annas, as Saint John tells in his gospel the.xviij.
chapt. The vppermoste vestiment, called the tunicle, The tuni^^e.
which the priest puts upon him last of all, represents the purple robe,
that the Jews put upon our lord and savior when they said to him in mockage:
Hayle king of the Jews. In so much that the priest, when he is thus
apparelled, and goes to the altar, does manifestly set before our eyes our
sweet savior Jesus, when he suffered his paynful passion, and went to offer up
to his father his blessed body upon the cross for our redemption. In
remembrance of which holy passion the priest representing Christ our high
priest, whose priesthode contynueth for ever, offers up upon the altar the
very same body to god the father, that suffered for us, and the very same
blood, that was shed for us. So that whosoever desire to be partakers of that
blessed passion, The hearing of Mass.
let them with most humble reverence come to mass, hear it with fervent
devotion, and earnestly think upon the great and painful torments, suffered
by our savior for their sakes, which be represented therein. And give him most
hartye thanks therefore, and desire him of pardone for all their offenses
committed in time past, and to give them grace to avoid al vice and sin from
thenceforthe. For thus shall they vndoubtedli receive much fruit by hearing of
Mass. And when their devotion serves them, Receauyng of ye sacrame^te
oftentimes.
to receive the most blessed sacrament thereat, were in they shall (if they
worthily receive it) take singular commodite and comfort. And to do the same
at lest at every solemn feast in the year, or oftener, if they be so
disposed. For so we se the people commonly do in other Christen realms: Who
first do confess them selfs unto a priest, and then come they to receive that
blessed food with such lowly reverence and earneste devotion, as a good
christen man would much rejoice to se them. Which thing, I pray god, may
shortly come to pass among us, and that we may both steadfastly believe it to
be our savior Christ's blessed body, as it is in deed, (and not as our last
wicked and blasphemouse communion book and all our new preachers most
untruly and damnably taught us, that it was but bread only) and also devoutly
and godly receive it to our souls health and comfort. Now as for all the
rites and ceremonies of the mass, and all the prayers contained therein, they
are so godly, and so well placed, as all the world is not able to inuente the
like, nor so well to dispose and set them together: as all good men, that will
deepelye weye them, and consider the order of them, shall easily perceive. As
for such, as have most wickedlye called the Mass a Maskarye, and the
priests vestimentes, Mockers of the Mass.
maskynge clothes, and mocked all the ceremonies thereof, and spytte at them,
and did smite the priests, may well be compared with Pylates men, who (as
we read in S. Mathewes Gospel) bowynge down their knees, Mat. 27.
mocked our Savior Christ, spitte at him, and smote him upon the head. For
surely it is not unlike, yt if Christ were here among us personallye present
in a man's lykenes and nature, as he was then among the Jews, but that these
ungodly folks would take the Jews part, and mock him, as they did, seeing
that they play the very same parts with his priests and ministers* that
represent him unto us, that the Jews in old time did play with him. But
our Lord grant, that they may espy betyme their ^^rye and madness, that the
miserable plages that fell upon the Jews for their mockyng of Christ, fall
not likewise upon them for mocking of his priests and ministers. But many
grudge and are offended, that the Mass, Divine service in Latin.
and al other divine service is in Latin, so that when they be in the Church,
they do not understand, what the priest says. I would gladly ask one
question of such, why they come to the church, whether to hear, or to pray:
they will answer, I doubt not, to do both. For there they both learn their
duetye by hearing of sermons, and also practice it by diligent and seruent
praying. Now then seeing, that to do our duty is much better, then to
learn our duty, because that every manne learneth, to this end, that he may
practice, although both twain be good and necessary, yet the one far
passes the other. And the one may be gotten in short space with small
travail, but the other asks long time, and much pain to get it. As
concerning which purpose we read a notable storye of one Pambo, Socra. hist
eccle. li. 4
a man utterly unlearned who on a time came to learn a psalm of the psalter.
And when he had heard the first verse of the.xxxvii^. psalm, which is thus
much to say in English. I have determined with my self, that I will so
direct and order my life, that I do not offend with my tongue: departed, and
would in no wise hear the second verse, but said, that one verse was
sufficient, if he could practice it in deed. After that when he had taught him
this verse, did rebuke him, because he had not seen him now the space of
six months, he answered* that he had not as yet in deed learned yt verse
of ye Psalm. Again along time after* one of his familiar friends demanded of
him whether he had learned his verse, and he said: Now or.xix. years passed,
and truly, as yet. I have scarcely learned to practice it. Whereby it well
appears, that a man may learn as much upon one day, at one sermon, as he
can well learn perfytly to practice in a whole year. Wherefore I have
oftentimes much maruayled at us English men of late, that we came to the
church at the time of our English service to hear only, and not to pray our
selfs. By means whereof many folks are so inured, that they can hardlye frame
them selfs as yet to pray in the church, which, as our savior says is the
house of prayer. Mat. 21.
And most mete were it for folks coming to the church, to pray earnestly
them selfs, and both to think upon their sins. wherewith they have offended
their lord god, and to be sorry for them, and to desire god to forgive them,
yea and beside to give him hearty thanks for all his benefits bestowed upon
them, and to beseech him to assiste them with his grace against the assaults
of their adversary the devil. For thus ought men to spend the holy day, and
thus ought they to bestow their time in the church of God, when they come
thither. For what did Anna the daughter of Phanuell, (who had lived with her
husband.vij. years, and after his death continued widow, till she was four
score and four years old, and so died) is it not written of her by S. Luke,
Luc. 2.
that she departed not from the temple, but served God there night and day in
fasting and praying? The Evangelist tells not, that there she was occupied in
hearing, but that she was occupied in praying. Many hear and either they
shortly forget, what they have heard, or else if they remember it* yet they
do not practice it: and one hour spente in practisynge, is more worth to us,
then twentye spent in hearing. Therefore when they come to Church, and hear
the priests, who says common prayer for all the whole multitude, albeit they
understand them not, yet if they be occupied in godly prayer them selfs, it
is sufficient for them. And let them not so greatly pass for understanding,
what the priests say, but travail them selfs in fervent praying, and so
shall they hyghly please God. Yea and experience has plainly taught us, that
it is much better for them not to understand the common service of the
Church, then to understand it, because that when they hear other prayinge
with a loud voice in the language, that they understand, they are let from
prayer them self, and so come they to such a slacknes and negligence in
prayinge, that they at length (as we have well seen of late days) in manner
pray not at al. And let the^ first think this (for it is undoubtedly true)
that the divine service here in England has ever been in Latin since the
first time, that the faith was among us received (save only this.vi. or.vij.
years last passed). And then how godly the people all that while were
disposed, how many virtuous and holy men and women have been within this
realm, and how God did in all things prosper us. And read who so list the
godly ecclesiastical story of sayncte Bid, and he shall find my sayings
herein most true. By which story he shall learn beside, how the same faith,
the same form of religion, the same rites and ceremonies, that we now use in
the church, have been since king Lucius days (in whose reygne the faith was
first received in England) continuallye used. Bed hist. eccle. li. ^ cap. 4.
And either must we grant this, that there was never any godly men in this
realm, never one soul saved, never any grace of God among us, never the
assistence of the holy gooste with us, (which no good, nor reasonable manne
either can, or will grant) if this be not the true faith and belefe (whereby
men's souls shall be saved), that now is among us. For where true belefe is
not, there is not God, nor none of his grace, nor no part of his holy spirit.
And therefore if this be a false faith and belefe that we now have, then god
both is, and has been most unkind, not only to us, but to all Christendom
beside, which is in the same belefe, that we be: seeing that he has not before
these.vij. years last passed, revealed and opened his truth unto us, but
suffered both us, and all our progenitors and elders to, yea and all
Christendom, ever since Christ's incarnation even to these latter days to
live in blyndnes, and to let us continue still in danger of damnation. But God
forbydde, that any man might justly, either think or say thus, For then might
we, coming before our savior Christ at the day of judgment, if we should
for our belefe be there condemned, answer that we were not to blame, nor
worthy of da^natio^ therefore: because that his blessed spouse the Catholic
church, had from time to time taught us this belefe, and that he had
promised to be with his church to the worlds end. Which promise caused us
always to give credence to his holy Church, which we thought could not err,
nor be deceived in any matter concerning our faith. Therefore no man has
cause to judge this religion, that we now have, to be naught, and so to
think, that the worshyppynge of Christ's blessed body in the sacrament is
Idolatrye (as many of late have most wyckedlye both believed and taught) and by
that means condemn all our fathers, grandfathers, and the rest of our
elders, which have so believed, but very good cause has he to suspect the
religion, that has been brought in of late, yea and utterly to abhor it,
both for that he sees so plainly before his eyes ye abominable fruytes, that
it has brought forth in this realm, and also that he knows, that it was
never received in this realm before these last.vij. years paste, save only
that wicked Wyclyffe had in corners taught the same in king Edward the
thirdes days, which his doctrine ended in notable treason, even as this did
that was latelye received among us: as after I shall more plainly declare. But
some say that they would have us believe, The trade of the primitive church.
and live according as men did in the primitive church. How was that I
pray you? was it as we have been taught of late in believing* that Christ's
blessed body in the sacrament is but a piece of bread, and to abolish the
Mass, to cast away praying and fasting? No no: Hear, I pray you, Beda hist.
ecles. lib. 1. cap. 26.
what saynct Bid says, concerning the state of the primitive church.

When as S. Augustyne and his fellows, that were sent by saynct Gregorye hither
into England to preach, had gotten the^ a place in kent to soiourne in, they
followed the Apostolical trade of living, that was used in the primitive
church, that is to say, they practysed them selfs in continual prayinge,
watching and fasting, in preaching the word of life to all that they could, in
dyspysynge all worldly goods, as not apperteyning unto them, in taking those
things only of them, whom they preached to, that was necessary to live
wythall, in living according to their preaching, and in having a prompte and
ready mind and will, both patientlye to suffer all kind of trouble, and also
to dye for the truth, that they preached. By occasion whereof many believed,
and were christened, much estemynge the simplicitye of their innocente life,
and the sweetness of heavenly doctrine.

And there was near unto the head City there toward the East a Church of
Sayncte Martyne, which had been builded, while as the Romans dwelled in
England, in which church the Queen, wife to king Edilberte (whom we said
before was a Christen woman) was accustomed to pray. And in the same church
sayncte Augustyne and his fellows repaired together to singe, to pray, to say
Masses, to preach, and to Christen.

Thus writes sayncte Bid, how sayncte Augustyne and his fellows observed the
order and trade of the primitive church. This was done here in England almost
a thousand year ago. And the same form of religion both was before, and after
even to our days evermore kept and used among us. And here we find fasting,
prayinge, watchynge, singing, and saying of Masses, which sayncte Bid calls
the Apostolical trade of life, that was in ye primitive church* But our
preachers of late when they talked of the primitive church, which they would
have had us to follow, they meaned no other church, but the malignau^t church
of Wicliffe, Husse, Luther, Decola^padius, and of such like heretykes. But to
return to our former purpose, concerning the wretched fruits, that came of
this doctrine, when aulters were pulled down, and mass put away, then were
all churches without any law, spoiled of all their ornaments, The churches
spoiled.
as of copes, vestimentes, aulter-clothes, corporaxes, chalishes crosses,
candelstickes, censers, cruettes, books, and all other things belonging
thereto, and ye same put to profane uses, as to hanginges of beds, curteynes,
cusshins, and other such like. And some men made Ioly mocking and gea^t^^ge,
and called them the priests masking clothes, as we told you before. But I
beseech our lord God, that such spoylers of the church, may repent and make
amends for their spoil, that they have not the like end, that one Iulianus
had, who was uncle to the noughty emperor Iulianus Apostata* (...) 5 hist (...)
Of whom Sozome^nus writes, that he mindynge to take away the precious
ornaments and Jewels of the Church of Antioche in Syria, which were a great
sort in nombre, and to increase them perours treasure withal, caused the
church to be shut up, that no man should resort thither, insomuche that all the
clergy apperteynng to that church, fled away, saving one priest only,
whose name was Theodorius, whom Iulianus caused to be taken, because he could
tell, where the ornaments of the Church were, and first made him to be sore
beaten, and after to be panged with many sore torments, and at length to be
beheaded. Which done, the said Iulianus after he had robbed the church, and
taken all the holy ornaments away, in great dispite did straw the^ upon the
ground, sat him down upon them, and so declared his spiteful malice
against them. Whose priuye members and the necessary parts beneath did by
and by putrifye and rotte, insomuche that the flesh being rotten, turned al
into worms, and his syckenes was so great and greuouse, that it passed al
phisicions power to cure it. So that at length after many paynfull panges he
made an end of his wretched life. Thus by the hand of GOD was this wicked man
for the robbyng of Christ's church worthelye plaged. By whose example let
every Christen man learn three points: first that he rob not the church of
any holy ornaments apperteynyng thereto. Secondarely that he put them not to
any profane use, as this Iulianus did. Thirdly that he do not make a mockyng
stock of them, and irreverently handle them* lest the same plage, that befell
to the said Iulianus, fall upon him likewise.

Then was the holy order of priesthode utterly disanulled, The order of
priesthode taken away
so that the name of a priest should not be any longer used, but such as should
preach and minister sacraments, should be called ministers, and not
priests, and that they should be apparelled like lay men, so that a minister
should not be known from a lay man, but all should be a like: which never was
seen in the church of God from Christ's time hitherto, but only among
heretykes.

Then was there means found, that there should be many such ministers. For
exhibition was begged by certain to be bestowed in the universities. Which ones
gotten, they bestowed it only upon such, as either were infected with heresy,
or else in whom men had good hope, that they would in time be heretics. And
thus was folks hired to forsake Christ's catholyke faith, and not only to
deceive them selfs, but many other beside. Would to god yt men were as well
willinge now to give exhibition to set forward godly learning and virtue, as
they were then to set forth vice and heresye. But to come to our purpose. Then
became those, yt were lewd and unlearned very worthy preachers, Lewd preachers
yea and such as had never been at any university, would teach the people, and
preach unto them, and were never sent, and boaste of them selfs, that they
had the spirit. Truth is it, they had the spirit of error and blindness. And
the more blind that they were, the more bold and shameless were they, so that
the saying of Hier^mye the Prophet might be well veryfyed in them: Hier. 3.
They had the shameless forhead of a drabbe* and would not be ashamed at al. For
he that was most ignorant, was most bold, so that such did well prove the
old proverb to be true, that none is bolder, then blind Bayarde. This sort
of men stepped stoutelye into the pulpit, and caring neither for God nor
devil, killed mo souls upon one day, then all the noughty phisitio^s in
England had killed bodies in twentye years: and always had they in their
mouths Gods word, Gods word, and some of them called it gods book, whereas
their doctrine was nothing else, but lies and fables forged of their own
brains, and scriptures falsely translated, and more falsely expounded,
according as they had learned of Luther, Bucer Decolampadius, Bullinger,
Caluyne, and such like heretykes.

And all their preaching or rather bablyng was spente in raylyng against the
order of Christ's church, Our new preachers doctrine.
against Images and candels, against Mass and mattyns, against purgatory
and prayinge for the dead, against free will and prayinge to saynctes,
against crosses and belles, against copes and vestimentes, against the
Blessed Sacraments, whereof the most part were by them taken away, and the
rest were so handled, as would make any good man's heart sore to lament
therefore. Over this much pratinge made they of only faith, that thereby we
were ^ustified, Only ^ayth preached.
whereof they talked so long, that at length a great many had no faith at al.
And in these matters were they so well practiced, yt when they talked of them
in a pulpit, they seemed to the people very eloquent. But if they at any time
took occasion (as they did very seldom) to speak of death or deadlye
sin, or of the fear of God, and his terrible judgment, or of good works
as of prayer, fasting, and almose, they were so baren in their talk, that
their auditors thought the^ altogyther unlearned, as they were without fail.
For so have many of them coming to their trial, well declared of late.

And although they lacked sound learning, The presumption of our new
preachers.
yet lacked they no arrogant presu^ption. For some of them would not let to
boaste, that they were singulerly learned in Latin, greek, and hebrew, and
say, yt they had red over all the ecclesiastical writers, and often times
allege the^ for their purpose. But how I pray you? False alleging of authors.
Either did they misconstrue and untruly expound the places, that they
alleged, or at lest wise falsely alleged the^ or else cut the sentence in
the midst, that it might seem to make for their purpose, and all that made
against them left they clean out. And so like wise handled they ye holy
scripture to: as it well appears in sondrye of their detestable and deuilishe
books, whosoever list to search them. But they were not the first, Deprauyng
of ye holy scripture.
that thus went about to deprave both the scripture, and also the old ancient
writers. For Asclepiades, Theodotus, Hermophilus, and Apollonius old heretics
of Artemones sect, Eusebius, lib 5. hist. eccles.
trauayled much in corruptinge the examples of holy scripture, to the intent,
that they might bring scriptures to confirm their abominable opinions
wythall. And Denyse the bishop of Corinthe writes thus of such like men.
Eusebius. lib 4. hist. ecclesiast.
At the request of certain brethren I wrote certain epistles, which ye
devils Apostles have filled full of cockel, darnil. For some words have they
put out of them, and some added unto them, for whom the woeful curse of Christ
at the day of judgment is reserved. And no marvel is it, though they went
about to falsifye the scriptures of our lord and savior Jesus, seeing that
they have corrupted these pore simple writings of mine, which are not of such
weight, as those be. Many authors could I allege to declare, yt heretics have
always played the like part both with the scriptures and the good interpretors
thereof, but here it needs not. Some other were there of our new preachers,
whose presu^ptuouse arrogancy might also be well known in that, that many of
them would preach and were never sent. Preachers that were never seen.
And a great meany, that had in manner no learning, and as little wit, would
start up into ye pulpet, and tell the people, that the spyrite moved them, and
then would they blaspheme and rail, as though they had been possessed with an
evil spirit, as in deed it is very likely they were. Such are well described of
Saint Peter after this sort. 2. Pet. 2.
These be wells without water, and mystes tossed with whorle wyndes, for whom
is reserved everlasting darkness. For by vtteringe their presumptuouse
bablinge, they allure and catch such, as through the concupiscence of the
flesh, are fallen in deed to follow wanton pleasures and continue in error. And
they promise other men liberty, whereas they the^ selfs are ye very slaves of
filthye corruption. Such godly masters because they ran and were not sent
(as the prophet says) came into the shepefold of Christ not by the door,
Hier. 13.
but an other way, so that Saint John the euangeliste, if he had been alive,
would have called them thieves. Joan. 10
And a thief, as the same evangelist writes, comes for no other purpose, but
to steal, to kill, and to distroye. For first did they steal Christ's sheep
out of the fold, that is to say, out of the Catholic church, by carnal
liberty, which (as I said before) they craftlye named ye liberty of the
gospel. Then killed they their souls with pestilence doctrine, and so at
length by their deuelishe diuises so blinded the^, that they destroyed them
all together. And when they had thus miserably handled them, they gloried in
their graceles act* as though they had done god good service. But if they
would remember what O^igene says concerning such men, as they them selfs be,
and well wey his saying, they should have good cause to leave their glorying
in malice and blindness, and fall to bewail the miserable murder, Super
epist^ad Roman.
that they in Christ's flock have committed. For he says that the damnation
of al those, that have either preached or written heresye, does still increase
to the day of judgment, that is to say, as long as the contagion of their
heresye does remain, and infect any man. For the mo that perish through their
doctrine, the more greuouse shall their punishment be. Which sentence I
beseech our lord god, y^ betime they may earnestly consider, and yt either by
reason, learning, and gentle exhortation, or otherwise they may be brought to
acknowledge their error and blindenes, to detest it, and to persuade other,
that have been deceived by them, to forsake it. Lib. 3. epist. 2.
And let them hear, what S. Cyprian writes to Maximus and Nicostratus after
this sort. Think not (says he) that you defend Christ's gospel, while as
you divide your selfs from the flock of Christ, and from the peace and
concord thereof, sithen that it is more fit for the valiant and gloriouse
souldiars of Christ to be within their own tents, and there abiding to do,
and provide for those things together with other, that are to be done and
provided for: because that our unity and concord ought in no wise to be cut
asonder. As for us, we can not forsake the Church, go forth of it, and come
to you. Therefore we in all that we possible can, exhort and pray you, that you
will return to your mother the church again. Which exhortation of saint
Cyprian God give grace, that those, that have by heresy divided themselfes from
Christ's catholic church, may gladlye hear, and thereby be persuaded to
come home, and embrace the holesom doctrine of their dear mother, ye blessed
spouse of Christ. For what a comfort should it be for them selfs, yea and what
a great joy for all good Christen folks, if they would forsake the synagoge
of heresy, and repair to Christ's holy Church again. Epist. 12. lib. 2.
Luc. 15.
For sayncte Cyprian writes that, seeing that Christ says in the Gospel, yt
there is in heaven the greatest joy, that can be, for one sinner that does
penance, how much more joy is there then both in heaven and in earth for
such* as with glory and praise return to the church of God again: and by
their example, by their faith, and trial, give occasion to other to return
likewise. And as it should be great comfort for all good folks to see them
return, so men ought by diligent preaching, by gentle exhortation, by fervent
prayer, and by all means possible travail to make them return. And whosoever
can by persuasion or otherwise pull any of them from their blind error, he
shall have great thanks at Gods hand therefore. For the ^olye Apostle S. James
says, Iac. 5.
That whatsoever he be, that turns a sinner from the error, whereby he has
gone amysse, shall save the man's soul from death, and blotte out a great many
of his own sins.

But to our purpose. Of these fo^kes preaching spronge all our sects and
sondrye opinions: which were so diverse and many fold, that so many heads, so
many opinions in manner were among us. And like as no fond opinion was there
ever (as we read in Cicero) that was not maynteyned by some folish philopher,
Cicero de diuinat.
so no lewd heresye was ever inverted, that had not some wise master here in
England to set it forth, and defend it. For some held, that all things
ought to be common* as the Anabaptists do. Sondrye sects in England
Some said, that all things were ruled by destenie and by mere necessitye, as
the heretics called Genethliaci said: And so took they away man's free will.
Some affirmed, that GOD was the author of evil, as we read of certain in
Basilius Magnus days, which were without God. Some again took away the
providence of GOD, as the Epicures do. Some believed not the resurrection of
our bodies, following the heretykes, which were named Seuerians. Some did
maintain, that all should be saved, as the Origenians did. Some said, that
Christ took no flesh of the blessed virgin Marye, as did the Martionistes and
Apollinaristes. Some taught, that he was less then the father, as the Arians
of old had taught. Some denied, that he descended into hell, and said, that
there was neither hell nor heaven. Some preached, that heaven was nothing else,
but a quiet conscience, and hell a troubled conscience. Some would say, that
men's souls do sleep to the day of judgment: and some believed that they were
mortal. Some thought, that there was no predestination. Some said, that
Christ died as well for his own sins, as for other men's sins. Some held,
that a man having the spirit of god, might lawfully lie with another man's
wife. Some affirmed, that the inward man did not sin, when the outward man
sinned. Some said, that it was deadly sin to play at any game for money. Some
taught that it was lawful for a man in a Christen commen wealth, without
imposition of hands of any bishop to preach openly. Some were persuaded, yt a
man might become so perfect in this life, yt he could not sin. But to
conclude, I think verily there was almost no abominable or fond heresi, since
Christ's time to our days, which was not in some folks heads now of late
here in England. And thus have you heard (most entyerly beloved contrye men) a
breue rehearsal of the perillouse and pestilent fruits that our new doctrine
has brought forth here in our contrye these few years last passed. By means
whereof Christ's true religion has been utterly defaced. Which truly I am
right sorry to recite But (as Josephus says) I should do my contry small pleasure
to leave those miseryes untouched in my words, that it has suffered in deed.
If a man should likewise reckon up the great incommodities, that has
chaunsed to the commen welthe of this realm by reason of the same doctrine, he
should be very long and percase tedious to. But thus much will I say, and
every man, that is about thirtye years old, shall witness with me, that I say
true, that before we forsook ye whole catholic church of god, and made us a
several and private church of our own, our commenwelthe was so rich, was in
such good order. was so strong and mighty, that no other was there,
consideringe the quantity of it, that might be compared with it. Again if a
man would particulerly recite the fails of diverse noble and gentle men, that
partly by reason of the same doctrine have suffered since the first coming of
it, Nobility destroyed through heresye.
he should make a long process. And seeing that as yet they be fresh in men's
memories, as it is not necessary to tell of them, so let them that be noble and
gentle men by their example take heed of such wicked doctrine, lest if they in
any point either further or maintain it, they following their footsteps
stomble upon the same block and take a like fall. For it never came in any
realm yet, where it has not utterly in manner destroyed the nobilite. As for
example in Germany, where it has now continued so long* ^t has not only
destroyed the rest of the commenwelth, but also the most part of the
nobility. And in diverse rebellions, that were made in that contrye, by reason
of it, the rebels intended to destroy al noble and gentlemen, as it appears
by their articles, which as yet remain in writing. For in the articles of the
rebels yt rose at Spiers, which Artycles be written by one Nicolaus Baselius
and joined with the cronicle of Ioannes Na^clerus, ye fourth is, yt they
intended to kill all the nobility, and all heads and rulers, to the intent that
they would be subject to no man, but live at their liberty. In an insurrection
that was made under the pretense of the Gospel, in the year of our Lord, a
thowsande, five hundredth, twentye and two, in the same country likewise the
rebels, because they would be under no obedience, purposed to dysanull all
laws, and put away judges, to rob churches and monasteries, to kill all
noble men and gentlemen, because they would pay no more rentes, customs, or
taxes. Therefore it is all noble and gentlemen's parts to be well ware of such
doctrine, if they either love to be partakers of heaven, or desire to keep
their worldly estate, to continue in it, and to have their children quietlye
to enjoy it after them. For they may well perceive by these examples, that
where it takes place, it is the ruin and destruction of al nobility. Let
them besides weye well, what harm it has done to their children, that were
now of late brought up in it.

And this wot they well, that the ring leaders of the Lutheranes or rather
Zwin glianes in king Edwardes reygne, sought always possible to corrupt all the noble and gentlemen's children within this realm. And either proprocured
they, that they might be brought up in the court, or else that some new
fangled scholemayster might be put unto them, or else to be put to the
universities, and there to be brought up under one of this new sect. For what
purpose was this done, but only to maynteyne their mischeuouse errors withal,
and to establyshe the same within our contrye for ever* But god by miracle has
ouerturned all their cursed devises, and suffered them by his divine providence
to work their own confusion. Now then seeing that this erroneouse doctrine
has so harmed both noble and gentle men the^ selfs, and their children to,
let them at length spy the wickedness of it, and help be time to banishe it
out of their contrye, and exhort their children to detest and abhor it. For
so shall they make the^ to fear god, and serve him, to exercise virtue, and
eschew vice, and to be humble and obedient to them selfs to* As for the
yeonianry of our contrye, The decay of the yeomanry
wherein did consiste a great part of the force of this realm, it has so
notably decayed since the time, that this pestilent doctrine began first within
this realm, that it would pitye any true English man's heart to consider
it. For where as the yeomen thirty or fourtye years passed, were well able to
do their prince and their country very good service, when as any occasion
required, and that every one of them did keep a substantial house, by reason
that their rentes then were very reasonable.

Now since this perillouse plage of heresye has infected this realm, their
re^tes has been so enhaunsed. and they so miserably polled, that neither
service were they well able to do for their prince and country, nor to keep
any plenteful house for the relieuynge of their poor neighbors. For men that
became Lords of such fermes, when as by reason of this lewd doctrine they
had cast away in manner the fear of GOD and good conscience to, and instead
thereof had caught such couetouse hearts, as would never be satisfied, and
joined withal a large licentiouse conscience, which told them, they might go
forth in their purpose with out any scruple at al, then doubled they their
rentes, and some tripled them, and took such incommes for their leases, as
where able to beggar the fermers, that took them: insomuche that where as the
fermers had been very welthye before they came by this means to such neade
and necessity, that scarce were they able to pay their rent.

The misery likewise that the poor commons have been bewrapped with since the
rereceauynge of this deuelishe doctrine, can no man without a long process
thoroughly declare. For what with taxes and tributes, what with the change of
our money and fall of the same, what with gressams and inco^mes, what with
extortion and briberye, what with puttyng out of their ferme holds and
tenementes, what with craft and false dealing, and what with all other kinds
of oppression beside, they have been so sore impouerished, that better had it
been for them to have dyed in their cradles, then to have lived to suffer such
wretched and miserable calamities. For when conscience was banished and
charitable hearts wa^ed keye cold, then cared no man from the highest degree to
the lowest, how he got goods, so that he had them, in so much that this
saying of the holy Prophet Hieremye might be well verified in them, Hier. 6.
that every one from the lowest degree to the highest had given them selfs to
covetousness. And when this came thus to pass, they that were most mighty*
were greatest oppressors* and like great fysshes devoured the small. And
oftentimes would they take work of artificers, wares and stuff of
merchants, and differ the payment so long, yt the poor artificers and
merchants to, were in manner beggered thereby. And when they demanded their
payment, they had of diverse a froward answer: in so much that the poorer a
man was, more injury he suffered at their hands, and the insatiable hearts of
such covetous men could never content the^ selfs. But woe be unto al such,
except they betyme repent them, and if there be any such, let them think,
yt at length they shall depart from all that they have, and remember, that they
for all their gaye and gorgiouse apparel, they shall have no more, but a simple
shete to wrappe their vile body in, and for all their fair buyldinges and
sumptuouse houses, a poor pytte in the earth to dwell in.

And wythal let them learn one preatye lesson, that Eusebius writes in the
life of Constantine. This good Emperor Constantyne making an oration to a
great company, that was gathered to hear him, specially inuehed and spoke
against those, that were spoylers, and very couetouse folks, saying thus:
Will your greadye covetousness never have end? Then with a little staff that
he had in his hand, he measured upon the ground the just length of a man, and
said: If a man have all the riches in the world, and the whole earth in his
possession, he shall at his end have no more, but such a small piece of
ground, as I have here measured. Therefore let al gready hearts remember this
well, and leave their care, that they take in goods getting, and consider their
duty in well bestowing of them, and think beside, how they have gotten them.
For evil gotten goods (as Salust says) evil cheueth. Over this if they
would compare their bodies and sowles with their goods and riches me think
they should beware to loose those things that be better, for those that be
worse. For goods and riches be given us of god for the commodity and use both
of our bodies and souls. And like as brute beasts are much better then
grass, straw, and hay, which be ordained to nourishe the^: So is a man's body
and soul more to be esteemed, then goods and riches. which be prepared for
them. Who then is so unwise, that will for the saving of those things, that be
much more vile, put in danger those that be far more precious? For both our
bodies and souls are of such estimation in the sight of God, yt for the
recovery of them out of thraldom, he vouche saved to send down into the earth
his only son, our savior Christ Jesus, by whose blessed blood, which far
surmounteth al gold and precious stones, both our corruptible and frail
bodies, and also our very sick and sore wounded souls are redeemed from
endless damnation, and restored again to ye celestial kyngedome, which was
from the beginning of the world prepared for them. Therefore seeing, that god
of his gracious goodness has taken so much pains to save them* we through
our folly and negligence ought not to travail to loose them, nor to put them
in hazard, for the love that we bear to our well thy estate in this world,
and so to change heaven with hell, joy with pain, myrthe with sorrow,
quietness with trouble, life with death, the* pleasant presence of god with
the horrible sight of the devil, and the glorious company of angels and
saints, with the hydious and foul fellowship of fendes. In consideracion
whereof, because of the tender and unfeigned love, that I (as our lord knows)
bear to the wealth and health of all my country men's bodies and souls, most
earnestly beseech almighty God, yt he will vouchesafe so to provide, that for
evil gotten goods no man in conclusion perish, but that every man cast away
his couetouse heart betyme, and begin to care for his end, and search the
bottom of his breast, whether he perfitly believe, that both his body and his
soul shall either ever live in joy inestimable, or ever dye abiding most
bitter and paynful torments. And remember as he came naked into this world
(as Job says) so shall he naked depart out of it.

Again among these three sorts of men, the nobles, the ^eomen, and the poor
commons, since the time they had sole or only faith preached among the^,
Faith only.
they have had such a self simple faith, yt not one in manner could trust
another. For as in old time a man's word was as sure as an obligation, so of
late days words were but wind, and writings to, werby some me^ not much
wey^d. Insomuche yt when faith toward god was in man^er utterly abolished,
faith toward man was banished therwt, and al good works was through lewd
preaching clean laid apart: Wherefore our faith as well to god, as to man was so
naked and single, yt it might be very well called a faythles faith, and likened
to a broken staff, yt deceaueth al the^, that lean upon it. And as our faith
was very badde, so our works were no whit better. For there was never seen
such malice and hatred, such deceyte and subteltie, such pride and ambition,
so yt the insatiable desire of honor was in conclusion so roted in men's hearts,
yt it brought forth such notable treason, as y^ like has not ben heard of in
this realm before. And beside it has stuffed diverse folks hearts with so
deadlye malice, yt the wicked works, yt are wrought by such well declare, yt it
is no doctrine come from god ye father of light, (as I said before) but it (as
S. James says) is full of car^al affections of deuelishe. Iac. 3.


For seeing that such tumultes, and such sedition among our selfs, such
grudginge against our prince* such blasphemye against god, such raylinge, and
such vile words used against his ministers, are grown of it (as to call them
foxes in the pulpit, yea and sometimes while they be godly occupied in
preachinge, to hurl daggers and to shote gonnes at the^) it is a plain
argument, that it comes from the devil, the author of malice, and is as it
were some contagiouse veneme spitte out of his breast, to poysen men's souls
withal. Again the books, that be made by ye mainteyners of it, are altogether
farsed with lies, as it well appears by a little peuishe book, conteynyng the
disputation made in the convocation house, wherein are scarcely two lines true
together, as all the learned men, that were there present, can evidently
testifye. What should I speak of the false rumors that have been of late by
the favorers thereof spread abroad in this realm, to provoke the people to
grudge against the Queen's highness? What pestilente libelles against certain
of the Queen's most honorable counseyll, yea and against her graces own person,
have been cast in corners to sow sedition?

Beside what mischeuouse misconstruyng is there of acts, laws and statutes,
and of all things in manner, that be set forth by the Queen's highness and her
counsel? yea and will they not say, that when we have any evil wether* as to
much rain, or to much drought, that it comes because the word of god
(whereby they mean their heresye) is suppressed among us? they will never say,
as all good folks use to say, that it comes, by reason of our sin and
wickedness. But truth is it. that God plageth this realm, and has done* yea
and yet will do, partly for our wretched lives, and partly for that such as be
infected with heresye, will not acknowledge their error and maliciouse
blindness, and turn to the church again.

Over this are there not diverse, that for very stubbornes, will in hucker
mucker against the laws of this realm, yea and against gods will, use the
pernitiouse book of the last Communion, and teach the English catechism, to
grafte in chyldrens hearts their blasphemouse and abominable heresye? If men
well consider these folks wicked malice, they have good cause to hate such
deuelishe doctrine, while they live, and whenever they hear any part of it,
to stop their ears* that no such cursed blasphemye enter in at them. But to
say very truth, it was in manner necessary, that it should be revealed, and
opened in this realm. For no man would have thought, that ever any such
incomuenience would have come of it, if they had not seen it present before
their eyes. So that whosoever shall hereafter hear of the abomination of it,
shall have just cause with all their heart to abhor it.

Many mo noughty fruits could I reken up, that have sprung out of this new
fond doctrine, but these are sufficient for my purpose, whereby every man, that
is not stark blind may clearly se, that if there were any cause, that should
move a man to rebellion (as there is none in deed) this were the worst of all
other. For saying that not only almighty god hates this doctrine, because it
is contrary to his holy word, contrary to his blessed spouse the chur^he,
contrary to the writings and authorities of al his blessed martyrs and
confessors, and of all holy men beside, and contrary to ye whole consent of
Christendom, but also that is the utter destruction of al commen welthes
whersoeuer it comes, it is no man's part to fight for it, to adventure his
life in the defense of it, but rather to travail earnestly to abolishe it, and
to exhort all men evermore to beware of it. Wherefore whenever the devil,
who is the only author of rebellion, goes about to persuade any man, that
such doctrine is gods word, and that there is no other truth but it, and
that he ought to stick fast to it, and fear not to suffer death for it, and
if need be, to raise up rebellion, and boldly step forth, and fight stoutly
against his prince in the maynteinance of it: Then may he well know, that it is
neither the word of god, nor no truth is there in it, because the devil, who
is the deadlye enemy both of gods holy word and of all truth, not only
moves him to stick to it, but also with the sword against his prince
manfully to defend it. But if he be by ye devil thoroughly persuaded to rebel
against his prince, rather then to forsake it, yet let him look or he lepe,
and call to remembrance the wretched end of all such, as has for the like
quarrel made rebellion. And first let him well consider the rebellions, that
has been made in Boheme for the same religion. When Wicliffes wicked doctrine
was conveyed out of England into Boheme, and there by John Hus translated into
their vulgar tongue, and preached there by the same Hus, and one Hierome de
Prage, a great number at length were infected with it, and because they minded
to rule the whole country, and to subdue and destroy all, that were contrary
to the^ in religion, Rebellion in Boheme for religion.
found they out a cruel captain very mete for their pestilent purpose
(whose name was Ziska) under whom they wrought much mischief to that goodly
country. Ziska.
And first builded they them selfs a city, and named it Thabor. after the
hills name, where our savior was transfigured, Aeneas Syl. in hist c. 40.
Histor Huss. li 5
because they thought, yt in that city all truth should be revealed and
opened. And after would they no more be called Hussites, but Thaborites.

Then pulled they down churches and monasteries, and most miserably persecuted
all catholic folk, and specially priests. Of whom some Ziska their
Captain caused to be burned quick, and some to be murdered with other
tormentrye. and the preuie members of some to be cut of, to the intent that
they should be a mockyng stock to the people. Which cruel and detestable
monstre (for so Aeneas Siluius calls him) because no men's power could
vanquyshe him* God with his myghtie hand at length for his manifold rebellion
ouerthrewe him. For as he was going to Priscouia to mete Sigismundus
themperoure, he was by the way suddenly taken with the pestilence, and so made
he an end of his cursed life. After whose death the Thaborites got them a
new captain, named Procopius: whose cruelty, spoil, and oppression the Lords
and barrons of Boheme well perceauyng and greatly lamentyng, thought such
wickedness no longer to be suffered, but to put in adventure all that they
had, and their lives to, rather then they would see their country by such
rebels so miserablye spoiled and wasted. Whereupon getting a great army
together, met with them betwixt Broda and Buris, and set upon them suddenly,
insomuch that the Thaborytes fled away apace. Wherefore Procopius their
Captain, when he could by no persuasion keep them from flight, like a
desperate wretch, run headlynge into the thycke of his enemies, where
fighting a while, and sore vexynge his enemies, at last with an arowe was
shot through. And when the ba^tayle was ended, an infinite number of the
Thaborites were taken prisoners, The miserable end of the rebels in Boheme.
and after put in great barnes, the doors shut up. And because that
country should no longer be troubled with such wretched people, the barnes
were set on fire, and they and the barnes were burned up altogether. This
woeful end had these seditiouse and cruel heretykes, the maynteyners of
Wicliffes and Hussis doctrine, by whose means the noble country of Boheme,
was brought from a most honorable state, to very slavery, from great riches to
very beggerye, from good order, to utter confusion, from noble liberty to vile
bondage, and from a royal kyngedome to a wretched tyranny. We read likewise
of the great rebellion, that was made in Germanye by the Lutheranes, Look upon
the chronic^e of the books of Burgundye, and the chronicle of Carrion
called Bellum rusticum, which intended to have destroyed Christ's catholic
faith, all the clergy, and all the nobility of Germanye, and never to have
been under any rulers or governors any longer. For the devil and Luther
together had taught them, that the liberty of the Gospel should not be subject
to such tyrauntes* as the^peroure was: and Luther in his sermons called
themperoure a sack of worms, and said, that the great Turk was a wyser
prince and a better, then the governors of our Christen commen wealth, and used
commonly to say, Lord deliver us from such tyrauntes. Where wythal the
people being provoked to sedition, gathered together a great army, and if
they had not been resisted betyme, they had destroyed al Germanye. And when
they came to the field, and were compelled to make battle, they fought
wonderful fearslye, so that there were slain at sondrye conflictes above an
hundredth thousand men. And both the authors of all this mischief in the same
battayles were killed, and all the rebels beside were either slain, or taken
prisoners. Such cruel bloodshed, and such manslaughter brought for the this
cursed enterprise.

What should I speak of a city in Germany called Munstere, Monasteri^^.
which before it was with the perillouse plage of heresye infected, was a very
rich and a welthy city, and meruelouslye did flouryshe both for ye
prosperouse estate. that it was in, and also for the honest behavior, and
ciuyll manners of the people. But after that heresye was cropen into it, and
that the people had received it, and a great number of them became
Anabaptists, then would they no longer obey their prince, but become a fre
city. Then false prophets arose among them, and all good men were thrust
out of the city, and spoiled of all that they had. After that made they a
king among them selfs, who most cruelly tormented all, yt would not obey his
denelish intentes and purposes, and hanged a great meany upon trees. But
consider the end of this rebellion. By and by after this, the city was beseged,
and with in a short space taken to. In the time of the beseginge whereof, they
that were with in the city were so famished, that many of them were glad to
eat y^ coueringes of great books, that were covered with leather, and some of
them eat their own children.

And yet notwithstanding all this misery, some desperate wretches would not let
to dance in the streates, and set forth spectacles and shows openly. As for
to pull down churches and chapels, they counted it a good pastime. And they
were sore agreued with images, that if they se any picture either in walls or
in glase windows. they would utterly deface it. But at length when the city
was taken, both the lewd king, that they had made, and all his adherentes,
were taken withal, and burned at a stacke, and so received the reward of their
wicked rebellion. If any man be desirous to know more of this story, let him
read an epistle of one Antony Coruine, which he wrote to George Spalatine.
What was the special cause (I pray you) of the great rebellion, that was made
by ye princes of Germanye against themperours majesty Charles the.v. that now
reygneth, but only the maynteynaunce of Luthers doctrine. For albeit they
pretended many other causes to cloak the matter, yet in very deed (as Lodouicus
ab Auila tells, by whom the storye is written) the princypall cause was
Luthers heresye, that they so much esteemed. But such as their cause was, such
luck ^ad they. For albeit that the^perours army was but small, and nothing to
be compared in force and power with the Lutherans army, yet themperor putting
his whole affiaunce in god, and trusting that he would assiste him in
maynteynaunce of his church and catholic faith, got by gods help a very
notable and merueylouse victory. For both was John Federike Duke of Saxonye
taken in the field, and Philippe the Landgraue of Hesse, yielded him self,
which be two of the chief Princes of all Germanye. And as for the rest of the
rebels, some were taken, and some were slain, and some put to flight. By
these examples all men may evidently perceive, that such as have made
rebellion for this noughty doctrine, have ever been miserably plaged at the
end. But to let pass thexamples of foreyne realms, and to come home to our
own, as soon as the favorers of Wicliffes wicked heresye heard, that Hus and
Hierome of Prage two of Wiclifs chief scholars were condemned at Constance, and
there burned for their heresy, they fell therefore into a ^uryouse rage. And
first conspired against the bishops and priests, Polydor. hist. li. 22
and then like vile traitors against their liege lord and soueraygne, king
Henry the.v. because he was a catholic Prince, and a virtuous. And straight
way made they open assembles, and determined to maynteine their cursed doctrine
by force of arms. Then got they them two mete Capitaynes for such a
purpose, John Oldcastell, and Roger Acton: and with a desperate company, which
were assembled with them, made they have to London, to the intent they might
take the city, and so there increase their army with men much like themselves,
and in conclusion by that means put down the king. But the king being
certified of the matter, thought it necessary to preuente them, and to be
ready to set upon them before they should enter into the city. Who when he
was well prepared for them, pytched his te^tes in a place mete for the purpose,
and tarried for their coming. But the wretches as soon as they heard of the
kings coming, straight way, as though they had lost the field, run
away as fast* as their fete would bear them. Of whom some were taken in the
flight, and by and by committed to the fire and burned. Anon after their two
captains were taken, and cast in prison. Beside this, the tragical end of
our last rebellion made by captain Wiat, and his accomplices for the same
religion, may be a sufficient warnyng for all men, as long as the world
continues, to beware both of such a detestable and deuelishe enterprise, and
also of the perverse doctrine, that drove them unto it. And let every man,
that is infected with the same doctrine, and looks for a day (as a great
meanye do) be well assured, that whenever he aduentureth the like act, he
shall have a like day, that is to say, a day of his utter confusion. For God
is al one, and fails not to defend all those, that put their sure trust in
him (as our most gracious sovereign Lady the Queen does) and punishes all
such, as fights against his church, and against princes, which be his
ministers. And whatsoever the matter be, that moves him to rebellion, let him
think surely, that the devil, that seeks to destroy him both body and
soul, has put it in his mind. And let him wax wise betime thoroughe other
men's harms. And if he will call to memory the words that certain of our
rebels said at their death, The kentishe rebels words at their ^eathe.
he shall have good cause to beware by their example. For diverse of them (as
it is reported) said to the people, that were present, when they were put to
execution after this sort. Good people, seeing that god for my most greuouse
offense committed against the Queen's highness has thus worthily plaged me and
punished me with this vile and shameful death, I beseech you al for your own
sauegarde, learn by mine example evermore to beware of rebellion. And
specially against your most virtuous and most gratiouse soueraygne Lady, yt
now reygneth over you, whom god (as it well appears) has elected and chosen
to govern you, and whom he cease not daily with his mighty hand to defend
against al her enemies. Wherefore all they, that goes about to resist her, or
to work any treason against her noble person, wittingly works their own
destruction. For there is no deceyptful driftes, or force of arms, that can
prevail against the faithful servants of god. Therefore may I most miserably
bewail my misfortune, that it was my chance to be one of that number, that
contrary to Gods will and pleasure, did rebel against such a gracious
prince. And well may I say with a sighinge heart, alas, that ever I was so
mad, as to follow the pestilent persuasion of such, as moved me thereto. But
now the act is paste, and it is not possible to call again yesterdaye. But
notwythstandyng that to late it is to amend the matter, yet it is not to late
to repent. And remedy find I none, but only to be sorry for it, and heartily to
beseech both almyghtye God to be merciful unto me, and the Queens hyghnes of
her goodness to pardon me. And I exhort all you, that be present to beware by
me, and that my plage may be a plaster for all them, whose hearts be wounded
with wicked rebellion. And I pray God, that all English men may take heed
by me* and learn to obey their Prince by mine example, and wax wise through
my folly. Such like words said diverse of the late rebels at their death.
But to be short, there was never rebellion yet, for what cause soever it was
made, that ever had prosperouse end.

And if a man would recite foreyne rebellions, that have been done in other
realms, he should be very long in the matter. But let us at this present
go no further, but to our own country, and we shall find this, that I have
said, to be undoubtedly true. For Jack Straw and Watt Tyler, Jack Straw.
Captains of the commotion, that was in Kente, in king Richard the secondes
days, Polydor. hist. li. 20
when they had taken South warke, spoiled it, broken up the prysons, let out
the prisoners, and after robbed the whole city of London, and killed meanye,
both strangers and citezins, and joined to them all ruffians, thieves, slaves,
and vile velaynes, that were within the city, at last the Lord Mayor, whose
name was William Walworth, and all the Aldermen of the city sore moved with
the matter, gathered a company together well armed, and the said lord Mayor,
while all men prepared them selfs to go against these rebels, having a
company with him, at the kings commandment went into Smithfielde, where
the rebels were. At whose coming the rebels being some what abashed,
^uffred him to enter in among the^ without any harm. Then the lord Mayor
took aparte Jack Straw, pretending that he would be glad to make peace with
him. But as soon as he had got him aside, in a great rage drew he his dagger,
and killed him out of hand. Which when the rebels ones perceived, they fled
away apace, and in the flight many were taken, and many were slain: and so
for their outrageous act received they worthy punishment.

The like end had the great captain of the Kentyshe rebels, called Jack
Cade. Iack^ Cade.
Which Jack in the reygne of king Henrye the.vj. took Southwarke, Polydor.
hist. lib. 3.
and when he was assaulted of one Matthew Goth at mydnyght, stoutly resisted
him, and drove him back to the bridge: and so hard pursued him, that he fled
into the city again. Then Jack with his men set fire upon the houses, that
were on the bridge: where was seen a lamentable spectakle to behold. For some
flying the danger of the fire, ran upon the drawn swords of their enemies.
Some piteouslye cryinge for help, were choked up with the smoke. Some that
could not escape out of the houses, were miserablye burned. Some to avoid ye
perillouse flame, lept down headling into ye midst of Temes, and there were
drowned. Somwere oppressed with the fall of the houses. O what a miserable
sight was it, to see young children sprauling in the midst of the fire, and
to hear the^ cry out so rufully? Or what a cruel wretch was he, yt had been
ye cause of such a cruel tragedy? Then the king seeing that these rebels
could not by force be vanquished* made a proclamation, that all that would
depart quietly home to their houses, should have their pardon, save only Jack
Cade, ye author of al ye misery. Whereupon ye rebels departed, and so was Jack
Cade taken, and shortly after put to death, as he had well deserved. Further
more what was ye end of the great rebellion, yt was in the North, in the time
of king Henry ye eight. Were not a great nu^bre of ye rebels in conclusion
hanged up? Had not also ye rebels in Northfolke and Deuonshiere, in the reygne
of king Edward the.vj. such like success? were not an infinite nu^bre of them
slain, and many after the battle was ended put to a vile and shameful
death? Therefore let no man, of what degree soever he be, that aduentureth to
work such wickedness, think that he shall escape such like punishment, as
these foresaid rebels have suffered: for God, which is the author of peace and
concord, by whom all princes have their rule and government, will not suffer
to escape unpunished such, as against his express will and commandment do
make rebellyon. Over this saying that a Prince, 2. Reg. 5
as god said to David, is appointed to feed and nourishe the people, what an
unkind subject is that, which trauayleth to destroy the prince, who by all
means seeks to feed and nourishe him? And if a man be never so high in honor
being no prince, yet let him take him self but as a subject, and let him
behave him self, as an obediente subject to, and always be well ware, that
ambition crepynge into his breast, move him not to covet the crown, lest
therefore he be crowned at length with an hatched. And let him contynually
remember this wittye and wise sentence of Sayncte Gregorye Nazianzene. In
oratione de ^rdine.
Why goeste thou about to make thy self a shepeherde, being but a sheep? Or
why laborest thou to be a head, seeing thou art but a foot? Or why will thou
become a captayn, where as thou art but a souldyar? That is a very vnge^tle
sheep, that will go about to destroy ye shepeherd, who does so carefully
provide for it, and saves it from the danger of the wolf. And so is that a
wretched foot, that will labor to cut of the head, to the intent it may become
a monstruouse head it self, seeing yt the true head does study so diligently
to keep it from all harm and inco^moditie. Yea and an unkind souldyar is he,
that will travail to put down his captain, by whose polycye, wisdom, and
force he has at all times escaped the hands of his enemies. And as the
shepeherde is the defense of the sheep, the head of the foot, the captain of
the souldyar, so in very deed the Prince is the tuition and safeguard of all his
subjects. And our prince and gouernesse the Queen, requires nothing of us
again but gentle and obedient hearts, which if we show unfeignedly toward her
grace, we shall save our souls, our bodies, our goods, and our country
thereby. For as disobedence damneth our souls, kills our bodies, spoyleth us
of our goods, and destroys our country: So obedience is the health and
safegarde thereof. What mischief, disobedience, The harm^s that come of
rebellion^
and rebellion works in every country, where it comes, we may easelye
learn by ye examples before recited. For when rebellion reigns, then peace
which is cause of plenty is broken. Then all concord and unity, which
byndeth the fellowship of men together, is clean taken away. Then all charity
which is mother of all godly virtue, is banished out of men's hearts. Then all
laws, wherewith the commen welthe is governed, is utterly disanulled. For then
(as Seneca says) law stands only in force of arms. Then all officers that
cause good order to be kept, and do minister justice, are displaced. Then grave
wisdom and policye, whereby wholesome counseyle is given, are thrust out of
the doors, and rash folly and headynesse take their p^aces. Then all good
order, which is the beautye of every commen welthe is trodden under foot, and
misrule and confusion have the upper hand. Then follows spoylinge of men's
goods. burning of their houses, cruel murder and bloodshed, rauishinge of
men's wives, deflowring of their daughters, rape, incest, and all beastlye vice.
The^ fall they to set at naught al religion, to contemn God, and to blaspheme
his holy name, and in conclusion destroy they them selfs and their country
to. For when men are by spoil sore impouerished, and their strength and
courage by civil dissension greatly abated, then shall they be a preye for
their enemies. And then shall it so come to pass, as Horace says by Rome, Od.
16. ^pod.
that that noble city, which no foreyne enemies could overcome, is now by
civil war and sedition come to utter ruin. For like as in a man's body, if
the fo^e should fight with the hand, the head with the neck, the back with
the belie, and every part with other, the body should utterly perish, so a
contrye, where the inhabitau^tes make war one against another, and one seeks
to destroy another, must needs come to utter confusion. For the holy
scripture can not be false, An^. 11.
which says, That every kyngedome divided within it self, shall be destroyed.

And Gregorye Nazianzene asks* what is ye worst thing and most noisome in
the world: and by and by he answered: discord. And then asks he again:
What is the best? and straight he answers, peace And Democritus a wise
Philosopher says, that civil dissension is daungerouse and noisome for both
parties. For it is the destruction as well of those that get the victory, as of
those that lose it. For then comes foreyne enemies, and invade the country,
and easelye vanquyshe it. For like as when two dogs fight for a bone (as the
proverb is) oftentimes the third comes, and catches it from them both: So
when two parts of a realm strive for the government, their enemies enter, and
take it from them.

For how wanne Willyam duke of Normandy this contrye of ours, Polydor. lib. 8.
but only through the sore dissension of two brethren, (whose names were
Haralde, and Tosto) that contended for the crown. For the civil war and
sore bloudeshed that they made, by reason thereof, so abated the force and
strength of this realm, that the said Wyllyam arryuing at the same time upon
the coasts of England, easily entered into it, and after one battayl foughte^
with Harald, took it. Or how wanne the Turk all greece, and took the goodly
city of Constantinople, but only by means that the princes and rulers of that
contry could not agree within themselfes. And I pray god that the deadly
dissension and cruel war, that is now in Christendom among the princes
thereof do not make away at the length for the Turk to subdue all the rest
of Christendom. For nothing is there that makes so much, for his purpose, as
our civil war and discord. Therefore let us pray god earnestly, that it will
please him to pacifye the hearts of all christen princes. And all we, that be
true English men, let us lay away our maliciouse hearts, and betime reconcile
us one to another, and seek not the means to destroy our country by
discord. For as mariners, that be in one ship together, if they fall at
variance when they be upon the sea, and every one fight with another, and care
not what become of the ship, it is likely that when the tempeste comes,
they shall al perish, and their ship to: Even so when the inhabitauntes of
one contrye are at debate within the^ selfs, and pass not at all for the
danger* that is like to fall to their country, then when they are by foreyne
enemies assaulted, they are by and by or ever they be aware overthrown and
vanquished. And then God sends unto them the four plages, that he said, he
would send upon the children of Israel for their wyckednes, Hier. 15.
that is to say, the sword to kill them, dogs to tear their bodies, birds
of the air to eat them, and wild beasts of the earth to d^uoure them. And
after shall the whole country be spoiled of all her welthe and riches, and
become a slave to her enemies, and repent her of her wyckednes, when it shall be
to late, and cry with Hieremye, Hier. 15.
Why good Lord is my sorrow endless, and how chaunseth it, that my plage is
incurable? Therefore let al true hearted English men for the love that we owe to
GOD, for the good will, that we are bound to bear to our prince, and for the
fervent zeal, that we have to the safegarde of our country, refrain from
discord, repress our rebelliouse hearts, and begin one to love another,
one to do for another, and neither by discord make a way for our enemies, nor
by malice wyshe them to come against us, but hartelye love our most gracious
soueraygne Lady the Queen, and most willingly obey her, love our native
country, and gladly spend our goods and lives in the defense thereof: and
let this deuelishe dissension reygne no longer among us, and consider that
no commen wealth can stand, where it takes place. For a house or family where
discord is, does never prosper, but by little and little it comes to misery.
Wherefore seeing that almyghtye God of his mere goodness has sent us such a
virtuous Lady to reygne over us, and by her delivered us from bondage and
tyranny, and by her brought us from blindness and heresye, and by her
reconciled us to his spouse the Catholic Church again, and so by her saved
both our bodies and our souls, it is al our parts to seek always possible to
set us at peace and concord, which shall at length make our country to
florishe a fresh, and to banyshe all malice and hatred, all division and
discord, which has been the cause of our miserye. And first those that be
of the clergy, The clergies duty.
as Bishops, priests, and other ministers, let them partly by diligente
preachinge them selfs, partly by sending learned men to preach, and partly
by godly visitations, call home the people to true faith again, and teach
them the fear of god, which is far to seek in many men's hearts. For if they
ones fear GOD, then will they easelye conform them selfs to the godly order
of Christ's church, and both serve God reverently, and also humbly obey
their prince. For all these that so rage against the blessed spouse of Christ,
and so blasphemouslye mock the ministers thereof, and so outragiouslye rail
against the blessed mysteries and sacraments therein, and cast books and
libels abroad, and disperse false rumors every where (as I said before) both
to maynteyne their heresye, and also to sow sedition thereby, they neither love
GOD, nor fear him, nor take any care for either soul or body, nor willinglye
will they obey their prince. For such verily are the children of Core. Number. 16
Dathan, and Abyron, who so sore grudged at Moses and Aaron for that they only
should minister in the tabernacle of God. But let the^, if ever they mind to be
saved, repent the^ betime of their greuouse grudge, and maliciouse hatred, that
they bear to Christ's Catholic church, lest either the earth open and swalow
them up, as it did with Core, Dathan, and Abyron, or else at length, when they
shall depart this life, hell open (which God forbid) and most miserablye devour
the^. And let all other that well know them, follow the xample of the
people, who seeing when Core, Dathan, and Abyron were swalowed up, fled
away. and said: Let us get us hence, lest perhaps the earth devour us
likewise. Beside let the clergy not only in their preaching, but also in
their living so behave them selfs, as becomes the true mynysters of God, to
thintente they may give such example of al godly virtue to Christ's flock,
that the same flock being provoked by their good works, may become such like,
as they be. Osee. 4.
For as the Prophet Osee says, Such as the people be, such are the
priests, and contrary wise such as the priests be, such are the people. For
if the priests be naught, the people be also naught: but if the priests be
honest, virtuous, and godly, the people folowinge their example, will become
like unto them. Let the noble and gentlemen also, Noble and gentlemen's d^^tie.
and all magistrates of this realm do their duties to God and to their
prince, and se all those, that they have cure over, to be kept in good order,
and to correct and punish, as apperteyneth to their office, all them, that be
stubborn and disobediente, and specially such as be rebels to God, and to
his Catholic church: and then this realm shall not need to fear any civil
war or rebellion: and they in so doing shall highly please GOD, do their
prince very faithful service, and both get them selfs great honor, and also
preserve the honorable state, that they have gotten. But if they be slack
herein, and wynke at wicked folks acts, and namelye at those, that be
detestable in Gods sight, and iniuriouse to Christ's holy church, and the
catholic faith, then shall they undoubtedly at length loose al their honor,
loose their estimation, put their prince in danger, and their country to.
For when men that be in authority, be slack in maynteynyng and furtheryng
the Catholic faith, then by little and little grows heresy, and spreads
abroad, that at length, except men be well ware, it preuayleth, and
destroys the country, where it reygneth. It is well compared by S. Paul to a
cancre. For as a cancre, 2. Tim, 2
if it be suffered increases daily, and so crepeth forward, that in
conclusion it corrupts the whole body: so heresye, whenever it is entered
into any commen wealth, it so goes forward, if it be not repressed, that in
the end it destroys the whole, as the xamples before rehearsed, do well
declare. And truth is it, that no common welthe can stand, if religion be
neglected. In consideration whereof all they, that in old time wrote of commen
welthes, as Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, and many other beside, thought it most
necessary for the governors of every commen wealth, chiefly to travail in
establyshyng religion. Which done it should be easy to keep the people in good
order. For the very paynems and infidels, to whom they wrote, having a great
fear and a reverence to the false Gods, that they worshipped, were gentle,
meke, humble, and very obedient to their rulers: So all Christen men without
doubt, if they be keped in the fear of God. and in the true religion of his
catholic church, they will most willinglye obey their prince, observe the
laws of their country, and quietlye behave them selfs every one in their
vocation.

Over this let all parents have a diligent eye to the bringynge up of their
children in the fear of God, Pare^tes.
in his holy service, and in all godly virtue, and teach them to obey God,
to obey his Church, and their lawful prince. But if they them selfs percase
favor not Christ's church, nor the order thereof, and their children
folowinge their fotesteppes, do the same, and so continue in their folly, and
rejoice in the same, let the children look for as wretched an end, 1. Reg. ^
and.4.
as ever had Helyes children, and the parents to be punyshed for bearing with
their childrens offenses, according as Hely him self was. Therefore let al
parents take heed, and chastise their children in dew season. For if the
children through the parents defaulte fall into heresye, or any kind of
vice, the parents shall make answer for them, and shall at length suffer
greuouse punishmente for not correctynge them. Ephe. 6.
For S. Paul commands them to bring them up with due correction and
discipline. Which if they do, they shall have loving and obediente children
both to God, and their prince, and to them selfs to.

Masters
Let also all masters take heed to their servants and prentises, that they
learn to fear God, learn to fast and pray, and to lead a godly life, and
not to follow their sensual appetite and carnal lusts, as a great sort do,
and think that they be favorers of gods word, because they can take their
liberty: and count the^ selfs witty, if they can make a merye mock at the
Mass, and at the ceremonies thereof, and geste at priests, Gods ministers,
and prate and babble against the holy sacraments of the church, and the divine
service done therein. But for such mockers (as witnesses Solomon) Gods
judgments are prepared, Pro. 1^
and beatynge hammers for such fools bodies. But if al masters would do
their duties in correctynge their servants, they would not thus behave them
selfs, and provoke Gods wrath against them. But it is to be feared, that
such as the servants be, such be their masters. For if their masters were
good and godly, they would never suffer their seruau^ts to be so noughty. For as
a man y^ as he rides by the high way, lets the bridell go, and suffers
his horse to break down hedges, and to destroy men's corn, it is not like,
that he is unwilling, that such harm should there be done: even so a master
that lets his servant have his own swinge, and suffers him to mock and
geste at gods mysteries, no man will think, but that such one is well wyllyng,
that he should so do, yea and glories to in that he has such a iolye man.
But let him take heed, how he suffers his servant so to run at large. For
it is not unlike, that such servants besides other greuouse enormities, will
at length fall to spoil their masters, and so shall the masters be iustlye
punyshed here in this life for the licentiouse liberty, that they give to
them: yea and moreover both the master and the man shall one day, except GOD
send them grace to amend, most earnestlye repent them, and bewail the time
that ever they were borne: and specially ye master, because that having charge
of his servant, and seeing him so far out of order, would never correct nor
chastise him. Let all masters therefore betime take heed to their servants,
al parents to their children, all superior powers to them, whom they have in
their gouernemente, and cause them leave their contentiouse reasonyng of
religion, and fall to steadfast beleuynge, and throughlye persuade them, that
in matters of our belefe, our senses and reason must always give place to
faith. For so shall God be reuerentlye served, so shall our most gratiouse and
virtuous Soueraygne be duelye obeyed, so shall al rebellion be easelye avoided,
so shall peace and concord reygne among us, and so shall our country, that
of late has been most miserablye spoiled, wax rich and welthye again,
and recover the honorable and noble estate, that it has been in, in time
paste. Therefore most hartelye beloved country men, seeing that GOD of his
bountefull goodness has of late been so merciful to us, and delivered us
from most cruel tyranny by his dearlye beloved handmayde, our most noble
queen, and has sent us such a maystresse and gouernesse, as this Realm
has not had the like, and that she so tenderlye loves every one of us,
cares so much for us, studyeth most earnestlye, how to auaunce us, seeks
nothing else, but the welthe, safeguard, and honor of our country, takes so
great pains for our commodity, watches for us, prays for us, and most
mercifullye deals with us, let us altogether with one consent, most humblye
obey her, most tenderly love her, and with our goods and our lives most
willingly defend her. And because she is the very faithful servant of God,
as both almightye God by miracle has plainly showed, and also she in her most
godly conversation does daily declare, let us in all things follow her
example, and become like unto her, and believe as she does, fear GOD as she
does, serve God as she does, and labor to keep his commandments as she
laboreth, be merciful as she is, be lowly and humble as she is, be charitable
as she is, cast away malice as she does, be ready to help the poor as she is
ready, be gentle to speak to, as she is gentle, keep our conscience clean as
she keeps hers, take heed of briberye, as she does, abhor covetousness as
she does, hate oppression as she hates it, hate debate as she does, love one
another, as she loves us all, care one for another as she cares for us all,
love al godly virtue as she loves it, fly from all vice as she does, and to
be short, fashyon our life to her life in all points, that the saying of
Plato may be verified in us that such as the prince is, such are the people,
and so undoubtedly shall we please our lord GOD, and seem to be thankful to
him for his benefytes bestowed upon us of late, please our gratiouse Queen,
that is delyted with al goodness, please all good Christen folks, that long
to hear of our virtuous behavior, reconcile our selfs wholye to Christ's
Catholic church, from which we have so long been divided, save our selye
souls, which otherwise were like to have perished, save our bodies, which
should have been oppressed with miserable servitude, save our goods, whereof
we should have been utterly spoiled, save our country, which was likelye to
have been brought into perpetual thraldom, recover the honor thereof, which
was altogether defaced, and both in this life live well and welthelye, and
after our death receive at Gods hand the crown of glory, that never shall
decay, in his celestial and everlasting tabernacle.

FINIS.
A prayer for the Queens highness, very conueniente to be said daily of all
her faithful and loving subjects.
O Most gracious and most merciful lord, whose power is almyghtye. whose
works are merueylous, and whose goodness is infinite, grant I beseech the to
thy most humble hand maid Queen Marye, our most gratiouse sovereign lady
and maystresse, such perfect and excellent wisdom, as thou vouchesafed to
give unto Solomon, to the intent she may so govern this noble realm, that
both thy glory may be auaunced thereby, and all the people thereof may learn
to fear and love the, to obey her grace, to study for peace, to love one
another, and to delight in virtue and godly conversation. Grant her also, I
beseech the such strength, as thou did to Iosue, who through thine aid and
help overcame all his enemies, Iosue. 1.
and safely conducted the children of Israel into the land of Beheste, and
say unto her, as thou saydest to him, Take a good heart and be strong, fear
not I say, fear not, because that I, which am thy lord and god, will be with
the in all thine affairs, to thend she may (as Iosue did) vanquishe all her
enemies, psalm. 128.
and say with David, They have even from my tender age oftentimes assaulted me,
but yet could they never prevail against me.Give her beside (Good Lord) such
trust and confidence in the, that she may truly rehearse these verses of the
prophet, Psalm. 26.
God is the defender of my life, therefore whom shall I fear? GOD is my helper,
Psalm. 17.
and in him will I put my trust. And send her more over such grave and
faithful counseylours, as will both without flatterye tell her the truth, and
also give her such wise counseyl, as shall be most expedient, not only for her
graces safeguard, which they are bound specially to care for, but also for the
safegarde of al her loving subjects, whose welthe they ought also to
consider, yea and for the good government of the whole realm beside, for
which purpose they are called to that dignity. And withal send her highness
such a good will to hear the^, that as they be ready to give her good
counseyle, so she may be ready always to follow it. Save her (most gracious
lord) from al pryuye conspiracies, and send her the grace before any peril
fall to spy out all treason and traiterous diuises contrined against her, that
both the authors thereof may be duly punyshed therefore, and her graces person
preserved always from danger. Good lord give her grace to beware of all
flatterers and dissemblers, whose tounges utters pleasant words, when
their hearts are full of greuouse grudge and malice, and by thy goodness so
bring to pass, as either her hyghnes at lest may give no credit to the^, or
else they may utterly forsake their dissembling and flatterye, and place truth
instead thereof. Most merciful lord, Gene. 21
who sent Sara a son, when she was very old, 1. Re. 1.
who caused Anna ye wife of Eleana by means of her earneste prayer to bring
forth a child, Luc. 1.
and who gave unto bareyne Elisabeth well grown in years fruit of her womb,
vouchesafe of thy bountefull goodness to send our gracious Queen fruit of
her body, to the intent y^ thy holy name may be glorified thereby, and her grace
take comfort therein, and all our country by means thereof long contynewe in
peace and quietness. O lord vouchesafe beside so to adorn her family and
household with all godly virtue, that all those that be placed therein, may for
their true faith and fervent devotion to God ward, for their faithful hearts,
and due obedience to her grace, and for their earnest love and hartye affection
one to another, be an example for all the whole realm to follow. Over this
grant (I most hartelye beseech the) that al her subjects may remember the
wonderful miracles, that thou haste now of late wrought for her, and the
great benefits, that they have received by her, to the intent that they may not
only glorifye thy name, and daily give the most hartye thanks for thy
goodness, but also al murmuryng and grudge laid aparte, humbly obey her grace,
lovingly embrace her godly laws, and think verily, that thou haste sent her
to deliver this realm, both from heresye and blyndnesse, and also from most
miserable thraldom and tyranny, and persuade them selfs, that whatsoever she
goes about, the same shall be to their wealth and commodity, because thou
lord, is always present with her. Uouchesafe also good lord for thy tender
mercy sake, that as thou have begone with her, and preserved her hitherto from
the hands of the cruel enemies, so thou will continue thy great goodness
toward her, and send her such grace, that she may not only contynewe in the
virtuous trade of living, which she has even from her childhode most
diligently observed, but also daily more and more increase in all godly virtue,
both for her own souls health, and for our example beside. And grant her
most merciful father a long raygne for the wealth and commodity of our
contrye, a prosperouse raygne for her own hearts ease and comfort, and a
quiet raygne for to avoid al murder and bloodshed, that both thy glory and
true relireligion may be thereby auaunced, and her grace also, and al we her
loving subjects may live together in peace and unity, and with one voice
praise and magnify thy most blessed and gloriouse name thorough our lord Jesus
Christ, to whom with the father and the holy ghooste be all honor and glory
world without end. Amen.

A Prayer both for to give God thanks for his benefits bestowed of late upon
this realm, and also to desire him to preserve the same in a quiet and
prosperouse estate.
ALmyghtye and everlasting God, the maker of heaven and earth, and Lord of
all creatures, by whose mighty hand the humble and lowlye are auaunced, and
the proud and stubborn are thruste under foot, we thy servants give the
most hearty thanks for thy great and bountefull goodness, which thou have of
late without our deseruynge bestowed upon us, both in delyueryng us from the
cruel tyranny and bondage, wherewith we were of late oppressed, and also in
restorynge us again to our dear mother the Church of Christ, and the
catholyke faith thereof. For which thy singular benefytes, and gracious
liberality, because we are in no wise able to render unto the worthy thanks,
therefore we make our humble suite and request unto the (O Lord) that it may
please the for thy holy names sake, to accept our good wills in this behalf.
And to give us grace all the days of our life to remember this merueylouse
work of thine, that partly by the devout and feruente prayer of thy humble
handmayden, our most gratiouse Queen, and other of thy people, and partly by
the sure confydence and trust, that her grace evermore did put in the, thou
have without the force and strength of men, put down not only her enemies,
but also al those, that did both fight against thy blessed spouse the church,
and trauayled by all means to disanull all the godly ordinances thereof. Which
wonderful and miraculouse act, as thou have most graciously begone, so we
beseech the for thy tender mercyes sake to go forward with it, so to
establishe it, as thy glory may be auaunced thereby, and all the crafty diuises
and malicyouse assaults of the devil and his ministers clean over thrown
and subdued. And now most merciful lord, thou, that art our head bishop
and priest, grant that all our Bishops, priests, and the rest of the
clergy may so diligently occupye the^ selfs in preachinge to the^ that be
ignoraunte, in good counseyle gyuyng to such as lack it, in exhorting those
that be blinded, to return to the truth, in correctynge the badde, that they
may amend, in commending the good, that they may continue, that the ruins and
decays of thy holy church may be repaired and builded up again. And over this
that they may so vertuouslye order their life, and so devoutly behave them
selfs in all their doings, that ye light of their good works may shine clear
in the flock of Christ, to the intent, that all that shall look thereupon, may
praise and magnify thee, o lord, that vouchesafest to send us such pastores
and guydes. And so assiste them (most merciful lord) with thy heavenly grace,
that al worldly respects laid aparte, they may freely open the truth,
maintain the same, and what storms of adversity soever fall upon them, that
they neither for loss of riches, or promotion, neither for fear of paynfull
torments, or death it self swerve in any point from the sound and sincere
faith of the catholic church. And make them (good lord) as ready and
willinge in all that they may, to set forward the same faith, as false
prophets and blind preachers have been of late to set forward perverse
doctrine and heresye. Give also unto the nobility of this realm such a zeal
to the maynteynau^ce of thy holy church, and such hearty good wills to the
good government of this our cou^trye, and such charytable hearts to the poor
commons. that both the godly orders, used in thy divine service, may be duly
and reverently observed and kept, and also the whole realm by their wisdom,
may be wisely ruled, and the poor, that have been of late days sore
oppressed, may through thy lyberall goodness be mercyfully relieved. And
grant them (O lord) always to care as much for the commodity of them, that
be their tenauntes, as for their own, and so to love them, as the parents do
love their children, and in no wise to pyl and impouerishe them. And thou (O
lord) which art the gyuer of al good things, grant them such an earnest
desire of virtue, and yt they may so in their living practyse it, as both they
them selfs for their own souls health may please the therewith and also all
those, that be under their rule, may be by their godly example provoked to
follow the same. O most gratiouse lord, which art the aucthour of peace and
concord, power down upon all the people of this realm the pleasant dew of
thy grace, and so mollyfye their hearts, that they may wax gentle, sobre,
meke, patiente, and charitable, to thintente that the deadly dissension that is
among us, ye great grudge and malice, that we bear one to another, may be
utterly taken away, and give us (good lord) one heart and one way, as the
Prophet says, Hier, 32.
that amitye, love, peace, concord and unity may reygne instead thereof. And
send all such as be proud and stubborn humble and lowlye minds, that they
may acknowledge both them selfs vile and wretched sinners, and the only to be
their lord and god. Grant also (good lord) that those, that have greadye
couetouse hearts, may earnestly think upon their end, and consider not only,
that nothing shall they carye with them out of this wretched world, but also
that they shall render a most straight account to god, both how they have
gotten their goods, and also how they have bestowed them. Therefore we beseech
the to send them grace betyme to repent them of their abominable covetousness,
and to make amends to all them, whom for the satisfyinge of their insatiable
desires they have so miserably oppressed. Most mighty lord, which art the
shilde and defense of all such as put their trust in thee, so aid us against
all forreyne enemies, as both they may, when soever they shall assault us, be
by thy helping hand overthrown and vanquyshed, and we thy servants
contynewe in peace. Most merciful lord, which art the well of truth, and very
truth it self, which art the author of light, and very light it self, give
unto all such, as by the deuilles ministers persuasion have forsaken the
truth, and fallen to heresye, and through blind ignorance and proud
presumpsion have gone from the pure light of thy holy church, and cropen
into the dark corners of cursed error, that they may through thy gratiouse
goodness both be so touched in their hearts, that they will freely confess
thy faith catholic, and also so illumined with the clear light of true
knowledge, that they from henceforthe most humblye will submit them selfs
to the godly order of their blessed mother ye church catholic, whereunto when
they be thoroughly reconciled, we beseech the, that they may continue still in
it, and evermore with glad hearts embrace all the holsom rules and precepts
thereof, to the end yt at length they may be pertakers of thy glory with all the
blessed saints in heaven. And moreover with a most fervent desire we do
beseech the, that it may please thy goodness, not only to purge this realm of
al heresy and false doctrine, which have been ye cause of all our misery, but
also so to preserve us evermore from the same, that neither the devil with all
his wily crafts, nor his ministers, with all their wicked endeavor, shall
ever be able to ^rynge it into our country again. And thou lord that has
with thy blessinge always endowed this realm, so bless us all at this
present, yt we may now and evermore be diligent in praising thy most holy
name, in gyuing thanks to the forthy goodness, in earnest penance doing for
our sins, in askinge ^orgiuenesse at thy hand, in calling for grace by
fervent prayer, in relieuing of ye poor, in abstinence and fasting, in patient
suffering, in reco^ciling our selfs one to another, in doing good one for an
other, in speaking well one by another, in agreynge in one faith and belefe,
that so we all being joined together with the bond of perfection, which is
charity, and dwelling within one church here in earth, may at our death come
and dwell with the (good lord) in thy heavenly palayce, and there with thy
blessed angels and saynctes praise and magnify thy holy name world without
end. Amen.

Imprynted at London in Paul's churcheyarde, at the sign of the holy Ghost, by
John Cawood, Prynter to the Queens highness.

Anno Domini. 1.5.5.4. 24. Iulij.

Cum priuilegio Reginae Mariae.

Fautes escaped in printing.
Lefe Side F^autes Corrected D. 6. 1. thaldome thraldom E^d. 7 1. vy up G. 4.
2. offices officers H. 4. 1. commanded co^maunde^^ I. 1. 1. whole hoate I. 5.
1. minded minds I. 8. 1. us to be busy us, be busy Eod. 2. liberties
liberty K. 7. 2. chaunseth changes M. 5. 1. committed counted Eod. 5. 2.
England, but England. ^u^ N. 7. 1. Arch. duke Archduke Eod. 2. comfortes
comfort. O. 2. 1. destruction, for destruction. for Eod. 4 1, a pure pure a P.
6. 1. reward. rewards E. 8. 1. spectable spectacle Eod. Chriss. Christ Eod. 2.
mystery mysteries U. 4. 2. eyes has eyes have U. 5. 1. we ^e. That we be,
that Y. 8. 2. cokkel darnel cokkel ^a. ^ 2. reasonable. Now. etc. reas^nable,
now Eod. 3. 1. where able were ab^e Bb. 8. 2. were ^ore were so sore


