The prologe of the paradoxe.
FOr asmoch as the noble scholars of ye philosophers / Socrates and Zeno named
stoici / left this notable sentens. Men be generate in to this world because
of men / to the end that one man may profit an other man. The very excellent
philosopher moral / prince of orators fountain of eloquens / and father of
laten tongue / Marcus Tullius Cicero / moved with this saying and following in
all his works the opinions of the said philosophers called Stoici / ever
pretending and procuring the common welthe of his natyue countreye / compyled
this fruitful work / called in the greek tongue Paradoxa / in latten soundynge
/ preter opinionem / and in our english tongue / contrary to the vulgar
opinion. For because Tully did excerpte and took out of the above said
philosophers / certain quick sentens / which seemed to the multitude and the
common people maruaylous sayings / strange and contrary to their opinion. In
which work the said Tulli reproves vices and auaunsethe virtues / and by
disputation and probable arguments declares the abusion of the living of
certain person^ (...) which led by blind (...) out of the right way /
exreme thingis that be most vicious and of villainous reproach / to be virtues
of hye reputation. Fro the which error he by subtyle reasons and pytthye
persuasions / studiethe in this work to reduce the minds of men to virtue /
and so to conduce them to thend of perfet felicite / which by ye opinion of the
schole of Zeno and Chrisippus philosophers, remains only in virtue. And in
this work Tulli sharply inuehyth again certain persons / for their
detestable vices that he noted in them / being in his time / as again Lucius
Catalina / Marcus Anthonius / Marcus Crassus / and Publius Clodius. Also he
extolleth virtue by example of valyant men / as Quintus Mutius Senola / Caius
Fabricius / Caius Scipio / and Publius Scipio / Marcus Regulus / Caius Marius /
Lucius Minutius / Marcus Curious / with other nobles of immortal fame and
memory. And to conclude for asmoche as I have of late translate out of the
latten tongue in to english my natyue tongue / for singler zele that I have to
the common welthe of this my country the.iii. books of Tullies office / which
I entende shortelye to put forth in printe. I have also translate this
paradoxe / a work dependynge and to be annexed to the said books of the
office / for asmoche as the disputation in this work is had about (in a
manner) like precepts and moral sapience. wherefore gentill reders I exhort
you with favor to accept this my little lucubrations and studyes / though
breue in quantite / yet frutful and sente^tious with pytthy wisdom. And if I
may perceive your favorable minds toward this little work / in short space
you shall have in prynte / not only this translation in our english tongue /
but also the text of Tully in latten joined to the same / with the three books
of his office / in like manner (God willing) to whom all laud and praise be
given. dixi.



The paradoxe or maruaylous questions of Marcus Tullius / to his familiar
Marcus Brutus.
I Have many times notedde and marked / my famylyare Brutus, Marcus Cato, thy
uncle / when he showed his mind in the Senate / entrate of matters of grauite
taken out of philosophy / far distant fro this exercise of oratory in the
judicial place and touching the common welthe. But not with standing he did
obtain by his perswadyng / that his words seemed to the people to be allowed /
which in him is greatlyer to be extemed / than in the or in me. For we use
more that perte of phylosophye / that brings copy of eloquence / wherein the
things be said that be not far different fro the opinion of people. Cato in
mine opinion is a perfyte Stoike / and holds the opinions / which be not
allowed among the commen people. He is in ye sect which follows no
florysshynge of speech / nor dylateth his matter. But he brought to pass by
breue and little questions (and as a man would say) by sharp points the thing
that he purposed. But there is nothing so incredible / but by persuadyng / it
may be made probable and to be allowed: Nothing so ragged and so rude / but it
may be made clean and ornate. which after I considered to be so / I more
boldly went to work / than he of whom I speak. For Cato is wont to speak
after the schole of Zeno / only of magnanimite / of continence / of death / of
all manner laud of vtue / of gods immortal / of the love that men should
have to their natyue countreye / using no colors or orname^tes of an orator.
But I in sport have cast in to the common places / tho things / which the
schools of Socrates do scantlye allow in schools / or in time of quietness.
which because they be maruaylous / and contrary to the opinion of all men /
be also called the Paradoxe. I would attempt whether they might be brought to
light / that is to say / in to the judicial place / and so to be said that
they should be allowed / or whether there were one sondre speech of learned men
and an other vulgar after the common people. And therefore I wrote the places
more gladly, because these that be called my Paradoxe semethe specially to be
after ye manner of Socrates / and very true. Therefore thou shall receive this
little work studied and compyled these nights now being short: Because the
other work of greatter watch and study went forth in thy name. Thou shalt
taste a manner of my exercise / which I have been wont to use / where as I
transpose to this my manner of oratory / persuadynge tho things that be called
in schools Ethica / which be private opinions of philosophers. For I require
not that thou shall bring this manner of speaking abroad. For it is not such
that it may be set in the tower Capitoline / as that image of Minerua that
Phidias the image maker made / but only that it may seem to go forth of the
same shop (fro whens that more work came) so that it may show to come forth
in the same form and fasshyon.

That, which is honest, is only good.
NOt withstanding I fear me lest this sentens may seem to some of you / to
be taken out of the disputations of the schole of the Stoikes / and not of mine
opinion. Albe it I shall show my mind therein / and that breuelyer than a
thing of so great pondre may be said: So god help me I never esteemed /
another ye money of these men / nor the gorgyous buyldinges / nor their riches /
nor their empire / nor their pleasures whereunto they be most bente / to be
no^bred among good things only to desire such things / wherein they most
abound and flow. For the thyrst of couetyse is neither filled nor satisfied.
Nor only they be turme^ted with the desire of encreasyng of such goods as
they have / but also with fear of loss thereof. wherein I often require the
prudens of our elders most co^tinent men / which thought that these weyke and
mutable members of money / to be named goods / only in word / where as they
should have judged them otherwise in deed and effect. May that thing that is
good in deed / be good to a man that is yuell? Or may any man flow in
abundance of goods / him self not being good? And we se all such things /
how that yuell men have them / and how they hurt good me^. wherefore though
any man have derysyon at mine opinion (if any be such) notwithstanding / the
treuthe reasoned / shall be of more credens with me / than the opi^nion of
rascal people. Nor I will not say yt a man has lost his goods / if he have
lost his cattle / or his householde stuff. Also I will often praise that sage
man Bias / which (as I suppose) is nombred among the seven sages in Athens /
whose country called Prienna / when a certain enemy did subdue / and other
of his neighbors did cruses of earth / were less accept to the gods
immortal / than the delicate silver pecis and goblets of other men? I let pass
the resydue of other kings / for they all be equal and like / save only
Tarquinius superbus. If so be any man ask me of Brutus what he did in setting
his country at lybertye? If also any man will ask me of other of his company
of that counsel? what they desired? what they got or won thereby? whether
or no? was there any of them? to whom pleasure? to whom riches? to whom (to
conclude) any thing was purposed as aua^tage? but the office and duetye of a
valyant and a bold stomaked man? what thing moved Quintus Mutius to have
sleyne Porsenna king of Hetruria? without any hope or trust of his own health
or profit thereby? what manheed held and kept Horatius Cocles alone standing
upon the bridge called Sublicius against so great a multitude of his enemies?
what invincible / stomach styrred Decius ye father to vow his son to death /
sendyng him among the thyckest part of his enemies in battle? what
pretends the abstinence of Caius Fabricius? (which refused a great sum of
gold offered by Pyrrhus) what mened the poor fare of Marcus Curious (That eat
roasted rapes) and refused ye great su^me of gold offered by ye Samnites (what
sygnyfyed the two strong bulwarks or forteresse / of the battle of Cartage /
Caius Scipio and Publius Scipio) which purposed to stop the invasion of ye
Carthaginenses with their two mighty bodies? what did the younger Aphricane?
(that destroyed Cartage) what did the elder? (that made Carthage tributary, and
subdued Hannibal) what did Cato the elder called Censorius, that was living
between the ages of both Affricanes? what did other innumerable? For we
abound in examples of our Romans? whether or no? think we that they
intended in their life to desire any thing for their private welthe? but that
which seemed laudable and virtuous? Therefore let them come forth all yt have
derision at this my saying and opinion / and let them be judges to themself /
whether they had lever be like to any of them / which did abound in the
gorgious buyldinges of marble / burnysshed with euorye and gold, which have
abundaunce of images / tables, which have abundans of graued gold and silver,
which have great foyson of iuels of Corynthus? Or else to be like Quintus
Fabricius / which had nothing of the before recited / nor none would have. And
such men wylbe lightly persuaded to deny yt these be goods which be turmoyled
now hither now thither. But the Epicures streytely hold this / and defend
it diligently / that pleasure is perfet felicite of man, which voice seems to
me, rather to sou^de like unto beasts than men. Thou reasonable man / where as
god / or else Nature the mother (as I may say) of all things has given to
the a soul: than ye which nothing is more excellent / nor more spiritual.
will thou so cast away thy self / and throw thy self down? That thou
iudgest no difference to be between yt and a be. Is there any thing good
that makes not better him that has it in possession? For ye more a man is a
partener of goodues / the more laudable he is. Nor there is any thing good /
whereof he that has it may rejoice without dishonestye. what of the things
that makes a man laudable is in voluptuous pleasure? (as who says nothing).
Does voluptuous pleasure make a man bett or more laudable? (As who says no).
whether or no? does any man auaunce him self by bragging or bostynge when he
opteyneth his pleasure? as who says no. But if so be pleasure / which is
defended by the aid of very many, it is not to be taken among things that be
honest. And the more that pleasure is / the more it remoueth the mind from his
seat of quietenes. For a certente, to live well and welthyly / is nothing else,
but to life honest lie and justly.

In whom virtue is, he may lack nothing to live welthylye.
NOr I judged at any time yt Marcus Regulus was a man sorrowful / unhappy / or
miserable. For the magnanimite of his heart was not turmented of the
Carthaginenses / another his grauite / nor his fidelite / nor his constans / nor
any virtue, nor to conclude his manly stomach, environed with the fortress of
so many virtues, and enclosed with so strong a garyson of vtue. when his body
was taken prisoner / surely he him self could not be a captyue. I have seen
Caius Marius which seemed to me in time of prosperity / one of the foriunate
men, and in aduersite / one of very excellent men. Than the which Marius
fortunate ande valyannte nothing may chance to any mortal man more happyly
Thou mad man. Here tully inuehythe against. Antonius.
Thou knoweste notte, Thou knoweste notte I say, what powers virtue has,
Thou vsurpethe only the name of virtue, and know not what power vtue is of.
No man can but be very happy and welthy, that is apt and constaunt of him
selse / and that puts all his assurance of defense in him self only, (as
who says he that is endued with virtue, he is happy (and has all thing in
him self) He can have nothing of suretye, nothing sufficiently known by
scrutyne to continue one day, to whom all his hope, respect, and forcast,
hangs upon blind fortune. If thou chance to mete with such a man put him in
fear with manasse of death and exyle. what so ever chance to me in this city
of Rome so unkind to me, it shall happen to me so that I will not only not
contend again it, nor yet say nay to it. For to what intent have I taken
labor? Or what have I done? Or to what end all my care and thoughts have
laid watch? For I have done nothing of such manner, nor have got nothing
after such manner, that I should be in that state, whom neither the folyshe
boldness of blyud fortune, nor the injuries of mine e^nemes should make me to
stoop and swerve from constans. Do thou manasse my death? so that I must
depart vtteriy fro the company of men, or else I shall desire help of such as
be naught. Death is terrible to them, with whose life all things be extincte,
not to them, whose laud and fame can not dye. Exile is terrible to them, to
whom a place to dwell in is debarred, not to them that say, that the round
circute of the holle world is one city. All manner of myseryes, all sorrows do
oppress the, which judges thy self to be happy and floryshyng. Thy bodily
lusts tourment the. Thou art vexed day and night, to whom that riches yt thou
have is not sufficient, And thou fears lest that those goods yt you have,
shall not continue long with the. The remorse and remembrance of thy
myscheuous deeds do prick the. Dread of judgment of the law does kylle tho
heart. which way so ever thou haste looked, the wrongs which thou have done,
run in thy mind as the furyes of hell, which never suffer the to rest.
wherefore like as good fortune can chance to no man yt is unthrifty, folyshe,
and rude, so a good man both wise and manly, can not be a wretch. Nor whose
vtue and manners be worthy laud, his life can not be but praised. Nor that life
is to be fled, which is laudable, It were to be fled if it were miserable.
wherefore what so ever is laudable, ye same is welthy floryshyng, and should
seem to be desired.

All fools be mad men again Clodius.
I Judge the not only a fool, as thou art many times, not only a leude
person, as thou art at al times, but also out of thy wit and a mad man. Shall
ye heart and stomak of a wise man fe^sed with things necessary to live by, with
abu^da^ce of counsel, with patiens of worldly chaunses, with the contempt of
blind fortune, and (to conclude) with all manner of virtues, be overcome and
subdued, which can not be expelled out of the city? For what is a city?
whether or no? All the company of wild beasts and cruel? or whether all the
multitude of fugitive persons and theuysshe assembled to gether in to one
place? Surely thou will say no. Than that was no city, wha^ laws took no
effect therein, when judgments were laid down, when the custom and manner
of ye cou^ntrey is decayed, when officers be expulsed by force of weapons, the
name of the Senate was not fpoken of in the co^menty. The recourse of theuys
and robbynge and spoil (Thowe being captain) was appointed in the myddle of
the market place, And remaynes or resydue with such as were confederate in the
co^spiracie of Cati.+line, was returned to the myschyefe and fur^e of the, it
was no cite. Therefore I am not expulsed out of the city, which was none, I
was called in to ye city, to thentent, yt a Consul should be in ye cite, which
notwithsta^dinge was no Consul in deed, and to the^tent a Senate should be,
which yt time was decayed to thentent ye concent of ye people should be fre and
to the^tent yt reme^bra^s of right and equite should be revoked, which be ye
sure bands of a city / But regard how I have despised the weappons of this
thine roberi I have thought thy wicked injury tossed and cast by ye upon me, yet
I judged yt it should never have come to me, except parauenture when thou did
distroble the walls, or else what time thou brought in myschyuous fyrebrandes
to set the houses of fire, thou thought that some of my goods should decay
in to the city or brene. But there is nothing mine, nor any other man's, that
may be taken away, that may be stolen, that may be looste. If thou
shuldeste have taken fro me the long constauns of my mind / my cares,
watches, counsels in the common welthe, which common wealth stands in
prosperity by my cares and watches of me. If thou should have fordone the
immortal memory of this my eternal benefit: and much rather if thou
had taken away yt mind whereof these counselles did issue fro me. Than would
I have confessed, that I had taken wrong. But if so be thou another did this
nor could do this, thy injury gave unto me a famous return, not a sorrowful
departing away. Therefore I at all times have be a citesyn, and that time
specially wha^ the holle Senate commended to strange nations my health and
life as of a special citesn. Art thou now a citesin? except peraue^ture ye
same may be an e^nemy and a citesyn. whether or no do thou divide a citesin
from a^ e^nemy, by nature and place / not by his mind and deeds. Thou did
murdre in ye market place. Thou tokest the temples with the vose i^ harnes.
Thou setest o^ fire ye houses of private me^, and holy places whi should
Spartachus be taken for an enemy and thou a citesyn? May thou be a citezyn.
For whose sake sometime the city of Rome was no city? And call thou me a
banisshed man aft thy name? where as all me^ judged yt ye come^ welthe was
banisshed by mi deperti^g the^s? will thou never look about ye thou stark mad
man? will thou never considre what thou do? or what thou say? Know not
thou that exyle is punysshmente of myschyefe? And yt my journey was taken to do
very noble acts here before time al mischeuous and vngraco^us persons, of
whom thou professes that thou art captain, whom the law will to be
punysshed with ey exyle. Be they banysshed men, though they change another soil
nor country? Than whether or no? wha^ all laws judge the to be a banysshed
man, will thou not be a banysshed man? He is not called an enemy / which
has been before the Senate with his weapon / thy skeine (where with thou
slewest a man) was taken all blodye. Is not he to be taken an enemy that has
killed a man? ey and thou have killed many. Is not he an enemy that sets
fire in the cite? Thy hands set fire upon the temple of virgins. Is not he an
enemy that inuadeth the temples of the gods? Thou did pytche thy tents in
the judicial place of Rome. But where to should I speak of the common laws
that thou have broken? by the which all and singler thou art a banisshed man?
Thy chyefe familiar Ceser made a law for the, that if so be thou came within
the secret place of the gods called Bonadea, thou should be banysshed, But
thou art wont to make thy boste also, that thou did so. By what reason than
was thou cast in to exile by so many laws? do not thou abhor the name of
a bannyshed man?

That all wise men be fre men, and all fools band men. Here Tully disputes
again Anthonius.
May the emperor Anthonius be praised? or also may he be named emperor? or
may he be thought worthy that name? by what reason may he have Emppire? or to
conclude what freman man may he govern that can not govern his afferccions
and desires. First let him bridle his own lewed lusts / suppress his waunton
pleasures / modifye his fume of ire / restrain his avarice and put away other
spots and blemmishes of his soul. Than let him begin to rule other, wha^ he
shall cease to obey to their fylthy and lewed maistres, shame infamye, and
villinous life. For whiles he does obey to them / he is not only not to be
taken as an emperor / nor yet in any wise as a fre man. This proverb notable
is used of well learned men, whose authoryte I would not use if I should make
this oracion before some rude persons. But for as much as I speak before very
prudent and syngler learned men, to whom such things be not vnharde, wherefore
should I semble my self to have lost my labor, if I have bestowed any in
such manner of study. For where it is said of syngler learned men / that no
man is a free man except he be wise. For what is liberty? power and free
choice to do what thou woll. who than lives as he woll? but he that takes
right ways, and he that enjoys in honestye, to whom the way of living is
consydereth and provides before / which obeys the laws, not for dread, but
follows them and keeps them, because he judges yt to be most wholesome.
which nothing says, nothing does, nothing to conclude thinks, but with
his good will and not coacte / whose entencyons all and singular, and all
things that he goth about, comes forth fro him self of free will and
returns the same way. Nor there is any thing that is more acceptable to him,
than his own will and judgment. To whom also fortune (which is said to
beyre most power) does herself give place, As the wise poet said, Every man
uses his own manners. Therefore this one thing chau^seth unto a wise man
only, that he does nothing again his will / nothing with heaviness /
nothing by compulsyon. wherefore for as much as I must dispute by long
cyrcumstaunce / that it is so / notwithstanding ye same is to be confessed and
that breuely, yt no man is fre, except any man be so affeccionate as is said
before. Therefore all fools be bond men. Nor this is so contrary to the comen
opinion and meruelouse in ded^, but also in word. For philosop^ers name not
them bond me^ as ^^che which be take in war which be^ so made by a bond of
their governors / by any law ciu^^e. But if there be any bonda^^ (as is ye
obedience of a faint an^ cowarde stomach, lacking his ^wne fre will) who can
deny th^^ all light brayned fellows, al^ ^^uetyse persons, all to conclude
lewed unthrifts to be. And rude like as in a great howshold of servants some
be more clenly as they think them self / if so be servants be servants to
their own follye by like act, whom images, tables, whom silver plate / whom
iuels of Corinthus / whose gorges buyldynges with curiouse work manshyp does
delight and please. And we be they say chyef rulers of ye city, you be rulers
of yonr servants But like as in a great household such as exercise these
things, which scowre and oil, which swepe and brushe, which straw the
chambres, keep a rowme of bondage not most honest. So in the city of Rome
such as have give them self to the affeccyons and desirous of such things a
fore said (as vile pleosures) occupye almost the vilest rowme of such
seruitute. I have made Here Tully tau^tes hye Bragging parsons.
great battles (thou say) I have ruled great empyres and provinces / show
thou than a stomach worthy to be praised. But thy spoil and robbery to be sold
openly lets the, or some image that Policletus made. I merueyle fro whens
thou stele away, how did thou behave thy self after thy spoil and fraud
gasynge amassed / and taking up an exclamacyon / when I se this, I judge the a
band man of all folly, and wau^ton tutches. But tha^ be not these things before
said comely and gorges? Let them be so, but we have tried eyes to discern
such things / but I pray ye let them be extemed gorges and comely so that
they entangle not wise men but let them be taken as poppettes and tryfles that
please chyldern what judges thou if Lucius Minutius Lutius Mutius dysttroyed
Corrynthus that yt should not rebel again the Romans
should have seen any of these lascivious persons (yt brag the^ self to be
chyefe rulers) what thinks thou of Matellio of Corinthus, that full
desyrously handeleth such iuels / where as he the said Minutius despised
Corinthus wholly. whyther would Minutius exteme Matellio to be an excellent
citesyn? or else a dylygent servant of the court / I would Marcus Curious were
a life again or some of the^ in whose grandge in the country and house at home
no gorgesse thing, no fresh ornament was beside them selfs. And I would that
he might behold some man that is set in hye office and authoryte by ye people
/ catchynge and handelyng out of the fyshe pound Barbles and mullettes / and
taking great pleasure in the multitude of lampreys. would not Marcus Curious
exteme that man so bond / yt he would judge yt he were not worthy any rowmeth
in a howshold / whither or no / is there bondage doutfull? which refuse no
co^dicyon of bondage / for ye covetous mind that they have to money. The hope
and trust of enheritaunce what unreasonable pain of bondage woll he take
upon him? what bekke of a rich old churl having no chyldre woll not a coue
tyse wretch merke and watch? what so ever is said he spekes after the old
churles pleasure, he does after his pleasure, he flatereth, he sytteth by him
if he be sykke / he pleases the old chorle. which of all these points belong
to a gentylman? which of these tutches (to conclude) do perteyne but to a
band man dilygent to please? Here Tully touches ambitious parsons that be
couytous of honor.
Now what is that inordinate couetise of honor? empire governance of princes?
which seems to resemble more gentylnes, or fre heart. How hard and payfull a
maystres is she / how emperious and sharp a maystres is she? That thing
compelled such men which extemed them self jolly fellows, to do service and
to send privily by night time brybes to Cethegus Cethegus was one of the
conspiracy of Catel
a man not most allowed / and to come to him by night time and to entreat him
/ also upon hands and fete to beseech him of favor. what bondage is there?
if this may be extemed a lybertye. what shall we say? when the empire of
couetyse desires is gone, and another ruler and master dread is risen up of
the conscience and remorse of evil deeds. How wretched and hard a maystres
is bondage? A man must study to please young boys, which be somewhat at blabbe
and lyberall of tongue, and all that seem to know any thing they be dredde as
they were lords and gouerners, what authorite has a judge? with what dread
does he punysh an evil doer, whyther or no / is not every dread a bondage?
what than auayled that oracyon of ye very eloque^t man Lucius Crassus? more
full of eloquence than of wisdom (wherein he said) O ye noble senators
deliver us Romans out of bondage, what bondage is this to so famous a man,
and so noble a man? For all feebleness and weykenes of heart, stoppyng cowardnes
and soon over cast is a bondage and villeyny. Suffer not us (said Crassus)
to be in bondage to any man. He woll by reuengynge be set in to lybertye, no,
what adioyneth he more? but to you universal to change your gouerner. He woll
be no gentylman or fre man (where he says) to whom you we may and are bound
to do service. But we (because we be of a manly and an hye stomakke and
enuiront with virtue) say, we another be bond nor may be in seruitute. Thou
Crassus say that thou may be in seruitute for because thou may Thou can not
say thou art bond For no man is bound to restore any thing / but that is
shameful not to restore. Here Tully inueyethe again Anthony.
But this have I said hitherto again Crassus, let him look upon this matter
how he may be an emperor. where as reason and truth in deed co^uinceth him
that he is no gentyl man nor free hearted man.

That a wise man only is rich.
WHat meanethe this proud This paradox is again Crassus
bragg and this boste that thou uses in speaking of thy great Su^mes of money?
Art thou only rich? Oh good lord? Should not I reiose that I have hard and
learned some what? Art thou only rich? what if thou be not rich? what if thou
be pore? For whom shall we take by our knowledge to be a rich man or in what
man shall we set this word rich? I think in that man / which has so great
possessions / that he is well content to lyffe like a gentylman / which look
for no more, no thing desires more, nothing more wysheth for, Thine own
mind must judge the rich, not the sayng of men, nor thy possessions and that
he thynkethe that he lakethe nothing / and carethe for no more, and that is
satisfied and is content with such money as he has, I grant that he is
rich, Or eles if for couetyse mind of money / thou thynkes that there is no
evil gaynes where as no honest man may be in this order / if thou daily do
fraud / deceive / ask make false promyses takes away by violence / if thou
rob thy fellows / if thon spoil the comen treasury / if thou desire to have
ye legacyes of thy friends by testament / or if thou desire not them and steal
thy self pryuelye in to there testame^tes / whedre be these signs of a rych
man? or of a nedy beggar? The mind of a man / and not his coffer is wount to
be called rich, though hit be full of money, As long as I shall se the to be
insaciable I will never compte the a ryche^ man, For after the qualytie of a
man's mind men judge the measure of riches. How myche is sufficient for any
man. if a man have a daughter to be married he has need of money to give with
her / if he have two he has need of more money / if mo, he has more need. if
he have fyfty daughters as men say yt Danaus king of Argos had: so many dowers
require a great sum of money. For look how much a man has need of / and to
that sum yt measure of riches (as I said before) is extemed. Therefore he
that has not many daughters but innumerable couetyse desires / which in
short space may consume very great riches. when shall I call him a rich
man? where as he felyth him self to be a nedy beggar. Many herd of the when
thou said, yt no man is rich except that man which is able to maynteyne an
army of his own lands, and fruytes. which thing the Romans Here Tully
inueyeth against Crassus for his insaciable couetyse of riches.
of so great customs and revenues now this long time is scantly able to
attain unto. Therefore in this purpose thou shall never be a rich man / before
the time that so much prouentes issue out of thy possessions / so yt thou may
be able to maynteyne thereby.vi. legyons / also great wings of horse men or
footmen. Therefore now thou confesses yt thou act not rich, which lakketh
so much to accomplish that thing that thou desires. Therefore thou never took
obscurely but manyfestely this thy poverty and rather thy necessyte and
beggarly degree. Here he calls Crassus a beggar.
For like as we judge that they which get geynes by honest manner in making of
merchaundyse / in setting and lettynge out workmen for hoyre and money in
taking to ferme customs and tolles / has need of gaynes. So he that sees at
home at thy house the resort of suitors and judges accompanied together / he yt
sees these wrong doers / and such yt be gylte full of money labouryng (thou
being their patron) to corrupt the true judgment by brybes, which sees
thy compaccions for tuicyon in their causes diminished by reason of thy
promise not kept / he that sees thy compaccions in eleccions of such men
that labor to be in office to be likewise withdrawe^, for lack of thy promise
not kept / which sees the sendynge forth of such as thou haste made fremen
/ to other countries to occupye usury / to poll and shave provinces and
countries by pyllage. That sees expulsyon of thy neighbors ou^ their
habitacions / which se thy robbery in the countries about / which sees thy
famylyarite with thy vile bond men and free men / with thy clientes, and all
for money. which se thy lands and possessions stand desolate, by reason of
thy pyllage and expulsyo^ of tenau^tes / which the bannyshment of rich me^,
which sees the morder of fre holders / which reme^breth that harrost and
spoil in ye time of Silla / which sees the forged testamentes / which
remembers that all thing was to be sold with the for money / as mustre of
men, none accept without money decre and sentens made by the senate / the
sente^s give by an other man / like wise sentens give by him / causes
judicial, lettyng no man in at his durres except he brought somewhat / his
voice in persuadynge for any man / his silens forberynge to speak again any
man without money. who would not judge but he would confess that he had need
of gaynes ^ who would repute at any time yt he is rich, which has need of
gadderynge and gaynes? For the fruit of riches is in pleynteth. The satysfieng
of a man's mind shows pleynteth and abou^da^s of goods which thou by reason
thou can not attain shall never be rich / because thou disprayses my poor
substance, and ryghtfully (for it is but mean after the opinion of the comen
people / and after thine opinion no substauns and after mine little) of my
self I will not speak / I w^ll speak of the / if the matter be put to my
judgment and estimacion / whyther in conclusyon whyther I shall exteme more
the money of Pyrrhus which he gave to Fabricus / or the continents of
Fabricus, which forsook the said money? whyther I shall exteme more the gold
of the Samnetes; or the vnsuer of Marius Curious? whyther the enherytau^ce of
Lucius Paulus, or the liberalyte of Affricane which gave unto his brother
Ostintus Marimus his part of enheritans. Surely these that be better members of
singular virtues / be more to be extemed than they that be members of money.
Than who douteth, if so be the more a man have in his possessyon; the more
rich he is to be extemed. But riches is in virtue / for no possessyo^ no
aboundans of gold and silver / is to be compted more of valour^ than virtue. O
ye gods immortal, men know not how great a gain or profit is for a man to
be a sparer and a sauer? For now I woll come to sumptuouse spenders / I let
pass this great geyner Crassus / he receives of his annual rentes.vi.C.
sesterce which is.xviii.C.li. I but an hundredth of mine he has, that makes
the roofes of his house gylte in his manner places / and the flowers or
pauimentes of marble and that couettes to have gloriouse images, tables
curiously depicte household stuff and apparel out of measure / has but small
substans to expende for his own use / nor after his increase of profit. Of my
poor revenues / the expenses / that I made for thentent of lucre / take away
yet su^e overplus shall remain, Than whedre is more rich he that lakketh or
he that has suffycyent with ye overplus? he that is nedy or he yt has
habu^daunce? whedre is rycher he? that the more possessions that he has / the
more hit requires to defend it self? or eles he whose possession does bear it
self? But wherefore do I speak of my self? which am trobled su^what with the
myserye of the evil manners of this time? ey paraduenture with the error and
blyndnes of this wreched world, Marcus Manlius whom our fathers might
remember / lest we should speak always of Curins and Luscinius / was a poor man at ye last, For he had a place in Carinis, and a percel of ground in
Labicano. Therefore we be rich which have more, would to god we were so in
deed, But the mesure and quantytie of money / is determined or taken not by
estemacion of riches but by meat and drink and apparel / it is a gain and
profet / not to be couetyse of money / no^ to a great occupyer in byeng and
seling / A man to be content with his own goods and such as he has / is the
gretest and the most sure riches for though these crafty and subtel praysers /
do praise meadous / and certain grounds at a great price / because / as a man
woll say / there can no hurt be done to this manner of possessions, how great
a price shall we exteme virtue to be worth? which another can be violently take
from us, nor be privily stoolne, nor is lost by wrake upon the sea, nor by
fire, nor is changed by mutacyon of trobles tempest, nor of time, with the
which they that be indewed, they only be rich For theye only do possede
goods fruitful, and everlasting, and theye only, which thing is
appropred to riches, be content with that goods which theye have they jude
it suffycye^t yt they have, they covet no thing, they need nothing, they feel
no lakke, they require nothing, But noughty and nygarde parsons, which have
possessions and riches uncertain, and standing in casual chance, and
always covet more, nor there is any of them found which was content with that
substance yt theye had, or to be externed not only no welthy and rich men,
But rather nedye and poor beggars.

Finis.
Thus ends the Paradox of Marcus Tullius Cicero / lately translated out of
the Latin tongue in to english, And newly imprynted, at London in shouth warke
by Johan Redman, For Robert Redman,

Cum Priuilegio.




