SCIPIO'S Dream. OR THE STATESMAN'S ECSTASY.

WHEREIN IS CONTAINED AN Epitomie of all the Sciences, Natural, Moral, and
Supernatural.

Tending to prove the Immortality of the SOVLE, as the proper merit of JUSTICE.

Superstes durat post hominem Justitia. LONDON. Printed by B. A. and T. Fawcet,
for L. C. and are to be sold at his Shop at Chancery Lane end. 1627.

TO HIS HONORED KINSMAN FRANCIS FVLLVVAR Esquire.
SIR:
THat I Dedicate this to your Gravity and Wisdom, is not that I arrogate
ought to my own ability, But to pay you the tribute of a Kinsman, according
to the tie of Nature, which so otderly linketh all dependancy thereof, as we
see each thing has some reference one to another. The Elements are joined by
Symbolization, the Air to the Fire by warmness, the Water to the Air by
moisture, the Earth to the Water by coldness. And these my not yet
sufficiently ripe endeauours to your mature judgment, which though in most
unequal proportion in regard of Time (not having attained Medullam SVADAE, yet
the honor I bear to MINERVA will (I hope) bring them near to your
acceptance; The rather for that you will give entertaynment to the Author,
whose work is worthy of your welcome, because it treats of the reward proper
to such as your self, that have spent the prime of your years in doing your
Country service: And so consequently to the Translation, which I lay in the
lap of your Love and Patronage, least any Harpie should meet with it, being in
a homely weed. But could I adorn it with APOLLO'S golden coat, or AESCVLAPIVS
golden beard, It should wait upon your favor, And my self shall do you the
service of

Your very loving Kinsman to command: E. C. S.

TO THE READER.
COURTEOUS READER; He that does not aim at the highest pitch of perfection,
can never attain to the lowest degree thereof; which gave me encouragement,
though yet but in the Infancy of the Muses to undertake this task, which
howsoever my pains prove accepted of, yet I am confident, for the worth of the
first Writer, it will find favorers. And though it come not apparelled with the
Majesty of a Courtly robe, yet I hope it has an honest Country comelines. And
my desire to communicate it to such as knew it not in the Natural and
National habit thereof, will gain a favorable construction that it comes
in our English attire, because the matter thereof is for all men, for all
times, full of complete and eminent knowledge: and the rather because this,
amongst many of that Noble and wise man's works has not come to light in our
language, for ought I ever knew, yet is it of merit in the first place, and
especially when many men now a days do sleep out their days not dreaming of
the reward in the Life immortal, which the wise Heathen did propound to
themselves as incitements to grave republiquists to take care, Nequid
detrimenti, respublica capiat. And it may move some more lofty towering spirit
to lend his tongue in a strain more lofty. And because great matters cannot
be expected from blooming years, my duty shall be discharged, if my diligence
be not scorned; For Non debent, qui magna prestare nequeunt, parua negligere.

Wise SCIPIO sleeps in Heavenly rapture's Dream
Thou Statesman Just, thy self like happy deeme^
woodcut of Scipio sleeping

THE DREAM of SCIPIO taken out of the sixth Book of Cicero de Republica.
SCIPIO the person.
WHat time I came into Africa, (MANLIVS MANILIVS, being Consul) Commander in
chief (as ye know) to the fourth Legion, there was nothing I more desired,
then that I might meet MASSINISSA, a King most friendly to our Family for just
causes. Whom when I repaired unto the old King embracing me wept withal, and
soon after beholding the Heavens with cast up eyes, uttered these words; O
sovereign Sun, I give thee humble thanks, and all the Celestial
creatures, that before I finish this transitory life, with these eyes I do
see, in mine own Kingdom, and in mine own house, PVBLIVS CORNELIUS SCIPIO,
whose very name does revive my spirits: Therefore the memory of that excellent
and invincible man shall never depart out of my mind.

When I had enquired the estate of his Kingdom, and he of our Commonwealth,
much speech having passed on both sides, the day was spent, and afterward being
entertained with a Princely supper, we prolonged our discourse the most part
of the night: When the good old King would move speech of nothing, but of
AFRICANVS, who remembered not only all his deeds, but also his words: This
done, so soon as we departed to bed, I being weary with my travel, and
because I had watched very late, a sleep more heavy then usual seized on me.
Father to SCIPIO.
AFRICANVS (I think out of that, which we had spoken: for it commonly comes
to pass, that our cogitation and communication do bring forth some such thing
in our sleep, as ENNIVS writes of HOMER, of whom waking he used often to
think and speak,) I say, AFRICANVS in such a shape presented himself unto
me, as I knew him better by his representation, then as he was heretofore
living (or in his body.) Whom so soon as I perceived, I trimbled with fear,
but he said unto me, O SCIPIO, be attentive, fear not, and what I shall tell
you, lay up in your mind. Do you see yonder City, which being compelled by me
to obey the people of Rome, renews the old war, nor can it rest in peace,
(For he did point unto me that ancient City Carthage, from an high place, full
of Stars, glistring, and bright) to which you now come to lay Seige, scarce
yet dignified with military honor. Within these two years you shall Conquer
it, being Consul, and this surname which now you have by inheritance, shall be
your own by purchase. And when you have sacked the Town, you shall be carried
in triumph, and be created Censor, and go an Ambassador to Egypt, Syria,
Asia, and Grecia, and in your absence shall again be elected Consul, you shall
wage a great war, and you shall raze Numantia. Bur when in your Charyot you
shall be carried to the Capitol, you will find the common wealth disturbed by
the counsels of my Nephew. Here SCIPIO surnamed AFRICANVS.
AFRICANVS, you must show to your Country, the luster of your spirit, wit, and
wisdom. But at that time I perceive a doubtful course, as it were of the
fates. For when you shall be seven times eight years of age, and these two
numbers, of which either is accounted a full number, the one for one cause, the
other for another, shall make up the fatal account by a natural revolution.
Upon you alone, and upon your name the whole City shall rely it self: the
Senate, all good men, your Confederates, and the Latins shall fix their eyes
upon you: you shall be the only man, on whose endeavors the safeguard of the
City shall depend. To be short, it is expedient, that you being Dictator shall
govern the commonwealth, if you can escape the ungodly hands of your
kindsmen. Here when LELIVS gave an outcry, and the rest of them groaned;
SCIPIO gently smiling, said, awake me not from my Dream and let all be at
peace. Hear the rest. But that you may be encouraged to defend the
Commonwealth, O AFRICANVS, so persuade your self, that for all those, who
have preserved, succored, and aided their Country, there is a place decreed
and appointed in Heaven, where the blessed shall enjoy Eternity. For there is
nothing, that on the earth can be done, more acceptable to that great God, who
governs this whole world, then Consultations, and Congregations assotiated
under a Law, which are called Cities. The Governors and maintayners hereof
descended from hence, and hither shall return.

Here, although I was affrighted not so much with the dread of Death, as the
Conspiracies of mine own kindred, yet I demanded, if he lived, and Father
Father to him, and Grandfather to SCIPIO.
PAVLLVS, and others, whom we thought extinct: Yes truly, said he, they
live, who have fled from the bonds of the Body, as if it were out of Prison;
for that which is called your Life, is Death. But see, Father PAVLLVS is
coming unto you; whom so soon as I beheld, I powered out a stream of tears.
But he holding me in his arms, and kissing me, bid me to bridle my passion:
So soon as I could refrain from tears, and was able to speak; I said, I
beseech you most holy and happy Father, since this is Life, as I hear
AFRICANVS tell, why do I abide on the earth, and hasten not rather to come
thither to you? PAVLLVS.
He replied, things are not so ordered; For unless GOD, even he, whose
Temple this Universe is, which you behold, shall free you from those prisons of
the Body, there can be no entrance for you hither. For this is the condition,
under which they are borne, who inhabit that Globe you see in the middle of
this Temple, which is called the Earth: And to these is Life given, out of
those Eternal lights, which ye call Stars and Planets, who being round, and
formed like a Ball, inlined with Divine intelligences, do run their course
and compass with wonderful swiftness. Wherefore, both you, ^ PVELIVS! and
all godly men, must retain your life within the custody of the Body. Neither
may we pass from this transitory life, without his Command, from whom we
received it. Least we seem to shun that human estate, which is ordained for
us of GOD. AFRICANVS speech.
But see, O SCIPIO! that you so love Justice and Godliness, as this thy
Granfather, and I thy Father who begat thee: which being so great in thy
Parents, and Allies, is also most excellent in thy Country: And that Life
leads unto Heaven, and into the society of those, who lately lived, and being
delivered from the body, do inhabit that place. (Now that was a circle
glistring among the Stars with a resplendant brightness) which you call Orbis
Lacteus, or the milky Circle (as ye received it from the Grecians.) From
whence I deeply contemplating all the rest did seem passing excellent, and to
be wondered at. But these Stars were such as we never beheld out of this
place, and there magnitudes such as we never suspected, of whom that was the
least, which being lowest in Heaven, the nearest to the Earth shined with a
borrowed light. Luna citima terris.
And the globes of the Stars did exceed the greatness of the Earth. But now
that Earth it self does seem so small, as I repine at our Empire, wherein we
do touch but as it were a point thereof. Which when I more earnestly beheld,
AFRICANVS said, I pray you, how long will your mind be fastened on the Earth.
Do you not behold, what holy habitations you shall come into? All things are
connexed to you by mine Orbs, or rather by nine Globes.

Whereof one is the heavenly uppermost, which inuolueth all the rest, that
supreme D^us summus.
GOD moving and containing the others. In which are infixed those ever
continewed courses of the Stars which run round and return to their first
motion: Under which there are seven others, that go backward with a contrary
motion to the course of Heaven. Among which seven, that within the Earth they
call Saturn, Saturnus.
does possess one Globe.

Next unto that, is the bright Star which is called Jupiter Jupiter.
(in aspect) happy and prosperous unto Mankind.

Then the fiery and dreadful Star which ye call Mars. Mars.


Next almost under the middle Region, Sol.
the Sun is placed, being the guide, and chief governor of all the other
Stars, the soul and temperature of the World, such in magnitude, as it
lightneth, and replenisheth all things with the brightness thereof. The motion
of Venus, Venus.
and the motion of Mercurius Mercurius.
do follow this Planet, as if they were his companions. And Luna Luna.
increasing her light by the beams of the Sun, does make her Changes in the
lowest Orb. Below the Moon there is nothing, but what is subject to Death and
decay, excepting Souls bestowed on Mankind by the gift of the Gods. Tellus.
For that which is the middle, and the ninth; to wit, the Earth is not moved,
and is under the rest, and all weighty things are carried downward to it by
their own motion.

Which when with amazedness I did view, as soon as I came to my self, what,
Oh what sound! (said I) so shrill and sweet does fill mine cares. Even this,
Coeli harmonia.
said he, which joined with dislike distances, but yet according to their
proportion distinguished in measure, is made by the vehement force and motion
of those Orbs: and tempering sharpes with flats, keeping equal time makes
various harmony. For neither can so great motions arise out of silence: And
beside, Nature so directs it, that the outmost on the one part sound flats,
but sharpes on the other part. For which cause the highest course of the
starrified Heaven, whose conversion is swifter, is moved with a sharp and
shrill sound: but this Orb of the Moon being lowest, has his motion with a
deep flat. Terra noua.
For the Earth being the ninth, remaining immovable, always subsisteth in the
lowest place, containing the middle of the world. But those eight motions,
among which, two of them have equal force, Venus, and Mercurius.
make seven Sounds distinguished in their distances, which number is the
perfection almost of all things. The which, learned men imitating with their
musical Instruments and songs, have gained recourse for themselves to this
place, as others, who with their rare wits in that corruptible life, have
exercised Divine studies.

With this sound your ears being filled were made deaf: (neither is any sense
more dull in you) as when Nilus powers down water-floods headlong from the
highest Mountains to those places, which ye call Catadupa, the Inhabitants of
that place, are deprived of the sense of Hearing, by reason of the hideous
sound. And this sound is so great by the most swift motion of the world, as the
ears of man cannot bear it; even as no man can look against the Sun, and as
by the beams thereof your sight, and sense is mastered.

Being struck with admiration of these things, yet I fastened mine eyes (thus
astonished) on the Earth. Then said AFRICANVS, I perceive, even now you muse on
the seat and house of man; which if it seem so little to you, as indeed it
is, ever cast up your eyes to these Celestial things, and despise those
Earthly. For what renown can you obtain from the mouth of Man, or what looked
for Glory can you enjoy? you see men do inhabit these straight and narrow
places in the Earth, and in those spotts (as it were) vast wildernesses are
interposed between their habitations: They also that dwell upon the Earth are
so interrupted that there can be no traffic or intercourse from one to
another, but some do side you, some do thwart you, and some are opposite to
you, from whom indeed you can expect no glory. For you perceive that same
Earth to be girded, Zonae.
and enclosed about as if it were with certain belts: Among which, you see two
far distant one from another, and underpropped on both sides with those poles
of Heaven, are extreme cold in temperature: but the middle one, and the
greatest be scorched with the vehement heat of the Sun: two are habitable:
whereof that Southward (in which the^ that dwell, Antipodes.
go with their ^eet adverse to yours) belongs not to that kind of men
whereof of you are. But this Northren Zone, which ye inhabit, consider, how
small a part of it belonge^h unto you. For all that earth, which ye dwell on,
being narrow in the top, wider on the sides, is a certain ^ittle Island
enclosed about with the Sea, which ye (tha^ live on the Land) call the
Athlantick Sea, the maine, and the Ocean. Which though it have so great a name,
you ^ee how little it is. Of all ^hese inhabited, and known^ lands has the
fame of any of our Ancestors been a^^e to transcend the Mount Caucasus, (now in
your sight) or sail over Ganges? who shall hear of your name in the farthest
parts of the East, or the utmost parts of the West, the North, or South? which
being cut off, you see assuredly, in how small compass your Renown is
dilated. And they that speak of your Name, of what continuance will it be?
Beside, if the offspring of those that shall succeed us, have a desire to tell
to their Posterity our praises, as they heard from their Ancestors, yet, for
the Deluges, and Conflagrations of the world: which of necessity must happen
at the appointed time, we can not obtain not only everlasting, but no long
lasting glory. For what matters it, that they who shall be borne hereafter,
shall speak of thee, when there is none left, of whom they are descended: who
neither were fewer in number, and certainly were of better condition?
Especially, when not one of them, by whom our Name (or glory) may be heard
of, can bear one Age in memory; for men commonly reckon an Age by the recourse
(or revolution) of the Sun which is of one Star.

But when all the Stars shall reuolue to the same point, from whence they
first moved, and shall bring about (or accomplish) the whole Heavens compass
(or circumference) with the long intercourses thereof, then that may be truly
called Annus vertens (or a perfect year) wherein I dare scarce tell, how many
Ages of men are contained. For as in times past the Sun seemed to men to be
lost and extinguished, what time the Soul of ROMULUS penetrated these Temples:
when both in the same point (of Heaven) and at the same season the Sun shall
again be lost; when all the Stars and Signs are brought back to their
first Original, count that a perfect year.

But of this year, know, the twentieth part is not accomplished. Therefore if
you despair a re-entrance into this place, where Worthy and Excellent men
enjoy all things, of how small a scantling is that glory of men, which can
scarce attain (or extend to) the small part of but one Age? If then you will
enter into a higher consideration, and lift up your eyes to this Mantion and
Eternal habitation; you shall neither give ear to the words of the common
people, nor repose the hope of your estate in any man's rewards. It best
becomes you to be led on by the allurements of Virtue to true Honor: Let
others look to it (or take heed) what they say of you (yet they will still be
tatling, and babbling.) For all their talk is confined to the narrow streights
of these Regions, which you behold, nor has it been durable of any; and is
buried in the Graves of men, and utterly abolished by the oblivion of Posterity.

All which when he had uttered, I replied, O AFRICANVS! since to these that are
of good desert; there is, from their Country bounds and limits laid open for a
passage into Heaven; though from my very Cradle (having trodden the steps of my
forefathers and your self, I have not been awanting to fill up the measure of
your Honor, yet now upon the propounding of such ample reward, I will apply my
self with far more vigilance.

And he reioyned, do but your endeavor, and take this from me, you your
self are not mortal, but this body of yours; neither are you the same, which
your outward shape does personate: but the mind of every man is his absolute
self, not that figure, or form, which may be pointed to with the finger.
Therefore know thou art a GOD, because he is a GOD, who has life, sense,
memory, and foresight: who does guide, govern, and move that body over which
he has rule or dominion, as well as that great GOD himself does this whole
world; And as that everliving GOD does move this world which is in some part
liable to mortallity: so does the never dying Soul, of the body, which is
subject to frailty. For that is Eternal, which is ever in motion. And that
which brings motion to any thing is ever in motion: But that which is moved
from some other thing, when the motion is ended it must of necessity have end
of living. That only therefore, which moves it self, because it is never
forsaken of it self, does in like sort never cease to move. Moreover that is
the fountain, that is the beginning to all the rest, which are moved.

Now to that, which is the beginning, there is no Original; for all things
sprung (or are derived) out of that which is the beginning; but it out of
nothing. For that could not be a beginning, which were begotten of another:
And if it never have beginning, nor can it at any time have ending: for a
beginning being ended or extinct, can never it self from any other take a new
beginning; nor of it self create another thing: because it is of necessity
that all things should grow out of that which is the first beginning.

So as it comes to pass, that the beginning of motion is from that which
moves it self, of, or by it self. And that can neither have beginning nor
ending. Else of necessity the whole Heavens must decay or fall, and all Nature
be at a stand, nor can it obtain any vigor (or power) whereby it may be
moved from the first mouer (or motion.)

Therefore since it is manifest, That is Eternal, which has its motion from
its self: who is he, that denies this Nature (or condition) to be
attributed to our Souls? For every thing is without Soul, which is agitated
with an external motion: but that which is the Soul is stirred with an
internal motion, and that of its own, For this is the Nature and Power proper
to the Soul.

Which if of all other things it be the only one thing that does move it
self: certainly it is not borne, but is Eternal.

Buisy this in the best cares. And the best cares are those, which consist in
the safeguard of your Country, about which your mind being employed and
applied, will more swiftly mount into this Habition, and Mantion, and that will
sooner come to pass, if very now, while it is included in the body, it shall
transcend the world, and contemplating these things, which shall be Eternal,
retire it self speedily from the body.

For the Souls of those, who have given themselves to the pleasures of the
body, and have manifested themselves, as it were servants to them, and by the
prouocations of Lusts, subdued to those pleasures, have violated the laws of
GOD and Man; when they are lapsed out of the body, are tossed too and fro about
the Earth, and never return (or re-ascend) into this place, until they have
been turmoyled many Ages.

So he vanished, and I from my Dream awaked.

A Corollary.
AS does a Dream;
or as a tale that is told,
So vanishes man's Life:
and All is gone.
Consuls and Common People
are Enrowl'd
Within Death's List:
Virtue suruiues Alone.
So Wisdom, Justice,
Meekness, Fortitude,
Are Crowned: when
this Chaos is subdued.
FINIS.

