Those five QVESTIONS, which Mark Tullye Cicero, disputed in his Manor of
Tusculanum: Written afterward by him, in as many books, to his friend, and
familiar Brutus, in the Latin tongue. And now, out of the same translated,
and englished, by John Dolman, Studente and fellow of the Inner Temple. 1561.

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete nere to S. Dunstons church by Thomas Marshe.

TO THE RIGHT reverend father in God, John Bishop of Sarum: John Dolman,
his daily orator, wysheth continuance of health, with increase of honor.
RIght honorable: when as, partly, by the counsel of them that might command
me, and partlye, by mine own consent, I left the university: and began to
apply my self to the study of the common laws of this realm: I felt my
self chiefelye hindered therein, with the entermedli^g of those studies, the
which, not without great delight, I had before time used. The which, because I
was loathe to continue, to the defrauding of the expectation of those, with whom
to trifle it had been impiety: I minded, to take my farewell of some such part
of philosophye, as, both might be most profitable to the quiet leading of my
life, to whatsoever trade I should give my self: and also should be so
pleasant, that it might even cloy me with delight. Which my desire to
satisfye, when I sought many books: yet found I none more meet, the^ this.
Which whiles I read, I must needs confess, that I was never more delighted
with any work, except it were the sacred volume of the holy Scriptures.
Wherefore, when I had perused it over, and found such profit, and pleasure
therein, as it were not possible to find the like in any Ethnike writer: I
wyshed all men the like delyght, as the reading of it brought unto me. And
because I could not mysdoubt, but the learned had already tried into
thintente, that the unlearned also, might have some fruicion thereof: and, that
our country, might at length flow with the works of philosophye: I
endeavored my self, although not eloquentlye, yet plainly, to translate the
same into our english tongue.

And considering, that there was none more meet, to have the protection of so
grave and learned a work, the^ your honor: remembering also, that the first
attempt, of the same part of philosophye, translated by master Grimoald,
passed forth under the protection, of one of that honorable vocation, to the
which also, it has pleased god, after sundry troubles, to call you: I thought
it my duty, in respect of many benefits, by your lordship on me bestowed,
to dedicate unto you this my simple travail. Thinking yt nothing could be
unwelcome to your honor, that sauoured Tullie. Whom I am not ignorant, how
much you were wont to esteem. Wherefore, I hope, that, lykeas, your lordshippe
was wont to be delyghted with the Roman Tullye: eue^ so, this english Tullie
(although not adourned, with like eloquence by the translator, yet varieng
nothing in sense) you will not disdain. Knowing, that this simple scolers
gift, contains the signifyeng, of as hearty good will toward your honor:
as those greater presents to, which crave requyting. Thus, loathe to trouble
your lordshippe any longer, with a vain number of words (because many words
often cause many trippes) I commend unto your lordeshippe, the favorable
judgment of this my simple travail: to be perused, at such time, as it shall
seem best, both for your leisure and pleasure. Written from the inner temple
the.xiiii. of July.

The preface to the Reader:
IF thankefulnes, for so simple desert, may cause the to requite him, with any
part of the like gentleness, who took upon him this travail (such as it is)
only for thy commodity, gentle reader: then stay a while, from the reading
of Tullie, and hearken favorably to this little communication, that I crave at
thy hands. I mind only, to excuse my self briefeli unto the, and so, to
dismiss the. The matters, which I think, colourablie may, and will be
objected unto me, are these. First, the lack of years, and eloquence, to
attempt the translation of so weyghtye a book: as, the very sages of the
university, have let lie still, even from the time that it was first written,
unto this day. Then, the profaning of the secrets of Philosophy, which are
esteemed only of the learned, and neglected of the multitude. And therefore,
unmeet, to be made commen for every man. First, as for mine own unableness
for years, I answer, by Plato and this mine author: that I know nothing,
but that, which my soul now settled in my body, recounteth, as things
learned before. And the soul, shall never have the body more apt, to
whatsoever thing it lists to dispose him, then in his youth: which is, in
manner, the greenenesse of the same.

Since therefore, the body, which has no knoweledge, but by reason of the
soul, is in youth most apt and able to execute the inventions of the same:
what cause is there, why the wit, being one of the principal parts of the
soul, should not chiefelye in this nimblenes of the body, utter her force and
virtue? Then, as for lack of eloquence. First, this (I think) they will al
grant. That, it is not possible for any man, to express the writings of
Tullie, in English, so eloquently: as he has uttered the same in latin.
Then, for mine own translation: forasmuch as it must of necessity, be either
more simple then, the style of Tullie, or else more foolish, and full of crooked
terms (for Tullies mean none can attain) I had rather to be partener of the
favor, due to simplicity, and plainenes: then, with foolyshe and far fet
words, to make my translation seem more dark to the unlearned, and more
foolish to the wise. By which my playnenes, without counterfaite eloquence,
if I have gotten no other commoditye: yet, thus much I am sure of, that I have
thereby escaped, the just reproof, that they deserve, which think, to cloak
their ignorance, with inkehorne terms. For, unless it were in such things,
as the Lodgicians term names of art, for the which, we have no proper
English words: I have used none but the plain and accustomed terms. Now: as
touching the second objection, which contains the unprofitable disclosing of
the miseries of lady Philosophye (as master Grymoalde terms her) I think,
that suffycientlye satysfyed, if they consider, that besides the rascal
multitude, and the learned sages, there is a mean sort of men: which although
they be not learned, yet, by the quicknes of their wits, can conceive al such
points of art, as nature could give. To those, I say, there is nothing in
this book to dark. Especially, inasmuche as, the reading of one book, will
open an other. And thus, in my opinion, I am discharged of unprofitable
reuealinge of the secrets of philosophye. Inasmuche as, both, I hope, it shall
do much good to this sort of men, before mentioned: and also, I am sure, it can
be nothing hurtful to the learned. But shall much more inflame, all liberal
wits, with the desire of knoweledge: when they shall see, so worthy matters,
contained in one little book, of that, which we term philosophy or learning.
Besides these, there are yet other faults, as the misprinting of many words,
and the ill printing of some greek words, in latin letters, and of the verses
also, otherwise then they should be red. But the blame thereof I utterly
refuse. Inasmuch as, every man knows, that it does nothing pertayne unto
me. Nevertheless, as for the first, which contains the misprintinge of
words, thou shall find them, all corrected, in the end of the book. So that
if thou list to read it, without desire of fault findinge: thou may first,
amend all those faults, with thy pen, in the margeant of thy book, which in
the end of the book be corrected. And so have the sense perfect. And as for
the two last, they were caused by necessity.

The one for lack of a Greek letter, and the other, for want of a smaller
letter, to print the verses in a less roame And for other faults, that may
be found in my verses, I trust they will pardon me, who may marvel, how, so
sodaynely I am become a versifier. But, I beseech thee, (gentle reader) to
place each man's fault by him self: that I may be forced to father no other
man's faults, then mine own.

Which, as I know to be more, then I would they were: so I shall desire the to
weygh them with gentleness.

Knowing, that if such, as have greater knoweledge, to set forth things more
exactlye, should hear my plainness not ouermuche discommended: they then,
should be much more provoked, with hope of the meruaylous fame, that their
doings should deserve if they listed, to employe some pains, in attempting the
like. Of the which, as I know there is a great number (in both the universities
inespetially) so I would wyshe, that either, they ceassyng any longer, to
envy knoweledge to our English tongue, would stain the same, with better: or
else, that they would not disdain, to forde their favorable words, to such,
as express their good will in the same: although not so well as it might be,
yet as their eloquence will permit them. And thus much, to the learned reader,
whom I make the judge of my work, though I permit the reading of it, to all
other. But now, thou unlearned reader: forasmuch as, whatsoever I did, I did
it for the desire, I had to profit thee: it shall be thy part, of the worst to
think the best. For, had it not been for thy commoditye, I could well enough
have suppressed mine ignorance with silence: and so, by concealinge that little
which I know: although not blased my simple skill: yet, well have avoided, the
necessity of excuse, in such things as I deserve reprehension. But so much I
tendered thy profit, that, I had rather to say somewhat (although not so
perfectly, as some other might) then, for lack of my little labor, to let so
wor^hy as book, lie unknown unto the. Thus, whiles I study to profit thee,
I am feign to submit my doings, to the judgment, of every curious carper.
Wherefore, inasmuch as, I have brought the (who toward these things, wast no
otherwise then blind) by my travail, to the sight hereof: and caused the, to
be rid from blindenes (which is so loathsome a thing, that it is almost grown
into a proverb, that a blind man, would be glad to se his nighest fellow
hanged, because the he should see (then truly, though I crave no praise at
thy hands (because it is a token of ignorance, to be praised of the ignorant)
yet, I may be bold, to desire so much of the, as Apelles commanded the
foolish shoemaker, to perform. Who, when as he beheld the picture of a man,
drawn by Apelles, so liuelye, that the senses of man would have doubted,
whether it were a picture, or a living creature: not contented, with the syghte
of it, which was more meet for a prince to behold then him: began, to find
fault with his show. Apelles, knowing that he was a shomaker, took it in
good part: and with the pensile, amended the fault. But the shoemaker by
likelihood, sum what proud, that he was able, to find fault with Apelles
works: came again the second day. And, began to disprayse the proportion of
his face.

Wherewithal, Apelles being much moved, stepped forth, and said. No farther
then thy shoe, sowter. Showing thereby, that no man ought to talk farther,
then his skill will bear him.

Megabizes, esteemed Alexander as a prince, whiles he, stood in his scoole,
and said nothing. But, when he began to talk of things which he knew not:
he said unto him, that even his little children, would laughe him to scorn.
Wherefore, shortly to make an end, and to send the to Tullye.

Do thou, neither praise, nor disprayse, farther then thy conning will bear the
For, they are both alike faults. But rightly weyghe, and remember the words
of Tullie, to whom, I now send the, to enjoy such pleasure, as at the first,
whiles I my self red him, I frendelye wished unto thee.

THE FIRST BOOK of the report of those Questions which Mark Tullye Cicero
disputed in his manor of Tusculanu^: treatinge whether death be evil yea or no.
BEING OF LATE wholly (or else for the most part) ridden of my causes of Plea,
and Parlyamente matters (dear fre^d Brute) I referred my self (chiefly by
your council) to those studyes: which concealed in my mind, suspended for a
season, and for a long space discontinued I have now revived. And forasmuch
as the right trade and order of all those arts which pertayne to the framinge
of a perfect life, is contained in the study of wisdom, which is named
philosophye: I thought good to endite the same in the Latin tongue: not for
that I thought it could not be so well understood, either in the Greek, or by
the teachers of the same language: but because my judgment has been ever
such, that our countrymen have either invented and found out things, more
wisely then the Greeks: or at the least that such as they had taken of them
they had made far more perfect: especially if the things were such, as they
esteemed worthy their travail and pains. For in manners, orders of living, and
maynteyning of householde: We truly behave our selves both far better than
they, and also more liberal.

And as for the comen wealth, our forefathers have governed it, with much more
politic orders and laws.

What should I say of warfare? in the which our countrymen passed truly in
manhood, but much more in pollecy.

But as for the gifts of Nature, and such things as they might attain unto
without learning: neither the Greeks, neither yet any other nation, may well
be compared with them. For, what so great grauitye? what so notable
constancye? stoutness of stomach, honestye? or trust, what so passinge
virtue in all kind of points, has been found in any nation? that it may for
the same be compared with our auncesters? In learning and all kinds of
profound knoweledge.

Greece passed us. Howebe it truly it was a light work to excel us in those
things, in the which we did not contend with them.

For where as the Greeks have had among the^ the most ancient Poets that
ever were counted learned (for Homer and Hesiodus lived before the buylding of
Rome: and Archilocus in the time of Romulus) we knew not Poetrye till of late
years.

For four hundred and ten years after the buyldinge of Rome, Liuius set forth
an interlude.

Caius Claudius, the son of Cecus, and Marcus Tuditanus being Consuls: the
year next before the birth of Ennius, which was more aunciente then Plautus
or Neuius. Of late years therefore Poets were of our countrymen both known
and received. Albeit we find in those histories, which were written in the
first foundation of our city, that at that time, they were wont in bankets to
singe certain songs, made of the noble prowes of valiant men. But that such
men were never in any estimation, we may well gather by the oration of Cato, in
the which he objected it as a rebuke to Marcus Nobilior, that he had taken
with him Poets into his province. For he had led into Aetolia the poet
Ennius: as we al well know. The less therefore that poets were esteemed, the
less men coueted their knowledge: and yet those few that gave the^ selves
thereto, were nothing inferioure to the renown of the Greeks. Likewise, if
it had been counted a quality prayseworthy (in Fabius a moo^^ noble Prince) to
paynte: should not we have had in our city, as excellent in that science
(think you) as ever was Policletus or Parrhasius?

Honor bredeth arts, and all men are provoked to study by fame: and always
those things are neglected, which no man sets by. The Greeks thought there
was great conninge and knoweledge in singinge: as well to the instruments, as
alone: and for that cause Epaminundas (in my judgment) the prince of Greece) is
reported to have been conning in singinge to the instruments: and Themistocles
a few years before, for that in a certain banquet he refused the harp, was
counted the worse learned. Therefore in Greece Musicia^s flourished: and every
man learned their art: neither could any be counted well learned being
ignorant of the same.

Geometrye was in great estimacion emonges them. For the which cause there
was nothing with them more famous, then the Mathematicalles. But we have
comprised the art of Geometry in the knowledge of measures and reasons of the
same. But co^trarywise, a perfect orator we have quickly poolished: who^ at ye
first we had not learned, but only meet to plead: but now nevertheless well
learned. For we understand yt Galba, Africanus, and Lelius were profound men:
and he who far passed them in age, namely Cato, very studious: after him
Lepidus, Car^o, and both the Gracchi: but afterward so many and so notable
me^, even to this our time, that herein, either not much, or else nothing at
all, we yielded to the Greeks. Philosophy has been neglected unto this our
age: and has been hitherto void of the light of the latin tongue: which now
must be opened, and revived of us to the intent, that if in our business, we
have somewhat profyted our country, we may also do the like by some means in
this our time of leisure: wherein also we ought to take the more pains,
because there are certain Latin books written now a days very
unadvisedly: set forth by men honest enough, but not sufficiently learned.

Truly it may well be, that some man may inuente well, and nevertheless,
that which he has invented, can not pr^nounce eloquentlye: but that any man
should set abroad his own inventions, which he can neither well dispose neither
hansomly pen, the reading of the which should nothing at all delighte the
hearer: it is the point of such a one, as abuses both leisure and learning.
Therefore, their own books they read with such, as they them selves are:
neither does any man handle them, except such, as would have the self same
liberty in writing granted them. Wherefore, if we brought any help by our
labors, to the praise of Orators, we will much more dylygently open the
fountaynes of Philosophye: out of the which nevertheless, those our works of
Rethorique did flow. But as Arystotle, a man of wonderful wit, and profound
knowledge, moved with the great fame and report of Isocrates the Rhetorician,
began both to plead, and also to teach young men: and so to join knoweledge
with eloquence: even so it likes me, neither to lay apart mine old study of
pleading, and yet nevertheless, to be occupied in this more noble and
plentiful art. For I have ever judged that to be perfect Philosophy, which
could reason of weighty matters, as well with great knowledge as also with
perfect eloquence In the which kind of exercise I have so earnestly labored my
self, that now I durst keep scooles after the manner of the Greeks. As of
late after your departure, in my manor of Tusculanum, being accompanied with
many of my familier fre^des, I assayed what I could do in that manner of
reasoninge. For as before I declamed causes, so this is my declaming in mine old
age. I willed any man to propose whatsoever he listed to hear debated: and
thereof I disputed either sittinge or walking. Therefore my disputacions in
scooles holden five days together, I have endyted in as many books. The order
thereof was this. That when he who would hear any matter discussed, had
showed his own opinion of the same, then I should hold the contrary. For this
is (as you know right well) the ancient way, first used by Socrates, to
dispute against all men's opinions. For so he thought, that whatsoever was
most true in any matter, might soonest be boulted out. But to the intent you
may more plainly perceive our reasons, I will write them as if the matter were
doing, not telling, therefore now take you the beginning in this manner.

The hearer. Death seems to me to be a great evil.


Marcus. To the^ do you mean which are dead, or else that must dye?


Hea. To them both.


Mar. It is miserable then, if it be evil.


Hea. Yea truly.


Mar. Then all they which are already dead, and all such as must dye, are
miserable.


Hea. So I think.


Mar. There is no man then which is not miserable


Hea. None truly.


Mar. And truly if you will in all points firmly hold this opinion, all men
which are borne, or shall be borne, are not only wretched but also for ever
wretched. For if you did only call the^ wretches which must dye, then should
you except none of the^ which now live: for we must all dye: but
nevertheless, the end of our misery should be in death: but forasmuch as
such as are dead also are wretched, we are borne to continual miserye. For it
must needs be that they are wretched, which an hundred years past are dead: or
rather all they, which at any time heretofore were borne.


Hea. So I think certaynelye.


Mar. Tell me (I pray you) do these things fear you? the three headed
Cerberus in hell? the noise of Cocytus? the rowinge over Acheron? Tantalus nigh
sterued for thirst, touching the brimmes of the water with his chinne? or this
else? that Sysyphus turns the tombling stone, and vayles not of a ioate.
Perchance also the rigorous judges, Minos, and Radamanthus, before the which,
neither Lucius Crassus, ne yet Marcus Antonius shall defend you, neither
(because before Greek judges your cause shall be pleaded) Demosthenes can do
you any service: you your self, must in a wonderful assemblye plead your
own cause. These things perchance you fear, and therefore think death to be
the greatest evil that may be.


Hea. Think you that I am so mad that I would believe these tales?


Mar. Why? do you not credit them?


Hea. No truly.


Mar. You tell an ill tale for your self.


Hea. Why so?


Mar. Because he had need to be eloquente that should assaye to dysproue
these things.


Hea. Who could not lyghtlye be eloquente in such a cause? or what busynes is
it, to confute these monsters of Poets and Paynters?


Marcus. Yet nevertheless, you shall read the books of philosophers, very
full of reasons, against the said tales.


Hearer. Folyshelye enough I assure you. For who would be so mad, as to be
moved with them?


Marcus. Well, if there be none wretched in hell, neither be there any in hell.


Hearer. So I think.


Marcus. Where then are those who^ you call wretches? or what place do they
inhabit? for if they be they must needs be in some certain place.


Hea. I truly think they be no where.


Mar. Then you think that they are not at all.


Hea. Even so, and yet nevertheless, that they be wretches, because they be
not.


Marcus. I had rather that you said it for fear of Cerberus, then that you
should have brought such an vnwittye reason.


Hearer. Why so?


Mar. Whom you say not to be, he you say afterward is: where is your wit?
when you say that they are wretched, then you say that they which are not
are.


Hea. I am not so blunt witted, that I would so say.


Mar. What say you then.


Hea. For example, I say that Marcus Crassus is wretched, for that he was
caused by death to leave so great riches, that Cneius Pompeye also is wretched,
whom death depryued of so great glory and honor: to conclude, I say that all
those are wretches, which lack the fruicion of this pleasant light.


Mar. You come to the same point, for they must needs be, if they be wretches.
But you even now did deny, that those are which be dead: if they be not
therefore, they can be nothing: and by that means neither can they be
wretches.


Hea. Perchance I have not told you all that I think: for not to be when you
have been, I think is the greatest misery that may be.


Mar. Nay by that reason what can be more wretched then not to have been at
all? and so those which are not yet borne, because they be not, are miserable:
and we our selves, if after our death we shall be miserable, were miserable
also before we were borne. But I sureli for my part, am not remembered, that I
was a wretch before I was borne. If your remembrance be any surer, I would
feign know if you remember any such thing of your self.


Hea. You board with me, as though I should say, that those are wretches which
are unborn, and not those which be dead.


Mar. You grant therefore that they be.


Hea. Nay because they be not as they have been, therefore I say they be
wretched.


Mar. Perceive you not that you speak contraries? for what may be so
contrary, as to say, that he which is not, not only is, but also is a
wretch: Do you, goinge out at the gate called Capena, when you see the tombs
of both the Calatines, the Scipions, the Seruilians, and the Metellans, think
that they be wretched?


Hea. Because you urge me so much with the word, I will no more say that they
be wretches, but only wretches, for that very cause, because they be not


Mar. Then you say not Marcus Crassus is a wretch. But only Marcus Crassus
wretch.


Hea. Even so.


Mar. As though whatsoever you do so pronounce must not either be or not be.
A^e you nothing skillful in Logike?

Emonges the very principles of that art, this is taught. That every
proposition (for so it semes good to me, to interpret the Greek word, (...)
I will use hereafter a more mete term, if I chance to happen on any) is either
true or false. Wherefore, when you say Marcus Crassus wretch, either you say
this in effect, Marcus Crassus is a wretch, that men may judge whether it be
true or false, or else you say nothing at all.


Hea. Well now I grant you, that they are not wretches which are dead,
because you forced me to grant, that such as were not could not be wretches.
But what say you to this? We which live, forasmuch as we must needs dye, are
not we wretches? For what pleasure may we take in our life time, when day and
night we must always think, that we shall by and by dye.


Marcus. Understand you then, by this your grant, of how much misery you have
relyeued mankind?


Hearer. How so?


Mar. Because, if death were miserable to such as are dead, then we should
have a continual and everlasting misery. But now I se the end of our race: to
the which when we have once run, there is nothing more that we ought to
fear. But you (as far as I can perceive) follow the opinyon of Epicharmus
the Sicilian, a man quycke witted, and not wholye void of learning.


Hearer. What was his opinion? for I know it not.


Marcus. I will show you if (I can) in Latin: for you know, that I do no more
use to speak Greek in my Latin talk, then Latin in my Greek.


Hea. You do well in that. But I pray you, what was the opinion of Epicharmus?


Mar. I would not dye: but to be dead, I would not much pass.


Hea. Now I remember the Greek very well. And inasmuche as you have constrained
me to grant, that such as are dead, are not wretched: bring to pass also
(if you can) that to dye I may think no misery.


Hea. Surely that is but a small matter. But I am about things of more weight.


Hea. How is this but a small matter? or what are those more weyghty matters
that you entende to bring to pass?


Mar. Because, if after death, there is no evil, neither truly is death it
self evil: the next time to the which, is the time after death, in the which
you grant there is no euel. So to die truly is no evil, because it is but a
leadinge and an entrance to that which is no evil.


Hea. I pray you, let these things be more plainly opened. For these dark
reasons, make me sooner to confess the thing that you desire, then to agree to
it. But I pray you, what are those greater things which you mind to do?


Mar. To teach (if I can) that death is not only no evil, but also a good
thing.


Hea. I do not necessarily require so much: but I greatly desire to hear it.
For albeit you bring not to pass, that which you mind, yet you shall surely
persuade me, that death is no evil. But I will not trouble you in your talk,
I had rather hear you speak alone.


Mar. What if I shall ask you any thing? will you not answer me?


Hea. Then I might be counted very statelye. But except you had need, I would
rather you should not also.


Mar. I am contented to follow your mind therein. And those things which you
willed me to show, as well as I can, I will declare. Nevertheless I would
not, you should take my words, as the Oracles of the god Apollo. Or to think
that whatsoever I shall speak is sure and certain: but as the sayenges of
some simple man, foloweinge that which is probable by conjecture. For farther
then likelyhoode I can not go. It is enough for them, to tell certain and
sure things, which say that such things may be known: and also profess
them selves to be wise.


Hea. Keep you what order you please: I am ready to hear you.


Mar. Death it self, which every man semes so well to know, we must first see
what it is. For some think that it is the deparparting of the soul from the
body.

There be other some, which think there is no departure, but that the body
and soul do dye together. But of them, which think that the soul does
depart, some say that he is strayght-wayes scattered: other think that he
remains long: some for ever. But what the soul is, or where, or from
whence, there is great dissensio^. Some think the heart to be the soul: of
the which, some men are called faint hearted, mad hearted, and joined with
hearts in frendshippe. And the wise Nasica, who was twice Consul, was called
a little heart: and A stout hearted man Catus Aelius the syxt.

Empedocles thinks the soul to be a certain blood about the heart. Other
some, take a certain part of the brain to be the soul. Other like none of
these opinions: but place the soul, partelye in the heart, and partly in the
brain.

And again, the soul some men think to be the life: as our countrymen call
it. For we commonly say, to labor for life: to end his life: and to be
long lived. But to Zeno the Stoyke, the soul seems to be fire. And these
opinions which we have recyted, of the heart, brain, life, and fire, are
commonly reported. But every pryuate man has other inventions: As many
auncyente Philosophers before time, and of late, Arist^xenus a Musicyan, and a
Philosopher likewise, said that it was a certain consonaunce of the body,
like as we see in certain songs and instruments a certain pleasant
concente and agreemente, even so that in the nature and shape of the whole
body, there were diverse motions stirred: as in songs soundes and noyses.

He left not his art: and yet he said somewhat: which very thing was
before opened, and declared by Plato.

Xenocrates denied, that the soul had any shape or body: saying that it was
a thing consysting only of members: the power of yt which (as Pythagoras had
before time declared (is of no small force, in the constitucion of man's body.
His master Plato divided the soul in to three parts. The chief of the which
(namely reason) he placed in the head as in a forte: from which he separated
the two other parts: namelye anger and desire: which he placed in diverse
roames. Anger in the breast, and desire under those places which are about the
heart. But Dicearchus, in his books which he wrytes of the reasonynge of
learned men kept at Corinthe, in the first bringes in many speakers: in the
other two he brings in a certain old man of Phthios, (who^ he calls
Pherecrates, and says that he came of Deucalion (reasoninge that the soul is
nothing. And that it is but a vain name, neither thinks he, that there is
either mind or soul, in man or beast, otherwise then a certain motion, by
the which we both do and suffer, spread in all living creatures alike. Neither
will he that it should be any other thing, the^ the body so shaped, that by
the force of Nature, it may have life and sense.

Aristotle who far passed all the rest in wit and diligence, (always
exceptinge Plato) after he had treated of those four kind of principles, out
of the which al things take their beginning: thought that there was a certain
fifth nature, of the which the soul and mind did consist. For to think, to
foresee, to learn, to teach, to inuente, and diverse such other propertyes, as
to remember, to love, to hate, to desire, to fear, to be vexed, to be merry:
these and such like, he thought were in none of these four kind of causes.
Therefore he adds to them the fyft kind, without any propre name, and
calls the soul and mind, by a new name (...), which signifies a certain
continual and everlasting motion. Except perchance a few, which I remember
not: these are the opinions of all the philosophers, touching the soul. For as
for Democrytus, a worthy man, but yet compounding the soul of the chaungeable
meetinge of certain light, round and indivisible bodies, we will now
ouerpasse. For there is nothing which a company of Butterflyes will not
lightlye make with him. Of all these opinions which is most true, let some
god judge: but which is most likely to be true, there is great doubt.
Whether will you therefore, that we try out the truest of them? or else that we
return to our purpose?


Hea. I would very feign hear both: if it might be. But it were very hard to
confound them together. Wherefore, if without the searching of these opinions,
we may be delivered from the fear of death, I pray you do that which we have
in hand: if not, do that now, and this at some other time.


Mar. That which I perceive you would rather have done, that also I think, is
more commodious.

For which soever of those opinions be true, I shall lightlye persuade you by
reason, that death is not evil but rather good. For if the heart, blood, or
brain be the soul, truly, because either of them is a body, it shall dye
with the rest of the body. If it beaer, it shall be dispersed: if it be fire
it shall be quenched: if it be Aristoxenus musical concent, it shall be
dissolved. What shall I say of Dicearchus? who says that the soul is
nothing at all. By all these opinions there can nothing after death pertayne to
any man. For even with our life our sense is lost: and he that feels
nothing, need not to pass, what chance betides him. Yet the opinions of y^
other Philosophers, put us in good hope (if that delight you) that our souls
may after this life pass into the heuens, as a place appointed for them.


Hea. Truly it delyghteth me greatly. And assuredly, y^ it so is, I will
always persuade my self.


Mar. What need you in this case, to require my labor? am I able in eloquence
to excel Plato? read diligently that book, which he wrote of the soul: so
shall you lack nothing, concerning the knoweledge of this question.


Hea. I have done so truly, yea and that very often. But (I know not how)
whiles I read him, I am fully persuaded. But after I have laid aside the
book, and begin to think with my self, of the immortality of our souls, all
my persuasion sodaynelye slips away.


Mar. Well sir, grant you that the souls abide after death? or else say you
that they dye with the rest of the body?


Hea. I grant that they remain.


Mar. What if they remain?


Hea. I grant they be blessed.


Mar. What if they dye?


Hea. Then they be not wretched, because they be not. For that being thereunto
costrayned by you I have already granted.


Mar. How then? or for what cause? do you say that death is evil? which
either shall make us happy, our souls remayninge, or else not wretched our sense
being paste.


Hea. Show therefore first (unless it be to paynefull for you) that our
souls remain after this life. But if you can not prove that (for it is very
hard) you shall show, that there is no harm in death. For I fear much
least it be a grief (I do not mean to lack sense) but that I must lack
sense.


Mar. To prove this matter which you desire, we may use as good authoures as
may be: which in all causes both ought and also is wont to be of great
importance: and first we may confyrme it by all antiquity: which, the nigher
it was to the beginning of the world, and progenye of the gods, so much the
better (peradventure) did see those things, which were true. For emonges
those ancient fathers, (who^ Ennius calls Cascos) this one thing was comen:
that there is in death feling: and that a man by departing of his life, is not
so utterly extinguished, that he should altogether peryshe. And this may you
gather, both by many other things, but chiefly, by the law of the bishops,
and ceremonies of burials: which they being most wittye men, would neither,
with so great care have observed, neither yet being irreuerently or unhonestly
used, would so sharply have punished: except this had been fast fixed in
their minds, that death is no destruction utterly marring and blemishing al
things, but only a certain departure and change of life: the which to
worthy men, and women, is wont to be a guide into heaven: and vicious and il
disposed persons, did cause to tarry on the ground: and nevertheless to remain
still. By this opinion also, and by the judgment of our countrymen. Romulus in
heavens with gods does pass his time.

As Ennius the Poet, agreeing to comen fame, has written. And from thence
flyeng to us, and so to the West Occeane, Hercules is counted so great, and so
mighty a god. For this cause Bacchus, the son of Semele, is so much
reported. And in like manner famous were the.ii. sons of Tindareus, who not
only in field were helpers of victory to the Romans, but also messengers of
the same. Also Ino, the daughter of Cadmus, is she not of the Greeks by the
name of Leucothea, and of our countrymen by the name of Matuta worshipped?
What? the whole heaven (to the intent I make no longer discourse) is it not
replenished with mankind? for if I should assaye to search auncyente
monumentes, and put in writing, such things as be in old Greek books: the^
should you well perceive, that such, as we count to be the greatest gods, have
departed out of ye earth, into those places of heaven. But ignorant men that
knew not natural philosophye, which of late came into use, persuaded them
selves so much, as they could gather by natural reason. The order and causes
of things they knew not.

They were often moved by visions (and those chiefelye in the night) to
think, that such as were dead, did live again. Wherefore, like as we se it a
very strong argument to believe that there are gods: because there is no nation
so cruel, neither yet any man so beastlye: in whose mind there is not fixed
some opinion of God. (Many nevertheless have conceived diverse foolish fancies
of the gods) but yet they grant all that there is a divine power and nature.
Neither yet, does the communication or agreement of men, cause this consent,
the opinion is confirmed by no decrees, by no laws: but in every thing, the
argement of all nations is taken for the law of nature: So likewise, in as much
as all nations, have worshipped their benefactors as gods after their death
(although some more foolyshe then other it is evident, that nature has
engraffed in the hearts of all men, a natural opinion without persuasion, that
our souls are immortal, and remain after this life.

But who is there, that would not bewail the death of his friend? when he
thinks, that he is deprived the commodities of this life. Take away his
fansye, and you shall take away all mourning. For no man mourns, but for his
discommodity. For we sorrow, and are vexed, and all our woeful lamentation, and
sad mourning, ryseth hereof, that him whom so entirelye we loved, we suppose to
lack the commodities of this life, and that to feel. And these things we
ymagine, only by the conducting of nature, without either reason or learning.
And hereof we will talk hereafter. But the greatest argument, by the which we
may gather, that nature it self, does privily think of the immortality of our
souls, is that most wise men, take greatest care for things to come after
their death.

Some one sets trees, which may profit in an other age (as Statius says in
his books entitled Synephebi to what other end? but for that he knew, that
the time to come did also pertayne unto him? for the same cause, diverse
diligente husbandemen graffe trees, whose increase they shall never see. And
likewise, many noble men make laws, orders, and customs, the obseruatio^s of
the which, they shall never behold. What? the begettinge of children? the
spreading of fame? the adoptions of children? the diligent obseruinge of
testamentes? the very monumentes, and Epitaphes of graves? what other thing do
they signify? then that, we have al a respect to ye time to come? Besides this.
There is no doubt, but the trial of nature, ought to be taken of the best
nature. But what men's nature is better the^ theyrs, which think them selves
borne, to help, save, and comfort men? Hercules is departed from hence to the
gods. To them he should never have gone, unless whiles he was emonges men, he
had prepared him self a way thither. But these are old matters: and now also
sanctified by religion. What shall we think, of so many, and so notable men,
in this our comen wealth, which willinglye took their death, for their
countries sake? Did they (think you) suppose? that their memory should be
extended no longer then the term of their life?

Truly, no man at any time was so mad, as without hope of immortality, to
offer him self to death for his country. For otherwise, it had been lawefull
for Themistocles: to have lived in ease, it had been lawefull for Epaminundas:
It had been also (that we enquire no farther of old and foreign matters) lawful
for me. But (I know not how) there sticks in men's minds, a certain guess
of life to come: yea, and that does most commonly happen, in the most stout
and hearty courages, and in them appears most lightlye. Which hope taken away,
who is there so mad, that would continually live in labor and danger? and
hitherto we have spoken of princes. But do we not se the like of Poets? will
not they be remembered after their death? Upon what cause then, was this
written? Behold ye Citisens here the shape of Ennius image old.
Who has descriued your fathers factes and eke their gestes has told.


Lo, he requires the report of fame, and renown at their hands, whose
forefathers he had caused by his writynge to be famous. And the same Ennius,
writes in another place thus. Let no man me bemoane, nor wayle me when I dye.
For why? alive my good report in mouths of men shall fly.


But what doubt we of Poets? yea, such as live by handcraftes, desire after
death to be remembered. For what other cause did Phydias, grave his shape in
the tergat of Minerua? where it was not lawefull for him to write? What? the
Philosophers themselves, do they not in those books which they write of the
despising of glory, imprint their own names? Certes, if the consent of all men
be the voice of nature, and al men in all places do agree, that there is some
thing, that does pertain to the^ which are departed out of this life: we also
must needs think ye same. And since we know, ye they whose mind passes either
in wit or virtue (because their wit is best) do se most clearly the power of
nature. It is most likely, forasmuch as every good man takes care for his
posterity, that he supposes that there is some thing, the sense and feeling of
the which, he shall have after death. But as we know by nature that there be
gods: But what they be, we gather by wit and reason: so we think because of
the consent and agreement of all nations, that our souls do remain after
death. But in what place they be, or what manner things they are, we must
gather by reason. The ignorance of the which, has feigned and invented hell
and such terroures, as you seemed somewhat before not without just cause to
despise. For our bodies being laid in the ground, and covered with earth
(whereof also such as are buried are said to be earthed) they thought the
rest of our life should be led under the ground. Which opinion has been the
cause of great errors: Which have been augmented and increased by Poets. For
the thick company of the Theater, in the which there are many women and
children, is much moved hearing so terrible a verse as this. I here am come
from hell, by ways full hye and steep.
By dens ybuylte with stoanes, by caves full dark and deep.
Where lothly darkness dwells, where cralling furies creep.


Yea and that error was of such force, (which now I trust is nigh
extinguished) that whereas they saw, men's bodies burn before: yet
nevertheless, they would feign them doing such things in hell, as without
bodies, could neither be done in deed, neither yet ymagined. For they could
not well conceive, how the soul might live without the body: and for that
cause, they ymagined that they lived under some certain shape and figure.
Upon this occasion, Homere wrote his book which he entitled (...). Hereof
spronge that Necromancie, which my friend Appius was wont to use. For this
cause also, was the lake that stands not far from mi house, called the lake
of hell. Whence souls are stireed up, in dark and grisely shapes.
Which when hell gates are opened once, out at the doors escapes.


Yet nevertheless, these shapes and shadows they feign to speak. Which can
not be without the tongue jaws, sides, and lyghtes. For they conceived very
little in their minds: but referred all to their bodily eyes. But it is a
great point of wit, for a man to revoke his mind, from the judgment of his
outward senses, and to withdraw the consent of his thoughts, from things
that have been allowed by custom.

And I believe truly, that there have been many other, which in all ages have
reasoned of the immortalitye of the souls. But of those which have left any
writings behind them, Pherecides, a Sirian taught first, that the souls of
men were everlasting. A man surely of great antiquitye. For he lived in the
time of my kinsman Tullus Hostilius. This opinion, his scoler Pythagoras did
chiefly confyrme, who when he came into Italye, in the raygne of Tarquinius
the proud, amassed all great Greece, with his estimation, learning, and
authority. Yea, and many years after the name of the Pythagoreans was so
highely esteemed, that in comparyson of them, no other Philosophers seemed to
be learned. But let us return to those aunciente Philosophers. Commenly they
would give no reason of any thing, that they spoke unless it were same such
thing, as they should declare by numbers or descriptions. It is said that
Plato, to the intent that he might know the Pythagoreans, came into Italye: and
there was acquaynted both with many other, but chyefelye with Archytas and
Timeus, of whom he learned all the opinion of Pithagoras: and that at the
first, he not only thought as Pythagoras did, as concerning the eternitye of
the soul, but also confyrmed the same with reason. Which (unless you be
otherwise minded) let us ouerpasse, and leave of all this reasonynge of the
immortalytye of the souls.


He. What will you now leave me, wh^ you have brought me into so great
expectacion? I had rather to err with Plato (whom I know how much you
esteem, and I wonder at the more, because of your praise) then to think well
with other.


Mar. Worthelye spoken. For I my self assuredly, would not be aggrieued to
err with him. And is there any doubt, but that as he has handled al other
things very learnedlie and profoundly, so he has done this also? although
this has least need of cunning handeling. For the Mathematicians do well
prove it saying, that the earth, which is placed in the midst of the world,
in comparison of the whole heaven, has but the proportion of a small point,
which they call a center. And such is the nature of those four bodies, of the
which all things take their beginning, that they have equallye divided
motions. So that all earthly and watery bodies, do naturally fall down into
the earth and sea, and all other, namelye fierye and aerye, like as the
first.ii. because of the heaviness of their weyghte do tend to the midst
place of the world, so these by right lines fly vpwardes into the heavenly
region: either because they them selves naturallye do move vpwardes, or else,
because they being light bodies, are by force driven from the other which are
gross and heavy. Which sayenges, forasmuch as they are certain, it must
needs follow, that our souls, when they are departed from our bodies, if they
be of fyerye or aerie nature, must of necessity ascend into the higher
regions. But if the soul be some number (which was spoken more wittelye then
plainly) or if it be that fifte principle, (as well the name as the nature of
the which, no man can understand) undoubtedly, either of them are so pure and
perfect things, that at their departure they can not abide on the ground. And
truly some one of these is the soul. For so quycke a spyryte lies not
drenched in the heart, brain, or blood, as Empedocles says. But as for
Dicearchus with his scoole fellow Aristorenus, (learned men both) we will now
ouerpasse: of the which, the one seems never to have felt any grief, who
thinks that he has no soul, and the other is so delighted with his notes
and tunes, that he assayeth to allude them to these earnest matters. But a
harmonye is made of the diuersitye of tunes, the sun dry settinge of the
which, may make many sweet harmonyes: but the conformitye of a man's
lymmes, and the whole shape of his body, without a soul what harmonye it
may make, I can by no means understand. But he be learned, may in this
matter geus place to his master Aristotle, and he himself practice singi^g.
For it is wiselye counsayled of the Greeks in a certain proverb in this
sort. In what Art each man skillful is and most profoundly seen.
The same always to exercise, it does him best beseem.


But that foolyshe opinion, of the fallinge together of certain indivisible,
light, and round bodies, let us utterly root out: which nevertheless
Democritus ymagineth to be whole and breathing, that is to say of an aerie
nature. So the soul (which if it be of any of those.iiii. bodies, whereof all
things are made, does undoubtedly consist of fire, which opinion Panetius
also likes best) must needs fly to the higher regions: For those.ii.
elements, namelye fire and aer, have no falling, but go always vpwardes. So
it comes to pass, that whether they are scattered far from the earth, or else
do abide and always keep their own nature, by all these reasons it must
necessarilye follow, y^ our souls ascend unto heaven dividing this gross and
compound aer, which is next to ye earth. For our soul is more whote, or rather
more fyerye, then this aer, which I termed whilome gross and compound. And
that hereby we may well perceive: because our dumpishe earthly bodies do ware
whote, with the heat of our minds. Furthermore, it must needs be, ye the soul
must lightly pass through this aer (which I do often term gross) because
there is nothing more swifte then it, neither any such quickenesse, as may
by anne means be compared with the quickenes of the same. Which if he remain
unwasted, and like to his former being he must needs so move, that he, shall
pearce and cut all this lower aer, in the which, clouds, wyndes, and showers,
are gathered. Which is both moist and cloudye with the exhalracions of the
earth. Which region after it has once passed, and attained to a nature like to
it self, being there stayed amiddes the light aer, and temperate heat of the
son, he rests upon the fire, and there makes an end of ascending any
higher. For when it has gotten heat and lyghtnes congruent to his nature,
then as a thing equallye paysed, it month neither vpwardes nor downewardes.
And there at the last is his natural seat, when it has once pierced to
things in nature like to it self. In the which without the want or lack of
any thing, it shall be nouryshed, and sustained with such food as the sterres
them selves are fed and nouryshed wythal. And whereas here, the pricks of the
flesh are wont commonly to inflame us, to all ill motions, as we are so much
the more kindled by them, as we envy those, that have the same things that we
desire to have: then truly we shall be happy, when our bodies being ones
dissolved, we shall be rid from all yil desires and emulations. And that,
which we now do when we are void of ear (I mean the giuinge of our
selves, to the consideration and weyghing of some thing perteyning to
knoweledge) that shall we then do with much more liberty, and setle our
selves wholly, to the contemplation and viewinge of nature: both because
naturallye there is graffed in our minds, an insatiable desire to know the
troth and also because the place it self, to the which we shall come,
because it will show unto us, a more easy knowledge of those things which
we desire to know, must needs increase in us the desire and love of
knowledge, the beautye of the which place, has in this filthy earth, stirred
up, that ancient and heavenly philosophy as Theophrastus says) kyndled first
with the desire of knoweledge. But that heavenly pleasure they chiefly shall
enjoy, which although when they dwelte in this low earth, they had their
senses cloked with the clouds of error, yet in mind did still r new the
memory of that heavenly place, from whence they first came, for if they
here think them selves great trauaylers, which have seen the crickes of ye
sea Eurinus and those strayghtes, by the which the ship passed which was called
Argo. Because in her some chosen men of Greece.
To Colchos sailed to win the golden Fleece.
Or those which have seen the great
Oceane seas, and eke that place where
The surginge waves with suryous force Europe and Afrike part.


What sight may we think that shall be? when we shall behold the whole
earth, the situation, form, and description of the same, the places
inhabyted, and such again, as either because of parchinge heat, or fresynge
cold, do lack inhabi^auntes. For now truly, se not so much as those
things which we se with our bodily eyes, neither is there any sense in our
body. But (as not only the natural Philosophers, but also the Phisicians do
say, who have seen the same opened and disclosed) certain ways and holes
there be, bound from the inner vaute of our mind, to our eyes, ears, and
nosethrilles. And for this cause sometime it happens, that we are so blinded,
either with some sad thought, or vehemente disease, that our eyes and ears
being both hole and open, yet we can neither hear nor see. So that we may
well perceive, that it is our mind, that sees and hears, and not those
parts, which are but the casementes of the same. Without the which,
nevertheless, the mind it self can perceive nothing, unless it be
earnestlye bent thereon. Besides all this, what a thing is it, that the mind
only, can co^taine things of most diverse nature? as colors, tastes,
feelynges, smells and soundes? which by the.v. se^ses only, the mind could never
discern, were it not that al things coming to it by them: it only is judge
of all. And then truly, these things shall be more plain and clearly seen,
when as the soul is come to his own natural liberty. For now in deed,
although nature has very suttely wrought certain passages from the soul
to the body: yet nevertheless, the same are compassed, and in manner stopped up
with certain gross and earthlye bodies. But when there shall be nothing, but
the soul it self, then there shall be no let, but that it may well discern and
judge, what each manner of thing is. I could here describe (if my matter so
required) how many, and how sundry delectable syghtes the soul shall have,
in those heavenly regions. The which, sometimes when I do remember, I can not
but wonder at the vanitye of certain Philosophers, which have the secret
knoweledge of natural philosophye in great admyratian: and therefore thank
and praise with all their hearts, the inuenter and finder of the same, and
worship him as God: saying, that by this his benefyte, they are delivered of
right heavy masters: that is to wite, continual terror, and daily and nightly
fear. For what so doting a fool is there, that would fear those things,
which you, if you had not the knoweledge of natural philosophy, would have
feared. The Temples low of Acheron, with palenes all bespred.
And dens full deep of doleful death with darkness al beset.


Is it not a shame, for Philosophers to boaste, that now they fear not these
things, but know them to be false? May not a man think them quick
witted, which would have credited these things, had not learning persuaded
the^ to the contrary? But they have gotten knoweledge enoughe, which have
persuaded the^ selves, that at the time of their death they should wholye
peryshe? which if we grant to be true, (for I will not at this time much
contend with them) what have they therein either to be glad or proud of?
neither yet can I see any cause, why the opinion of Pithagoras and Plato,
should not be true. For were it so, that Piato brought no reason (see in what
estimation I have that man) his very authority should move me. But he has
confirmed his opinion with so many proofs, that it appears, that both he
was willing to persuade and also has persuaded. But there be many against him,
which think our souls condemned to death: neither is there any other cause,
why they will not believe the eternitye ^f the same, then because they can not
well ymagine or think, what manner thing the soul should be without the body.
As though they could understand, what manner thing it is, whiles it is in the
body: what shape it has, what quantitye, or what place. But if it were
possible, that they might see all the inward parts enclosed in man's body,
which now are separate from our syghte: whether they should see the soul,
or whether it is of such subtle nature, that they could by no means discern
it, that let them weyghe, which deny, that they can ymagine any soul
without the body. they must first see, what manner thing they will think him
to be, whiles he is in the body. For to me assuredly (diverse times, when I
ponder with my self the nature of the soul) it seems a far darker and
deeper consideration, to think, what and how the soul could be in the
body, as in a strange habitation: then what it shall be, when it shall depart
from thence, and fly into the open heavens, as to his propre and appointed
place. For if it be not possible for us to comprehend in our minds such
things as we never saw then, neither god him self, neither yet our soul
that came from God, what it shall be, when it is departed from our bodies, can we
well ymagine. Dicearchus and Aristoxenus (for that it was a deep and a weyghty
matter, to consider what the soul might be) said that there was no soul at
all. And surely, it is the chyefest point of wit, with the soul to know
the soul: and that is the wise meaning of that sage precept of Apollo, which
wills us to know our selves. For I can not think that it should bid us to
know our lymmes, stature, or shape. For we are not bodies: neither, when I
speak to you, do I talk to your body. Therefore when he says know thy
self, he says as much in effect, as know thy self. For thy body is but
the vassayle, and dongeon of thy mind. Whatsoever thy soul does, that is
thine own deed. And unless it had been thought an heavenly thing, to know
the soul: that precepte had never been taken to have been of such excellency,
as to have been imputed to God. But, if he know not, what manner thing his
soul is, how shall he know, that he him self either lives, or moves? And
hereuppon, is grounded that reason of Plato, which is declared by Socrates, in
the book called Phedrus, and rehearsed of me, in my syrt book of a come^
wealth That which always moves, is everlasting. But, as well that which
moves other things, as also that which is moved by other, when it ceasseth
to move, ceasseth also to live. Only that therefore, which moves it self
(because it can never forsake it self) can not but move. It also, is a
fountain and beginning of motion, to other things which are moved. Now of a
principle there can be no beginning. For of a principle all things are made,
and it takes his beginning of no other, (for it were no principle, if it took
beginning of any other thing.) Then if it has no beginning, neither has it
any ending. For a principle being ones extynct, can neither it self at any
time be reuyued, neither yet create, or make any other thing, whereas al
things take their beginning of a principle. So we see, that the beginning of
al motions, proceeds of that which is moved of it self. But that, can neither
have beginning, nor ending (not though the sky should fall, and all things
stand at a stay) neither yet any outward force, by the which it should be
moved. Wherefore, inasmuch it appears, that that is everlasting, which moves
it self: and no man will deny that our souls are of that sort, (for
whatsoever is moved by any outward motion, and not of it self, is without
life) it must needs follow, that since it is the only propertye and nature of
the soul (among so many sundry things) to be moved of it self: it
neither at any time heretofore had beginning, nor at any time hereafter shall
have endinge. Let all the rascal Philosophers lay their heads together, (for
so it seems good unto me to term them, which swerve from Plato, and
Socrates, and from their sect) they shall neither at any time express any
thing so eloquently, neither yet be able to perceive how suttelye this self
same reason is concluded. The soul therefore, perceives that he him self does
move: wherewithal it feels also, that it is of his own power, and not of any
foreign force: and that it can by no means chau^c^ that he should forsake him
self. Where by it is concluded, ye he is everlasting. Now let me hear, what
you can say against this.


Hea. I truly can not suffer my self, so much as to ymagine any thing
contrary unto it: I do so much Rauour your opinion herein.


Mar. How think you the^, of those things which are in the soul? which, if I
could by any means conceive, how they might have beginning, I could well
ymagine how they might peryshe also. For blood, choler, fleame, bones,
sinowes, veins and all the frame of our body, I could well ymagine how, and
whereof it is made. The soul it self, if it had no greater thing in it, then,
that it is causer of our life, I could lightlye be persuaded, y^ a man might as
well live by the power of nature, as a vine, or any other tree. Also if it had
no stranger properties then to desire some things and to abstain from other,
I could think yt that were as well common to beasts as to it. But first it
has an infinite remembrance of a wonderful number of things, emonges the
which, Plato reckeneth ye recordinge of our former life. For in yt book, which
is entitled Memnon, Socrates demau^deth certain questions of a child, as
concerning the measures of a four square: to ye which he answers as any
child might, but yet nevertheless, the questions are so easy, that he
au^swereth him so, as if he had learned Geometrye.

Whereby Socrates concludes, that to learn, is nothing else, then to
remember. This place also he handeleth more at large, in that talk, which he
had that self same day, that he departed out of this life. For he says
that when a rude and ignorant man, does answer well to one that questioneth
wiselye with him, then he does playnely^ show, that he does not the^ learn
those things but reme^breth the^, as things which he had almost forgotten. He
says also, that we could by no means, from our childhoode have the
general grounds of so many things placed in our minds, unless our soul
before it entered into our body, had lived in the knoweledge of the same. And
whereas the body is nothing, as Plato in all his works does reason (for he
takes that as nothing, which has had beginning and shall have ending, and that
only to be which shall continue for ever) the soul could not come to the
knowledge of these things, whiles he was enclosed in the body, but brought
them thither with him. Neither yet does it clearelye perceive the same at the
first, when it sodaynelye comes into the body, as into a troubled mansion,
but after that it has revoked and reposed it self, it recounteth such
things as it knew before. So to learn is no other thing, then to remember.
But I do wonder at our remembrance after an other sort. For what is it,
whereby we do remember? or from whence has our nature that force or power? I
do not here ask how notable the memory of Symonides was, either of
Theodectes, or else of Cyneas, the ambassador which came from Pyrrhus to the
Senate, or of Carneades, or of Scepsius Metrodorus, or else of our countreiman
Hortensius. I speak of the memoryes of the comen sort of men. And of those
inespeciallye, which spend the most part of their life in study: whose
memory how great it is, it is hard to think. They remember so many and sundry
things. But to what end belongs this my talk? To consider what this power
of remembrance, and from whence it is. It comes not surely, from the heart,
blood, or brain, neither yet from Democritus moa^es. I know not whether the
soul be fire or aer, neither am I ashamed to confess, that I am ignorant in
that which I know not, but this I may boldly affirm (as well as any man
may, in so dark a matter as this is) that whether the soul be fire or aer,
it is undoubtedly an heavenly thing. For, is there any man that would think,
that so wonderful a power of memory, could be made either of the earth, or
else of this dark and cloudy aer? For although you do not see, what our
remembrance is, yet what manner thing it is, you may well perceive. Or, if that
you can not do, yet you may well understand how great a thing it is. Shall we
then think, that there is any capacity, or void place in the soul, into ye
which as into a vessel, all those things which we do remember are powered? That
truly were very foolyshe. For, what bottom might there be, of such a
vessel? or, what might be the shape, of such a soul? or what so great
widenes might there be in the soul? What? should we think, that our soul is
imprinted, as it were wax, and that our remembrance is the oversight of those
things, which stick imprynted in our hearts? But what pryntes may there be
of words? either what suffyciente marckes of things? or what so huge a space
may there be in the soul, in the which all those things which we remember,
might be prynted? Furthermore, what think you of that part of our mind,
which syndeth out such things, as were never known before and is therefore
called invention, can that be made of this earthlye, frail, and compounde
nature think you?

What think you of him, which first of all, gave every thing his propre
name (which Pythagoras counted a part of great wisdom) or of him which
first gathered men together, to one society, and fellowship of life? what think
you of him also, who first comprised the tunes of our voice (which somed to be
in manner infinite) in a few notes? Or of him, who first marked ye motions,
progressions, and stations of the.7. planets? How judge you also of them, who
first found out corn, cloathinge, houses, orders for man's life, and defense
against wild beasts? by whom, after that we were tamed, and brought from
wildenes, besides our necessities, we have invented things for pleasure. For
there is invented, a temperate variety of the diverse nature of sundry tunes,
to delyght our ears, and also our eyes took great pleasure, in marki^g, as well
those sterres, which are fastened in certain places of the fyrmament, as also
the other, which are called (although they be not so in deed) wanderers: the
conuersions and motions of the which, whose soul did first perceive, he did
plainly teach, that his soul was like to him, which had first made those
things in heaven. For, when Archymedes made the motions of the Moon, the
Son, and the other five Planettes, in the artificial Sphere, he did as
much as God (whom Plato brings in in his book entitled Tymcus, making the
world) when he made the turninge of one Sphere, to rule several motions,
differynge both in slowenes and swyftenes. Which, if in the motion of the
whole world it can not be done, without the hand of god, neither could
Archymedes in his materyall Sphere, have imitated the same, with out an
heavenly wit. Neither yet can I see, how these accustomed things with the
which we are daily acquaynted, can be done without an heavenly power. As that
a Poet should write a grave and full verse, without some heavenly
influence, or that a man should be eloquent with pleasant words, and weyghty
sentences, without some greater invention, then the wit of man. But
philosophy, the mother of all arts, what other thing is it, then (as Plato
says) the gift and (as I think) the invention of the gods? She first taught
us the worship of them, and secondarelye, to use right toward all men, and
then afterward modestye, and stoutenes of stomach. She drove away all
darkness from the soul, whiles it is in the prison of the body, that it might
see all things, as well high and low, as far and near. And sure lie, this
seems to me, to be a heavenly thing, which does so many and so wonderful
things. For what is the remembrance of words and deeds? what is invention?
assuredly such things they are, as a man can not imagine greater, in god him
self. For I do not think, that the gods are delighted with the food which
the Poets call Ambrosia, or with the heavenly drink, which they call
Nectari: neither can I think, that they have young boys waiting at their
tables: neither do I believe Homere, which writes, that Ganimedes was taken up
into heaven to be cupbearer to Jupiter. It is no sufficient cause, why he
should do Laomedon so much injury. Homere feigned it, and applied the qualities
of men to the gods. I had rather that he had derived the properties of ye gods
unto us: namely to be wise, to invent, and to remember. The soul now, which
(as I say) is a heavenly thing, as Euripides fears not to say is god him
self. And truly, if god be either aer or fire, he is the soul of man. For as
the heavenly nature is void both of earthlye substance, and also wateryshe
moisture, so in likewise, is the soul of man compounded of none of them both:
But if it be a certain fyft nature (as Aristotle first invented) assuredlye,
as well the gods, as our souls, do consyste of the same substance. Which
opinion we following, have thus expressed, in our books which we entitled of
consolation. there can be found no original nor beginning of our souls in the
earth: since in them nothing is mixed or co^pound, nothing made or framed of
earth, nothing moist or a^rye, ne yet of fyerie nature: for in these four
natures there is nothing, that has the power to remember, invent, or ymagine,
that can either bear in memory things paste, foresee such as are to come, or
rightly weyghe such as are present. Which propertyes and gifts, as they are
heavenly, so no man can imagine how they may come to man but from God.
Whereby it seems that the nature of the soul, is other then these four: and
separated from these accustomed and commen natures.

So whatsoever it is, that can discern^ by the senses, can judge by discrecyon,
or can will, or not will, that must needs be of an heavenly force and power, and
for that self same cause everlasting. For god him self (whom we can not
conceive, but by the force of our understanding) we can ymagine to be no
other thing, then a loose and free soul, separate from all mortal
concretion, seenge and moving all things, it self being moved of nothing,
and of this self same force and nature is the mind of man. Where then, or what
is thy soul? can thou tell me where, or what manner thing it is? But if I
have not so many helps to the knoweledge of my soul as I would wyshe to
have, will thou therefore let me, to use those things, which I have to the
understanding of my soul? the soul is not able in this body to see him
self. No more is the eye which although he sees all other things, yet (that
which is one of the least) can not discern his own shape. But admit that
the soul can not consider him self: howebeit perhaps he may. His operacions,
as quyckenes of invention, sure remembrance, continuance and swiftnes of
motion, it does well enough perceive. And these be great, yea heavenly, yea
everlasting things. But of what shape it is, or where it rests we ought
not to inquire. As when we see the form and beautye of the heavens,
furthermore such quyckenes of motion, as we can scarce conceive, also the
continual courses of day? and night, the four chaunges of the year,
convenient both for the rypening of fruytes, and also for the te^perate
disposicion of our bodies. Besides this, when we see the son, the causer and
worker of all increase, and the moon whose increase and decrease of light,
does in steed of Calender, descrybe unto us the chaunges of every day, when
we behold the other five planettes, which most constantly continue one set
course (under that Circle which is divided into.xii. equal parts) with
unequal motions, and the faces of the skies, by night on all sides set with
stars, and the globe of the earth (saved from the sea, and fyxed in the
midst of the whole world) in some places habitable, and well tilled, of the
which one part (which we inhabit) is placed under the North star, where The
blousteringe Northern blastes congeale the frosen snow.

And the other far in the south, which the Greeks call (...) whereas the
other parts be not inhabited, either because they are frosen with cold, or
parched with heat. But here where we dwell at appointed seasons. The Sun
does shine, the trees does burgen green.
The merry Uynes, with clusters are bespred.
The bindynge trees with fruit a joy to seen.
The corn does spring, and things that erst were dead.
As now revived their old shape of do cast.
The fountayns flow, and grass wax green a new
When Summers heat has changed the Wynters hue.


Furthermore when we se the multitude of beasts ordained partly for our food
partly for ye tillage of our ground, partly to carry us, and partly to clothe
us, and man among al these things a beholder of the heavens and gods, and a
worshipper of the same: and furthermore, all things as well in land as in sea,
provided for the profit of mankind: these and other innumerable works of god,
as often as we do behold, must we not needs acknowledge that if these things were
at any time made, there must be some worker and maker of the^? Or else if they
have been for ever, from the beginning (as Arystotle thinks) y^ at the least
there is some ruler and gouerner of so great a work. So likewise although
thou can not se the soul of man, no more the^ thou can god him self, yet
nevertheless, as you do acknoweledge god by his works so likewise seeing the
infinite remembrance of things, the quickenes of invention, the swiftnes of
motion in the same, and finally all the beauty of virtue, y^ must needs
confess the divine and heavenly power of the same. In what place is it then?
I think truly in the head. And why I so think, I can bring many reasons.

But that we will refer to an other time. And now dispute where the soul is.
In thee he is assuredlye. What nature has it? a nature properlye belonging to
it self, as I think. But admit that it had the nature either of fire or aer.
For that is nothing to our purpose. This only consider, that as you know
God, although his place and shape you know not, so likewise, you ought to
conceive your soul, although you know neither his mansion place, nor form.
And truly, as concerning the soul, we can not doubt (unless we will
confess our selves wholye ignorant in natural philosophy,) but that there
is no motion in the same, no composition, no concretion, no copulation, nor
coagmentacion. Which if it be so, assuredlye it can never be separated,
departed, disseuered, or sundred: and for that cause, neither can it die. For
death is the departing, seperatynge, and loosynge of those parts, which
before death were conjoined. With this reason, and such like, Socrates being
moved, did neither desire any patron to plead for him, when the judges gave
him dome of death, neither yet became he an humble suitor to them, for the
lengthning of his life. But uttered always a stout stubbernes, procedinge not
of pride, but of a hautye courage. Yea, and the very last day of his life, he
reasoned much of this self same question: and a few days before, when he
might easily have been conveyed out of prison, he would not: and finallye at
the time of his death, holdinge in his hand the cup that should poyso^ him,
spoke in such sort, that he seemed not to be compelled to dye, but with a
fervent, desire to clyme up to heaven. For thus he thought, and so he taught,
that there were.ii. ways and courses of our souls, when they depart out of
our bodies. For such as had defiled them selves with sin, and had given
them selves over to lust, and pleasure wherwyth they being blinded, had
stained the nobilitye of their souls, with walowynge in vice, or otherwise
fraudulently gouerninge the commen wealth, such he thought went by a path
separated from the counsel of the gods, but such, as had kept the^ selves
pure and holy, and were least defiled with the fylth of they^ bodies, but had
always called them selves from the filthy lusts of the same, and whiles they
lived in their bodies, ^ad ^mitated the life of the gods, such he thought had,
an easy return to the place, from whence they first came. And for that cause
he says, that a^ the swannes (which not without cause are dedicated to
Apollo, but because they seem to have of him the gift of natural prophecye)
foreseeynge what pleasure is in death, do dye singinge with great delyght: so
ought al good and learned men to do. Neither truly could any man doubt hereof,
but that as often as we muse much of the nature of our foul, we are in such
case as they are wont to be, who when they have a long space beheld the son
are made in manner blind with the bryghtnes thereof. And so likewise the eyes
of our mind beholding it self, do often ware dim: and by that means we
lose the diligence of contemplation of the same. So the indgemente of our
opinions, doubting, wauerynge, staggering, and po^dering many doubts, is
driven as a waueryng ship in the main sea. But these examples are counted
state, and come from the Grecians. But Cato our countreyma^, so departed out of
this life, as one that was glad, that he had gotten just occasion to dye. For
that god that rules within us, forbids us to depart hence without his
leave. But when soever he shall give us a just cause (as he did to Socrates,
now of late to Cato, and often heretofore to many other) then truly, every
wise man will gladly depart from this darkness into that light. Neither yet
ought he to break ye bands of his prison (for that the laws of god do
forbid) but to depart from thence when he is delivered and called by God, as an
officer or other lawful power. For all the life of wise men (as he in like
wise says) is ye practice of death. For what other thing do we, when we call
our mind from pleasure, that is the body, from the cares of wealth and richesse,
which is the minister and hand maid of ye body, to conclude when we separate
our selves from all s^irre in y^ common wealth, and from all other business,
what do we then (I say) but call our soul to it self: compellinge it to
return to it self, and to wythdrawe it self, as much as may be, from the
conjunction of the body: and to separate the soul from the body, is nothing
else then to dye. Wherefore let us practyse this, to sever our selves from our
bodies, that is as much to say, let us accustom our selves to dye. For that,
both whiles we live here in the earth, shall be like to that heavenly life, and
also, when we being loosed from the bands of our body, shall wend toward
the heavens, so much the less flow shall we find our course thither wards.
For they which have always lived in the fetters and gyues of their body, yea
when they are loosed go some what more slowelye: as those which many years
have been laden with yrons. For truly this life is but death: which I could
lament more at large, if I lysted.


Hea. You have done that sufficiently in your boooke which you entitled of
comfort. Which when I read, I desire nothing more then to leave this body.
But now whiles I hear this, much more.


Mar. Your time will come, and that shortly, whether you draw back from it,
or haste^ toward it (for swyfte wynged time flies a pace) but so much it
lackes, that death is an evil (as you whylome thought) that I fear me there
is scarce any other thing, to be accounted good that may happen to man. Since
it shall either make us gods our selves, or else place us with the gods.


Hea. Yet nevertheless, there be some that think not so.


Mar. But or ever I have finished my talk, I will prove unto you, that there
is no reason, why death ought to seem an evil thing.


Hea. How can it seem an evil thing unto me, now I know thus much?


Mar. How can it ask you? there are great companyes of Philosophers against
this opinion: and those truly not only Epycures (whom nevertheless I do not
despise, but I know not how, each learned man sets at naught) But also mine
own dearlig Dicearchus, has sharplye written against this immortality of our
souls. For he wrote three books, which are called the books of Les^os,
because the same disputacion was kept at Mitylena, in the which he assayes to
prove, that our souls are mortal. And the Sto^kes do but lend us the using
of the life of our souls for a space, to make us as long lived as dawes. For
they say that our souls shall abide a great space, but not (...). Will you
therefore hear me prove, that if it be so, yet death is not to be counted an
evil.


Hea. That do as you think good, but no man shall remove me from my opinion,
as concerning the immortalitye of our souls.


Mar. I commend you therefore, howebeit, I would not have you to be to rash in
allowyng opinions.

For we are lightly moved, with a witty reason, and stagger and change our
opinion, yea though the matters be somewhat play^e. Yet nevertheless, in these
there is some darkness. But if any such thing should happen, we ought to be
armed with witty conclusyons.


Hea. Well spoken: but I doubt not but I will foresee, that no such thing shall
chance.


Mar. Is there any cause then, why we should not ouerpasse our friends the
Stoikes? them I mean, which say that our souls abide for a while after that
they are departed out of our bodies, but not ever. Who, inasmuch as they do
grant that, which seems to be hardest in all this matter, namelye, that the
soul may abide being from the body, ^^^ruayle much, that they will deny that,
which is not only easy to be beli^ued, but also that being ^rau^ted which they
do gra^nt, do^^ (...) in manner of necessity: namely that when they have abiden
a great while, they can not dye.


Hea^. You reprehend them worthelye: for it is even so as you say.


Mar. Should we then believe Panetius, who in this point dysseu^eth from his
master Plato? For him, whom in all other points he calls divine, most wise,
most holy, to conclude, the Homere of all philosophers, his this only
opinion of the immortalitye of the souls, he does not allow.

For he says (that which no man denies) that whatsoever has had
beginning, shall a^^^ have ending. And that our souls had beginning, which
he declares by they^^ that are daily borne, (...) whom there does appear, as
well grenenes o^ ^^yt, as of years. He brings also this other reason: that
whatsoever may feel gryefe, may be sick: and ^^at soever may be sick shall
dy^iour sou^^s (quod ^e) do feel grief wherefore they shall also die. These
things may lightly be refu^ed. For hereby it seems, that he was ignorant,
that when we talk of the eternitye of the soul, we do therein compryse the
mind which is always void of any troublous motion, or affection, and do
not talk of those parts, in the which, sorrow, anger, and lusts are. Which,
he against whom I now reason, thinks to be sundred and severed from the mind.
For the likelynes of nature, does more appear in beasts, which have no
reason: but the outward guess of the soul of man, does much consyst in the
shape of his body. For it is much material, in what sorts of bodies the
souls be placed. For there be many things in the body, that quycken the
mind, and many things which dulle the same. Aristotle says, that all
wittye men be of melancholy complexion, by the which reason it greueth me not
at al to acknoweledge my self to be blunt witted. He reckens up many things
to prove ye same: and (as if it were certain) shows the reason of it. Then,
if there be a great force of those things that are in the body, as concerning
the disposition of the mind, there is no necessitye, why the works of the
soul should be alyke in every body. But I let this pass. I would to god
Panetius might be here present. He lived in the time of Africanus. I would
feign know of him, to whom of his kinsemen Africanus brothers cosen was like:
who being favored much like his father, yet in his life did so much
refemble every vnthryfte, that he was commonly counted the worste that might
be. Also to whom was the nephewe of Publius Crasius (a right wise and
eloquente man) like? and so likewise of diverse other notable men's children, and
other their kynsefolkes, which I need not here to remember.

But whereof do I now entreat? have I forgotten, that this is my purpose,
after I had spoken sufficiently of the eternity of our souls, to show also,
that if they did dye, there could be no euel in death.


Hearer. I remembered it well enough: but whiles you talked of the eternitye of
the soul, I suffered you with a good will to stay in the same.


Marcus. I perceive that your mind is on high things, and that you will even
clyme into heaven.


Hear. I hope so. But admit (as these men will have it) that our souls
remain not after death, then I perceive, that we have lost the hope of
immortal life in heaven.


Mar. What harm (I pray you) does that opynion bring? admyt that our soul
shall dye as our body? is there then any gryefe, or any sense at all, in our
body? no man says so: albeit Epicurus lays it to Democritus charge. But
his scolers deny it. Then if there be no feelynge in the body after death,
neither does there remain any sense in the soul. For it is in no place.
Where then is the evil? But perchance they will say, that the departing of
the body from the soul, is not without grief. Admyt that there be some,
how little is it? howebeit I think there is none at all.

For it happens commonly without any sense, yea, and some times with
pleasure, yea and it is but light, what so ever it be. For it is done in a
mynute of time. But this it is that gryeueth us, or rather vexes us, the
departing from all those things, which we count commodityes in our life.
But I fear me that they may be more truly called euels. What should I here
bewail the life of man? although I well may, and that upon iusts and good
occasyon.

But what need I, inasmuche as I do entreat, whether after death we shall be
wretches, to make our life in bewailing to seem more miserable? we have done
that sufficientlye, in that book, in the which (as much as we might) we have
comforted our selves. Death therefore, delivers us from euels, and not from
goods, if we speak the truth. And that truly, is so largely reasoned of
Egesyas the Cyreman, that he was forbidden of the king Ptolomeus to teach the
same in scooles: for that many after his doctrine, did wyllingly kill the^
selves. There is an Epigramme of Callimachus, upon Cleombrotus the Ambrocian:
whom he says, after that he had perused Platos book of the immortalitye of
the souls, forth with without any other apparent cause, cast him self
headelonges down from a wall. But the matter of the book of Egesias (of who^
I spoke even now) is such. He faineth that a certain poor man, departed out
of this life, for want of necessary su^tenaunce, is revoked again to life, by
his friends: whom he aunsweryng, recites all the discommodityes of ma^s I
could do so in likewise: how beit I would not do it in such sort as he did:
who counts it good for no man to live in this world. I know not what it
were for other: but I am sure that death had been best for me. Who being now
depryued of all comfort and worship, both at home and abroad, if I had before
time been extinct by death: I had assuredlye thereby been delivered from much
care, which since has chanced me, and not from any joy or pleasure. Admit
therefore, that there be some one man who has no aduersyty, who has in no part
felt ye cruel stroke of fortune. As the honorable Metellus with his four
sons, and Priamus with fyftye, of the which.xvii. were borne of his lawefull
wife, in both of them fortune had the like stroke. But to the one she showed
her self more favorable. For Metellus, many sons and daughters, neuewes and
neeces, accompanied to his grave. But Priamus, being before despoiled of so
great a stock, saying his children bathed in their own blood, and last of al
he him self flyenge to the aul^are for refuge, his enemies hand did slaye. If
death had taken him while his kyngedome stood. Whiles that his corpse was safe
beset with fyerce Barbarian route.
And whiles his palaice stood ygraued with gold both in and out.


How think you, had he departed from the pleasure which might afterward
beside him, or else from the aduersytye which afterward befell him? at that
time you would have judged it had been from pleasure. But assuredlye it had
been far better for him, if death had the^ taken him. For then we should
never have heard this woeful lamenting. The palayce erste of Pryam stout, I
saw the fire waste.
And eke beheld when bloody sword amids his body past.
When aulters of the heavenly gods with blood were all to dashte.


Neither those things, nor any of like sort could have chanced unto him, if
he had died before. For now at this present, he is past the feelynge of al
miseryes. It chanced somewhat better to my friend Pompeius, when he came
gryeuously syc^e to Naples. For the men of Naples had garlandes on their
heads, and the Citesyns of Puteolos did all welcome him home.

A ^olyshe toye of the Grecians, but yet it, ^^^^ye as it happened. But if he
had dyed at that present, had he departed from prosperitye, (think you) or
from aduersitye? from adversity undoubtedly. For then he had not waged war
with his son in law, he had not been feign to fly to arms being
unprovided, he had not left his house nor fled Italye, and finallye his army
being lost, he had not needed as a naked man to fall into the hands of his
servants: his poor children, al his substance and wealth, had never been
enjoyed of the hands of his enemies. So he, which if he had dyed before, had
departed in maruaylous prosperytye, by the little lengthenynge of his life, into
what myserye ^ell he?

Lo, all such miseryes are prevented by death, although they do not caunce
yet because they may chance.

But men think that no such thing can happen unto them, every man hopes
for the good luck of Metellus: as though either there ought to be more lucky
men then unlucky, or there were any certaynty in the life of man, or else it
were the part of a wise man, rather to hope, then fear. But let us grant,
that men lose many commodityes by death. Then will they say that such as be
dead, do lack the commodityes of this life, and therefore are miserable. For
so they must needs reason. But I pray you, can he which is not, lack any
thing? this word lacking is a sorowefull term. For there is included in it,
that he once had it, and now he has it not, but wants it, lackes it, and
misses it. I think, that is the discommoditye of him that wants any thing. As
blindenes is the discommoditye of him which lacks his eyes: and barennes of
her, which lacks children.

But there is none of them that is departed, that lackes not only not the
c^modities of this life, no not so much as this life it self. I speak of
such as are dead, which now we suppose not to be at all. But we which live
here, if we lack bornes or wings, is there any of us which would miss them:
^rulye no man. why so? Because although we have not such things, the which
are neither necessary for our use, neither yet meet for us of nature, yet we
do not lack them although we have them not. This reason ought to be urged,
that being first grau^^ed, which they must n^des confess, if they say that
our souls be morrall, that is, that there is such destruction in deathe^that
there can not be, so much as any ly^le suspicion, of any sense after death.

That therefore being stablyshed and fixed, this must be discussed: what it is
to lack: that there may be no doubt in the word. To lack therefore,
signyfyeth the want of that, which you would have. For there is a wyshinge for
those things which we lack: unless it be as we take this word in an other
signification? For we say we lack a thing, in an other sense also. As when we
have not a thing, and we perceive the lack of it, howebeit we may well abide
the want thereof. But none of these ways can we term any lack in death. For
we can not be sorry for any thing that we lack. That is said, to lack a good
thing, which is of it self evil. But a man being alive does not lack a good
thing, unless he feel the miss of it. But of a live man, one may say, to
lack a kingdom. Howbeit not so properly, of such a one, as you who never was
king. But well of Tarquinius, who was banished out of his realm. But in a
dead man we can conceive no such thing. For to lack is properly said of him
which feels the lack. But there is no feeling in a dead man. No more therefore
is there any lack in him. But what need we in this point to play the
philosophers, since we see yt as touchi^g this we need it not. How often, have
not only our captains, but also hole armies run to sure and undoubted
death? Which if it were a thing to be feared, Lucius Brutus, to thente^t to
keep out the tyrant, who^ he had before banished out of his realm, would not
willingly have sho^ved him self upon his enemies pike. Lucius Decius the
father, fightinge with the Latins, his son with the Tuscans, his nephewe
with Pirrhus, would never so willi^gly have put the^ selves in manifest
danger, of death: Spain should not the^ have seen the.ii. Scipio^s s^aine,
both in one battle, when they stoutely stood in defense of their country:
nor ye town of Cannas Paulus Aemilius, Ue^^sia Marcellus, ye Latins Albinus,
nor the Lucanes Gracchus. Is there any of these, counted at this day miserable?
No truly not after their happy life. For no man can be a wretch, his sense
being once paste.


Hearer. But it is a hateful thing, to be without sense.


Mar. A hateful thing in deed, if we did feel ye lack of it. But inasmuche
as it is evident, that nothing can be in it, which is not, what can there be
hateful in it, which neither does lack, neither feel any thing? Howbeit we
have talked of this to often. But I do it because that herein consists all the
fear, that we conceive of death. For when we see, that our souls and bodies
being spent and all our parts being brought to fynall destruction, that
which was a living creature, is now become nothing: we must needs perceive
also, that betwyxt a thing that never was, and king Agamemnon, there is no
difference. And in like sort, that Camillus dead long since, does now no more
force for the civil war, which is kept at this present, then I took thought
for the taking of Rome, at such time as he lived. Why should Camillus then be
sorye, if he had known in his life time, that.350. years after him, such
things should happen? or I, if I should imagine, that ten thousand years
hence, some strange nation should race our city. Yet such is the love, that
we owe to our country, that we take thought for it, for the good will we bear
it, and not for any harm, that we being buried, may have by the destruction
of it. Wherefore, death can not so fear a man (which because of thincertainty
of our life, does continuallye hang over our heads, and also because of the
shortness of our age can never be far of) but that he ought continuallye to
have more respect to the commen wealth, the^ to his life. And that he ought
also to think, that those which shall come after him, whose commodities or
discommodities he shall never feel, do in like wise pertayne unto him.
therefore, even those that judge our soul to be mortal, may attempt things,
whose remembrance shall long endure, not for any desire of glory, which they
shall never feel, but for the good will they bare to virtue, whom glory of
necessity does follow, albeit you look not for it. But the nature of al
things is such, y^ as our birth, is the original cause and beginnynge of all
those things which we have, so in likewise our death is the end of the
same: the pain of which, as it did nothing pertayne unto us, before our life,
so neither shall it after our death. Wherefore, what euel can there be in death?
which pertayneth neither to such as live, neither yet to those that are dead.
For such as are dead are not at all, and such as are alive it can not come
to. Wherefore they which will speak truly of the nature of death, do term it a
sleep: as though a man should pass the course of his life, for the space
of.90. years, and then, sleep out the rest. I think assuredlye, that a
swyne would not cou^yte to sleep so long. But Endim^on (if we give any
credyte to tales) a great while since, slepte in Latmos, which is a hill of
Caria. He is not as yet awaked, as I think. Think you that he cares what
pains the Moon takes? of whom the tale goes, that he was there brought a
sleep, to the intent, that she might kiss him as he slepte. What care should
he take that feels not? So here you have s^epe the image of our death, which
you do daily put upon you: and do you doubt whether there be any feelynge
in death, since in the image and pycture of the same, there is none at al?
Leave of then this old wives tale, that it is a wretched thing to dye before
thy time. What time I beseech you? the time that nature has appoyneted? But
she has lent us our life to vsurye as it were, appoyntynge no certain day
when we shall repaye the same. What cause haste thou then to complain, if she
require it of thee when she lyffe? For thou had it under such condition. The
same men, think it a heavy case for one to dye being but a boy, but if he
dye being an enfante, in his cradell, they think that then he has no cause
of complaynte.

Yet nevertheless, of him did nature more sooner require that which she had
lent. O whiles he was a boy (say they) he had not smatched the swetenes of
life. But he was in lykelyhoode to attain to great worship, which even at
the time of his death he began to come to. But I marvel much since that
in all other things it is counted better to attain to to some what then
nothing at all, why then it should be otherwise in our life. Howebeit
Callimachus said very well, that Priamus had wept far oftener then ever did
Troylus. But now, they praise much their chance, which dye in their age: and
why so? Because (as I think) if they might live longer, their life could be no
pleasanter, then it has been. But assuredlye, there is nothing that a man may
take more pleasure of, then of wisdom, the which (if we grant that it takes
away other commodityes) Yet that assuredlye old age does bring. But what is
this long age? or what is the long time of a man? Do we not see, that age has
ouertake^ them, which were even now but boys and stripelinges, when they least
thought of it? But yet beause we can live no longer, we call it long. And so
every things life, according to the end that nature has appointed it, may
well be termed either long or short. For about the river Hypanis, which
runs through a part of Europa, into the sea Pontus. Arystotle says, that
there are bredde certain beasts, which live but one day. Of them then, she
that lives.viii. hours is counted aged. But she that lives till the son
set, is as one even spent with age: and so much more if it be the longest day
in the year Compare our age with immortalyry, and we shall be found to live in
manner as short a space, as those foolish beasts. Let us then set aside all
this trifelinge (for how may. I better term it) and let us frame our selves
to a perfect life, despysyng all vanity, and trading our selves in virtue. For
now we are even puffed up with wanton thoughts, so that if death overtake us
before such time as we have obtained the promises of the sothsayers, we seem
there by to have been mocked, and defrauded of many notable commodityes. And, if
at the time of our death, we hang in desires and wishes (lord how we are vexed
and tormented, whereas that journey (o god) how pleasant ought it to be unto
us? which being once paste, there shall be no care nor trouble left? O how
much Theramenes does delyghte me? what a stout courage seems he to have?
For albeit I weep, as often as I read the storye of him, yet nevertheless, it
rejoices me to see, how stoutelye he dyed like a noble man. Who lyenge in the
prison, after he had there drunk up the poison (which the thyrtye tyrannes
had sent him) with such an earnest desire, as if he had thyrsted after it, he
cast that was left with such a force out of the cup, that it sounded on
the floore^ which sound he hearing, smyled and said. I begin this to
Critias, who was one of his deadlyest enemies. For the Grecians in their
bankets were wont, to drink to some man, namelye to him that should pledge
the^. So it pleased that noble man to ieste at the time of his death, when he
had that within him which should be his bane. And he truly prophesied death to
him yt sent him the poison, which shortly after ensued. Who would comme^d such
securitye in death, if he thought death to be an evil thing? Into the same
prison, and the same kind of death, came a few years after Socrates,
condemned so unjustly of his judges, as Theramenes of the tyrauntes.

Let us hear the, what manner of words Plato says he spoke to the judges,
when he was condemned to death. I am in good hope (my lords) quod he, that I
am happy, for that I am thus put to death. For one of these two must needs
follow, that either this death will take away all sense from me, or else, if my
soul do continue, it shall depart into an other place of rest. Wherefore, if
my sense shall be ertyncte, and my death resemble sleep, which often without
any trouble of dreams, does bring a man most quiet rest, (O Lord) what
pleasure shall death be to me? or what day should I prefer before such a
night? the which without varyaunce or change, shall keep a continual estate
and stay for ever. And so, who should be more happy then I? But if those
things be true which are written, namely that death is a departure into those
regio^s, which all they inhabit, that are departed out of this life, then do I
accoumpte my chance far better, for that, after that I have escaped the
hands of you, which sit here in place and name of judges, I shall then come
to them which are the true judges, Minos, Rhadama^ thus, Aecus, and
Triptolemus, and shall there have the company and communication of them which
have lived vpryghtly in the faith and fear of god. This ought to seem a
sweet pilgrymage. But to talk with those worthy men, Orpheus, Museus, Homere,
Hesiodus, or such other learned sages, lord how much I do esteem.
Assuredlye, if it might be, I would often dye, inespecially, if I thought I
should find those things which I now speak of. What pleasure shall it be to
me, when I shall commen with Palamedes, or Aiar, which were of unrighteous
judges wrongfully put to death? I should there see the wit of the chyefe
prince, which led the power of Greece to Troy walls, and in likewise the
wisdom of Ulisses, and Sisyph^s, neither yet should I for the search of such
things as I here am, so there also wrongfully be put to death. And ye O just
judges, which have heretofore quitted me, fear ye not death. For no harm
can happen to a good man, neither in this life nor after. For the gods above,
will not cease always to have him and his in their protection. For this self
same death, comes not to me by chance, but by the just judgment and
appoyntme^t of god. And for that cause I am not angrye with my accusers, but
only for that they thought, that thereby they did hurt me, whereas I do
esteem nothing more then it. But now it is time (quod he) that I depart
hence to dye, and you to live. Of the which two which is the better, the
immortal gods know, and no mortal man as I think. Now truly, I had far
rather to have so stout a stomach, and well disposed mind, then all their
worship and wealth, that gave sentence of his life and death.

Albeit, that which he says, that no man but only the gods know, yet he
him self does know, that is to wit, which is better of life or death. For he
had uttered it in his former words.

But he keeps his old wont even to the death: which was, to affirm no
certayntye of any thing. But let us stand stiffely herein, that nothing can
be evil which nature has provided for all men: and therwithall consider,
that if death be an evil, it is a contynuall and everlasting evil. For it
seems, that death is the end of every wretched and careful life. Now if
death it self be miserable, what end can there be of miserye? But what do I
here rehearce Socrates, and Theramenes, men of notable constantye and wisdom?
since a certain Lacedemonian, a man of no report or fame, did so much
despise death, that when he being condemned, and led to his death, did smyle
and laughe. And one of his accusers, seeinge it, said unto him: do then
mock and despise the laws of Lycurgus? No (quod he) but I give him right
hartye thanks, that he appoincted me such a fine, as I may pay without any
change or lone of money. A man assuredlye worthy, of the name of the right
famous countreye of Sparta. whose stout courage does well declare (as me
seems) that he was vnryghtfullye put to death.

Such men had our ci^ye more then any man may noumber. But what should I
here reckon up our captains or nobles of our city, that have so done since
Cato wrytes, that whole armies of men, have merelye gone into those places,
from whence they thought they should never return. So were the Lacedaemonians,
slain at Thermopilas, among the which on Symonydes tomb these Uerses were
written. Thou stranger that hereby do pass say here thou saw us lie.
Whiles we defend our country laws, or else desire to dye.


What says the stout Captain Leonidas? go to: be you of ^^oute courage
o^ye lacedaemonians (quod he) for this night perhaps we shall sup with God.
This was a stout nation as long as they had Licurgus laws in reputacio^? For
on a time, when a Persyan, one of their enemies, boastyng of his emp^rours
power, said to one of them, that the company of their darts and arowes should
darcken the son, so that they should not see it, why then quod the other, we
shall fight in the shade.

I have hitherto talked of men. But what think you of a woman of Lacedemon?
Who when she understood that her son was slain in the field, I bore him
(quod she) to that end, that he should be such a one, as should not styeke
to die, in the defense of his country. God continue you in such stoutenes, O
ye Lacedaemonians: see of what force good laws are, in the ordering of a
commen wealth. Is not Theodorus the Cireman, a notable Philosopher, worthy to
be wondered at (think you?) whom when Lisimachus the king threatened, that he
would hang him, you might have spoken that (quod he) to have feared your nyce
courtyers.

But as for Theodorus, he little passes whether he rotte above ground or under.
By whose saying, I am put in mind, to speak somewhat at this present of
buryal. Which shall be nothing hard, presupposyng those things to be true,
which we have before spoken of not feelinge. And of this, what Socrates
thought, it appears in that book in the which his death is described: of
the which we have made mention before. For after that he had reasoned of the
immortality of the soul, and now his death drew on, being demanded of Crito,
how he would be buried, he lookyng toward them that stood about him, spoke
these words. My fre^des (quod he) I have spent much labor in vain. For I
have not persuaded my friend Crito, that I shall depart hence, and leave
nothing behind me, that is mine own. But truly Crito, if ever thou can
come by me, or ever get me, burye me as thou list. But I know right well,
that when I am hence departed, none of you all will solowe me. Wyselye spoken.
For he did both permit his friend, to satisfye his mind, and yet
nevertheless showed, that he little past of any such thing. Diogenes more
rechelessely, yet wittely inoughe, but with small ciuilitye, as a doggyshe
philosopher, wylled them to cast his body abroad, without buryal. And when his
friends asked him, whether he would then have his body devoured of birds and
beasts?. No not so says he. For I pray you set a staff nigh to me, that I
may drive them away. And when they asked him how he could do so, inasmuche
as he should have no sense after death? What hurt shall I have then (quod he)
of the bytynge of beasts, and peckynge of birds, when I feel it not? But
Anaxagoras spoke wisely, who when he was lykelye to dye at Lampsacus, and his
friends demanded of him, whether if he should chance to die there: he would
be carried to Clazomena, to his own country, it needs not (quod he) for from
every place, there is like distance of way to heaven and hell. Wherefore as
concerning buryall, we must know this, that it perteyneth to the body only,
whether the soul dye or live. And in the body it is plain, that after the
soul is once departed, there remains no sense. But see how full the world
is of error. It is written, that Achilles drew Hectors dead body at a
carts tail. I think he thought that he felt the gratynge of his limbs.
And therefore he bragges of it, as if there by he were revenged. But Hectors
mother lamenteth it as a most cruel fact with these words. I saw, I saw,
that grieved me most to see.
The corpse of Hector through hye town drawn lie.


What Hector I pray you? or who was then Hector? it was better said of Actius
under the person of Achylles. The Carcas cold to Pryam I did give.
But Hectors soul above in heavens does live.


Thou drewest not then Hector, but the body that once was Hectors.

But now here startes up one out of the ground, which will not suffer his
mother to sleep in rest. O mother I the call which slepest void of fear:
And takst no pitye on my grief, thy son come bury here.


Such pitiful verses as these, when they are lamentablye rehearced in the
Theater, and moan all the company to sadness: is it not an easy thing, for the^
that are present, to judge them to be wretched which are so unburied? they be
afraid to have their limbs torn, and yet they fear not to have them burnt.
And therefore one lamentes Priamus in this wise. Alas the ashes of the King,
with bones to powder bet,
I saw in heaps of gored blood, embrued and bewet.


I see not, what occasion he has to be sorye for any such thing. This therefore
we must firmly maintain, that nothing is to be cared for after death.
Although some vain men do rage against their enemies being dead.

And in such sort Enni^s brings in Thyestes, cursynge his brother Atreus:
first desyring that he might perish by shipwreck. That was hard surely. For
such death can not be without great pain. But that, that follows is to to
vain. I would that he him self were stuck upon some rock.
His bowels out, his bloudbulcke all to broke,
And pyked stones on which he thus does lie
With goared blood in read hue he may dye.


And such other like. Assuredlye the stones them selves could be no more void
of sense, then his dead body hanging upon them, to whom he wysheth this
torment. Which although it were crueli if he could feel it, yet now is t^
none effect, because he can have no sense thereof. In like manner vain is that
whych^ follows. Let him have no grave where he his corse may shroude.
Ne where his wearyed ghost may take his last abode.


Do you see in what error this fellow is. He thinks that the grave is the
harber and rest of the body. Truly there was a great fault in Pelops, that
he taught his son no better, how much he ought to esteem buryall. But
what should I here reckon up the opinions of every several man, since we may
see the manifest errors of many nations, as concerning buryall. The
Egiptians spyce the dead bodies, and keep them in their houses. The Persians
sere their bodies in wax, and then spyce them, that they may abide as long
as may be. There is a custom among the wise men of Chaldee, not to engraue
the dead bodies, before such time, as they be torn of beasts. In Hircania,
they keep commen dogs, such as be noble me^, hounds, and the commen people
rascal curres, every man according to his ability, that eat them when they
be dead, and that do they count the best buryall. Chrisippus, has written
many sundry fashyons as concerning the same matter: as he is a man very
diligent, in the reading of historyes. But some of them be so cruel, and so
much against nature, that my pen abhorres to endite them. Wherefore as
concerning buryall, we ought not much to force it: neither yet our friends to
neglecte it: so that always we keep this opinion, that the bodies of the
dead, care for nothing. But what men ought to do, for customs and good
names sake, that our fre^des that ouerlyue us must see to: so that they know,
that it nothing pertayneth to such as are dead. But then truly, death is
most welcome unto us, when our life being well nigh at the wane, can comfort it
self with his own praises. For no man has lived to small a while, which
whiles he lived, did live vertuouslye. I my self have many just occasyons of
death, which I would to god, I might have pu^ in execution. For there is
nothing that I did desire more. For I wanted nothing. I had plenty of worship,
so that ever after, I did look for war and battle with fortune. Wherefore,
if reason will not move us, to despise death, yet let our life forepassed do
it: when we think we have deserved sufficient praise and glory. For although
our sense be paste, when we are once dead, yet nevertheless we do not want
the due reward of glory and fame, for those things, which we have done in
our lives. For although glory of it self has no cause, why it should be
desired, yet nevertheless, it always follows virtue, as the shade of the
same But as for the wrong judgment of the commen people, as I count it a
co^me^dable thing to have their good will, so I think, no man can be the
happyer for attayninge the same. Yet can I not think, that Licurgus or Solon
shall at any time want the glorious report that they deserved, for making
ci^ile laws: or that the memory of the warlike prowes of Themistocles, and
Epaminundas shall at any time be forgotten. For, the sea shall sooner ouerwhelme
y^ I Will it self of Salamine, the^ it shall drenche the remembrance, of the
Salamine triumph. And ye town of Leuctra in Boeotia, shall sooner be rased,
then the remembrance of the field there fought, forgotten. So neither time
can duske the praise of Curious, Fabritius, Calatinus, the two Scipions, the two
Affricanes, Maximus, Marcellus, Paulus, Cato, Lelius, and diverse other: whose
due praise, who so ever measures, not by y^ vain judgment of the commen
sort, but by the sure meaterodde of wisdom, he undoubtedly would, (if
necessity so drive him) with a stout stomach go unto the death: in the which
there is either the chiefest joy that may be, or at the least wise no evil.
Yea and such a man will gladly dye in his chief prosperity. For unto a wise man
a huge heap of goods can not be so pleasant, as the departure from the same
shall be joyful. To this intent may we apply the saying of a certain wise man
of Lacedemon who, (when one Diagoras, a noble man of the city of Rhodes) had
both been him self conqueror at the game pus, and also the self same day
had seen both his sons conquerours at the same) came to the old man, and
said. Dye now O Diagoras: for thou shall not be taken up quycke into heaven.

It was counted a great thing in those days, among the Grecians, to see three
men of one house win the games in the mount Olimpus: and for yt cause, he
willed him having gotten such prosperity, to abide no longer in his life,
subject to ye casualtie of fortune. But now I think, I have sufficiently
answered you, with these few words, since y^ it is plain, y^ such as are
dead are in no miserye. But I have tarried somewhat the more, in talkinge of it,
because that that is one of the greatest co^fortes in all our lame^tacio^s and
mourninges. For we ought not to much to require other men's sorrow as
concerning our selves, least we may seem to favor our selves more then it
becomes us. And yt suspicion vexes us most, when we think y^ our friends,
who^ we have lost, are in such misery as the common people think and that not
without pain. This folishe opinion I mind utterly to root out, and therefore
perhaps was somewhat longer, the^ otherwise I would.


Hea. what? do you compain of being to long? I assure you it seemed not so to
me. For the first part of your talk made me not un willinge to die. But the
last made me eue^ to c^^et death. So y^ by all your reasoning, I am fully
persuaded to count death no euel.


Mar. Do you the^ look for a conclusion after the manner of ye Rhetoricia^s, or
else shall we here break of?


Hea. No not so. For I long to hear you in y^ art, which you always set forth,
or rather (if we will say y^ truth) it sets forth you. And therefore I pray you
let us hear ye conclusion.


Mar. Diverse men are wont to allege in the scooles, the judgments of the
gods the^ selves, as concerning death. And those not of their own heads, but
confirmed with the aucthority of Herodotus, and other more. First they tell of
Cleobs and Biton, the sons of Argia, the priest. The history is common.
when she should have been carried in a wagon to a certain sole^pne sacrifice a
good space from the town, and the horses were tired, the.ii. young me^ which I
named even now, putting of their garments, anointed their bodies with oil,
and came to the waggo^, and drew it. The pryest, when by this sort she being
drawn of her sons, was come to the place of sacrafyce, prayed the goddess,
that in reward of their godly reverence, she would give to her two sons the
greatest reward y^ god might give to man. Her prayer being finished, the young
men after they had dined, lay down to sleep, and in the morninge were found
dead. The like is reported of Trophonius, and Agamedes. Who after they had
buylte to Apollo a temple at Delphos, desired of him as great a reward as any
man might have. To who^ Apollo answered, y^ they should have their request,
three days thence. now as soon as the third day came, they say, that they
were both found dead. So they say, that god (yea and that god to who^ all the
rest of the gods yield in prophecye) showed hereby, that death was the best
thing that any man might wyshe. There is also an historye of Silenus, who
being taken prisoner of king Midas, paid this rau^some. He taught the king,
that the best thing y^ might chance to a man, was never to be borne: the next
to dye as soon as might be. The which sentence Euripides has e^pressed in
verses in his tragedye entitled Cresphon. It well behoues us to lament the
birth of every man
If we the dangers of this life and present perilles skanne.
But when triumphante death has ryd him once from those.
Then ought his friends no more to wail but merry to rejoice.


There is the like, in the book of consolation, of Crantor. For he says that
one Psichomantius, meting with one Elisius, who much lamented the death of his
child, gave him three such verses written in a table. O mortal men with
ignorance how much be you deceived?
For this man's son reioyces now this mortal life bereaved
Thou eke were well if so thy life the fatal wightes had weaued.


With these and such like authorities, they confirm this cause to be adjudged
by the immortal gods. Alcidamus an ancient orator, a man of great fame wrote
in commendacion of death: who lacked the weighty reasons of philosophy, but
had plenty of words enough But the notable deaths, which men suffer for
their countreye, seem to the rhetoricians, not only glorious, but also
blessed. They rehearse Erictheus, whose daughters suffered voluntarye death, to
save the life of their citesins. And Codrus, who willingly entered in the mids
of his ennemies in the armor of a commen soldier, to thinte^t that he might
not be known to be king. Because there was an oracle given, that if the king
were flayne, the^ should the Athenienses have the victory. Neither do they
ouerpasse Menecheus, who having the like oracle given, bestowed his blood for
his country. Iphigenia also, was willinge to be slain at Aulide, that by her
blood, her countreyme^ might more easily sheade the the blood of their
ennemies. Then they come nigher. They remember Harmodius, and Aristogiton,
Leonidas also the Lacedemonian, and Epaminu^das the Theban. They know not our
countrymen, whom it would ask great time to reckon, there be so many, to
whom we know that glorious death was always welcome. Which inasmuche as it is
so, I must needs wish, that either men would hereafter desire death, or at
the least wise, cease to fear it. For if at the last day of our life, our
souls dye not, but only change their place, what ought we more to wyshe? But
if death do utterly destroy us, what can be better, then in the rage of great
storms, swetely to slumber? and after that a man has nodded out of this
life, to sleep everlastingly. Which if it be so, then ought we rather to
allow the words of Ennius, the^ Solan, for Ennius said. Let no man me
bemoane, ne moyst^ my grave with tears.
But the other. Let not my death want tears, al ye my friends do weep.
And ye that erst alive me loved with tears my funeral keep.


But we, if so be it happen, that by the commandment of god we must depart
out of this life, let us do it merely thanking him for it. And let us think,
that thereby we are loosed from prison and eased of the irons, with the which
we were clogged, either to depart into perpetual mansion house appointed for
us, or else to be void of the sense of all grief. And before such time, that we
shall be called of god, let us think that day which is so terrible to other,
to be a blessed and a happy day to us. Because it is appointed, either of the
gods immortal, or else of nature, the first framer and maker of all things.
For we were not first made by hap, or chance, but by a certain heavenly
power, which will provide for us, and not create any of us, to the end, that
when we had passed the miserye of this life, we should fall into the
everlasting darkness of death. But let us rather think, that death is a safe
haven, and baye for us, to the which I pray god we may come, with spedye
wind and say^e. But although for a while we may be kept of by a contrary
tempeste, yet nevertheless, we must needs come to it at length. And can that,
which must needs come to all men, be misery to any one? Thus you have now my
conclusion, so that you can not justly complain of any thing.


Hea. You say well, and truly this conclusion has strengthened me more, the^ I
was before.


Mar. I am glad of it. But now let us see somewhat to our own ease. And this
next day, and so long, as we shall abide in this my manor, we will talk of
those things chiefly, which pertayne to the ease of grief of the mind,
fear and desire, which is the most profit of al philosophy.


Thus ends the first book.
THE SECOND BOOK treating of the second question which Mark Tullye Cicero
disputed in his manor of Tusculanum, concerning pain and forment, how far
it is the duty of a wise man to suffer the same.
NEoptolemus, in Ennius says, y^ he must of necessitye practice philosophy.
But yet nevertheless, but in few things: for universally it likes him not.
And I truly (O Brutus) must needs use philosophy (for wherein may I better
employe my time of leisure?) But I can not limite it to a few things only,
as he does. For it is very hard, that a man should be any thing skillful in
philosophy, without the knoweledge of most things, or all. For a man ca^ not
chose a few things, but out of a great number: and it is not possible, that
he which has gotten a little knoweledge, should not with earnest desire study,
to know the rest. But nevertheless, in a busye life, and (as Neoptolemus then
was) much troubled with war, both a little is profitable, and turns to much
use: (But yet not such as may be gathered of all Philosophye) and yet such
nevertheless, as we may thereby be eased, of desire, care, and fear. As by
that disputacion, which we kept last in our manor of Tusculanum, we seem to
have wrought a great despyte of death which is of no little force to ease our
mind of fear. For who soever fears that, which by no means may be
avoided, he surely, can not by any possibilitye, enjoy the fruyctes of a
quyete life. But who soever (not only because he must needs dye, but also
because there is nothing in death to be feared) does not pass on death, he
assuredlye, has gotten him self a strong stay, for a quiet life. Although I
am not ignorant, that many will speak against it: whose vain reproach I
could by no means anoyde, unless I should write nothing at al. For if in mine
oracions, in the which I somewhat esteem the favor of the people (for that
rethoryke is an art appliable to the common voice of the people, and the very
end and perfection of eloquence, is the praise and commendacion of the
hearers.) If then I say there were some, which would like nothing in my
oracions, in the wits, they them selves were not likely to passet and would
extend their commendacion in other men's works no further, then they thought
their own which might well attain the same: and for that cause when any
other man passed them in weight of sentence and eloquence of words, would
say, that they lyked rather a thin and base then so plentiful a style (of
the which sort also they were, that were called Attici, who boasted the
profession of that, which no man else knew, who now are almost laughed out of
al courts). If then in the allowynge of mine orations the people were of
several minds, what manner of hearer (think you) shall I in this grauer
matter have of the same? For philosophy sekes not the judgment or praise of
many, but of purpose flies the preace of the comme^ people, of whom it is
always either feared, or hated. So that, if either any man list to disprayse
it wholye, he may do it with the good will of the people, or else if he will
chiefly dyscommend that, which we now treat of, he may have sufficient
aid out of the books of other philosophers. But we have answered all the
foes of philosophye, in our book entitled Hortensius, and whatsoever was to
be spoken in the defense of Plato and his sect, called Academia, we have
expressed in our.iiii. books entitled Academikes.

But yet nevertheless, so much it lackes y^ I would be angry or displeased, if
any man should write against the same, y^ I wish it even with all my heart. For
philosophy in Greece it self, had never come to such perfection, unless
there had been such contention, and diuersytye among the best learned men,
as concerning the same. Wherefore I desire all such as are able to do it, that
they would help to take this praise also from Greece, that is already
faynted, and bring it into this our city, as our auncesters have already done
by all the rest, that were worth any pain or travail. And truly, the praise of
Oratoures increased from a low to such perfection, that now (as natures
course does work in all things) it begins to wax aged, and within this
short space is lykely to come to naught.

Wherefore, now let philosophy, begin to be spread in the latin tongue: and let
us help the increase thereof, altho^gh that for the same we be reproved and
refuted. Which truly they can not abide, which bind them selves to a^ye
certain opinion, as men wholye given to the same, so that sumtimes they are
constrained, to get them opinion of constancy, to maynteyne such things, as
otherwise they would not allow. But I who in all things follow probability,
and can go no farther the^ likelyhode, am ready both to write against others
without any stubbernes and also to be written against, without any anger. If so
we may bring this kind of exercise, from the Grecians to our countrymen, we
shall not want the help of the Greek libraries, which are stuffed with an
iufinite company of books, written of the same matter.

For many have written the same in effect that some others have done before
them. So that the noumber of books is infinite. The which shall in likewise
happen to us, when many give them selves to writing. But I will assaye
chiefelye to provoke the^ to write, who being well learned, and instructed with
perfect eloquence, can endyte philosophye with a good trade and order. For
there is a certain sort of men, which will needs be counted philosophers,
that are reported to have written many latin books, which surely I do not
despise, because I never read the^: but inasmuche as the aucthours them
selves, do plainly confess, y^ they can write neither distinctlye, orderlye,
eloquently, nor trimlye, I assuredlye neglect the readyng of that, which
should nothing at all delyght me, inasmuche as they care not, what they
write: I know not why any man should be bound to read the^, but such as
ar^ of the same opinion that they be. For as all men read Plato, and the
works of other, scolers of Socrates, and so likewise of others, that were
taught of them, although they agree not in opinion with them, or at the least
wise do not greatly allow them, but Epicurus and Metrodorus none almost
handles, but such as be of their own sect, so these late latin writers they
only read, which think the same to be well and wisely written. But me seems,
that whatsoever any man would set abroad, ought before to be commended by the
judgment of such as are learned. And for that cause, the ancient custom
peripatecian and academias, to reason on either part of every question, does
maruaylously well like me: not only for that by no other means the truth^ of
every doubtefull question might be tried, but also because there is in it a
great exercise and practyse of Rhetorique: which Aristotle chiefly used, and
all they that followed him. But in this our time, Phil^ (whom we have herd)
appointed one time to teach the precepts of Rhetorique, and an other to
declare the rules of philosophy. To the which order I being likewise moved of
my familyar fryendes, spente there in such leisure as I had in my manner of
Tusculanum. Wherefore when I had spent the morninge in the study of Rhetoryke,
after noone we came down to our scoole: in the which such reasoninge as we
had. I do now express: not as if I told it, but even in manner with the self
same words, as it was done. Therefore whiles we walked, we fell into this talk.

Hea. I can not well express how much I was delyghted, or rather
strengthened with your yesterdayes reasonynge. For although I am assured, that
I was at no time to much desirous of my life, yet nevertheless there would
come come sometime both fear and gryefe, to my heart, when I thought, that I
should one day lose the fruition of this pleasant light, and eke of all the
commodities of this life. Of this trouble assuredly, I am now so eased, that I
care for nothing less.


Mar. It is no maruayle truly. For such is the effect of philosophye: it
helps the mind, it takes a way all vain care, riddes the mind of desire,
and drives away fear: but this her power is not of like force with all men.
But then it works most, when it chances on a good nature. For stout men
not only fortune does help (as the old proverb is) but much more reason.
Which in manner with certain precepts, confyrmeth the strengh of fortitude.
Nature first made you hye minded, and meet to despise all earthlye things,
and for that cause, in your stout stomake', the persuasion of sufferynge death
is lightly rooted. But think you, that these self same persuasions, do so
much prevail with them (except very few) of whom they were first invented,
reasoned, and written? No truly. For how many philosophers shall you find,
whose life and behaui^ur is such as reason requires? Or that does use their
teaching not as a brag and boastinge of knoweledge, but as the law and order
of good life? Or how many of them shall ye find, that are ruled by them
selves, or obey their own decrees? you shall see some of such lyghtnes, and
arroga^cie, that it had been better for them, never to have learned. Some other
covetous men: many very desirous of glory: and most of them s^aues of
pleasure. So that, their talk and their life seems meruaylously to differ,
which assuredlye, seems to me a thing worthy great reproach. For like as if
one that did profess gra^mer, should speak false latin, or one that would be
counted a musician should sing out of tune, his fault were so much the worse,
because it is in that kind of knowledge which he professes: so likewise, a
philosopher showing ill example of living is so much the more to be blamed, as
he offe^deth in that thing, of the which he professes him self a teacher, and
professinge the art of life, offends in his living.


Hea. Is it not then to be feared least you commend philosophy^ without a
cause? For what can be a greater proof, that it is not auaylable then that
diverse notable philosophers do live abhominably?


Mar. Truly it is no proof at all. For as all fields that are tilled are not
fruitful, and it was falsely said. Although the fruitful seed in barren
ground be cast.
Yet it at length will there take root and so come up at last.


So not all the minds that are sown with the seed of philosophy, do bring
fruit thereof. And that I may persyste in the same similitude, as the ground
be it never so fruytefull, yet without tilling can not be fruytfull, so
neither can our mind without learning. For Philosophy is the plough of the
mind, whose share cuts up all vice by the roots, and prepares our minds to
receive the seeds of virtue: and so at last sows the same in it, which in
due time yield most plentyfull increase. But let us now go forewarde, say
what so ever you are wylling to hear dyscussed.


Hearer. I think that gryefe and pain is the greatest evil that may be.


Marcus. What? greater then shame or dishonestye?


Hea. I dare not so say. And therefore I am ashamed to be so soon trypped in
my talk.


Marcus. Nay it were more shame for you, if you did continue in your former
opynion. For what ought to seem worse unto you, then shame, vice, and
dyshonestye? which to escape what grief is there, that we ought not only
not to refuse, but also to coueyte, and desire?


Hearer. I think so likewise. But yet although gryefe be not the chyefest
evil, yet assuredlye it is an evil.


Mar. See you then by this my short admonicion, how much you have abated of
the terroure of gryefe.


Hearer. I do see it suffycyentlye. But I desire to hear it more at large.


Mar. I will assaye what I can do. Howebeit it is a great matter, and I had
need to have you well willing to hear.


Hea. You shall be sure of that. For as I did yesterday, so now also will I
follow reason whether soever she leads me.


Mar First then, I will speak of the weakness of many men, and the diverse
doctrines of philosophers: the chief of the which as well in authority, as
also in auncie^tie, Aristippus the scoler of Socrates, doubted not to say,
that grief is the greatest euel that might happen to man. This nice and
effeminate opinion, Epicurus was very ready t^ take: and after him one
Hierome a Rhodia^ said, that to want grief, was the greatest good that might
be. So much evil he thought was in sorrow. And diverse other, except Zeno,
Aristo, and Pyrrho, were of the same opinion.


Hea. But what think you?


Mar. That it is an evil in deed. But (...) nevertheless that there are
other far^^^ worse then it. For that which both nature it self, and also all
stout courage does deny, I mean that you should not count grief the
greatest evil that might be, but that shame did far pass the same) that
also philosophy the maistresse and lady of our life does still maintain. For
what duty, what praise, what ho^esty, will he so much esteem, that he will
put his body to pain for the attayninge of the same, who thinks gryefe to
be the chyefest evil? And what shame, what dishonesty would not a man suffer
to escape gryefe, if he thought it to be the greatest misery? To conclude,
who is there not wretched, not only then, when he is oppressed with pain, if
grief be so miserable, but also in as much as he knows it may happen unto
him? For who is there to who^ it can not chance? So hereof it must needs
follow, that none at all can be blessed. Metrodorus truly thynkes him to be
happy, whose body is in good health, and is assured, that it shall be so for
ever. But who is he, that can promise him self any such assurance. Now
Epicurus opinion is such, that I think he invented it purposelye to move men
to laughter.

He affyrmeth in a certain place, that if a wise man be burnt, if he be vexed,
yet he will bear it, and not yield unto it. A great praise surely, and
worthy of Hercules him self. But yet nevertheless, this will not suffyce
Epicurus a hard and a stout man (god wot).

For he albeit he were in Phalaris bull, will say, o how pleasant is it? how
little do I care for it? yea it is eue^ sweet to me. Why is it not enough, if
it seem not bitter? For they truly them selves, that say that gryefe if no
evil, are not wont to say, that torment is pleasant to any man. But that it
is sharp hard, hateful and against nature: and yet nevertheless no evil. And
he that thinks this only to be euel, yea and the extremest of all euels,
thinks that a wise man will count it pleasant. I do not require you to term
grief so lightly, as Epicurus (a man wholly given to pleasure) does. Let him
say on gods name, that it were alone to him, to be in phalaris bull, and in a
soft fetherbed: I do not require in a wise man so great patience against
gryefe. If he be able to perform his duty in suffering it, I do not require
him to be glad of it. For undoubtedly, it is a heavy thing, sharp, bitter,
enemy to nature, hard to bear, and suffer. For see Philocteta, whom we must
give leave to mourn. For he had seen Hercules before in the hill O^ta
roarynge, because of the greatness of the grief that he suffered. The arowes
that he before time had received of Hercules, could then be no ease to his
smart, when the veins of his inward ^owelles, infected with adders poison put
him to bitter gryefe, causinge him to call for help, and desire death in this
wise. O what man now within the seas would drench my wretched corpse.
Or who would beat my bloody brains about the boisterous rocks.
How wretchedly I here consume? the poison wastes my life.
I would to God that some good man would ryd the same with knyfe.


It were a hard thing to say, that he were in no evil, who should be
constrained to cry out so. But let us hear Hercules him self, whom the pains
of grief did then pearce, when he passed by death to immortality. What kind
of ou^ecryes makes he in Sophocles? who when he had put on him the shert which
^eianira sent him, embrued with y^ blood of y^ Centaure, and it stacke to his
ribs he cried in this wise.

O grievous pains to speak, and hard to suffer eke:
That these my faynted limbs, and troubled mind have bore.
Not I^nos malice strange to me was ever like,
Nor yet Eurystheus force, erste troubled me so sore:
As now one folishe wenche Oeneus daughter lo.
That wrapped me thus unawares, within this deadly cloute:
Which cleaving to my skin, my flesh does pull up so:
That shortly it is like to riue my spyrite out.
For now it wasted has well nighe my breath and blood.
And thus this cruel death my body lo has spent.
Which now the bitter bane of poisoned shert does shroude.
Lo here behold those wounds, which enmies hands nere lent,
Not gyantes mighty strength, nor monstrous Centaures hand.
Not Grecians prudent force, nor Barbares crueltye,
Nor yet the cruel folk which dwell at thend of land:
Which passing I full often nere tried such miserye.
But now a woman's hand my martial corpse shall slaye.
O son, in this one thing thy wretched father please:
Let not my cruel death thy mothers love alaye.
But bring me her whose bane would make me feel some ease.
Now shall I prove whom best thou love of us twain.
Go to my son bewail thy poisoned fathers case.
Rue on me whose vile death, whole nations will complain.
O that I like a wench, to tears should wrest my face?
Whom no man erste has seen to syghe at any sore.
So now my weakened force, shall dye before his date.
Come nere my son behold thy fathers gryefe therefore
Whose inwards fret^ing force, of poison now does grate.
Behold all men, and thou which heaven and earth did make.
Cast down on me thy boltes, which other men do fear.
For now the whirlynge panges of gryefe my body shake.
And now the poison smartes, O hands that conquerours were.
O heart, O breast, and eke you loathsome lasy hands.
Did erst your force constrayne, a Lion lose his life?
Or Lerna put to death yseared with fire brands?
Did ye from Centaure once, his wretched life berieue?
Did ye destroy the beast, that Erimanthia spoiled?
Or else from hell drive out, the threfold hellyshe hound?
Were ye those hands that erste, the waker dragon failed?
That kept the golden fruit, there lyenge on the ground?
Did ye erst do these things, or give so great assayes?
Or did your valyaunte deeds deserve a worthy praise.
Can we despise gryefe, since Hercules was so impacient of it? Now let us
hear Aeschilus, not a Poet only, but a Pythagorean also. How does he make
Prometheus lamenting the gryefe, which he suffers for the theft committed in
Lemnos. For the fire which we have, it is said that he stole from Jupiter. And
for that cause, does there endure tormente: which he recountinge with him
self, tied to the mount Caucasus, speaks in this wise.

You rare of Titans stock, partakers of my bl^ud,
Descended once from heavens, behold me here ybounde
And ryed unto the rocks* as ship in main sea flood
The warye shipmen use with ropes to tie on ground:
The son of Saturn Jupiter did cause me here to lie:
When he did join his hand to Uulcanes heavy wrath.
Who in these lasting gyues my body lo did tie:
And crushed my limbs in two so in this balefull bath,
With yrons all to perced I miser here do lie.
And when the third day comes the bitterst that may be:
An Egle then full ^ell with talentes hookt I see:
Which stoupes from hie to plumme her greedy fill on me.
But when she being filled has taken away her flight
In aers hye: she lickes her goared bluddye beak.
And when my liver is renewed in each night:
Then lo she comes again, her fill thereof to eat.
So I continuallye mine only woe maintain:
Which does me still tormente with woeful miserye.
For as you here see bound, with Io^es most mighty chain:
I can not fear the foul away, from me to fly.
So age has come on me whiles I this pain abide
Desiring bitter death the same to fynyshe once
But Jones most cruel dome has death to me denied
And so this cruel plague shall still stick in my bones
Til that ^he son my flesh upon this hill roast shall
Which that most filthy foul from hye does often let fall.
Assuredlye, I think we can not but count a man in his case wretched, and if
he be wretched, the^ is grief an euel.


Hea. As yet you have pleaded my part. But thereof we will talk hereafter.

But in the mean time, I maruayle much what you mean by using verses so
much in your talk?


Mar. I will tell you the cause, and it is well asked of you, since you see
that I am now at leisure. I think when you were in Athenes, you have been
often ere now, in the scooles of the philosophers.


Hea. Yea truly, and that very gladly.


Mar^us. Did you not then mark, that they did much use to bring in verses in
their talk.


Hea. In deed I remember that Dionisius the Stoyke brought in very many.


Mar. You say troth. But he did it without any choice or eloquence. But
Philo both kept the number of his verse, and used choice therein and placed them
also conveniently.

Wherefore since the time that I first fell in love with this declamation of
mine old age, I do gladly bring in my talk the verses of our poets. And if
they chance to be imperfecte in any poynct, I have translated the same out of
the Greek: because I would not, that our tongue should want any kind of
ornament that the Greeks had.

But do you see the discommoditie that Poets cause? First they bring in stout
men lamenting, which weakeneth the readers courage. Then they be so pleasant,
that men do not only read the^, but also learn them without book.

So, when to little learning, and to a wanton and effeminate life, poets are
once adjoined, they utterly slake all the pricks of virtue. And for that
cause, they are worthelye banished of Plato, out of that cicie, which he
framed as the most perfect form of a well framed and governed commonwealth.

Yet nevertheless, we being learned so to do of the Grecians, do both read
them even from our youth vpwardes, and also learn them without book:
thinkinge their learning to be both good and honest. But what should we blame
Poets? since there have been philos^phers, who ought to have been the masters
of all virtue, which have thought sorrow and gryefe to have been the greatest
evil: and whereas you being but a young man, and even now of the self same
opinion, with this only demand, whether it were greater then shame, did
foorthwyth relente and forsake your vain opinion: Now^ ask Epicurus the same
question, and he will say, that small grief is a greater evil, then the
greatest shame that may be. For he will say, that shame is no evil, unless
gryefe do follow.

I marvel then, that there does no gryefe follow Epicurus, when he says
that gryefe is the greatest evil: which is the most shameful thing, that
any Philosopher might have spoken. Wherefore you did well answer when you
said, that shame seemed to you a greater evil then gryefe. And if you will
persiste in that opinion, you shall lightly perceive, how much we ought to
avoid grief. For we must not so much search, whether gryefe it self be an
evil yea or no, as how we ought to strengthen our minds to bear the same.
The Stoykes occupye them selves in certain light reasons to show the cause
why it ought not to be called an evil. As if the controversy were of the
word, and not of the matter. Why do thou deceive me Zeno? For when thou
denyest that gryefe and formente (which seem to me horrible things) are any
pain at al: I am straight delyghted therewyth and become desirous to know,
how y^ which I esteem the greatest miserye, can be counted no euel at all.
There is nothing euel (says he) but y^ which is dishoneste or vicious. Now
y^ tryflest. For that which grieved me most, thou leauest untouched. I know
that pain and gryefe is no sin. Cease therefore to tell me of that. Teach
me, whether it be any thing material to sorrow, or not sorrow. Nothing at al
(thou say) as concerning a blessed life, which consists in only virtue.
But yet nevertheless it is not to be used, but left: and why so? Because it is
sharp against nature, payneful to suffer, heavy and hard. Here is plenty of
words in deed and yet nevertheless, all this in effect is no more but evil.
And by this varietee of words, thou doste descrybe and defyne unto me, what
gryefe is, and not how I should rid my self of it. Thou call it sharp,
repugnaunt to nature, scarce able to be borne, neither do thou lie therein.
But thou should not have used such copye in words, and faynted in matter.
As to say, that nothing can be good, that is not honest, nor nothing ill
that is not dishonest: that is to wyshe a thing as it should be, and not to
teach it as it is. But that was said much better and truer, that all things
which nature does abhor are evil: and contrary wise, such things as it
coueytes are good. This foundation being placed, and all contention about
words set a part, yet nevertheless, that self same thing which the
Stoikes so much esteem, which we call honesty, right, and comelines, and
which we sometimes compryse under the name of virtue, shall so much pass all
other, that the goods of the body and fortune, may well seem right small in
comparison of it. Wherefore, if (as you granted at the beginning) shame is
worse then pain, then truly is pain nothing at all. For when thou shalt
think it a shame, for one that would be counted a man, to groan, cry,
lament, and bewail, the^ shall thou have before thine eyes, the beautye of
stoutenes and honesty. According to the which, as long as thou shalt rule thy
self, thou shall undoubtedly perceive, that gryefe will yield and give place
to virtue. For where so ever virtue is, there is no fear of gryefe. For first
as for pru-without the which a man can not so much as understand any other
virtue. Will she suffer the to do any thing or attain to any profit,
without labor or travail? Will temperaunce suffer the to do any thing,
without moderation? And justice what man can observe, that for fear of pain
would dysclose secrets, that were told him, betraye his friends, or ouerpasse
many other duties of a just man?

But inespeciallye, what will thou answer to fortitude and her mates, stoutnes
of stomach, gravity, patience, and despysyng of al worldly things? what will thou lie like a miser, complaining lamentablye, to thintente to hear some
other call the a stout man?

Now assuredlye, one in that case, no man would esteem to be a man.

Wherefore, either we must despise ma^lye courage, or else bury grief. What?
know you not this, that although, you loose one iuell, yet the residue of your
substance may be safe? But if you lose one virtue (but virtue can not be lost)
or if you confess that you lack one, you must needs lack all? May we the^
call Philocteta before mentioned, a stout man, or a man of great courage, or a
pacient or a grave man? For I had rather to have your indgement therein then
mine own. But he truly can be no stout man, who li^th in a warm bed and yet
With cries complaints and sighs, does cause the aer resound.

I do not deny pain to be a gryefe: for then, what need should we have of
fortitude? But I say, that it ought to be overcome with patience, and
sufferaunce, if there be any such thing. But if there be none such, then why
do we in vain commend Philosophye? or what mean we so much to brag of the
works of the same Does gryefe prick the? Let it vex thee on gods name, or
else if thou be naked, let it eue^ (...) ^hy throat. But if thou have thy
harness framed in Uulcanes forge, (that is) a stout courage, withstand it.
For fortitude the preserver of worship, unless thou so do, will leave and
forsake thee.

The laws of the Cretenses, which either Jupiter him self made, or else
Minos at the commandment of Jupiter (as the Poets say) and so likewise the
laws of Licurgus, do command, that youth should be brought up in labor,
hunting, running, hunger, thirste, cold, and heat. And the boys of Sparta,
at the aultars, are so laded with stripes, that often times a great deal of
blood gusheth out of their bodies: yea and sometimes (as it was told me,
when I was in that country) even to the death. Yet of them all not one, did at
any time not only not cry, but neither so much as groan. Why the^, may
children suffer so much, and me^ nothing? or shall custom so much prevail,
and reason nothing? There is a difference betwixt labor and grief, yet
nevertheless, they are very nyghe in nature. But they differ somewhat. For
labor is the exercise of the mind or body, in some busye work or travail.
But gryefe is a sharp motion in the body, contrary to the senses.

These both, ye Grecians, whose tongue is more plentiful then ours do
confound under one name. Therefore, painful men they name desirous and lovers
of gryefe. But we, much more aptelye, call them paynefull. For it is one thing
to labor, and an other to be gryeued. O Greece, sometimes yet barren of
words, with the which thou think thy self chiefelye to flow. I say,
there is great diuersitye betwyxt gryefe and labor. It was a gryefe to Caius
Marius, when the veins in his thigh were cut. But it was a labor for him,
when in a whote day, he marched before his army. Yet nevertheless there is
some affinitye betwixt these. For the use and custom of labor, causes
grief to be more easy to be borne. And for that cause, they which first gave
laws to the commen wealth of Greece, commanded inespecially that young man
should be acquaynted with travail: which the Lacedaemonians applied in
likewise to their women.

Who (whereas in other cities they sit shaded within the walls of their houses
clothed in nice apparel) lived there nothing after that sort. For they more
desired to wrestle, to bathe them selves in the river Eurotas, to abide the
heat of the son, duste, travail, and warfare, then to sit idle and bear
children. And among these paynefull exercyses, grief must sometimes be
entermedled For they are some times beaten, stricken, and cast down. But
custom it self does even harden them from feeling the gryefe. But now as for
warfare (I talk not of the Spartans, who use to march in measure according
to the blaste of the trumpet) but our armies, first you see are called
exercitus, of exercise: then, what or how great labor do they en^ure, in
bearing each man a half months vitayle, or any other thing that they shall
have need to use? For as for the caryage of their tergate, sword, or helm,
they count it no greater burden, then of their shoulders, legs or arms. For
they say, that harness is the hands of a souldyoure. Which they carye so
much without any combraunce, that if need should be, they casting away
their other caryage, might use they^ weapons as their limbs. What? the
exercisinge of our souldyours? the runnyng, coupling, and shouting of them,
what pain is it? Thereby their courage is made so r^ady, to abide blows in
the feilde. Bring thither a fresh water souldyoure, albeit he have as good a
stomach as the other, yet he will seem a woman in comparison. Why? such
dyfference is there betwyxt new comers, and old beaten soldiers, as we
have sufficiently proved. The strength of the younger souldioures is commonly
better. But to take pains, and to set naught by wounds, that custom
teaches. Also we may diverse times see, when they being wounded, are borne out
of the fyelde, that a young and raw souldioure, having a small blow will
weep like a child: But the old beaten warryoure being hardened ^y
continuance, will but call for a Surgyan to bind up his wounds. He says
Patrocles here I come you^ gentle aid to crave:
Before I dye the doleful death which enmies sword me gave:
For lo my blood out of my wound in wondrous wise does run:
Wherefore assaye if by your help the death I now may shun.
For both Aesclapius childrens hals are full of wounded men.
So that by no means any access I now may have to them.


This is Euripylus. You may well perceive him to be a man much exercised in
war. For where is his long lamentacion? See how stoutly he talks, yea and
shows a reason, why he ought to take it in good part. Who so does mind, his
^oe in war with deadly ^int to strike:
Let him first think, that the other does for him provide the like.


Truly if Patrocles had been a man, he would have borne him into his chaumber,
and bound up his wounds but he did nothing less, for he enquyreth, how the
fyeld was fought. Tell me quod he, in what case now the Grecians state does
stand.

He is not able to express the same so well in words, as by shewinge the
tokens which appeared on him. Cease therefore, to ask him any more questions
(O Patrocles) and bind up his wou^des. For although Euripylus can abide the
gryefe, yet Aesopus can not. Who after he described Hectors fatal chance,
weping lamentateth the ruinous state of the Trojans, in great sorrow and
anguishe. So impacient is a stout man sometimes, for the loss of glory in the
field. Well: shall an old soldier be able, by continuance and custom to
do these things? and a well learned and wise man not? Now truly he ought to
do it far better. But as yet I speak of the custom of e^ercise, and not of
reason and wisdom. Old women very often will bear honger.ii. or.iii. days.
Take away meat but one day, from one of these stout ^yghters: he will cry
out upon Jupiter him self, and say he is not able to bears it. Custom is of
great force. For we see, that hunters lie all night on the snow, and in the
day are parched with the son, rebounding from the hills. Thereof it comes
also, that masters of fence and champions stir not for a dry blow. But
what do I here talk of them, who strive for games as it were for the office
of the consulshippe? these ruffins, and other desperate persons, what blows
bear they? And whereof comes it, that such as have been well brought up,
^ad rather receive punishment justly deserved, the^ by shame to avoid it?
How many proofs have we of some, that esteem nothing more, then to please
either their masters or else the people. Yea, and of some, who when they have
been almost stayne, have sent to their masters, to know their pleasure:
saying, that if their wyil be so be^te, they are even ready to dye. What so
mean a champion, did at any time groan at a stroke: or else so much as ones
chaung^ his countenance? Who of them, did not only stand in fight, but
either dye with shame? Who of them, being commanded to lay his head on the
block to be stricken of with an axe, did at any time shrink in his neck?
Such is the force of exercise, use, and custom. Shall a Samnite then, a filthy
man, worthy of so beastly a life, be able to abide these things, and shall a
man well brought up, and even framed to obtain glory, have any part of his
mind so effeminate, which with exercise and wit he can not fortifye? The sight
of the fence players, seems to many men meruaylous cruel: and I can not
well say, whether it be so or no, as it is now a days used. But truly I
think, that when condemned persons did fight out their lives, as there might
be some better enstructions for the ears, to teach men to despise gryefe, so
assuredlye, to prove the same, and even to set it before our eyes, I think
there could be none better. Thus much I have spoken of the exercise, custom,
and practyse of gryefe. But now let us consider the reasons against the same,
unless you have any thing thing to say against that, which is already
spoken.


Hea. What that I should trouble you in your talk? No surely, I will not.
Your reasons so much move me to credyte you.


Mar. Whether gryefe be any evil or no, that let the Stoikes weygh: who with
far fette and trifelinge conclusions, in the which the sense of man has no
judgment, assaye to conclude, that gryefe is no evil. But I (what so ever
thing it be) think assuredlye, that it is not so great as it seems, and that
men are more afraid, with the outward apparaunce and show of it, then they
need. And to be short, that there is no pains in it, but that is very
tolerable. Whence therefore were it best for me to begin? shall I bryefelye
repeat those things which I have already spoken, that my talk may the
better proceed in order? This therefore all men grant, as well learned as
unlearned, that it is the part of courageous, stout hearted, and valiant men,
patiently to bear grief. Neither was there any man, who would not count him
worthy great praise, that could suffer the same. That therefore, which is both
necessarilye required of stout men, and also counted praise worthy^ when it is
done, that I say, either to fear when it is coming, or else not to bear
when it does come, is it not a great shame? And whereas all the good affections
of the mind, are properlye called virtues, it seems to me, that that name,
does most properly belong to that only, which does far pass all the rest.
Now the name of virtue, is deryued of the name of man, which in latin is
vir. To who^ the virtue that does most properly belong, and appertain, is
fortitude and stout courage. The two chiefest points of the which are the
contempt of death, and despysyng of grief. These therefore we must use, if we
will be counted the obtayners of virtue, or rather thought worthy of the name
of men: because of this word (vir) which in latin sygnifyeth this word man)
the name of virtue is taken. But perchance, thou will ask me, how should I
bear grief? And not without good cause. For philosophye professes also a
medecin for the same. But now comes Epicurus, a man not very euel, or rather
good, and gives counsel according to his wit.

Pass not for gryefe, says he. Who says so? even he, which co^^eth grief
to be the chiefest euel. Fayntly enough god wot. How be it let us give him the
hearing. If it be the greatest grief that may be (quod he) then must it needs
be short.


Hea. I pray you rehearse the same again, that I may understand, what he
means by greatest, and what by shortest.


Mar. The great^st is that, then the which there is none greater. And the
shortest is that, more short then the which none can be In deed I despise the
greatness of such grief* from which, the shortness of the time shall deliver me,
well nie before it come. But if it be such, as the pain of Philocte^^ was* it
seems to me to be great enough, although it be not the greatest. For when no
part of my body al^es, but my foot: yet mine eyes may, so may my head, sides,
lights, and other parts of my body. And although this be not the greatest
gryefe, because I feel not gryefe in all those parts, in the which I might,
is it therefore no pain? But continual gryefe (says he) has more mirth then
sorrow.

Now truly, I can not well (...) that so learned a man wantes wit. But
assuredlye, I think, he speaks it in derision of us. I call it the greatest
grief, although some other be ten moates more then it. And think not,
because that some other is greater then it, that for that cause it should be
foorthwyth small and light. I can name many good men, which these many
years, have been troubled with extreme pains of the gout. And shall we
think their pains small, because they might have some greater? But he like a
suttel man appoyntes neither any measure of the quantity, or greatness, ne yet
of ye length of grief. So that I ca^ not know what he thinks to be greatest
in gryefe, or what to be short in time. Wherefore let us ouerpasse him, whose
words are to none effect: and let us playnelye confess, that we ought not to
seek remedy of our pain at his hands, which said that gryefe was the greatest
of all euels: although he him self in his disease of stra^gurye, seems to
show him self some what stout. We must then seek help otherwhere: but
chiefly (if we desire to know, what is most mete for us to do) at their
hands, which think that which is honest, to be the chiefest good: and
contrarywyse, that which is dishonest, to be the principal evil. In their
presence truly, thou durst not syghe, nor yet to brag of such trifles. For
virtue it self, by their voice will commen with the, in this sort. Will thou
(seeing children in Lacedemon, young men in the games of the mount Olimpus,
and barbarous bondmen in the liftes, abidinge most bitter strokes, yea and
that without any noise of cry) If any light grief chance to touch the,
schriche out forthwyth like a woman? Will thou not abide it constantly, and
quietely? thou will say, it can not be suffered: my nature will not bear it. I
hear the. Children bear it: some for praise, some to avoid shame, and some
for fear: and are we afraid, least that which so many men, in so many diverse
places have suffered our nature will not bear? But it truly will not only bear
it, but also requires it. For there is nothing that it does more esteem,
neither yet any thing that it does more coueyt, then honesty, then praise,
then dignity, then worship. By these diverse names, I mean but one thing. But
I use the^ to show the thing more evidently by many names. But my meaning is
this, that that thing, is far above al other most convenient for each man,
which is to be desired for it self: as a thing either issuynge out of virtue,
or else being it self placed among some one of the virtues, and of his own
nature praise worthy. Which truly, I would rather term the singular and
only, then the chiefest or greatest good. And as these things may be truly
verified of hones^ye, so may the contrary as well be spoken of dishonesty, then
the which there is nothing more filthye, nothing more to d^ abhorred, nothing
more unmeet or unseemly for a man. Which if you be already persuaded (for
you said at the beginning, that you thought there was more evil in shame and
dishonestye, then in any gryefe) then you may well enough be your own master.

Howbeit I do not well know how a man may understand that phrase of
speech, of being your own master, as though one part should rule, and
the other obey. Yet nevertheless, it is not spoken unadvisedly. For our mind
is divided into two parts: of the which, the one is endued with reason, and
the other is wholly void of ye same. Wherefore, when we are commanded to rule
our selves, this is the effect thereof, y^ we ought by reason to rule
rashenes. There is in all men's minds some softnes, wantonness, and faintnes,
and truly, if there were nothing else, there were nothing worse then man. But
even with the sam^, we have reason, the mistress, and queen of all things
given unto us, which by her own endeavor and ^arder increase, is made perfect
virtue. That this may govern that part of the mind, which ought to be subject
and obedient unto it, that is the charge and duty of every good man.
Perchance thou will say, how shall it rule the other? even as the master
does his servant, the captain his souldioure, or the father his son. For if
that frail part of our mind, behave it self dishonestly, if it give it self
effeminately to tears, and mourninge, let it be fast bound, and committed to
the ward of his neighbor reason. For often times we see some afraid of shame,
whom otherwise reason could not move. Such therefore as servants, ought to be
kept within the bands of fear. But such as are somewhat stronger, and yet
not fully fortified, those we ought by often admonicion to put in remembrance,
of their own good name. See how the wisest man in Greece, being wounded
lamenteth not unreasonably but moderately rather, saying. Go softely sirs,
least otherwise, you cause my gryefe increase.

Pacuui^s therefore said far better then Sophocles. For be brings in
Ulisses lamentably complaining, when he was wounded, yet nevertheless he makes
such as carried him, waytinge the worship of his person, say thus unto him.
Now sure Ulixes, though we see the wounded grievously:
Thy stomach truly is not such, as soldiers stout should be:
Who all his time has spente in wounds and bloodshed commonly


The wise poet thought, that custom ought to have been no small enstructor to
him to bear gryefe. And he truly lamenteth not immoderately in extreme gryefe
saying. O hold me: stay me now: and help by art to staunche my blood:
Lay bare my wou^des: for grief does cause me now to ware nigh wood.


Then he soundes, and foorthwyth returns to him self, saying. Away depart
and get you hence; and leave me here alone.
For why, my pain does more increase through your great noise and moan.


See you how suddenly not the grief of his body was appeased, but the rage
of his mind repressed? And therefore in the last verses he chideth others,
even when he was dieng with these words On fortune we may well complain, but
yet not well lament.
For why, the first beseemes a man, the last is women's point.


Lo, the weaker part of this man's mind, was so obediente to reason, as an
old soldier should be to his captain. That man in the which perfect
wisdom may be found (which truly we never see, but yet nevertheless know by
the wrytinges of Philosophers, what manner man he shall be, if there shall at
any time rise any such) he truly, or else reason for him (which shall show
her perfect force, and bear her full stroke in him) shall so rule and govern
that inferior part, as a good father should his obedient children.

He shall do with his commandment, what soever he list, without any pain or
grief. He will strengthen, fortifye, defend, and arm him self, to wythstand
gryefe, as his deadly enemy.

But what be those weapons with the which he shall so furnyshe him self?

The inward talk, and communicatio^ of his heart: when he is willing to fly
all dishonestye, fayntnes, and all other things, not seemelye for a man. Let
him also have always before his eyes, the pure examples and pictures of
honesty. Let him behold Zeno the philosopher of Eleas: who those to suffer all
kinds of tormente, rather then he would utter such, as were privy to the
conspiracy, to destroy the tirantes. Let him think of Anaxarchus Democritius,
who being fallen into the hands of Nicocreon, the king of Cipres, forsook and
refused no kind of punyshement. Calanus an indian, and unlearned and barberous
man, borne at the foot of the hill Caucasus, did voluntarilye suffer him self
to be burnt. And we, if our feet, our teeth, or al our body chance to ache,
are not able to abide it. For we have a fond and light opinion, the which
proceeds not so much of gryefe, as of to much pleasure, by the which when
we are once made nice, and begin to abound in wantonness, we can not so much
as abide the stynge of a be, without great outcries. But Caius Marius a man
always bred in the country, but nevertheless a man in deed, when he was cut
as I have showed before, forbid them to bind him. Neither was there any man
before him cut unbound. But many since: and why so? because they followed his
example. Do you not then perceive, that we think grief to be a greater evil
then it is in deed?

And yet nevertheless, that it was a gryefe unto him, he him self does
sufficientlye show. For he would not let his other thyghe to be cut. So he did
both bear the pain like a stout man, and also like a wise man, refused to
suffer more then was nedeful. This matter therefore, chiefelye consists in
rulyng your self. But what kind of rule that must be, I have already showed.

And truly this co^sideracion when a man weyghes, what things are worthy to be
suffered, for the name of patience, a stout stomach, and a hauty courage, does
not only restrain the mind from doing amiss, but also (I know not how)
does greatly assuage the gryefe it self For as we see in the fyelde, when a
cowarde and fearful souldioure, at the first sight of his enemy casting away
his armoure, flies as much as he can, thereby sometimes comes to his
destruction, whereas he that abode in the field, felt no such chance: so they
that can not abide the first brunt of sorrow do cast away them selves, and lie
some sore vexed, and other some mad, whereas they that wythstoode it, do often
times depart, having the upper hand.

For there be some things, in the which our mind does resemble our body.
For as our bodies are the better able to bear burdens, when we stretche out
our limbs, and setle our selves to abide the weyghte thereof, and
contraryewyse when we have no courage to it, an easy burden ouerlades our
lasye limbs: so likewise, our mind having an earnest atte^tiue desire to any
thing, can lightly cast of the weyghte of any burden troubling it from the
same.

But if it once slack his good will, it is to kept down, and depressed by the
same, that it can never after raise it self again. And (if we will say that
which is truth) in the execution of all such things, as appertain to our
duty, there ought to be an earnest and zealous desire of our mind, which is
the only mayntayner and preserver of all duties. But this chiefly we must
provide in the sufferyng of all gryefe, that we do nothing fearfully,
cowardlye, slauishely, or effeminatelye: and above all other things, that we
utterly reject such lamentable complayntes, as Philocteta made. To sygh and
groan may be well granted and permitted to a man: but to cry out, not so
mcuhe as to a woman. For, such mourninge the law of the.xii. tables
forbids any man to use in funeralles. Neither truly, will a stout or wise
man, at any time so much as syghe, unless it be to setle him self more
strongly, for the abidinge of gryefe. As runners sometimes in their race, cry
as loud as they can. So do the wrestlers in their exercise, and the champions,
even when they lift their clubbes to strike at their adversaries, use to
groan. Not for that they feel any pain, or that their heart faynteth them,
but because with their lord shoute, the strength of their body is pulled
together, and so there comes a sorer strype. So, they that are minded to cry
very loud, are not contented to apply thereto their sides, tongue, and jaws,
which are the instruments of the which the sound of our voice is caused,
but that also with their hole body, and every part of the same, they assaye
to pour out their voice. Truly I saw when Marcus Antonius pleadynge very
earnestlye for him self, touched the ground with his knee. For, as stone
bows, and other gunnes, that shoot out stoanes, and arowes, cast so much the
faster, as they be stiffer bente, and drawn more hardlye: so our voice,
runnynge, or stroke, is so much the greater, as it proceeds from the earnest
endeavor of the whole body, being bent to nothing else saving that only.
The which earnest good will, since it is of such force and power, i^ such
syghynge in the sufferynge of gryefe, as proceeds from the same, be to the
confirmation and strengthening of our courage, such I think best that we
use. But as for the lamentable, weak, abiecte and woeful cry, to that I say,
who so ever shall give him self, him surely, would I scarce think worthy the
name of a man. Which if it did bring any ease to his pain, yet were it the
part of him to consider, what were the duty of a stout and couragyous man.
But since it asswageth no part of our smart, why should we show our selves
lewd without any cause? For what is more fond then to weep like a woman?
And this precepte, which we now give of gryefe, extends further. For all
such things, as we ought to avoid, we must wythstande with as earnest desire
and affection, as we ought gryefe it self. For if we burn with anger, or
frye with the flames of lust, we must run to the same fort, and take the same
weapons to wythstand it. But since our purpose here is to entreat of gryefe,
we will ouerpasse those thinge^ To bear gryefe therefore quietelye and
patiently, it is necessarilye expedient, that we have our hole intent fyxed on
the honestye of the thing, wherefore we suffer it. For we are of nature (as I
said before (howebeit I must remember it oftener) very desirous of honesty*
the glimse of the which, if we once chance to see, there is nothing that we
be not ready either to bear, or suffer, for the obtaining of the same. From
this earnest desire, that our mind has to get true praise, and honestye,
proceed the aduenturing of so many dangers, in the battle, so that stout men
do either not feel their wounds, or else if they do feel them, yet had rather
to dye, the^ to lose one jot of their worship. Both the Deci^ saw the
glistering swords of their enemies, when they voluntarilye ran upon them.

The nobility and glory of their death, did take from the^ all the fear of
wounds. Do you think that it grieved Epaminundas, when he felt his life to
faint even as his blood wasted? no truly.

For he left his country rulinge over the Lacedaemonians, to whom when he came
first to office, they were bond and slaves. These be the co^fortes and eases
of the greatest griefs, that may be. But thou will say, what comfort may
they have which are payned at home in peace, out of wars in their quyete
beds? Now thou bryngest me to philosophers, which come not often into the
field: emonge the which one Dionisius borne at Heraclea, a vain and a light
man, learning these same enstructions of Zeno, to be stout against grief,
was afterward nevertheless overcome of the same. For having a pain in the
raines of his back in his greatest gryefe he cried out, that all those things
were false which he had learned before as concerning grief Whom, when
Cleanthes his scoolefelowe demanded, what reason had moved him to change his
opinion, he au^swered: because (says he) if I should spend all my time in
Philosophye, and not be able to bear gryefe, it were a sufficient proof, that
it is an evil.

But I have spente a great number of years in philosophye, and can not
nevertheless abide gryefe, it must needs therefore be evil. Then Cleanthes
hearing this, striking the ground with his foot, rehearsed this verse. Do
tho^ hear this Amphiara^s ygraued in the ground.

By Amphiara^s he meant Zeno, from whom he was sorye to hear him so degenerate.
But far otherwise did our country man Possidonius, whom I my self have
often seen, and of whom I will tell you, what Pompeius was wont to remember.
Which was, that when he departing out of Siria, came to Rhodes, he would gladli
have heard Possidonius. But understanding that he was greuouslye sick, with an
ache in all his limbs, and that for that cause, he could not hear him
dispute, yet he thought good to see the noble philosopher. To whose presence
when he came and had honorably saluted him, saying that it grieved him very
much, that he could not hear him reason of philosophye, at that present: you
may very well, if you please (quod he) for I will never suffer, that a little
ache of my body, should cause the journey of so noble a man, to be taken in
vain. So Pompeius told me, that he lyeng, reasoned very sagelye and
eloquentlye of this position, that nothing is good but that which is honest.
And when the thorns of gryefe would now and the^ prick him, he would often
say, all this is to no end O grief: for be thou never so troublesome unto
me, yet will I never confess the to be evil.

So all noble and renoumed labors, even with despysynge of them are made
tolerable. Do we not see in the scooles of fence, that such as esteem the
praise of the same, pass for no pain, so they may attain it? Likewise,
those, whom the praise of hunting and riding the horse does more delyghte,
do they refuse any pain, in learning the same? What shall I speak of our
ambition for offices, for greedye desire of honors?

What fire is there, through which they would not run that sue for the
same, with tooth and nail, as a man would say. Africanus had always in his
hands Xenophon the scoler of Socrates, whom among all other things, he
chiefelye praised for this saying, that the self same labor, was not alike
grievous to the captain, and to the soldier. Because the honor makes the
capitaynes labor but light But it chances commonly, that among the commen
sort of fools, the opinion of honesty is of some force, but it it self they
can not discern: and for that cause, they are much moved with commen report
and judgment of the multitude, and so think that only to be honest, which
most men commend. But I would not wyshe you, although you be in the favor of
the common people, yet to stand to their judgment: neither to esteem that
best which they do. You must use your own discrecion and judgment. If you
like your own judgment in esteeminge such things as be honest, you shall not
only be able to rule your self, (as I said somewhat a^ore) but all other men
and all other things likewise. Wherefore propose to your self a certain
stoutenes, and highenes of stomach, which is of great force to cause a man to
contemn and despise all gryefes. Think also, that there is but one thing
which is most beautiful of al other, and that so much the more, if it want
the praise of the people, and not looking for it, does delyghte it self with
his own commodityes. Truly all such things as are done without boasting, or
commendation of the people, seem to me more prayseworthy then the contrary.
Not for that I would have such things done out of the face of the people
(for all honest deeds love to be placed in the light) But, because there is no
greater praise that virtue requires, then the good judgment of a sound and
undefiled conscience. And let us chiefelye think, that this sufferaunce of
grief, which we have said often heretofore, ought to be strengthened with the
earnest desire of the mind, ought to be equally and indifferentlye showed and
applied in all cases. For many which either for desire of conqueste and
dictorye, or couetyse of glory, have stoutelye abyden many cruel strokes, yet
nevertheless sometimes the self same men, are not able to abide the pains of
a dissease. For the cause is, for that that pain which they suffered before,
they suffered not learned by the guide and conductynge of reason, or wisdom,
but only for desire of glory.

And for that cause many rude and barbarous people, can stoutely weld their
weapons, and yet nevertheless can not behave them selves manlye, in their
disease. But the Grecians being men not very stout, but wise enough (as the
wits of men are diverse) can not behave them selves stoutly against their
enemies, and yet nevertheless can bear disseases patiently, and as it
becomes men. And the Cimbrians and Celtiberians, are stout in the field, and
plain women in their sickness. For, nothing can have any equalitye or measure
in it, which does not proceed of reason. And when you see them, whom either
earneste desire, or else a vain opinion moves to coueyte any thing, in
following and attayninge the same, not to be wearyed of gryefe, then ought you
to think, that gryefe is either no evil at all, or else if there be any
hardenes in it, or any thing contrary to nature, and for that cause it may
please you to call it evil, yet nevertheless, that it is so little, and so
much overcome of virtue, that it can not appear at all. Which I beseech you
ponder with your self. For this reason will serve you to many more uses, then
to avoid gryefe. For if we must refer all our doings to the auoydinge of
dishon^stye, then we shall not only need to despise the pryckes of sorrow,
but y^ thunderboltes of flattering fortune also. Specially inasmuch as at our
last end, there is that haven and port prepared for us, of the which we
reasoned the day before: namelye death. For, like as if God would say, to a
sayler persecuted with Pirates, cast thy self over the ship board, for there
is a Dolphine which will bear the (as he did Arion) or else the horse which
draw Neptunus chair upon the seas, shall be ready to receive the, and carye
the whether so ever thou list. Would not then this mariner (think you)
abandone fear? So, when the sharpenes of gryefe does vex us, if it be such
that we can not bear it, you see where is our refuge.

Thus much I thought good to speak at this present. But I think you do still
persist in your former opinion.


Hea. No truly, for by these two days reasoninges, I hope that I am eased of
those two things, which I did chiefelye of all other fear.


Mar. To morrow we will measure our talk by the clock But I think, that you
can not be at leisure.


Hea. Yes truly, even before diner this self same time.


Mar. So we will do, and satisfy (as I trust) your earnest desire.


Finis.
THE THIRD BOOK containing the third Question disputed by Mark Tully Cicero
in his third days reasoning, in his manor of Tusculanum, treatinge how a
wise man ought to behave him self in sorrow and grief of mind.
WHat might I think the cause to be (dear friend Brutus) that whereas we
consiste both of soul and body, there is an art invented for the
preservation and health of the body, and it also so much esteemed, that the
invention thereof* is fathered on the immortal gods. But the cure of the
soul, was neither so much desired before it was found, nor greatly freque^ted
after it was known, neither scarce well accepted nor allowed of some men, but
rather suspected and hated of the most? may this be the cause, for that the
grief and disease of the body, we may judge by our mind, but the gryefe of
our mind, we can not discern by our body? and so it happens, that our mind
then judges of it self, when ye* wherewyth it judges is sick? For truly,
if nature had made us such at the first, that we might playn^ly behold and
perceive her force and under her most sure guide and conduite pass the course
of our life, then needed we not to require the help either of reason or
learning. But she has given us only certain small spar^les, which with
noughtye fashions ^ erroneous opinions we do lyghtelye quench, in such wise,
that not so much as any glymse of the light of nature can appear. For there
are sown within us, the seeds of virtue, which i^ they might increase and
grow to ripenes, would of their own nature with out any other aid, bring us
to the blessed and immortal life: but now as soon as we are borne and
brought forth into this light we are forthwith continuallye trained in all
noughtinesse and perverse opinions, so that it may well be said, that even
with the milk of our nurses, we do suck error. And when from them we are
committed to our second pare^tes (our masters I mean) we are then seasone^
with so many lies, that truth yeldeth to vanity, and the enstructio^s of
nature, to y^ strength of false opinions. Hereunto also are poets adjoined:
who, for y^ they have an outward show of learning and wisdom, are heard,
read, and learned, and so are fullye fastened in our minds. But when to this
same we join the people also, as a wise teacher, and the comme^ voice of the
multitude, the confirmer of al vice, then are we altogether infected with
erroneous opinions, and swar^^ wholly from the rule of nature. So y^ those which
teach us that nothing is more necessary, more to be desired, or coueted then
honor, empire and the praise of the common people, seem in teaching us so
contrary doctrines to ye enstructio^s of nature to have envied us ye fruicto^
of those most excellent principles, which she at the first had engraffed in
us. Al men nevertheless do greedelye desire the praise of the commen sort,
and suinge therein after true and unfeigned honesty (which only, nature in all
her works does propose as an end) are foulye deluded and mocked. For they do
not obtain any perfect picture of virtue, but ye shaded image of glory. For,
true glory is a sound and perfect thing, and no colored shadow. And that
is the incorrupted and universal praise, of al good men, proceeding of the
right report of the excellency of virtue.

Which truly is in manner the echo of virtue. For it always answers to
the sound of the same. Which in as much as commonly it follows all good deeds,
is not to be refused nor despised of such, as are good men. But it which will
needs be an imitatour of the same (the commen brute of the people I mean) is
often time rash, unadvised, and most commonly a commender of vice, and
naughtines, and under the shape of honesty, stayneth the form and beauty of
unfeigned glory. With the ignorance of the which men's minds being blinded,
and coveting always to do some fact, whereby they might be renowned, knoweinge
not nevertheless, how or which way they might per^ourme the same, have
fallen into great inconvenience. For some have rased their own cities and some
have slain them selves.

And so they seekynge things that are of the^ selves good, are deceived, not
so much of a set purpose, as because of the ignorance of the way, by the
which they should come to the same. Now, those which have their minds vexed
with the greedye desire of money, or with the filthy lust of pleasure, or they
whose minds are so much disquyeted with the same, that they are not far
from madness (as foolish men commonly are). Have all these sorts of men no
need of help think you? either because the disseases of the mind have less
need of help then the sickenesses of the body, or else for that there is an
art invented to cure the body, and none to heal the soul? But truly the
diseases of the mind are both more deadlye, and also more in number then those
of the body. For they be so much the more grievous, as they pertayne to the
mind, and the vexing thereof, which being sick, does always err (as Ennius
says) and can for grief neither do, neither suffer any thing well. And
furthermore never ceasseth to be vexed with desire: then both the which
maladies, that is to wite, grief and desire, what greater diseases may there
be? And who can prove, that the soul is not able to cure it self, inasmuch as
it first invented medicines for the body? and also, whereas the healinge of
the bodies, does much consyste in the constitution and nature of the same, and
al me^ which were contented to be cured, have not been healed, yet every man's
mind which was willing to be healed, and was therein ruled by the precepts and
counsels of wise men, has been always undoubtedly cured. The medecin of y^
mind, is philosophy, which helps us (not as the diseases of our body are
helped) by things without us, but we our selves must with al our power and
endeavor, labor to cure our selves. But of philosophy universally, how much
it should be either esteemed or used I have sufficiently spoken (as I think)
in my my book entitled Hortensius. And of other wayghtye questions, I have
not been slack, either to dispute or write. But in these books, I have
endited those questions which I reasoned with my familiar friends, in my
manor of Tusculanum. And in as much as in the two first books, you have
heard our disputacions of death, and of the grief of the body, in this
third book you shall receive our reasoning kept the third day. Therefore when
I came down to my scoole (the mids of the day being past) I required some of
the^, that were present, to put forth somewhat, whereof we might reason. Then
the matter fell our thus.

Hea. I think y^ grief of ye mind sometimes happens to a wise man.


Mar. Think you so likewise of ye other perturbatio^s of ye mind, fear, lust*
and anger? has any disease (under the name of diseases, the philosophers
comprise those troublesome motions of the mind, as I said before) is no more
hole then our bodies in sickness. So it must needs be, that wisdom is the
health of the soul, and follye the syckenes of the same. Which we may call
either madness or folyshenes. The which is better expressed in the latin
words, the^ greek. As it chances in many other terms besides. But thereof we
shall treat an other time. Now let us speak of that we have in hand. This
therefore, whereof we treat, what it is, the word it self does sufficiently
declare.

For we must needs think them to be hoale, whose mind is troubled with no
motion, in manner of disease, and such as contraryewyse are vexed with the same,
to be diseased. The latin word of the which called Insania, does properlye
signifye madness. And therefore we use to say in the latin tongue, that such
as are out of their wits, as become fransye, either with lust or anger.
Although, anger it self is a part of lust: for thus it is defyned.

Anger is the lusting affter vengeance. They therefore, which are said to be
out of their wits, are so termed, because they can not use their wits to
the which nature has granted the rule of the mind. But why the Grecians
call it (...), I do not well know. But we distinguishe the same better then they.
For this vnhealthfulnesse which being all one in effect with foolyshenesse,
extends very far, we separate from madness. So the Greeks would. But they
have no apt word for it. For that which we call madness, they call
Melancholian. As though men were made frontike only with melancholye, and not
rather and more often, with great anger, grief, or fear. as we read that
Athamans, Alcmeon, Aiar, and Orestes, were. And in such case, who so ever is,
him the the law of the twelve Tables, forbyddeth to have the vsyng of his own
goods. And there it is written, if a man be (Insanus) which sygnifieth
vnhelthful, but if he be (Furiosu^) which properly signifies mad and
furious. For by this word (^nsania) they did understand, the want of a good
and perfect disposicion. How be it they thought, that a man in such case
might well accomplish al duties, pertaining to the commen and accustomed trade
of life. But madness, they thought, was the blyndenesse of the mind toward
all things. Which although it seem to be a great deal worse, then the
vnhealthfulnesse of the mind, yet truly it is such, that it may sooner
chance to a wise man, then this lack of health of the mind, I mean
folishenesse. But that is an other question. Let us return to our purpose.
You said (unless I be deceived) that you thought, that grief of mind might
chance to a wise man.


Hea. I think so in deed.


Mar. You do but like a man, in that you think so. For we are not made of
flynte. But there is naturallye in us some tender and soft thing, which
gryefe of mind shakes as a storm. Neither was it evil said of Crantor, who
was a man of great report in our university. I do not agree with them (quod
he) who affirm so much insensibilitye of gryefe, which no man either can, or
ought to have. I would not gladly be sick (quod he) but if I be, let me feel
it whether they cut away any dead flesh, or else take any thing out of my
body. For to feel nothing at all, can not be without great dullness in the
mind, nor masinesse in the body. But weyghe ye well, whether by this talk, he
agree to our infirmity, or favor our softenes. Wherefore, let us attempt to
cut of, not only the branches of these foolish miseries, but also to pull up
all the mores of the same, by the root.

Yet do we the best we may: some thing will remain. Follye has rooted so
deep in men's hearts. But yet only so much shall remain as is necessary to
be le^te. Wherefore, know you this for a certayntie, that unless our mind be
cured (which by no means can be done without philosophye) we shall never have
an end of miserye. Wherefore, know you this for a certayntye, that unless
our mind be cured (which by no means can be done without philosophye) we
shall never have an end of miserye. Wherefore as we have begone, so let us
wholly yield our selves to it, to be cured. We shall be healed if we list. And I
will go somewhat farther. For I will treat not of the grief of the mind
only (although thereof chiefelye) But of all the perturbations or rather
diseases of the same, as the Greeks term them. And first if you be so
pleased, let us follow the order of the Stoikes: who are wont, first in a
short compass to frame the force of their arguments. And afterward, we will
talk of the same more at large after our accustomed use. Who so ever is a
stout man, he must needs be bold, but whosoever is bold, fears not (for
boldenes and fear are things differente in nature) But to whom so ever gryefe
of mind may chance, to him likewise fear may come). For what^soeuer
things do grieve us when they chance, the same before they come we fear.
Therefore gryefe of the mind, is contrary to stoutenes of stomach.

Furthermore it is likely, that who soever may feel grief, he must also abide
fear and faynte hartednesse, the which two, in whom so ever they be found,
he may be subject to affections, and must needs confess him self overcome
with them. But none of all these can happen to a stout man.

Therefore neither gryefe may. But none can be a wise man, unless he be
stout. Wherefore, to no wise man, can any gryefe happen. Furthermore, it must
needs be, that he which is a stout man, should have a hau^y courage: and
who so ever has such courage, is invincible of all evil motions. And he that
is so inuyncyble will despise all casualtyes, that may happen to man, as
things worse then him self. But no man despises those things, the miss of
y^ which should grieve him, but a stout man. Whereof it is concluded, that all
stout men are void of gryefe. But in a wise man, stoutnes is requisite. No
wise man therefore can feel gryefe. And like as a troubled eye is not in good
estate to execute his fu^ction, and so likewise the other parts of the body,
or the whole body, when it is once moved from his quiet state, faynt^th in
doing his part and duty: so likewise, a troubled mind, is not able to
execu^ue his duty. But the duty of the mind is to use reason well: And the
mind of a wise man is always so disposed, that it can guide it self
according to the use of reason. It is then never troubled. But all gryefe is a
trouble to the mind. Wherefore every wise man must needs be void of the
same. It is likely also that every temperate man, whom the Greeks call (...)
and the virtue it self (...) which I am wont to term temperaunce or
moderance, and sometimes modestye. But I can not well say, whether it may be
called frugalitie, which the Greeks take very strayghtlye, who name frugall
men (...) which signifies only profitable. But it has a larger sense. For
all abstinence, al innocence (which emonges the Greeks has no proper name,
but may well be called (...). For innocence is such an affection of the
mind as hurts no man) and all the rest of the virtues may well be comprysed
under the name of frugalitye.

Which if it were not so largelye taken, but so limited as some me^ think. L.
Piso had never got so great a name for using of it. But because neither he who
for fear does forsake his garrison, (which is a point of cowardice, neither he
which because of couetyse does not restore a thing secretelye committed to his
custodye (which is the point of iniurye and wrong) neither he which through
rashenes has lost the fyelde, (which is a point of follye) are wont to be
called frugall. For that self same cause this name frugalitye contains
these.iii. virtues fortitude, justice, and prudence. And if this be common to
all virtues, that they be all coupled and kni^ together among them selves,
then the last and fourth virtue, frugalitye it self must needs be. For it is
the proper duty hereof, to rule and appease the motions of a ragynge mind,
and standing always stiff against lust, and pleasure, to keep a moderate
stedfastenes in all deeds. The contrary vice to the which, is properlye
called naughtines: but frugality (as I think) was so called of fruy^e, then the
which the earth can yield nothing better.

And naughtines hereof (for although it be somewhat hard to deryue it, yet
let us assaye, and if we chance not to deryue it well, let men then deem that
we spoke it merelye), because the use of it serves to naught in any man Who
soever therefore is frugall, or rather moderate, and temperate, he must needs
also be constante. But he that is constante, must be quyete. He that is quyete,
must be void of perturbation, and by that means of gryefe also. But all those
things before recited, appertain to a wise man. A wise man therefore shall
want gryefe.

And therefore Dionisius an Heraclean, does not vnwittely reason, against the
complaynte of Achilles, in Homere, in this manner (as I remember) My heart with
angry mood, puffed up in wondrous wise does swell,
When I record from honor hye, and worship how I fell.


Is thy hand in good estate when it swelles? or is there any of thy limbs,
which being swollen or p^ffed up, is not sore and ill at ease? So likewise, a
swelling mind is always sick. But the mind of a wise man, is always veyde
of syckenesse. It does therefore never swell. But an angry mind does always
swell. A wise man therefore is never angry. For if he be angrye, he does also
desire: for it does properly belong to an angrye man, to desire and wish the
greatest grief that may be, to him of whom he thinks he was hurt. But
whosoever wysheth any thing, he must needs when he has attained the same
great^y rejoice: and so in this case, he should rejoice at an other man's
misfortune: which if it chance not to any wise ^a^, no more truly may anger.
But if this grief of the mind whereof we talk, might happen to a wise man,
then should anger also, which inas it may not, no more truly may not gryefe.
For if a wise man might feel grief, then might he feel also pity, and
enuyenge. For pitye and envy go together. For who so ever is sorye, for some
man's aduersitye, he may likewise envy some others prosperity. As
Theophrastus, lamenting the death of Calisthenes his fellow, is vexed and
grieved with the prosperitye of Alexander. And therefore he says, that
Calisthenes chanced on a man of great power, and notable felicity, but
nothing skylfull how to use his prosperity. So as pitye is a gryefe conceived
of other men's adversity, so is envy a sorrow, for other men's prosperitye. Who
so ever therefore is subject to pitye, he is also some^ines troubled with with
envy. But to envy is no point of a wise man: wherefore neither to pitye. But
if a wise man should take greuouslye any man's aduersitye, he must needs be
subject to pity. All gryefe therefore is far absent from a wise man.

These are the reasons of the Stoykes, and their crooked conclusions, which
sometime hereafter we will express more largely, and also more plainly, and
their reasons we must needs ^olowe, because they ground their foundation, upon
the stoutest and manlyest opinion. For our familiar friends (...)
Perepatetikes (then the which we philosophers can be either more eloquente,
more learned, or more sage) can not well persuade me, that there is a
mediocritie of the perturbations, or diseases of the mind. For every evil
thing, though it be but mean, yet nevertheless is to much. And we intend to
show, that there can be no such grief in a wise man. For as the body, if it
be but meetely sick, yet nevertheless, is far from health: so truly if
the mind be but meanly troubled, it wants health. Therefore our countrymen,
as they have well given many proper and meet names to other things, so have
they very well termed gryefe, care, and anguishe of the mind (for the likeness
that it has to the diseases of the body) sickness. With the like word, do
the Grecians term all perturbations. For they call al troublesome motions of
the mind ^athos which is as much in effect as diseases. For the sickness of
the mind does much resemble the diseases of the body. But lust is not like
to a disease.

Nor immod^^^te joy, which is the merye mood of the mind. Neither is fear
it self any thing like a disease, although it is very nygh unto grief. But
that which is called a disease in the body, is commonly called a grief in
the mind. We must therefore, show the original beginning of this gryefe. I
mean the thing that works grief in our minds, as some other thing does
disease in the body. For as the phisicians, when they have once found out the
cause of any disease, think the cure thereof to be but light: so we when we
have once found the cause of this gryefe, shall lyghtlye find some help for
the same. All the cause therefore consists in our own opinion. I mean not
only of gryefe of the mind, but of all other perturbations also: which are but
four generallye. But there are more branches and parts of the same. For,
inasmuch as every motion of the mind is either void of reason, or a despyser
of reason, or disobedient to reason, and that motion is stirred with the
opinion either of good or evil, within these.ii. parts, all the four
perturbations are equally contained. For.ii. proceed of the opinion of good:
of the which the one, is called immoderate joy, which ryseth of some
marvelous goodness being achieved and gotten: and the other is named desire,
which is an immoderate lust after some thing of the which we have once
conceived a great opinion of goodness, not obeyenge to reason. And as these two
are moved with the opinion of goodness, so are the other.ii. raised of the
opinion of some evil. For fear comes of ye opinion of some great euel, which
is at hand: and sorrow is the opinion of some evil, already chanced: and that
some such euel, y^ it seems but right, that a man should ve^e him self about
it, so y^ he, who^ it grieves, thinks y^ he ought of right to be grieved
with it.

These perturbatio^s, which only folly sends emonges men, as certain furyes
we must wythstand with all our might and power, if we mind to pass this little
space of our life, quietely and pleasauntlye. But of the rest we will talk at
other times. But now let us vanquyshe gryefe if we may. For that is our
purpose, inasmuche as you said that you thought it might chance to a wise
man: which I can by no means think. For it is a beastlye wretched, and
detestable thing, and such as we ought to fly with might and maine, as a
man might say. How like you then, the neuewe of Tantalus, the son of Pelops,
which heretofore by force ravished Hippodamia, from his father in law
Oenomaus? Does he seem now to be the kynseman of Jupiter, lamentinge and
vexing him self like an abject? Take heed ye strangers al (quod he) that
none to me draw nie:
Least my disease may you infecte, or shadow you annoye.
This hateful plague is rooted in my flesh so greuouslye.


Wylt thou O Thyestes condemn thy self to death, for an other man's fault?
But now, as for the son of Phoebus, do you not think him worthy to behold
his fathers light? who lamenteth in this wise. Mine eyes within my head, are
shronke, my body lo consumes.
The skyn is freated from mine eyes by my continual tears:
My bed in driuelinges is ydrownd, my mouth has stinkyng fumes.
And so my breast looks hoare, like foul, ye whited plumes aye bears.


These euels, thou thy self O foolish Aeta, wast the causer of: for they were
not among those things which chance cast upon the. For all sorrow as I
will hereafter show, proceeds of the opinion of some evil that is present.
But thou mournest truly, for the lack of thy kingdom, and not of thy
daughter. For her thou did hate, and that perchance not without a cause.
But it grieved the greatly, to lack thy kingdom. Truly it is a shameless
sorrow, to mourn, for that thou may not keep free men in servitude.
Dionisius the tiranne, when he was banished from Siracusa, taught children at
Corinthe. So great desire he had, to bear rule. But who could be more impudent
then Tarquinius? Who waged war with them, that would not suffer his pride. He
at the last when neither the armies of the Ueientes, neither yet the Latins,
could restore him into his kingdom, went to the city of Cume in Italye, and
therewyth age and anguyshe pyned away. And think you, that the like may
chance to any wise man? I mean, to be wasted with thought? which is no
better than mere miserye. For whereas every perturbation is a certain kind
of misery, chiefly sorrow is the very torment of a troubled mind Lust brings
heat, ouermuche gladness causes lightness, and fear breeds a baseness of
courage. But sorrow, causes far greater things then all these, as pynynge,
veration, affliction, and filthiness. It tears eats, and murders the mind.
It unless we lay aparte, that we utterly shake it from us, we can never
want miserye. And this truly is plain and euidente, that the cause of gryefe
of the mind, is when any thing which we account to be some marvelous evil,
seems to be even at hand, and presentelye to prick us. But Epicurus
thinks, that the opinion and thought of any evil, causes sorrow: so that
whosoever beholds any great evil, if he think that the same has at any
time chanced unto him, he by his opinion must needs be troubled with sorrow.
The folowers of Aristippus, called Cyrenaikes, think that gryefe of mind,
ryseth not of every gryefe, but only of such as comes unlooked for, and
unprovided.

And assuredlye, that is of no small force to increase the gryefe: for all
sudden chances seem to be more grievous then other.

And for that cause are these verses worthelye commended, as the sayenges of a
stablyshed mind. When first of all I them begot, I knew that they must dye.
To bring them up that well to do, I did my whole duty.
And eke when I to Troy them sent their country to defend:
I knew I did to deadly war, and not to feasts them send.


This foreknoweledge of euels which are to come, does make the fall of those
things more tolerable, whose cummynge a man has long time before foreseen:
and for that cause, these sayenges of Theseus, in Euripides are commended (For
I may lawefully, after my wonted fashion, turn the same into latin.)
Recounting often with me the words of that wise father old.
In mind the mischieues that might come, I did always behold,
Some cruel death, or exile else, and now and then among
Of every other mischief strange, I did forethinke a throng.
So that if any storm should fall, by fortunes bitterness:
Like as a thing foreseen before, it should me grieve the less.


Whereas Theseus says, that he learned it of a wise old man, Euripides
means that by him self. For he was the scoler of Anaxagoras, who when news
were brought him of the death of his child, said. I knew that I begot him
subject to mortality: which saying declares that such chances are grievous
to them which look not for them. Therefore, herein truly is little doubt,
that all such things as are counted evil, are then most grievous, when they
fa^l sodaynelye.

Wherefore, although this thing only does not cause sorrow, yet nevertheless
because the setlyng and preparynge of the mind, is of great force to assuage
the gryefe, let every man forethynke such, inasmuch as they may happen to a
man. And truly, it is a great point of wisdom, for a man to look for all
such casualties, as customably happen to men, not to marvel at any thing
when it does chance, and not to doubt but any mischyefe which is not
chanced may well enough happen. Wherefore let every man in his prosperitye,
Muse with him self, by what means he may bear aduersitye.
Some peril, loss, or cruel exyle, when he returns home.
His childs offense, or his wives death, let him aye think upon.
And these as commen let him take besides some stranger pain,
If some good chance befall to him, let him take that as gain.


Inasmuche as Terence has spoken this so wyselye, which he borrowed of
philosophye, shall not we out of whose store it was taken, both say the same
better, and also think it more constantlye? For this is the same countenance
which never changes.

Which Xantippe was wont to praise in her husband Socrates: saying, that he
always showed the same look at his coming home, that he did at his going
out. Neither was he in this point like to Marcus Crassus, who as (Lucilius
says) never laughed but once in all his life. But (as far as I could
learn) he was fair and clear ^ysaged. And truly, there was good cause, why
his countenance should be always alyke, inasmuche as his mind, which
causes the diuersitye of al looks, did never varye, Wherefore both I will
take of the Cyrenaikes, these weapons against chances, that is to break their
force, with long forethinkynge of the same: and also I judge, that that euel
which is in grief consysteth in men's opinion, and not in the things them
selves. For if it were in the things, that chance unto us, wherefore should
the foresyghte of them, make them ye lighter. But there may be more subtle
reasoninge of these matters, if first we see the opinion of Epycurus.

Who thinks it necessary, that every man, to whom any evil is chanced,
should forthwith live in gryefe and sorrow as well although he did foresee,
and provide for those chances before hand, as also when they wax old.

For neither does the length of time make the euels the less (says he)
neither yet the foresyghte of them, make us to bear them more lightly. He
says also, that such forethinkynge of euels, is very fond. Because it may
be, that they shall not chance at all.

Every gryefe (says he) is odious enough, when it does chance: but he
that always looks for some aduersitye, makes it to him a continual and
everlasting miserye. And if it should chance not to come, in vain then
should a man voluntarilye sorrow.

So he thinks, that a man is always vexed, either with the chance, or else
with the thought of some evil. But the ease of sorrow, he places in thinkinge
of gryefe, the other in drawyng^ it to the contemplacion of pleasure.

For he thinks, that our mind may aselye obey reason, and follow her guide.
Reason (says he) does forbid us to think on gryefe. It drawth our dull
wits from the sharp thoughts of sorrow, to behold the miserye of the same:
from the which, when she, has once wythdrawen us, she then moves and stirs
us, to behold and handle sundry sorts of pleasure: the which both to
remember when they are past, and also to hope for, when they are coming, he
thinks to be the perfect life of a wise man. Thus I have uttered his opinion,
according to my fashion But the Epicureans do it after an other sort of their
own. But now let us consider, how lightelye we esteem their words in this
poynct.

First of all, they do without cause reprove the forethinking of euels to
come. For there is nothing, that may so much dull or lighten the force of
grief, as a continual thought and persuasion, through out all our life, that
there is no miserye, which may not happen unto us: as the ponderynge of the
condition and estate of man: as the law of our life, and study to obey.
Which causes us not to mourn always, but never. For who so pondereth with
him self, the state of every thing, the inconstancy of his life, and the
weakness of mankind, he does not then mourn but rather then chiefelye does the
part of a wise man. For hereby he gets two commodityes. The one, that in
wayghynge the frayletye of man, he does execute the duty of a philosopher, the
other, for that against adversity, he has gotten three confortes. The first,
for that he thought long before, that it might happen. Which only thought does
most of all other, swage and wipe away all sorrow. The second, for that he
thinks, that all chances which may happen to a man, are patiently to be
borne. And last of all, because he sees, that there is no evil but where is
some fault. And it is no fault of his, inasmuche as that, which a man could
not withstand, is chanced. For that reuoking of our mind from the thought of
grefe (which Epicurus would have) is to no poynct at all. For it is not in our
power, when we are prycked with miserye, or mischaunce, to dissemble or forget
it. For such chances tear, vex, prick, and inflame us. And fynallye,
suffer us not to take any quyete rest. And yet nevertheless, thou Epicurus,
wyllest me to forget that, which is against nature.

But now, to the help which thou show of an old rooted gryefe. Truly,
although it be somewhat s^owe, yet great is the remedy, that length of time
and space of years does bring. But thou willest me to propose to my self, the
hope of good things, and forget the evil. Now truly thy saying were
somewhat, yea and worthy a notable philosopher, if thou though^est those
things to be good, which in deed are most worthy a man's travail and pains.
If Pythagoras, Socrates, or Plato, should say thus unto me: Why lie thou
sad? Wherefore ^^^urnest thou? or why do thou thus faint, and yield to the
stroke of fortune Which, as perhaps she may pull and prick the, so she can
not wholly daunte thy courageous force. Uertues are of great power, to resyst
and wythstande the same. Them (if perhaps they sleep in the) raise and quicken.
Then will the valyaunte fortitude forthwith be at hand, which will cause the
to be of so good courage, that thou shall despise and esteem as nothing, all
chances which may happen to a man. Then shall stand by the, temperaunce (which
is also moderance, and by me termed somewhat before frugalitye) which will suffer
the to do nothing shamefullye, or dishonestlye. But what is worse or
shamefuller, the^ an effeminate person? Now truly, justice will not suffer
the so to do: which seems to have least to do in this matter. She will say,
that thou art two ways injurious. The One in that thou desyrest that which is
not thine, who being borne mortal, do look for the estate of the immortal
gods: the other, for that it greeueth the, to restore that, which was lent thee
only to use for a space. But to prudence what wylt thou answer, when she
shall say, that virtue is sufficente of her self, to make a good and happy
life? The excellency of the which, if it hang upon outward chance, and be not
cont^nted with his own force, and power, but lacks the ornamente of foreign
goods: I see no cause why it should be so much either commended in words,
or coueted in deeds.

To these goods O Epicurus, if thou call me, I obey the, I follow the, I take
the as my guide. I blot also (as thou wyllest me) out of my memory al euels and
that also so much the gladlyer because I count them not worthy the name of
euels. But thou drawest my thoughts to pleasures, and delights. Of what sort
I pray the? Of the body, I think, or at the least wise such, as we do either
remember that our body has enjoyed, or at the least wise ^hope, that it
shall. Is it any otherwise? Do I truly interpret thy meaning? For they are
wont to say, that we do not understand what Epicurus means. Even this truly
he means.

And this the old Zeno, the Grecian, at Athenes in my hearing was wont very
earnestlye to affirm, that happy was he, which did either presentlye enjoy
pleasure, or else did hope, he should enjoy it: either throughout all his life,
or at the least wise, through the greatest part, without any intercourse of
gryefe. Or if there were any, if it were extreme, that it should be short. Or
if it were somewhat long that it should have more pleasure, then myserye. He
that did so think, he said should be blessed: especially if he were contented
with the pleasure, that he had before taken, and also feared not god. Thus here
you see the happy life appointed by Epicurus, descrybed so playnelye, with the
words of Zeno, that therein is nothing that he can deny. May the proposyng,
and thought of such a life then, ease either Thy^stes, or Aeta, of whom I
spoke before, or Telamon, a poor exyle banyshed from his native country. Of
whom this wonder was made. Is this that Telamon, whom late frail glory raysde
on hye.
On whom the Greeks of late did gase with many an envious eye.


Truly, if any man with his substance has lost his courage also, he must
seek his remedy of those grave and ancient philosophers, and not of those
slaves of pleasure. For what company of goods is it, that they mean? Admit
truly, that it were the chiefest good that might be to feel no grief.
Howbeit that can not well be called pleasure. But is that such a thing, as the
syghte or minding thereof might ease our sorrow? Admit that gryefe be the
greatest evil, that may be. Shall he then that feels not it, foorthwyth
enjoy the chiefest felicitye? But why dalyest thou Epicurus? And will not
grant that thou meanest, that pleasure, which thou thy self in other places
do express? Be these which I will rehearse, thy words or no?

In that book which contains thy whole doctrine (for I will now play the
part of an interpreter least any man think I lie) thou spakest in this
wise. Neither truly do I perceive what good thing I may imagine, void of
those pleasures, that consist in taste, or void of those which consist in the
hearing of sweet noyses: or wantynge those pleasa^n^e syghtes, which the eyes
do gather of fair beautyes: or lackinge the pleasures requysite to any of the
four senses in man. Neither may we truly say that the delight of the mind
is only in such goodness as want all these. For I know, that the mind will
so rejoice, even with the only hope of those pleasures, which I have before
named, that when it has once attained them, it is void of all grief. These
be the words of Epicurus. By the which every man may right well perceive,
what pleasure Epicurus meant. For somewhat after. Right often, I have demanded of
them that were counted wise, (says he) what they would account good, if
they take away those pleasures by me before named. But I could get nothing of
them, but only bare words. Who if they will name virtues, and wisdom, they
do no more then show the way of those pleasures, by me before named. Those
words that follow are to the same purpose. And to conclude, all his book
entitled of the chiefest good, is stuffed with such words and sentences. Will thou then to this life revoke Telamo^, to ease his grief? And if thou chance
to see any of thy friends vexed with sorrow, wylt thou give him rather a
daynty dyshe of fish then some comfortable book of Socrates? Will thou
exhort him, to hear rather the counsel of dayntye courtyers, then of Plato?
Thou will set before him fresh syghtes to gase on, burn sweet smelles at his
nose, and set garlandes, and roses about his head.

Truly (I think) if thou add any thing more thou must needs take away
all his mourninge. Either all these comfortes Epicurus must confess, or else
all those things which even now I recited word for word must be blotted
out of his book: or rather his whole book must be called in For it is full of
commendation of pleasures. I ask of him therefore, by what means we may ease
him of gryefe, which cries out in this sort. Now riches truly more I want,
the^ noble stock or race.
For once a crowned king I was: se^ now from what hye place,
What stock and power, fond fortun^ has now brought me to this case


What? is it best to give this man some pleasant potion, to make him cease
his mourning? Hercken another in the same poynct. From great wealth fallen, I
Hector come, thy aid now to desire.

It is a poynct of gentleness, to help him. For he desires aid. Where may I
aid or succor crave* whose help should I trust to?
Who want both realm, and royal place, and know not where to go
Whose aulters all for sacrifice, are broken and cast down.
Whose churches fire has consumed whose walls are overthrown.


And diverse other such like exclama^^ons as follow. But this inespecyallye. O
father, friends, my country eke, and Priams house farewell.
Farewell thou church with walls yfenst, till Priams palaice fell.
I have the known well ydect, whiles that this kingdom stood.
With iuery sheene, and glistring gold, with stoanes and pearls good.


O conning Poet. He thinks that al sudden chances, are more grievous then
others. And therefore, after he had reckned up the treasure and power of the
king, which seemed to be such, that there was in manner no end thereof. See
what he then says. All these things lo I saw, when fire did inflame.
When at the aulters Priamus, with enmyes hand was slain.
The gushing of whose giltles blood, Jove's aultare did distayne.


A goodly verse. For it is both in deed, word, and measure lamentable. Let us
ease him of his gryefe. How? Let us lay him on a soft featherbed, bring him
a singinge woman, let us burn cedre at his nose, and bring him some pleasant
potion, and therewithal provide him of some good meat.

Be these the goods that are able to slake the greatest sorrows? For you even
now said, you knew none other goods. But I could well agree to Epicurus,
that a man in sorrow ought to be called to the conte^plation of good if we could
agree what that is which we term good. But some man perchance, will say.
What? think you that Epicurus meant as you enterprete him? And that his
sentences, are to be referred to bodilye pleasure. No truly. I think nothing
less. For I see many things, grauelye and notablye spoken of him. But as I
have often heretofore said the controversy is of his words, and not of his
manners or life. Let him say, that he despyseth those pleasures which he did
whylome commend, yet I will well remember, what felicity^ he seems by his
words to declare.

For he did not only name it by this word pleasure, but also expounded his
own saying, taste (quod he) and the embrasyng of fair and seemelye bodies,
plays, and songs, and those shapes, with the which the eyes are pleasauntlye
delyghted. Do I feign? Do I lie? I desire to be reproved. For what else do I
coueyte, but that the truth may appear, in every question. He says also,
that the pleasure does not increase, the gryefe being gone: and yet that it is
the chiefest pleasure, to feel no gryefe. In a few words, he has made
three great faults. One, in that he is contrary to him self. For even now
he said, that he could not so much as think, any thing to be good, unless
the senses were tickled with the pleasures of the same. And now he says,
that to lack gryefe is greatest pleasure that may be. May any thing be more
contrary? An other fault is, that whereas there be naturally thre^ yoyntes,
the one to rejoice, the other to sorrow, the third neither to be glad nor
sorye: he thinks, the first and the last to be all one, and does not
separate pleasure from the want of gryefe.

The third fault (which is commen to some men) is, that whereas virtue is
the thing, which we ought most of all other to desire, because that for the
attaynynge of the same, Phylosophye was chiefelye invented, yet he has
separated felicitye from virtue. But (some man will say) he does often
commend virtue.

And truly, Caius Gracchus, when he gave abroad the commen money, and
beggered the treasure, yet nevertheless in his talk defended the same. What
should I hear his words, when as I see his deeds to the contrary? Piso the
thryftye, had always wythstoode the law of dystrybutynge corn. Yet
nevertheless, that law being establyshed, he being once before Consul, came
to take corn. Whom when Gracchus espied he asked him in the audience of all
the people, what he meant, to come to demand corn by that law, which he
had always dissuaded.

Whereunto he answered, I would not gladlye, O Gracchus (quod he) that thou
should distribute and give away my goods. But if thou will needs do it,
I will take some part my self. Did not that grave and wise counsayler,
sufficientlye in those words declare that by the law of Gracchus, the commen
treasure was scattered? Read the oracions of Gracchus, you will say, that he
is a defender of the treasure house. So Epicurus denies that a man may live
pleasauntlye, unless he live also vertuouslye. He denies also, that fortune
has any force on a wise man.

He prefers a bare living, before a sumptuous and costlye. He says that
there is no time, in the which a wise man is not happy. All these things are
worthy to be spoken of a philosopher, nevertheless they are contrary to
pleasure. But he means not (...) sort of pleasure. Let him mean^ what
pleasure he will, so he does not mean such a pleasure as has in it not so
much as one jot of virtue. Well, if we understand not what pleasure he
means, neither do we know what gryefe he understands. But I do think that
he which thinks gryefe to be the chiefest evil, ought not once to make
mention of virtue. Truly the Epicureans complain, that I do of a set purpose
inueyghe against Epicurus. As though we did strive for some honor or
worship. I think that the chiefest good consysteth in the mind, and he
places the same in the body. I think virtue to be it, and he takes pleasure
for the same. And hereaboute they contend, and call for their neighbors help,
with great outcryes.

But I am one, which little pass for such contention. For I do not now
reason of the war betwixt us and the Carthaginenses: wherein nevertheless when
M. Cato, and L. Lentulus were of several opinions, yet they did never strive
about it. But these men are now to much angry, whereas otherwise they do not
stoutelye enough defend their opinion: for the which they are afraid, either
before y^ Senate, or at the bar, before the army, or in presence of the
Censors, to plead. But with them I will reason at other times, and that truly,
not with the mind to contend: but wholye glad to yield to their reasons.
Only thus much I will admonish the^, that if it were true, that a wise man
should refer all things to his body, or (to speak somewhat more honestlye)
that he should do nothing, but that were for his own profit, or commoditye,
because these things deserve no commen praise, let the^ laugh in their sleeves
(as they say) and leave of their open bragges. Now there remains the opinion
of the Cyrenaikes: which think, that gryefe is then only caused, when any
mischief comes unlooked for: and truly that is a great occasion of gryefe, as
I said before.

And also, I know that Chrisippus, thinks, that chances not foreseen,
happen most vehementlye. But this is not all. For we know, that the sudden
coming of our enemies does more trouble us than when we look for them: and
also, a tempeste in the sea, risinge on a sudden, does more fear the
sailors, then that which they have foreseen before. And so is it most
commonly in all other things. But if you do diligently weyghe, the nature of
such sudden chances, you shall perceive, that they seem the greater
chyefelye for two causes.

First, because we have not leisure to consider, how great the things are,
which, have chanced unto us. Secondarilye, for that we think it might have
been avoided, if it had been foreseen: and so, thinking it to have chanced
only through our own fault, it makes our gryefe the sharper. Which to
be true, time it self declares. Which in space does so assuage our sorrow,
that the euels remaygninge all one, yet our gryefe, is not only minyshed,
but also many times utterly abolyshed.

Many Carthaginenses lived in bondage at Rome. And likewise the Macedonians,
their king Perses being taken prisoner. I saw also, in Peleponnesus (whiles
I was young) certain Corynthians, which might hau^ song the song of
Andromacha, before mentioned. For their countenance, talk, and miserable
behauioure, was such, that a man might well have said, they were miserable
Greeks.

Yet nevertheless, the sudden sight of the reced walls of their city
Corynthus, moved me much more, then it did the Corynthians them selves: whose
hearts, the daily sight thereof, had even hardened against sorrow.

We read the book of Clitomachus, which he, after the subduynge of Carthage
sent to the citesens, that were prisoners, to comfort them. Therein is written
a disputacion of Carneades: which Clitomachus says, y^ he there has
abridged. In it when it was first proposed, yt it seems that a wise man
should lamente the captiuitye of his countreye, forthewith follow the reasons
of Carneades to the contrary: in the which truly, the philosopher, does so
much comfort their present calamity, as in an old gryefe a man would scarce
have wyshed, or desired. And truly, if that book had been sent a few years
after to them, it would not so much have helped their sores, as their
skarres. For sorrow, by little, and little, in process of time, does wear and
consume: not for that the things them selves, either are wont, or may be
changed: but because, at the last, that which reason ought to have done,
experience does persuade us: namelye that those things are but small, which
seemed to be so great. Why then (some will say) what need have we of reason?
Or of any of those comfortes, which men do use, when they would lyghten the
sorrow of such as mourn? As this and such other, that nothing that is
chanced ought to seem strange, or unlooked for? Yes truly, he shall more
tolerablye bear every discommoditie, who knows, that of necessity, such
things must chance to men. For such persuasions in deed, do make the evil
it self nothing the less, only hereof it puts us in mind that nothing is
happened, which was not to be looked for. Neither yet therefore are that sort
of persuasions, nothing auaylable, to the curing of gryete: but they are
rather of all other, the best. Wherefore, these sudden chances, are not of
such force, that they only should be the causers of all gryefe. They smite
us perhaps more sharpelye, then the rest. But they are not able, to make those
things, which so chance, greater then the rest. They seem greater, because
they are new, and fresh, and not because they came sodaynely. But there
are.ii. ways, to find out the truth, not in those things only, which have
the appearance of evil, but in those also, whyth seem to be good. For either
we question of the nature of the thing it self, of what sort, and how great
it is. As of poverty sometimes, whose burden we make light with reason, showing
how small and how few things nature does require: or else, from the subtle
disputation of the nature of things, we turn our talk to examples. And in
this part, we rehearse Socrates and Diogenes, and also that saying of
Cecilius. In bare threades often full p^re y^lad, dame Sapience does lie hyd.

And inasmuch as the force of pouertye is alyke, wheresoever it lyghteth, what
might be the cause, that Cai^^ Fabritius could easelye bear it, and other men
not? And to this last kind, that sort of consolation like, which shows
that those things which are chanced, are commonly incidente t^ the life of
all men. For this persuasion is not only of this effect, to put him in
remembrance that he is a man: but also it sygnyfyeth that those things are
tolerable, which other have both in times paste borne, and also do daily
suffer. As if our talk were of pouertye many pacyent poor men, might be
recyted. Or if we should speak of the contempt of honor, many men that have
despised the same might be rehearsed, and truly, even the happyer, for so
doing: for surely their life is above al others namely commended which have
preferred their private quyetnes, before the stir of publyke affairs.
Neither is the saying of that mighty prince to be forgotten: wherein he
commends an old man, and accompteth him fortunate, because without glory,
he should in manner unknown, come to his last end.

Likewise the mourning of those, which lament the loss of their children, is
swaged, with the examples of them, that have abyden the like.

So the trial of other men before hand, makes that those things, which
chance on a sudden, seem less in deed, then we took them at the first to
be. So it comes to pass, that whiles we ponder the things well, by little
and little, we perceive how much our opinion was deceived, and that Telamon
does well prove saying. When first of all I them begot, I knew that they
must dye.

And Theseus. In mind the mischiefs that might come, I did always behold.

And Anaxagoras, said. I knew that he was borne to dye. For all these men,
long weighing the chances that happen to men, perceived that they are not to
be feared, according to the opinion of the commen people. And truly, me
seems, that they which ponder things before hand, are helped after the same
sort, that they are, whom continuance of time does help: saving that reason,
heals the first, and nature the other: they having this always in their
minds, which is the ground of all such remedies, namely, that the euel which
they thought to be so great, is not such, that it may destroy a happy and
a blessed life.

Thus therefore we will conclude, that of a sudden chance there comes a
sorer strype, not as they think, that when two equal chances do happen to a
man, it only shou^de put him to gryefe, which comes of a sodayn^: for it
is written that some men understanding the commen miserye of mankind, namely
that we are al borne under that law, that none may be for ever void of
misery: hane taken it very heauilye, yea and mourned for it.

For the which cause, Carneades (as Antiochus writes) was wont to reprove
Chrisippus, for commending these verses of Euripides. There is no man whom
gryefe of mind, and sickness may not pain
Some many children do beget, and burye them again.
And death, is thend of all the grieves that happen may to man.
We all must render earth to earth, and dust from whence we came
And til that time shall mow us up, we here on earth must live.
Like as we suffer corn to grow, to reap the same with sciue.


For he said, that such kind of talk was of no efficacye to ease a man of
gryefe, but rather, gave us occasion to lament, that we were borne under so
^ruell necessitye. And as for that kind^ of comfort, which comes of the
rehersall of other which hane abyden the like gryeues that he thought was
good to comfort none other, but only those which were delyghted to hear
other men's sorrows. But I truly think far otherwise. For, both the
necessity of bearyng the estate of mankind, forbids us to strive with god: and
also it puts us in remembrance that we are men (which only thought does
greatly ease all gryefe) and also the rehersall of exaumples, serves not to
delyght the minds of envious persons, but only to prove, that he which
mourns, ought to bear it pacyentlye, inasmuche as, he sees that many^ before
him, have with great moderation and quyetnes suffered the same. For they must
have all manner of such stays, which are ready to fall, and can not
wythstand the greatness of gryefe. And well did Chrisippus say, that gryefe of
mind was called (...), which sygnyfyeth the dissoluing loo^yng of every part
of a man.

Which may well be rooted out even at the first, the cause of the gryefe
being once known. But the cause of it is nothing else, then the opinion of
some great evil that is prosent and at hand. But the gryefe of the body,
whose pricks are right sharp, may well be borne with the hope of ease. And
the life honestly and worshypfullye spente, is so great a comfort, that those
which have so lived, either gryefe touches not at al, or at the least very
lyghtlye. But to this opinion of some great evil, when that also is adjoined,
that we think we ought, and that it is our duty to take such chance
greuoslye, then truly, becomes that gryefe of mind a heavy perturbation. For
of that opinion, proceed those diverse and detestable kinds of lamenting:
tearing of the hear like women, scratchynge of their face, beating of the
breast, legs, and head. So is Agamemnon of Homere, and also of A^^ius
described. And renting often for grief his goodly bushe of hear.

Whereupon, there is a merye ieste of Byon. Saying that the foolyshe king
pulled of his hear, as though baldnes would help his sorrow. But all these
things they do, thinking that they ought of right so to do. And for that
cause, Aeschines inueygheth against Demosthenes, for that he three days after
the death of his daughter, had done sacrafyce. But how rhetorically pleads
he? what reasons gathers he? How wryeth he his words? So that a man may welll
perceive, that a rh^torician may say what he list. But truly his talk no man
would allow, unless we had this foolish opinion in our minds, that all
good men ought to mourn, for the death of their friends. Hereof it comes,
that in great grieves some men fly to solytarynes^ as Homere writes of
Belerophon. Who flyenge all resort of men in fyeldes did walk alone.
And there consumed and pinde away with bitter gryefe and moan.


And Niobe is feigned to have been turned into a stoane, (as I think) to note
thereby her continual solytarynes in mourning. But Hecuba, for the cruel
madness of her mind, the Poets ^ayne to have been turned into a dog. And there
be some, whom in sorrow it delyghteth, to talk with solytarines* As the nurse
in Ennius. A furious lust is come on me, now out abroad to tell
The wretched chance of Medea, to heaven, to earth, and hell.


All these things men do in gryefe, having opinion, that they ought of right
and duty to be done. And if any perchance, at such time as they thought that
they ought to mourn, did behave them selves somewhat gently, or spoke any
thing merrily: they will revoke the^ s^l^es again to sadness, and blame them
^^lues as of a fault, for that they ceass^^ to mourn. But young children their
mothers and masters are wont to ^hasten, not only with words, but also with
strypes, if in time of commen ^^urnynge, they chance either to do or speak
any thing merelye, they compel them to weep. What I pray you? when they
leave of their mourning, and perceive that they profyt^ nothing^ at all, with
sorrow, does not that declare, that all which they did before, was only of
their own will, without any other constraynte?

What? the old man in Terence, the tormentour of him self, does he not say?
I think O Chremes, so much le^^e wrong I do to my son.
As if I do my self appoint a wreth^ for to become.


Lo he has eue^ decreed to be a wretch and does any man appoint any such
thing, against his own will? I would my self worthy account of any miserye.

Lo, he thinks him self worthy (...) ^iserye. You see therefore, that the
evil of his gryefe proceeds of opinion, and not of nature.

Besides this, sometimes, the thyng^ it self does make them cease they^
mourninge: as in Homere the daily murder, and death of men does make them to
cease their sorrow. In whom this is written. For now we see to many erste lie
dead and breathelesse here.
So that scarce any house is void of dole or mourning cheer.
Wherefore it is most mete, that them we in their graves do lay,
And finishe all our mourning, with the wayne of son and day.


Wherefore, it is in our power, to lay^ apart gryefe, when we will and tim^
both serve us. And is there any tim^ (because the thing it self is in our^
power) to soon to lay away sorow^ and care? It is well known, that those
that saw Pompeius slain (fearyng^ in that sharp and cruel fight, greatly
the loss of their own lives, because they saw them selves on all sides
enclosed with the nauye of their enemies) did at that present nothing else, but
encourage the shippemen to sayl^ swiftely, for the safetye of their lives. But
afterward when they came t^ Tyrus, began to afflyct them selves, and lament.
Could fear therefore, stay them from sorrow, and shall not reason and wisdom
be able to do it? But what is there, that may sooner make us leave our sorrow,
then when we perceive, that it profits us nothing: and that all our labor
therein was spent in vain? If then we may leave sorrow we may also not take it
al. Wherefore, we must needs confess, that of our ^wne will and accord, we
suffer grief to enter on us. And that is well declared also, by their
patience, who having abiden many cruel chances, do more easelye bear
whatsoever comes.

And are in manner hardened against the bl^wes of fortune. As he in Euripides.
If this time were the first, that I such miserye did try.
And that before I had not felt, the same continuallye.
Then had I just cause to lamente, like as new broken coltes
Bear ill the bridles bit, when first they are brought from the holtes.
But I have ever lived in woe, and with so seeldome change,
That now as one yduld therewith, no pain to me is strange.


Wherefore inasmuche as the weariness of miseryes, does lighten grief, we
must needs confess, that the thing it self, which is chanced unto us, is not
the cause of our sorrow. Those that are chiefly studious of wisdom and have
not as yet attained the same, do they not sufficiently understand, that they
are in great misery? for they have not gotten the perfection of wisdom. And
truly there can be no greater miserye, then the imperfection of wisdom. Yet
nevertheless, they do not lament this miserye. And why so? Because to this
sort of euels, there is not affixed that opinion, that it is right and just,
or any part of our duty to take it heauilye, for that we are not wise.

With the which opinion, that gryefe is always accompanied, out of the which
proceeds mourning. For Aristotle, blaming the ancient philosophers, which
thought that their wits had made philosophye perfect: says that they were
either most foolish or else most vain glorious of all men. For he saw, that
within few years the same was greatly increased. So that it was likely, that
in short time, it would be finished. But Theophrastus, at the time of his
death is reported to have blamed nature. For that to hertes and dawes, whom
the same served to little use, she had granted long life: but to me^, to whom
it might have been most commodious, she had granted but a short term. Whose
age, if it might be lengthened, it would come to pass, that all arts being
made perfect, the life of man should be adourned with all kind of learning.

And therefore, he did complain, that when he first began to perceive somewhat
therein, then it was his chance to be taken out of this life. Likewise of all
the rest, does not every of them that is counted wisest and grauest witted,
confess the ignorance of many poynctes? And that there are many things,
the which he would gladlye learn? And yet nevertheless, albeit they know
that they stick in ignorance, then the which there can be no thing worse,
they do not sorrow nor mourn. For they have no such opinion, that it is any
part of their duty, to be sorye. They which think that men ought not to
mourn, as Quintus Maximus, who buried his only son, that had been once
Consul: as Lucius Paulus, who lost both his sons in one day: as Marcus
Cato, whose son dyed when he was appoyncted to be Praetor: As all the rest
whom we have reckened up in ours book which is entitled of the comfort of
Philosophye. The mournings of all these men (I say) what other thing did
stay, but that they thought sorrow and sadness to be things not properlye
belonging to any man.

So whereas other men, delayed with an opinion of duty, do yield the^ selves
to gryefe, they thinkinge it a shame, did wythstand sorrow. Whereby it is
evident, that grief of mind, consists not in the nature of the chance, but
in the opinion of men. Against this it is said, who is there so mad, y^
would of his own voluntary will be sad and mourn? Nature brings sorrow. To
the which, your Crantor (say they) thinks, that we ought to yield. For it
does prick, and burden us, neither can we resyst it. So Oileus in Sophocles,
which comforted Telamon before, when he mourned for the death of Ajax, he (I
say) when he heard of his own mischaunce, was even overcome with sorrow. Of
the sudden change of whose mind, these verses are witness. I think no man
so constant is, whose wit can serve him so.
That though he counsel other, to assuage their gryefe and woe.
Yet when that fortune has on him, once laid her heavy stroke.
Would not be overcome, and with his own hurt straight way broke
So that the words which he before, to others wisely spoke,
Should slip away as things the which adversity did slake.


By such kind of proofs, they go about to persuade, that we may by no
means withstand nature. Yet nevertheless, they them selves confess, that men
sometimes take greater sorrow, then nature constrains them. What madness is it
then, that we should desire every man so to do? But there are many causes of
sorrow. First, the opinion which we have, that is an evil which is chanced
unto us. Which when we be once persuaded, the^ grief of mind does
necessarilye ensue. The second occasion is, for that they think their
mourninge to be acceptable to such, as are departed. And hereunto is adjoined,
a certain effeminate superstition. For they think, that they shall the sooner
content the anger of the immortal gods, if they as men astonyed with their
heavy stroke, do af^lycte and vex them selves. But in the mean time, these
men mark not how contrary they are to them selves. For they commend them,
which dye wyllinglye. And yet they disprayse those, that bear not heauilye
the departure of their friends. As though^ it might be by any means, that
any man should love another better than him self. That is a notable saying,
and (if you mark it well) right and true, that such as ought of all other to
be dearest unto us, we love as our selves. But that we should love them more
then our selves, I think that is truly impossible. Neither truly is it to be
desired in frendeshippe, that my friend should love me more, then him self: or
I him more then my self.

For thereof would ensue, a confusion of the whole trade of our life, and of
all sorts of duties. But hereof we will reason, in other places. Now this
shall be sufficient to admonyshe, that to the loss of friends we do not
adioyne our miserye: and that we love them not more, then they them selves
would, or at the least wise more then our selves. For whereas some say that
such kind of comfortes, do help many men nothing at all, and add
thereunto, that such as comfort others, when fortune tourneth her face to
them, are not able to cloak their own miserye: the aunsweryng of both is
easy enough. For these are the faults not of nature, but of follye.

But to inueyghe against such follye, although I might at this present very
largelye, yet I will not. For both they which do not suffer them selves to be
helped, do thereby provoke others to miserye, and also, they y^ take their own
chance more greuouslye, then before they counsayled others, are not more to be
blamed then the commen sort, which being nygardes, yet reprove coueytous
parsons, and being ambitious them selves, reprehend^ ^a^ ynegl^ryous fools.

For it is a commen practice of fools, to espy other men's faults, and
ouerpasse their own. But this is a great proof, that whereas it is certain,
that time takes aways sorrow, yet that help does not consyste in time it
self, but in long musing and ponderynge of the mischaunce. For if both the
chance and also the man him self, are always one, how may the sorrow be
any part swaged? if neither the thing which caused it, neither yet the man
which soroweth, are changed? wherefore, this continual opinion, that there is
no evil in the thing, that is chanced, does help the sorrow, and not the
length of time. Here some men bring in the moderation of all perturbations
which if it be naturallye in man, then will nature it self appoint a measure
of sorrow. But they consist only in the opinion. Let that opinion be wholye
rooted out therefore. Now (I think) we ha^^ sufficientlye proved, that sorrow
proceeds of the opinion of some present euel: to the which opinion also, this
is adjoined, that we ought of right to lament and be sorye. To this
definition, Zeno has well added, that that opinion of some present evil,
ought to be fresh. By the which term he does understand, not only that to be
fresh, which happened but late, but also, as long as, in that which we took
to be evil, there is any force or countenance which troubles us.

As Arthemisia, the wife of Mausolus, king of Carya, which made that famous
tomb at Halycarnassus, she (I say) all her life time lived in sorrow: and
therewyth also at length consumed. To her, this opinion which we now talk
of, was continually fresh. He therefore that will assaye to comfort any man, in
his sorrow, ought either utterly to root out his gryefe, or to appease it,
or else to mitigate it as much as may be, or else to suppress it, not suffering
it to spread any further, or else to turn his mind from one gryefe to
another. There be some, who think, that this only is the duty of him that
would assay to comfort any man, to prove that it is no evil at all. Of the
which opinion Cleantes is.

There are other some which would huae him show, that the evil is not so
great as he takes it. And of this mind are the Peripatetikes, and other there
be, which think it sufficient to show, that it is no strange chance,
which is happened. Chrysippus thinks, that it is one of the chyefest
poynctes of comfort, to take away from him that is in heaviness this
opinion, that he ought of duty to lament, and be sorye. There be some also,
that put al these things together for diverse men are dyuerselye moved. I have
put them all in my book, which I wrote of consolation. For at that present,
my mind was greatly vexed, and I assayed all means to help my self. But we
must take our time, as well in the diseases of the mind, as of the body. As
Prometheus in Aeschilus. To whom when one said. But this (Prometheus) I do
think, you know assuredlye
That reason force full lightly may, fond anger remedy.


He answers in this wise. I think so eke, if to the same, a man lay salve
in time.
And do not to a festred sore, apply his medecin.


The first precept therefore in consolation, is to show that that which is
chanced, is either no evil, or else very small. The next is, to show the
commen estate and miserye of mankind. The third, that it is mere follye in
vain to waste him self with sorrow: especially, in as much as he perceived,
that he is nothing helped thereby. For Cleantes comfort, serves but for a wise
man, who needs no comfort at all. For if you persuade a sorowefull mind, that
nothing is evil, but that which is dishonest, you shall not by that means
take away his sorrow, but his follye. But truly both the time, is ill t^
teach, and also it seems, that Cleantes saw not, that gryefe of mind might
be styrred sometimes, upon such occasion, as I am sure he him self will
confess not to be greatly evil. For what will he say hereunto? when Socrates
persuaded Alcibiades, that there was no poynct of manhood in him, and that he
was no better the^ the vilest slave, that went on the ground. When Alcibiades
did for this cause afflicte him, and humbly weeping, requested Socrates to
enstructe him in virtue, y^ he might fly vice: what? will you say Cleantes?
that the cause of Alcibiades grief was no evil at all, because it was not the
greatest evil that might be. Lycon, mindinge to make men esteem grief of
mind, as a light matter, says that it is stirred upon small occasions: as
with the mischaunces of fortune, and bodilye hurt, without any euels
pertaynyng to the mind. But did not the grief of Alcibiades, rise chiefelye
for the vices, which he felt in his own mind? Now of the consolation of
Epicurus we have spoken sufficientlye heretofore. Neither truly is that kind
of comfort very strong, although it both is much used, and also many times
takes effect, I mean, to show, that such chances come not to him only.
It helps in deed (as I have said) but neither at all times, neither yet all
men. For there are some that despise it. But it is a great matter, bow we
bear it. For we ought not to tell, what mischaunce every private man has
suffered, but how wyselye wise men have borne it. The consolation of
Chrisippus, is the strongest for the truth of the saying: but hardest to
persuade in time of sorrow. For it is a hard work to prove to one that
mourns, that he does it of his own free will, and for that he thinks he
ought so to do. Wherefore, as in pleadyng of causes, we do not always use one
kind of state (for so we term the sundry sorts of controuersyes) but
therein confyrme our selves, to the time, the nature of the question, and the
person of ye hearer, so must we do in the asswaging of grief. For we must
mark what kind of cure each man is apt to take. But I know not how I have
made a long digression from our purpose. For you moved your question of a wise
man, to whom either nothing may seem evil, that wants dishonestye, or else
if any evil chance unto him, it is lightly overcome with wisdom: so that it
is scarce seen. Because he fosters no fond opinion, to the increase of his
gryefe. Neither thinks it wisdom to vex and waste him self with
mourning. Then the which there can be nothing worse.

Yet nevertheless, reason has taught us (as I think) albeit it was not our
appointed question at this present time, that nothing is evil, but that
which is dishoneste. Or at the lea^^ wise, if there be any evil in gryefe,
that it is not natural, but proceeds of our own voluntarye will, and
erroneous opinion. Thus we have treated of the nature of sorrow, which is the
greatest of all gryefes. For it being taken away, the remedies of the rest
need not greatly to be sought. Yet nevertheless, there are especyall
^^mfortes against pouertye, and a base and low life. And there are pry^ate
scooles appointed, to reason of banyshemente, the ruin of our country,
bondage, weakness, blyndenes, and of every chance that may have the name of
calamitye. For these things the Greeks deuyde into several scooles. For
although they are matters worthy the reasonynge, yet they ^ou^yte in handlyng
of them only to delyght the hearer. But as Phisicians in curing the whole
body, help also every least part, that had any gryefe in it. So likewise
Phylosophye after it has taken away this universal sorrow, ryddeth also all
the rest, that use to trouble us, as pinchyng poverty infamous shame, hateful
exyle, or any of those gryeues which I hau^ already treated of.

Yet there are several sorts of remedies, for every one of these.

But we must always come to thy^ foundation, that all grief of mind, ought
to be far from a wise man.

Because it is vain and to no purpose Because it is not natural, but
proceeds of a fond opinion, and judgment alluryng us to sorrow, when we have
once determined, that we ought so to do. This being taken away, which wholly
consists in our own will, all sorowefull mourn, shall be utterly quenched.
Perchance, certain privy pricks may remain, which let them count natural,
so that the heavy, terrible, and deadlye name of sorrow, be gone. Which may by
no means dwell with wisdom. But there are many bitter branches of sorrow,
which the stock being once rooted out, must needs wither and peryshe. How
be it we had need of several reasoninges against them: wherein, we will bestow
some time of leisure. But there is one nature of all the gryeues of the mind
albeit there are several names. For both to envy is a poyncte of gryefe of
the mind, and also to back bite any man to be pitiful, to be vexed, to h^
wail, to mourn, to lament, to sorrow, to be careful, to be afflicted, and to
despair, all these, the Stoykes do seueral^ye define. And these words which I
have rehearced, are the names of several things, and not (as they seem to
be) many words signyfyenge one thing: but differ somewhat. As we will in some
other place perhaps, entreat more at large. These are the shootes of the
stock (which we spoke of even now) which we ought so to root out that they
might never rise again.

A great work and a hard as no man denies. But what notable thing is there
which is not hard? Yet nevertheless, philosophy will bring it to pass. Let us
only suffer our selves to be ^ured of her. And thus we will finishe this
Question. And of the rest at some other time in this self same place I will be
ready to reason.


Finis.
The fourth days reasoning of the fourth Question, disputed by Mark Tullye
Cicer^, in his manor of Tusculanum, as well containing in it, the description
and deuysion, of all those perturbations, which commonly disquiete the mind,
as also prouinge, that none such may, or ought to be in a wise man.
BOth in many other things, I am wont to wonder at the wit, and travail of
our countrymen (dear fr^^d Brutus, but chiefelye as often as I refer my
mind to those studyes, which being crepte but very late into some estimation
with us, and therefore scarcely missed or desired until these later days, they
have now derived our of Greece, into this our city. For whereas even from the
very beginning of y^ city. Partlye by orders appointed by the kings, which
then reigned, and partly by written laws, divination by birds, ceremonies,
elections of officers, appealementes, a parliament of lords, a muster of
horsemen, and footeme^, were ordained: yet much more afterward, the commen
wealth being once eased of the yoke of the kingdom, there was made a wonderful
forwardnes and a spedye course, to all kind of excellency. But this place
serves not, to talk of the customs and ordinances of our forefathers, or of
the orders and governance of the city. Thereof, we have spoken sufficientlye
in other places. But chiefly, in those.vi. books, which we have written of a
commen wealth. But in this place, whiles I consider with my self the studyes
of all sorts of arts, and learning, I have many occasions to think, that
as they have been borrowed and brought from the Greeks, so of us they have not
only been desired, but also preserved and honored. For there was well nigh in
the sight of our forefathers, Pythagoras, a man of wonderful wisdom, and
great fame ^or learning. who li^ed in Italy, about the same time, that Lucius
Brutus (the noble auncestoure, of your house) delivered his countreye, from the
bondage of the kings. Pithagoras learning, spreadinge far abroad, came at
the last also into this our city: the which we may gather, both by many
probable conjectures, and also by euidente reasons, which in manner of steps
shall show us the truth. For who would think, that, whereas the country
called great greece, well stored with mighty cities* was famous throughoute all
Italye, and in it, first Pythagoras him self, and afterward his scol^rs and
folowers, began to have a great r^por^ ^ name, who could thin^e I say, that the
ears of our countrymen, were stopped or closed against their learned
doctrine? I do rather judge, that because of the great estimation y^ the
Pithagoreans were in, such as l^ued after Numa, notwithstanding, y^ Pithagora^
lived not in his time, est^emed him to be a scol^r and follower of Pithagoras.

For they knowing his orders and rules, and hearing of their forefathers the
iu^^ice and wisdom of king Numa, being ignorant of the ages and times,
because it did far pass the memory of them that then lived, be leued, that
he, who far passed all the men of his time, in wisdom and learning was
undoubtedly the scoler and ^earer of Pithagoras. And thus far we have,
reasoned by conjecture. But now, as concerning proofs* to show, y^ our
countrymen knew the Pithagorea^s. I could bring many. But I will use (...)
^^we, because* it is not our purpos^, at this present time. For like as it is
reported of th^^, that they were wont to give dark precepts in verses, and
also to withdraw their minds from weigh^y* meditations, with song and
instruments, so Cato a man of great grauitye, and authority, wrote in his
b^^ke which he made of the beginninges of this our city, that it was a
custom used among our forefathers, in all bankets, y^ such as sat at the table
should sing to y^ tune of an instrument y^ praise and prowes of worthy men.
whereby it is evident y^ songs even it y^ time were pricked by note. Also y^
law of the.xii. tables does declare, that verses were wont to be made at that
present: in that they command, that no man should make any ditye, to the
hurt of another. Neither may this seem a light proof, of the learning
which they used in those times: that, before the pillowes of the gods, and at
the feasts of the magistrates, musicians did play: which was a thing,
chyefely used of that sect, of which I now speak. Furthermore the verse of
Appius the blind, which Paneti^^ commends hyghly, in an epistle which he
wrote to Q. Tubero, seems is savor Pithagoras doctrine. There be many of our
orders also, which we had from them, which I do here ouerpasse, least we may
seem to have learned those things otherwhere, which we are thought to have
invented our selves. But to bring back my talk to my first purpose: in how
short time, how many and how notable poets, but chiefly what excellent
oratoures, have there been among us? So that it may well appear, that our
countrymen could attain al things, as soon as they gave their minds unto
them. And of other studyes, we both will speak in other places, if need shall
require, and also have already spoken very often. But the study of wisdom, is
rooted truly among us: howebeit before the time of Lelius and Scipio. I scarce
find any, whom I might well name wise. In whose youth I understand, that
Diogenes the Stoike, and Carneades the Academike, were sent emba^^adours from
the people of Athenes so our Senate, who having never borne any office in the
commen wealth: and being borne the one at Cyrene, the other at Babylon, truly
as I think, they had never been appointed to that office, unless in them, as
in certain principal men, all studyes of learning at that time had chiefelye
flouryshed.

Such men, when they employed their wits, to writing, some penned the civil
law, some their own orations, some the monumentes of their forefathers. But
this most ample and necessary art of all the rest. I mean the rule of good
life, they taught more with their sincere cunning, then with any monumentes
of learning. And therefore of that true and excellent philosophye, which
invented of Socrates, has hitherto remained among the Peripatetikes, there
be almost, either none, or else very few Latin works, either, because of the
greatness and hardness of the things the^ selves, or else, because they thought,
that their travail therein, should be nothing acceptable to such as were rude
and ignorant.

But while those worthy sages whisted and kept silence, there rose one Caius
Amasanius, with whose books the people being persuaded gave them selves to his
doctrine, whether it were, for that it was very easy to learn, either because
they were allured thereunto, with the flattering baits of pleasure, or else
because there was no other philosophye written, y^ which they heard, they
followed. But after Amasianus many folowers of his doctrine writing many
books, spread the same, throughout all Italye. And y^, which is a great proof
that there is no wittye invention, in their reasons, I mean because they be
both lightli perceived, and also allowed of y^ unlearned, yt they think to be
a great strengthening to al their doctrine. but let every man defend what he
likes best For each man's judgment ought to be free. I will keep mine old wont:
and binding my self to no one sect to y^ which I ought of necessity to be
subject, will always seek out, what in all things is most likelye to be true.
Which I have done, both in many other places heretofore. But chiefelye of
late in my manor of Tusculanu^ with earneste pains. Wherefore since I have
already told you our.iii. days reasoninges, it rests that in this book
you hear the fourth days disputacion likewise.

Therefore, when we came down into our shaded walk, as we did all the rest of
the days, y^ matter fell out thus.

Let some man say, whereof he will dispute.

Hea. I think that a wise man cannot want al perturbations of y^ mind.


Mar. Yesterday you thought that he might want sorrow unless perchance you
agreed only because of the shortenes of the time.


Hea. Not so, for your talk did meruaylously well please me.


Mar. Think you then that sorrow can not happen to a wise man.


Hea. Yea truly, I think it can not.


Mar. But if it can not trouble the mind of a wise man, then truly can none at
all. For what should do it? might fear disquiet it? But fear pr^ceedeth but
of the absence of those things, whose presence causes gryefe and sorrow.
Taking away sorrow therefore, fear is gone. Then there remain two
perturbations: light gladness and desire. Which if they can not chance to a
wise man, then shall his mind be always quiet.


Hea. So in deed I think.


Mar. Whether will you then, that we forthwyth hoyse up all our sails, or else
as shipmen are wont to do, when they come forth of a haven, to row a while
with ores.


Hea. What mean you by that? for I do not well understand you.


Mar. Because Chrisippus, and the Stoykes, when they reason of the
perturbations of the mind, do bestow a great part of the time, in deuidynge
and defininge. Which talk of theyrs, assuredlye is of little purpose, to ease a
troubled mind. But the Peripatetikes, bring many reasons to the comfortyng of
our minds, and ouerpasse these crabbed partitions, and definitions. I did
therefore ask of you, whether I should at the first, hoyse the sails of my
talk, or else at the beginning row the same forwards with the ores or logyke.


Hea. I think it best even so. For by that means best, shall my question be
discussed.


Mar. Truly, it is the wysest way. For hereafter you may as^e of me, if any
thing seem some what dark unto you.


Hea. I will do so in deed. But you nevertheless, after your accustomed
wont, shall express these dark reasons more plainelye, then the Greeks d^
utter them.


Mar. I will do my endeavor. But you had need to hear attentiuelye: least if
you chance to forget some one small thing, all the rest also may chance to
slip from you. Because those motions (which the Greeks term Pathae, we call
perturbations rather then diseases: in describing of them, I will first f^lowe
the ancient order of Pythagoras, then the trade of Plato. Who deuideth the
mind into two poynctes: o^ the which, the one they say is endewed with reason,
and the other is wholly void of the same. In that part which is partaker of
reason, they place quietness with an assured consta^cy. In the other, they
say, are all the troublous motions, as well of anger as desire, which are all
enemies, and contrary to reason.

Let this therefore be our foundacyon: but in describyng these perturbations,
we will use the^ definitions and diuysions of the Stoykes, which in my opinion
handle this question more wittely then all the rest. This therefore, is the
definition of Zeno, that that, which we term perturbation, and he Pathos, is a
turning from the rule of reason, contrary^ to the nature of the mind. Some
describe it more shortly, to be a vehement appetite. By vehement, they mean
such a lust, as has swarued far from the constancye of nature. But the
sundry kinds of perturbatio^s (they say) have their beginning of the two
sorts of goods, and two sorts of euels. And so there are in noumber four.
Two that are stirred by the opinion of some good thing: which are desire and
gladness. For gladness proceeds of joy, for some good thing, that is present:
and desire, of some good that is to come. And two that are caused of the
opinion of some evil, which are fear and grief of mind. Fear of euel to
com^, and sorrow for some present evil. For those things, which we fear,
when they are coming, those put us to grief when they are come. But mirthe and
desire, proceed always of the opinion of some good things* Desire feruentlye
co^eytinge some thing that seems good unto i^, and mirth reioy^inge for the
obtaining of some thing which it had long time before c^ueted. For naturalli,
every man coueites that which s^emeth to be good, and flies the contrary,
wherefore wheresoever there is any thing which has in it any apparaunce or
show of goodness, forthwith na^^re it self prouokes us to desire the same.
Such a desire or lust, the Stoykes name Voyl^s^, and we term willinge. It,
they think, to be in a wise man only, and defyne it thus. Willing, is that,
which desires any thing according to reason.

But it which coueytes against reason is called lust, or immoderate desire,
which is in all fools. Also when we have attained any good thing, our
mind is moved two manner ways.

For either it is quyetelye moved unto mirth according unto reason: and then it
is called i^ye: or else it reioiceth vaynlye without measure, and then it may
well be called light or overmuch mirth. Which they defyne to be the joy of the
mind, without reason. And as we do naturally coueyte such things, as seem
in our eye to be good, so do we naturallye fly from those things which
seem to be evil. Which if we do according unto reason, we may well call it
warynes: and say, that it is in none, but only such as are wise. But if it be
with an humble submission, without reason, then may it be called fear. So
fear is wearynes against reason. But as for any affection that should be in a
wise man, because of some present evil, there is none at all. But that
wherewith fools are combred, is sorrow, which proceeds of the opinion of some
present evil, and causes them to abate their courage, and faint, contrary to
reason. For the which cause, it is defyned, to be a faynting of the mind,
contrary to reason. So there are four kinds of perturbatio^s: and but three
sorts of good motions, because there is no good motion contrary to sorrow. But
they think, that all these perturbations are stirred of our own judgment,
and free will.

And for that cause, they defyne they^ yet more strayghtly: that men may not
^nelye perceive, how ill they be, but also, that they are in our own power.
Sorrow therefore, is a fresh opinion of s^^e present euel. In the which it
seems right, that the mind should ^^mble and submit it self to gryefe.
^yrth, is a fresh opinion, of some good that i^ present, wherein, it seems
^yght to rejoice. Fear is the opinion (...) some euel hangyng over us, which
we think our selves scarce able to suffer. Desire is the opinion of some good
likely to come unto us, which it were for our profit presently to have. But in
these opinions, they do not only place the perturbations them selves, but
also those things which are done by them. As gryefe of mind, causes a
certain nippinge of sorrow, and fear a fayntinge and submission of the mind,
and joy an unreasonable mirthe, and lust an immoderate desire. And this word
opinion, which we have put into every one of the former definitions, they
interpret to be a light agreement. But of every perturbation, there are many
parts of the same sort. As of gryefe of mind, inuyenge, (for we must use at
this time that word, albeit it be not much in use. For envy is not properly
said to be in him only, which does envy another, but also in him which is
envied) emulation, obtraction, pitye, anguyshe, waylynge, mourninge, gryefe,
sadness, lamentacion, carfulness, trouble somenes, affliction, desperation,
and such like. The sundry sorts of fear, are slouthfulnes, shame terror,
f^are, dread, extreme, fear examination, trouble, fearfulness. Of joy,
there is maleuolence, rejoicing at other men's loss, vain delg^htes,
boastinge, and others like. Of lust, or desire, there are anger, shaking,
hatred, enmity, indigence, desire, with others of the same sort. And all these
parts, they defyne after this sort. Enuienge, is a sorrow taken for some
other man's prosperity, which nothing hurtes the ^^^your. For, if any man be
aggreeued with the prosperitye of any man, that is noisome to him, he can not
be well said to envy him. As no man would say, that Agamemnon did envy
Hector. But he, which is grieved with the prosperity of some other man which
is nothing hurteful to him, is said to envy. But emulation is taken two manner
ways, the one praise worthy, the other discommendable.

For, the desire to excel in virtue, is ^alled emulation. But thereof we will
say nothing at this time. For it is commendable: and also, there is emulation
which is a gryefe taken, for that another: has obtained that which we (...) t^
have, and we do lack it, and this we now speak of. Obtrectation is a ^orowe
taken, for that an other man has gotten that which we desysyred. Pity, is a
sorrow taken for the misery of some man plagued therewith unjustly. For the
punishemente of a mankyller, or a traytoure mo^eth no man to pitye. Anguyshe,
is a sharp gryefe. Wayling is a sorrow taken of some man's death, whom we loved
entyerly. Mourninge is a lamentable sorrow. Grief is a paynful sorrow. Sadness
is a vexing sorrow. Lamentation is sorrow joined with mourning. Carfulness
is grief joined with thought. Troublesomnes, is a continual gryefe.
Affliction, is sorrow joined with vexation of the body. Desperation is grie^^
without hope of amendme^t. The parts of f^are are defyned thus. Slouthe, is a
fear of some labor to come. Terroure is a quakynge fear. For like as
blushyng follows shame: so does after terroure, come palenes and quakyng.
Dread, is the fear of some evil nigh at hand. Extreme fear is such, as
makes a man besides him self. whereof there is this verse of Ennius. Then
extreme fear, out from with in me, did berieue my wits.

Exanimation, is a fear following and ensuinge extreme fear. Conturbatio^,
is a fear, dispersing the thoughts. Fearfulness, is a continual fear The
parts of fear they describe in this wise. Maleuolence, is a pleasure
conceived of an other man's adversity, which is nothing to our profit.
Delyghte, is a pleasure reioycinge the mind, with some pleasant noise, sight
touching, smell, or taste. Which are al of one sort. Pleasures invented to
effeminate the mind. Boastinge, is a light and a bragginge pleasure. The
parts of desire they define in this wise. Anger is a desire to punish him
which seems to have hurt us without cause. Chafing, is an anger soon begone
and soon ended, which in Greek is called Thymosis, Hatred, is an inueterate
malice. Enmity, is anger, waiti^g time to revenge. Discord, is a bitter anger,
conceived with inward hatred, from the heart. Indigence, is an insatiable lust.
Desire, is a lust to see some thing that is not present. But, the fountain
and spryng of all perturbations, is intemperance. Which is a swaxuinge of the
whole mind, from the obedience of reason: so strayed from the rule of the
same, that the lusts of the mind, can neither be ruled nor brydeled.
Wherefore, like as temperaunce does quiet all lusts, and makes them to obey
reason, and keeps the judgments of the mind uncorrupted: so the enemy of
the same, intemperaunce, disquieteth, troubles, and vexes every part of the
mind.

And for that cause, both sorrow and gryefe, and also the other perturbations,
are stirred by her. Like as when the blood in the body of man, is once
corrupted, or fleaume or choler does abound, it causes syckenesses and
diseases to rise in the body: so, the trouble of evil opinions, and their
contraryetie among them selves, bereues the mind of health, and troubles it
with dyseases. Those diseases take their first beginning of perturbatio^s*
which the Greeks call Nosimata. In this poyncte the Stoikes take much
pains, in comparynge the diseases of the mind, with the sickenesses of the
body. Which (as a thing nothing necessary) being ouerpassed, let us com^ to
the matter. Let this therefore be presupposed, that every perturbation, because
of opinions troublouslye tossyng to and fro, is always moving. When this heat
and styrringe has perced the mind, and is entered as it were into the veins
and mary, the^ ryseth there both some sickness, and disease, and also those
vices which are contrary to the same. For virtue, is not contrary to any
perturbation but a mean betwyxt two of them. These things which I say,
differ in thinking, but in deed they are all one: and rise of d^syre and
joy. For when a man coneyteth money, and has not by him forthwyth reason,
which as the salve of Socrates, might heal that desire, it spr^^des forth
into the veins, and ^^icketh in the inward bowels. An^ there at the length,
becomes a syckenesse or disease. Which being once rooted, can never be
remedyed: and is called auaryce. The like is the beginning of all the rest:
as of the desire of glory, concupyscence of women, and all the other
perturbations. But those things, which are contrary to the same, are thought
to b^ ^aused o^ fear, as the hat^ of women, or of all mankind, which was in
Tymon.

Who was called (...), which sygnyfyeth a hater of women. Al these dyseases,
rise of a certain ^^are o^ those things, which they fly, or have 'But the
syckenesse of the mind, to be a vehement opinion, that some thing ought to be
desired which is not to be coueyted. And the same fyrmely set and gra^^ed in
the mind^. But that disease, which proceeds of the mind being offended,
they (...) to be an earnest opinion, in any^ (...) that he ought to fly that,
which ^n deed he ought not. And this ^pinion is in thinking, that he knows
that, which (...) knows not. But under the name of sickenesses, are
contained all these. Co^eytise, ambition, concupiscence of women, stubburnes,
riot, dronkennes and such like. Couetise, is an opinion ^^rmelye fired in our
mind, that we ought to desire money. And after the sam^ sort are all the rest
defyned. But ^^ose vices, which grow by the offenses of our mind against
certayn^ thing^^, are thus defyned. In hospita^^^^e* is a vehement opinion,
fyrmelye ^ooted in our minds, that good house ^^pynge, and hospitalitye, ought
to be ^o^saken. After the like sort is the hate of wom^n defy^ed. Which was in
Tymon. And that I may come at ^^ngthe, to the comparyson of health, and
sickness of the body: herewyth using it nevertheless, more sparelye then
the Stoykes are wont: as there are some more prone to diseases, then other,
whom we call syckelye, not for that they are always sick, but very^ (...)):
So are there also, some more prone to fear, and some to some other
perturbation.

So in some men there is carefulness^, whereof they are called careful: and in
some angrynes, which differs from anger. For it is one thing to be angry* and
another to be angerd. As carefulnes, differs from anguyshe. For neither are
all men careful at some time, when they feel anguyshe: neither ar^ all
careful men in anguishe. As dronkennes, and drowsines, differ, and it is one
thing to be a lou^r, and another to be loving. And this pronenes of diseases,
extends far. For both it do^^ pertayne to many perturbations, (...) also it
is apparent in many vices* (...) it has no certain name* Therefore, men are
called envious, evil willers, fearful, and pitiful, because they (...) prone
to these perturbations, though they be not always troubled with them. This
pronenes, in comparison* may be called syckenes: so that pronenes be always
counted a readynes t^ be sick. But it in good things, because some are more
apt to goodness* than other, may be termed aptenes.

And in evil things, it may signifye a ^^adines t^ ^all. And in such things,
^s are neither good nor bad, it may ^aue his former name. But as there ^re
diseases and sickenesses in the (...), so like wise there are in the mind. A
disease, they call the infection of the whole body^ but a syckenes, they name ^
faynte disease: A fault is, when the limbs of the body are not ^quallye
proporc^o^^ed: but some miss^ placed, and ill favored to see. So a disease,
and sickness, are, when the whole b^^dye is disquiete, or out of tempe^*
(...) may be oftentimes per^^yue^, (...) ^odye being of perfect health. But in
the ^^nde, we can not separa^^e ^ (...) from a disease, but onely^ by thought.
And in it that which we (...) a fault in the body, may well (...) called
viciousnes. Which is an in^^staunt and waueringe dssposition, (...) all the
life time. So it (...) to pass, that the corrup^^on (...) manners* breeds a
syckenesse and disease, and the other causes inconstancy and repugnaunce.
Neither yet, does e^^ry imperfection, cause discordaunce in the mind. As they
who are not far from wisdom, yet whiles they are in that imperfection, have
some iarring in th^yr minds, but no such contrarietye or repugnance. But,
syckenesses and diseases, are parts of viciousnes. But whether perturbations
be parts of the same, it is in doubt. For vices be permanente affection^: but
perturbations, are continuallye in motion, so that they can be no parts of
such affections, as use to continue in the mind. and as in the proportion of
euels, the mind may well be resembled to the body, so it may likewise in
good things. For the chyefe parts in the body are beautye, might, health, and
swiftnes. The same likewise, there are in the mind. The body is in health
when those principles of the which we consist, agree among them selves, and
jar not. So the mind is said to be in good health, when it agrees in
right judgments, and true opinions. and that is that virtue of the mind,
which some ^all temperaunce* And other some name (...) be a virtue, following
and obeyeng temperaunc^* having no certain name. But which of them so ever it
be, they do all agree; that it is in a wise man only. But there is a certain
health of mind, which a ^oole also may have. Which is, when by the help of
philosophye, the perturbations of his mind are cured. And, is there is a
certain proportion of the ^^^mes of the body, with a pleasant shape, which
is called beautye: so likewise teh equalitye and consent of the mind in
opinions; and judgments* with a certain stoutenes and co^^tan^ye, following
virtue, or rather, con^^ynyng the whole power and force of (...), (...) named
the beautye of the mind. Now, as for the strength, ^^yntes, and styffenes of
the body, there are like parts also in the mind. But whereas there is a
certain quick^esse in the body otherwise called swiftnes, neither does the
mind want that praise also: which in short time can run over, the
remembrance of things, in number infinite. But these differences there are
betwyxte the body^ and the mind: that the mind being in good health, may in
no part feel any grief: but the body may. Also, the diseases of the body
may sometime come without our fault. But so can not the diseases of the
mind. The lyghtest troubles of the which, can not happen, without the
despysyng of r^^son. And for that cause, they be in me^ on^lye. For beasts
may have some such like chances* but they have no ^^rturbations: and betwixt
quick and dulle witted men, this difference there is* that wise men, like as
the brass (...) Cori^^he will, ^eeldo^^ (...) rows^ye, so will they likewise,
either hardly fall into a^ye disease, or else y^ they chance to fall into any,
lightly^ ^e cured. And so it is not with dull witted men. Besides that, the
mind of ^ wise man is not subject to every perturbation. For he does none of
those things which are beastlye and cruel. Yea, and those perturbations,
which sometimes chance unto him, have a certain show of gentleness: as
pitye, sorrow, and fear. But those sickenesses, and diseases of the mind are
more hard to be rooted out, then those extreme vices, which are contrary to
virtues. For those old rooted dyseases remaining, vices can not be taken
away. Because they are not so lyghtlye healed, as the other rooted out. And
thus you have so much, as the Stoikes subtelye reason of perturbations.

Which they call logical, because they are profoundlye written. From the
which, since our talk is now escaped, as it were from cragged rocks, now let
us go to the other part of our disputations: if you think that we have spoken
plainly enough, respectinge the darkness of the matter.


Hea. Yea truly plainly enough. Therefore, now we look that you should
spread the sails of your talk, which why^ome you spoke of.


Mar. Forasmuch as, ^^th at other times hertofore, we have spoken much of
virtue, and must also hereafter do the same. In many other places, (for most
of those questions, which pertayne to the trade of life and manners, are
grounded upon virtue) for that cause we will now define virtue. Which is a
constante, and laudable affection of the mind: both making them in whom it
is commendable: and also it self, even without the name of profit, worthy of
praise.

From it, do proceed all honest desires, words, and deeds. And to be short,
the whole rule of reason. Howebeit, virtue it self, may in the bryefest manner,
well be termed the rule of reason. To this virtue, vice is contrary, for so, I
think better to term it, then malice: which the Greeks call Kaki^. For,
malice is the name, of some one certain vice. But vice is the name of all.
From which also, proceed al perturbations. Which be (as I said before) the
troubled and stirred motions of the mind, strayed from reason: enemies of the
mind, and also of a quyete life. For they bring with they^ careful and
bitter gryeues, they afflycte and weaken the mind, with fear. They inflame it
also, with a greedy appetite. Which we term, either desire or lust. Which is
an impotencye of the mind, swaruing from temperaunce, and moderation. Which
if it chance to obtain that, which it did desire, then it falls into
excessi^e mirth. So that, then, nothing which he does is to any purpose at
all. Like as he, which thinks ioy^ and pleasure of the mind, to be the
chyefest error. The help of all these euels, consysteth in virtue only. But
what is there, not only more miserable, but also more filthy, or ill
^auoured, then to see a man afflycted or overcome with gryefe? To which
^iserye, he truly is very nyghe, who ^eareth any evil when it it is
coming, and stands continually in dread of the same. The power whereof, the
Poets myndinge to express, feigned that in hell, a stoane hangs over the
head of Tantalus, for the mischieues which he had done, and his proud heart.
And truly, it is the common pain of all follye. For all men, whose minds
abhor from reason, have always some gryefe, or fear hanging over them. And
as these two, namely grief and fear, are motions, wastinge and consuminge the
mind: so, those which are some what more merye (I mean desire, which does
always gredely^ coueyte some thing, and vain gladness, which is as much as
excessyue mirth) do either nothing at all or else very little, differ from
madness.

Whereby we may well perceive, what manner of man he should be, whom we call
moderate, modest, temperate, constant, and continent. Which words also, we
use sometimes, to refer to the name of frugalitie: as the chyefe of all the
rest. And truly, unless under that name, al virtues were contained: this
saying had never been so common, that it had at these days purchased the name
of a proverb. Namelye, that a a frugall man does all things well.

Which self same saying, the Stoikes affirm with great constancye, and
stoutenes. Whosoever therefore, has so fortifyed his mind with moderance and
constancye, that he is neither pyned with sorrow, nor discouraged with fear,
neither gredely coueytinge any thing, does burn with desire, neither
rejoicing, with excessive mirth, does become effeminate: he is that man who^
we seek. He is happy to whom neither any grief shall seem so intolerable,
that it may constrain him to abate his courage: neither yet any joy so great,
that it should cause him vainelye to boaste and brag of him self. For what
may seem great to him, in this world, who museth on eternitye, and knows
the largenes of the wide world? For what, either in the invention of man, or
else in this shortenes of life, may seem strange to a wise man? whose mind,
is always so watchefull, that nothing can befall to him unlooked for, nothing
unprovided, nor strange. Who also spreades his wit so far on all parts,
that he does always, see both place, and also time, how, and where he may
live in time of anguyshe. So y^, whatsoever chance fortune shall cast on him,
he will quietly take it, and be content therewyth. Which, whosoever does, he
shall want not only gryefe of mind, but all the other perturbations also. And
truly, the mind being of them eased, is perfectly and absolutelye happy. And
the same stirred and drawn by them, from sure and perfect reason, does lose
not only constancy, but also, al his health. Wherefore, fond and effeminate
is the reason and talk of the Peripatetikes, who think it necessary, that our
minds should be troubled. But, they appoynte a certain mean, which we ought
not to exceed. Will you make any mean in vice? Or is it no vice, not to
follow reason? Or does not reason teach, that it is not good, either thirstily
to coueyte any thing, or when thou have obtained it, to rejoice vaynelye? Does
she teach, that it is no euel, either to be overcome, or else not to be quiet
in mind, because of sorrow?

Does not she show the: that all exceadinge sadness, or vain myrthe, proceeds
of error? For let us seek some mean in sorrow. For in it men take most
pain. Fanius writes, that Publius Kutilius, took greuouslye his brothers
repulse, when he stood in election for the Consulshippe. But it seems that he
passed measure. For it was the only cause of his death. He ought then, to
have taken it more moderately. But, what if whiles he took this so greuouslye,
the death of some of his children had chanced also? Then there had also come a
new grief. Nevertheless, moderate: but yet it had been a great increase of
his former sorrow. What, if then, there had ensued some disease in his body,
the loss of goods, blyndenes, banishemente, and some new gryefe, and a new
sorrow for every one of them? then it were made the greatest gryefe that
might be: which could not be borne. So we se that, who so ever sekes to
appoyncte a mean in any vice, does, like as if a man would think, that one
y^ should cast him self down from a rock, into the sea, might stay him
self, when he would. For truly, like as that can not be, so, neither can a
troubled, or moved mind, stay it self, where and when it will. Also, those
things which are ill, when they come to their rypenesse, and proof, those
same also are naught, when they are tender and young. But sorrow, and all other
perturbations, when they are increased to the most, are undoubtedly pestilent.
Therefore, even at the first breeding they are not without vice. For when they
are departed once from reason, they increase of their own accord: and over
own frayletie flatters it: and so at the last, unawares launches into ye deep,
where it can not stand. Wherefore there is no difference, whether they allow a
mediocritie of perturbations, or a mean of unrighteousness, sloth, and
intemperaunce. And he which appoynteth a mean in vice, confesses, that some
part thereof ought to be borne. Which both is odious of it self, and also so
much the worse, as all vices are of slippery nature, and being once begone in
any man, do continually cause him to fall and slide into all noughtines. So
that, he can by no means, stay him self. Furthermore, what a thing is it
that the Parepatetikes say, that these perturbations, which we think ought to
be pulled out by the roots, are not only placed in us of nature, but also
that the same was done for a great commoditye? For this is their saying. First
they commend anger hyghlye, naming it the whet sloane of fortitude and saying,
that it enflameth the hertes of men, more stoutely both against their enemies,
and also against a wicked citesen: terminge their reasons light, who did thus
persuade them selves. It is right that we should wage this war, that we
should fight for our laws, liberty, and country.

These things, are of no force to inflame our courage (say they) unless
anger be present. Neither do they reason thus of warriors only. But they
think also, that there can be no severe judgments, without some sharpenes of
anger. Neither do they allow any orator, not only being pleintife, but also
defendaunte, unless he plead angerlye. Or, if he be not angry, yet both in
his words, and iestures, do feign anger: so that, his words, may kindle and
provoke the hearers to anger. To conclude, they think he is no man, that can
not be angry. And that which we call gentleness, they term lenity: and count
it a fault. Neither do they only commend this kind of lust (for anger as I
have already defyned it, is the lust to revenge) but say also that that other
sort of lust, or desire, was given us of nature for a great commodytie. For
they think that no man can do any thing notable, unless he have an earnest
lust, or desire unto it.

Themistocles walked in the night time, in the open street, because he could
not sleep. The cause whereof, when some men did inquire, he answered, that
the triumph of Milciades would not suffer him to take his rest. who has not
hard, of the watchefulnes of Demosthenes? who said that it grieved him very
much, if he should here any workmen up before him. To conclude, the chiefest
Philosophers, should never have profyted so much in their studies, without a
burning desire, and zeal of learning. We have heard, that Pithagoras,
Democritus, and Plato, searched the farthest countries that are known, for
knowledge. For where so ever they hard, that there was any thing for them to
learn, thither, they thought, that they ought to travail. And think we,
that they would so have done, without a great heat of desire? Now, sorrow it
self, which I said, that men ought with all their might to fly, as an
horrible and ugly beast, they think to have been appointed of nature, not
without some singular commodity. Which is, that it should gryeue men for their
faults to be chastened, rebuked, and put to shame. For they seem safelye to
have sinned, who bear shame and reproach (which they deserved for their
fault) without any sorrow. It is better to have his conscience gnawed with
repenta unce.

Whereof proceeded that saying of Afranius, who when his effeminate son cried
out, alas I wretch, his severe father answered. If one part grieve the, would
to god, that all did smart a like.

Also, the other two parts of sorrow they say, are profitable. Pity, to help
and relieve the calamitye, of su^he as are vniu^^lye tormented. Yea and that
emulation is not unprofitable: which is, when we are agryeued, that either we
have not attained that, which some other has, or else some other has obtained
the same, which we have gotten. But fear, if any man should take away, then
were all diligence (think they) utterly gone. Which is chiefly seen in them,
which fear the laws, the officers, pouertye, shame, death, or sorrow. All
these things, they say, ought to be cut of, from their full styrryng and
liberty, but to be rooted out, they think they neither can, neither need to
be. So that, as in all other things, so in this also, they think the mean to
be best. In which reasons, think you, that they speak any thing to the
purpose, yea or no?


Hea. Truly, they seem to me, to speak very reasonably. And therefore I look,
how you wylt answer them.


Mar. I will find some what to object against the^. But this one thing
before. Do you mark, how great modesty there was emonges the Academikes? For
they speak playnelye to the purpose. The Peripat^tikes, are answered of the
Stoykes. Let them contend for me: who need not, but to inquire what is most
likely to be true, in every question. What is there then in this question,
whereby that may be tried? farther then the which the wit of man can not
reach, the definition of perturbations: which I think, that Zeno has well
expressed. For he does thus defyne it. A perturbation, is a motion contrary
to reason, and against the nature of the mind. Or more brieflye thus. A
perturbation, is a vehement appetite, or lust. By vehement, be understands
such an appetite, as should far swerve, from the constancye of nature. What
is there that I may say against these definitio^s? But these are for the most
part, the words of wise and suttel disputers. But these terms of the
Peripatetikes, the heat of the mind, and the whetstones of virtue, come out
of the Rhetoricians scooles. But can not a man be stout, but when he begins to
stomach the matter. Truly, that is a poynct of masters of fence: howebeit,
oftentimes in them also, we see great modestye. They commen together, they
company together, they ask questions one of another. So that they seem to be
pleased, rather then angry. But of their opinion, let there be some one like
Pacidianus, whom Lucilius describes with these words. I Will kill him straight,
and beat him sure, if that be it you seek.
But first perhaps his chance may be, me in some place to stryke.
Before my sword within his heart or lights I fasten may.
I hate the slave, and therefore now no longer will I stay
Then til his sword out of his sheath into his hand he take.
So much I long my hateful wrath upon his blood to slake.


But without this dronken anger, we see Aiar in Homere, coming out many
times, with great mirth, when he should fight with Hector. Whose entrye into
the field, when he had put on his armor, rejoiced his fellows, and feared his
foes. Insomuche, that, (as Homere writes) it repented Hector him self, that
he had provoked him to battle. And they truly; commoninge gently, and
quyetely, the one with the other, before they fought, did not in their very
fight, do any thing angerlye, or outragiouslye. I truly think, that not
Torquatus, who got his name by fight, did with an angrye mood, take away
the french man's ^hayne. Neither, that Marcellus was therefore to be counted
stout, at Clastidium, because he was angry. For Africanus, because he is
better known unto us, for that he lived but of late years, I durst swear,
that he was not then inflamed with anger, when he covered with his Tergat,
Marcus Halienus, a Pelignian, and fastened his darte, in the breast of his
enemy: of Lucius Brutus, there is more doubt whether, because of the
unmeasurable hate, that he bare against the Tirant, he ran more fiercely
against Aruns or no. For I understand, that either of them, at one course,
slew the other. What need you, to bring in anger then? Has fortitude no force,
unless she begin to wax mad? What? think you that Hercules, whom this
self same valyauntnes, has now placed in the hea^ens: was angry, when he
fought with the bore of Erimanthia, or with the lion of the wood Nemeus? Did
Theseus in a chafe, hold the bull of Marathonia, by the horns? Take heed,
that you join not fortitude with madness. Whereas anger is full of all
lyghtenes. And fortitude, can not be without reason. Al chances that may
happen to man, are to be despised.

Death is not to be feared. We must think, all gryefe, and pain, tolerable.
These things, when a man minds with him self, with a sincere judgment, and
reasonable decree: the^ is fortitude in him strong, and stable. Unless
parchaunce they will say, that such things, as are done vehementlye and
stoutelye, are done angerlye. But ^rulye, Scipio, who was wont to affirm that
saying of the Stoykes, that a wise man was never angrye: in my opinion was not
angry with T. Gra^ ^hus when he (I say) being chief priest forsook the
consul being sick, and he him self, being but a payuate man, as if he had
been consul, commanded e^erye man, that bare good will to the common wealth,
to follow him. I know not, whether I my self did any thing stoutelye, when I
bare office in the commen wealth. But if I did any such thing, truly it was
without anger. Is there any thing that does more resemble madness, then anger?
why^he Ennius did well term, the beginning ^f madness. The color, voice,
eyes, and breath, being scarce able as well to speak as to do any thing, what
point of health or wisdom do they declare* what may there be more foolyshe,
then Achilles in Homere? or then Againem non scolding? for Ajax anger brought
both to madness, and also to death. Fortitude therefore needs not the aid of
anger. It is sufficiently furnished, armed and aided of it self. For after
their opinion, we may say, that dronkennes, is profitable for fortitude. And
so likewise of madness. Because, both mad and dronken men, do many things
very stoutelye. Ajax was at all times stout, but most of all in his madness.
For then he did a valiant feate, when the Grecians, being ready to fly, he
only aided them, and renewed the battle. Shall we therefore say, that madness is
profitable? Weygh the definition of fortitude. So shall you perceive, that it
needs not anger. Fortitude therefore, is an affection of the mind, obeyeng
the hye law of reason in sufferyng things. Or the continuance, of a stable
and sure judgment, in the suffering or avoiding, of those things, which seem
to be fearful and terrible. Or, the knoweledge of such things, as ought to be
feared, and also of the contraryes, continui^g a certain and a sincere
judgment of the same. Or else, more bryefely, as Chrisippus does (for all y^
former definitions, are made by one Spherus, who according to the judgments
of the Stoykes, is expert in defininge, and they are all in manner like, but the
one declares some things, mere plainly then the other.)

How then says Chrisippus? Fortitude, is the knoweledge (says he) how to
bear, or suffer gryeues. Or it is an affection of the mind, obeyinge the
high law of reason, in bearing and sufferynge without all fear. Although,
we use to scoff at these philosophers, as Carneades was wont, yet I fear,
least they only, are to be counted philosophers. For, which of these
definitions, does not open unto us, the opinion, which is hidden, and closed in
our minds, of the nature of fortitude? Which being opened, and known, who
is there that would seek any other aid, for a warrior, judge, or orator.
Or would not think, that they, without madness or anger, could do any thing
stoutely? Why? the Stoykes when they prove, that all fools are mad, do they
not rehearce, these things, among their follye, and madness. Take away the
perturbations, and anger chiefelye, their reasons will seem to be monsters.
They reason thus. We say, that all fools are mad likeas we say, that donge
smells ill.

But as donge does not always smell ill, but when you stir it, you shall
then perceive it: so likewise, an angry man, is not always angerd. but provoke
him a little, and then shall you see him stark mad. What? this warlyke anger,
when it enters into any house what division makes it, betwyxte the man and
wife, children, and all the householde? Is it then profitable also? Is there
any thing, that a dysquyete mind, can better do, then a quiet and constant?
Or can any man be angrye, without the disquieting of his mind? Our countrymen
therefore, whereas all diseases of the mind, are great faults and vices,
yet, because none of them was worse then anger, did term only those, which
were angrye men, si^ke persons. But an orator truly, anger becomes not, and
to dissemble, is it not a shame? Do you think us then to be angry, when we
speak somewhat earnestly, or vehemently in pleadinge? Also, when the matters
being paste and gone, we write oracions, do we then write angerly? Did any man
think that either Aesopus, pleaded being angrye? or, that Accius, wrote in a
chafe? All things, are handeled more notablye, and far better, of some
orator, then of any stage plaier. But they are handled by them, quietlye and
peasablye. Now, to commend lust, what a toye of lust is it? You bring for
the Themistocles, and Demosthenes, to whom you join also, Pythagoras,
Democritus and plato. What? do you ^all earnest study, a lust? which being
referred to the best sort of things, yet ought we to be quiet and steadfast.
But in praising sorrow, of all others most detestable, what philosophers, do
they show them selves? But Afranins said well. If one part grieve the, would
to god, that all might smart alike.

For he spoke it, of a rechelesse, and a dissolute young man. But we put our
question of a constant and a wise man. And so let us leave that anger, to some
captain, or soldier: whom we need not here to rehearce. For it is good, for
them to use the motions of their mind who can not use reason. But we (as I
have often heretofore said) put our question of a wise man. But emulation,
obtr^ctation, and pitye, are also profitable. Why should thou pity a man
rather then help him, if thou can? Can we not be liberal without pitye? We
ought not to sorrow for other me^, put if we can, to ease others of sorrow.
Now, obtrectation, and emulation, whereunto are they profitable? since it is
the poynct of emulation, to be vexed at an other man's commoditye, which he him
self has not: and the nature of obtrectacion is, to be gryeued, with the
prosperitye of an other, for that he has gotten the self same commodity,
that we had. But who could find in his heart, to come to the experience of
things, by sorrow? And the mediocritye of euels, who can justly commend? For,
who is there, in whom there is any lust, or desire at all, y^ is not a
noughty luster, and desirer of that, he should not?

Or who is there, in whom there is any anger, that is not an angry person?

Or who is there, in whom there is sorrow, that is not soroweful? In whom is
there fear, that is not fearful? And think you, that a wise man, may be a
vicious desyrer, of that, he should not, or an angrye, sorowefull, or fearful
person? Of whose praise, although, I could speak very much, yet thus much I
will briefly say, that wisdom, is the science, and knoweledge, of the
proper, and appointed causes, of every thing: as well in heaven as in earth.
Whereby, it appears, that it pursues only such things, as are heavenly: and
earthly things, it does subdue and rule, with virtue: Did you then say, that
to him, as a sea lyeng open for every wind, any perturbation might chance.

What is there, that could trouble so great gravity, and constancy? May
some sudden or unprovided chance do it? But what such thing, may happen to
him, to whom no chance, that may happen to man, does come unlooked for? For
whereas they say, that that, which is ouermuche ought to be cut away, and
that those things only, which are natural, ought to be left: what one
thing is there, engraffed in us of nature, of the which, we have over much?
For all these things spring out of the roots of error: which ought
wholye to be pulled up, and not to be pared, or cut away. But because I think,
you do not put your question of a wise man: but of your self, or of some
other commen person, (for him perchance, you think to be void of all
perturbations) let us see what store of remedies, philosophye has devised, to
help the diseases of the mind. For assuredly, there is some medecin. For
nature was not so cruelly bent against mankind, that whereas, she has invented
so many remedies for the body, she would deuyse none for the mind. Of which
also, she has better deserved. For that whereas the medecines of the body, are
made of things without the same: the health and helps of the mind are closed
within it self. But look, how much more noble, and heavenly their nature is,
so much the more diligence they need to be cured. Reason therefore, being in
good plite, sees what is best to do: But being neclected, or impure, it is
wrapped in many errors. To you therefore now I must turn al my talk For you
feign, that you put your question of a wise man. But, perhaps you mean it by
your self. Of those perturbations therefore, which I have rehearsed, there are
diverse and sundry remedies. For all sorrow is not swaged after one sort. For,
there is one way to help him that mourns: an other, to help him that
pityeth: and an other to help him that enuieth. Also, there is this doubt in
all the four perturbations, whether we ought, in consolatio^s, to apply our
talk against all perturbations generallye (which are the despisinge of
reason, or else a vehement appetite) or else frame our persuasion, against every
singular perturbation. As against fear; desire, or any of all the rest. And
whether we ought is reason, whether this pryuate chance, for the which he is
so vexed, ought patientlye to be borne: or else, to show, that we must not be
sorye for any chance. As if a man were pricked with pouertye, whether, would
you prove unto him, that pouertye is no evil at all, or else, that a man ought
to take no mischaunce heavily. This last truly were the better: least, if you
should not persuade him, that pouertye is no euel, you must needs give him leave
to sorrow. But if you take away all manner of gryefe, with such reasons, as I
yesterday used: you shall in manner, take away, all the evil of pouertye. But,
let every such perturbation, be finished with the quietness of the mind. which
comes, when you prove, that it is no good, that we so desire: or that causes
us, to rejoice: and that it is no evil, whereof our fear, or gryefe does
proceed. And this is a sure and approved remedy: to show, that the
perturbations them selves, are vicious. And, that they are not in us of nature:
neither are caused by necessitye. As we see that commenlye men swage their
sorrow, when we cast in their teeth, the weakness of their effeminate mind:
and when we commend unto them, their gravity, and stedfastnes, which without
any trouble, do bear the like. Which truly, is wont sometimes to chance
to them, which think them to be e^elles in deed, and yet nevertheless, that
they are to be taken in good part. As perchance, some man thinks pleasure to
be a good thing: and some other has the same opinion of money: yet
nevertheless, both the one may well be stayed from riot, and also the other
from coueteyse. But the other manner of persuasion, which does assaye, both to
take away their fond opinion, and also to rid their sorrow: is in deed,
more profitable. But it takes effect but feeld, And also, it is not to be
ministered to the commen people. Also, there are some sorts of sorrows, which
that medecin can not help. As if any man be aggryeued for the lack, that he
feels in him self, of virtue, courage, good behavior, or honestye: he
truly, were gryeued for a thing, that is in deed evil. But there must be
some other salve ministered to him. And that is such truly, as may well
enough be a help of all the rest. For this every man ought to confess, that
although, those things which stir us to fear, or sorrow, be evil, yea, or
no: or those things, which cause us to desire, and rejoice, be good, yea or
no: yet assuredly, that motion or stirring of the mind is evil. For, we will,
that he, whom we term a stout hearted, and valaiunt man, should be constant,
quiet, gra^e and such a one, as should tread under his feet, all chances,
that might happen to man. But such a one, can not be a sorowefull, fearful,
desirous, or a fond, joyous person. For, those things are in such, as suffer
chances to bear dominion over them. Wherefore, this is one precepte, commen
among all philosophers, that we speak not of that, which troubles the
mind: but only of the perturbation it self. And therefore, first as
concerning desire, when we mind to take away that perturbation, we must not
always reason, whether that be good or no, which moved us to desire: but the
desire it self, must be taken away. So that, whether honestye be the chiefest
good, and therefore chiefly to be desired, or if pleasure be it, or else both of
them joined together, or all those three sorts of goods, namely of the
mind, body and fortune: yet nevertheless, if we unto much desire, even
virtue it self: we must use the like means, to dissuade men from that, as we
use in all the rest. Also, the description of the nature of man, being set before
our eyes, is a great means to quiet our mind. Which, that they may more
plainly behold, you must describe in your talk, the commen state, and
miserye of man's life. And therefore, it is reported, that Socrates, not
without cause, cut away these three first verses of Euripides, from that
tragedy, in the which he describes the historye of Orestes. The fearefulst
chance, that either tongue may tell, or ear may hear.
That chance may bring, or gods down flynge, our troubled minds to fear.
The nature yet, and heart of man, with patience well may bear.


Also, to persuade, that it which is chanced, both may, and also ought to be
borne, the rehersall of many, which have suffered the same, is very profitable.
Howebeit, we have showed, how sorrow might be swaged, both in our yesterdayes
talk, and also in our book of consolation: which, (for I must needs
confess: that I am no wise man) I wrote in the mids of all my gryefe and
sorrow. And whereas, Chrisippus does forbid us to minister our medecines, when
our mind is fresh swollen, with the wound: yet I did it, and joined
thereunto, the whole strength of my nature: that, the sharpnes of my sorrow,
might yield, to the strength, of the medecin. But next to sorrow (of the
which we have sufficiently spoken) comes fear. Of the which also, somewhat
must be said. For as sorrow, proceeds always, of some present grief: so
is fear always caused, of some grief that is to come. And for that cause,
some said, that fear was a certain branch of gryefe: other some, said it
was the forerunner and guyd of gryefe. Wherefore, by the same means, that we
may bear gryefe, when it is present, by the same also we may despise it,
that is likelye to ^om^. For we must take great heed, that in them both, we do
nothing more humblye, lowelye, wantonlye, effeminately, or abject like, the^ it
becomes a man. But, although, we must treat of the inconstancy, weakness, and
lyghtnes of fear: yet it is good to despise those things, which most men
fear. And for that cause, whether it were by chance, or else of set purpose,
it happened very well, that the first, and second day, we reasoned of those
things, which men most of all fear, namelye of death, and of pain. Our
reasons of the which, who so ever does like, and bear away well: he may
easelye be rid of fear. And hitherto we have treated of those perturbations,
which proceed of the opinion of some evil. Now, let us consider those, which
are styrred, by the opinion of some goodness. Which are joy and desire. And I
think truly that of all perturbations of the mind, there is one only cause:
and that, they are al in our power: and, that we suffer them to enter upon us,
of our own voluntarye free will. This error therefore, and feigned opinion,
must be taken away, and as by reason, we make those things, which seem to be
evil, more tolerable, so we must in those things also, which are thought
to be great and notable goods, make our mind more quiet and peasible. And
this truly, is commen, as well to those things, which are counted evil, as
also to those which are counted good: that, if there be any difficulty to
persuade, that those things, which trouble his mind, are not good, or that
they are not evil, yet nevertheless, we must have a several remedy for
every ^ynde of motion. For there is one way to help an envious person, another
to ^elpe a lover. One mean to ease a so^owefull man, and an other to help a
^earefull person. And truly, it were ea^ye for such a one, as follows the true
opinion of good and euel, to deny, that ^^oole could at any time be troubled
with mirthe. Because nothing that ^ood were, could happen unto him.

But now, we speak after the comen ^^rte. Admit that those things, which
(...) thought in this world to be the ^^^efest goods, were so in deed. I
^eane, honor, riches, pleasure, and such (...). Yet nevertheless, if we had
obtained any of the same: fond and light ^irth, were to be dispraysed. As,
although it be lawful to laugh, yet light ^aughter is discommendable. For the
same fault, is vain joy of the mind in mirth: that shrinkinge and abatinge
^f courage, is in sorrow. And even as light, and fond, is desire in coveting:
as joy is in obtayninge. And as ve^a^^on in an afflicted: so, in a joyful mind
vain mirthe is counted light: and whereas, to envy, is a branch of gryefe,
but to be delighted with other men's mischaunce, is a part of light mirth:
both sorts, are wont to be reproved, by settinge before them their own
cruelty, and fiercenes. And as it becomes us, to be bold, but to fear, it
does not beseem us: so we lawefullye may rejoice, but not be drowned in vain
mirth. For, for to teach more plainly, we will at this time disseue^ joy and
mirth. We have said already that the shrynkyng of the mind, could never be
without fault. But the raysinge or exaltinge of the same, might well be. For
otherwise Hector in Ne^ius does rejoice. It glads me (father) that you, who
were well est^emd always.
Did not disdayn, with blameles tongue, my simple factes to praise.


And otherwise Cherea, in Trabea. A baude being greased with money, shall be
ready at my call.
My fingers pushe, shall cause the doares, and gates abroad to fall.
And forthwyth Chrisis, as soon as she shall me there espy,
Will merely come to mete me then, rejoicing me to see.


What a commoditye and pleasure, he thinks this to be, his own words, may
well declare. Thus my good chance shall pass, the luck, of fortune lo it
self.

What a filthy mirth this is, it is sufficient, that who so ever list behold
it, may sufficiently see, and look how ^eastlye they be, that do then
rejoice, when they have obtained the pleasures of the flesh: alyke fylthy are
they also, which fervently desire the same. But all that, which is called love,
(and truly, I can find no other name that it has) is of such lyghtnes, that I
know not, whereunto I might compare it.

Of whom Cecilius writes. Who would not count him now for god, and that right
worthylye.
Who makes some fools, and other still in ignorance lets lie.
In whose hand madness is and wit, who some men's hearts has fierd
Some makes beloved, some hated eke, and some to be desierd.


O notable poetrye, the amender of our lives, which thinks, that the love of
sin, and the ancthoure of all lyghtenes, ought to be placed emonges the
immortal Gods. But, hitherto, I speak of a comedye. Which consists of
nothing else, but such mischieues.

But what says the prince of the sailors in the ship Argo, in a tragedy?
Thou sauedst me but for my love, and not mine honors sake.

This love of Medea, what flames of miserye did it kyndle? And yet
nevertheless, she in an other poet, dares to say to her father, that she had
a husband. Whom love her gave, whose force did pass the duty she ought him.

But let us give the Poets leave to trifle, in whose tales, we see this vice,
attributed to Jupiter him self. And let us come, to the Philosophers, the
masters of all virtue. Which deny that thereaboute contend much with
Epicurus. Who therein, in my opinion, lies nothing. For what is this love,
that men term frendshippe? Or why, does no man love a foul young man, or a
fair old man? Truly, I think, this custom began first in the universities
of Greece, in the which, such love is permitted. But well said Ennius. It is
the cause of much mischyefe, and vice as I suppose,
That men should use in open sight, their bodies to disclose.


Which sort of me^, if they be honest, (as I think they may) yet is it not
without great pain and trouble. Yea, and that so much the more, for that, they
do, in manner constrayne them selves to refrain. And that I may ou^rpasse the
love of women, which is far more natural then the other: who doubts what
the Poets meant, by the rape of Ganimedes? Or who knows not what Laius in
E^ripides, does both speak and wyshe? Furthermore, who sees not, what songs
and balades, the most chiefest, and best learned Poets, set forth of their
own loves.

Alceus, being a man of good reputation, in the common wealth, yet what toys
wrote he, of the love of young men? And all the wrytynges of Anacreon, are
only of love. But most of all other, Rheginus Ibicus, even burned with love:
as it appears by his wrytinges. And now, we philosophers also, (yea and that,
by the council and aucthoritye of Plato, whom Dicearchus does therefore
worthily reprehe^d) are become the commenders, and honourers of love. For the
Stoikes, both say, that every wise man will love: and also, defyne love, to
be the desire to get amity: stirred by the syghte of beauty. Which, if it may
be without care, desire, and thought, I am well contented to admit. For the^,
it wantes the perturbation of desire. Against the which, we at this present
reason. But if love be, (as it is truly) not far distant from madness, as it
was in him of the i will of Leucadia, who cries out thus.

If so in heaven be any god, that does for me take care.

Now truly, it were but reason, that the gods should care, how he might
obtain his fleshely lust. Then he goes forward.

Alas unhappy man:

Truly, he spoke nothing in all his talk, more true. But he answers him
well. May I think, that thou thy wits well have, that do so sore lament?

So he seems, even to his own companion, to be mad. But hark what
tragedies he makes. On the Apollo, now I call, on Neptune, and ye wyndes.

He thinks, that the whole world, will turn to help him. Uenus only, he
excludes as unjust. Saying. For wherefore should I now, call on thy name O
Uenus vain.

For her, he thinks, for the delyghte, that she takes in fleshelye pleasure,
to care for nothing else. As though he him self, does not both do and say, all
his flagitious toys, only for fleshely pleasure. Whosoever therefore, is
herewith diseased, ought thus to be cured. Both by ^hewynge, how light, how
fond, and also of how small effect, that thing is, which he does desire: or
else, how ease lie in some other place, or by some other means, he may obtain
his dedesire, or utterly neglecte it. Also, he must sometimes be turned to
other thoughts, cares, and business Oftentimes change of place helps, likeas
it does also, a diseased body. Also, some think that old love is driven away
with some new fancye, lykeas, when with one nail, we drive out another. But
chyefelye we must put him in mind, what madness is in love. For of all the
perturbations of the mind, there is none more vehemente. So that, if you would
not blame it, for the whoredom adultery, and other vicious acts, which ensue
thereupon: yet you must needs hate it, because of it self, it is a
perturbatio^. For, that I may ouerpasse those things, which declare stark
madness in it. Of what fondness, are all these th^nges, which seem to be but
mean? In love are wrath, fierce hate, and truce, with sower suspicions eke.
Now war, then peace: which if that thou, to make certain do seek
By reasons force: then sure I think, thou should do nothing more,
Then if thou seek how to be mad, obeying reasons lore.


This inconstancye, and waueringe of mind, only, whom is it not able to
fear? Also, we must show unto them that which is commen to every
perturbation: that namelye, that they are all taken of a fond opinion, and of
our own free will. For, if love were natural, both all men should love,
and also be loved, and should at all times love, yea, and all men one thing.
Neither, should shame, thought, or satietie fear any man from the same. But
anger, although it does long trouble the mind, yet it is not taken to be
madness: by force of the which, there rises sometimes, even among brethren
such like chiding. What man in shameless impudence could any time pass thee?
Nay, who, in cankerd malice could thy better ever be?


You know what follows. For, verse for verse, there are very quick tauntes
betwyxte those brethren. So that it may lightlye appear, that they were the
sons of Atreus. Who museth, how to invent some strange cruelty, against his
brother. A greater payse of mischief now, does lie upon my neck.
In musinge how, his stubburne heart and stomach I may break.


Will you know what payse, or load of mischief, this is? Then hear Thyestes
saying. My wicked brother, counsayles me, my childrens flesh to eat.

Lo he sets the bowelles of his children before him. For what cruelty is there,
to the which, anger, and madness would not persuade a man? And for that cause
we do well say, that angrye men are out of their own power. By the which, we
mean, that they are without counsel and reason. Which only, ought to rule
our minds. From such men, we must remove them, on whom they would gladly
avenge them selves till such time, as they come again to the^ selves. Which,
what other thing is it, then to bring home, the scattered parts of the mind,
into their own place? Or else we must desire and entreat them, that if they
have any great desire to revenge: yet they would differ it, to some other
time, till their anger coal. For, in their anger, the heat of their mind,
does even boil against reason. For the which cause, the saying of Architas,
is much commended. Who, being angry with one of his hindes, said. O how would
I have beaten the, unless I had been angry? Who be they then, that say, that
anger is profitable? (so may madness be profitable) or natural? Can any thing
be natural, which is contrary to reason? Also, if anger were given us of
nature, how should one man be more angrye then another? Or, how could any man
be sorry for that, which he had done in his anger? As we have heard of king
Alexander, who when in his rage, he had caused his very friend Clitus, to be put
to death, afterward, for sorrow he would have slain him self. So much it did
repent him. Wherefore is there any doubt, but that this motition also, does
wholye consiste in our own opinion, and will? For, who doubts, that all
diseases, such as coueytousnes and desire of glory are: do rise, and are
caused hereof: namely, for that we have those things, of the which they take
their beginning, in great reputation? Wherefore, we do well perceive, that every
perturbation, consists in opin^on. And, if boldenes, be a certain and sure
knoweledge, and a constant opinion, not agreing rashely to any thing: then is
fear, a mistrust, and doubt of some evil, that we look for even at hand.
And, if hope, be the expectation of some good thing: then, is fear the
expectacion of some evil thing. As fear ther^ore, so all the other
perturbatio^s also, are of the number of euels. And, as constancy, is caused
of knowledge: so does perturbatio^ proceed of error. But, such, as are said
naturallye to be angry, pitiful, envious, o^ any such like: they truly, have
an il constitution of their minds. But nevertheless, they may well be healed.
As it is reported of Socrates, in whom, when one Zopirus (which professed the
knowledge of every man's disposition, by the syghte of his face,) had reckened
up a great number of vices, in the presence of some of the friends of Socrates,
who knew, that he was not faulty in them: they laughed him to scorn. But
Socrates, defended him.

Saying, that those signs and conjectures were in him in deed. But, that he
did overcome them with reason.

Wherefore, as men being in good health, may seem yet, some more then other,
to be given, to this or that disease: so likewise some man's mind is more prone
to vice, then some others. But their vices, who are not of nature but only be
their own fault vicious, consiste, of the false opinions of those things,
which they count either good or evil. And a disease once rooted, like as in
the body, so in the mind also, is hardly helped. For, easier it is, to heal
a sudden swellinge, of the eyes, then a continual blearynesse. So, the cause
of al perturbations, being once known, which take their beginning, of the
sundry judgments, of opinions, we will here finishe this days disputation.
For the ends of good, and evil, being known, as much as a man may know
them, nothing more profitable, may be wyshed, or desired, of all Philosophye,
then those things, which in these four days we have discussed. For, to the
despysynge of death, and bearing of all bodilye pain, we joined the ease of
sorrow. Then the which, there is nothing more troublous, to man. For although
every perturbation be grievous unto us, and does not much differ from madness:
yet, when men are in any of the other perturbations, as fear, mirth, or
desire, we say, that they are but troubled, or disquieted. But, those that are
subject unto sorrow, we term wretched, afflycted, and full of calamitye.

And for that cause, it was not by chance, but well, and aduisedly^, appointed
by you, that we made a several discourse of sorrow, from all the other
perturbations. For, in it, is the spring and fountain, of all miserye. But
there is one way, to help, both it, and also all the other diseases of the
mind. Namely, by the showing, that they are caused only, by our own fond
opinion and will, because we think it right, and duty, to take them on us.
This error, as the root of all evil, philosophye promises to pull up,
even by the roots. Let us therefore, yield our selves to it, and suffer it to
heal us. For, as long as these ^uels are within us, we shall neither be
happy, nor whole. Either let us therefore playnelye deny, that reason can do
any thing (whereas in deed, nothing can well be done without it) or else,
inasmuch as philosophy consists of the conference of reasons: of her, (if we
will be either good, or blessed) let us learn the helps, to attain to a
happy, and a blessed life.


Finis.
THE FYFT AND LAST book of M. Tullie Cicero: containing his reasoninge of the
last and fifte question, which he disputed, in his manor of Tusculanum being
this in effect, whether virtue only, be sufficient to make a man lead a
happy life.
THis fyfte day (fryende Brutus) shall make an end of our disputations holden
in our manor or Tusculanu^: in the which, we reasoned of that Question, which
you, most of all others are wont to allow. For I perceived, both by y^ book,
which you wrote unto me, and also by your talk, at many other times, that you
like this opinion very well. Namelye, that virtue is sufficient of it self,
to the mayntayning of a happy and a blessed life. Which although it be very
hard to prove, because of so many and sundry strokes of fortune: yet
nevertheless, such it is, that we ought to travail, and take pains for the
proof thereof. For, there is nothing in all philosophye, more gravely or more
wisely spoken. For, inasmuch, as it moved all those, that first gave them
selves to the study of philosophye, despysynge all other things, to setle
the^ selves, wholye, to the searchinge of the happyest state of life: truly,
they took so great travail, and pains, only in hope, to attain a blessed
life. And truly, if such men, have either found out, or accomplyshed virtue:
and if they found sufficient aid in only virtue, for the attayninge of a
blessed life: who would not judge, that well, and worthelye, both they did
first invent, and we also have, followed, the study of philosophy? But, if,
virtue being subject, to sundry and uncertain chances, is the slave of
fortune, and not of sufficient ability, to maintain her self: I fear much
then, least it be all one, to trust to the aid of virtue, for the obtaining
of a blessed life, and to sit still, and wish after the same. In deed,
remembering many times, the chances, with the which, fortune has galled me.
I begin to mistruste this opinion, and to fear, the weakness, and frayletye
of mankind. For, I am wont to fear, least, inasmuch as, nature has given us
weak bodies, to the which also, she has fastened sundry sorts of incurable
diseases, and intolerable grieves: least, she (I say) has likewise given us
minds, agreeable to the diseases and greues of our body. And also of the^
selves, wrapped in other several cares and troubles. But, in this poynct, I
correct my self. For that, I judge of the strength of virtue, according to the
wantonness and weakness of other, yea, and perchance of my self: and not by
virtue it self. For virtue truly (if there be any such thing at all, which
doubt, if there were any, your fathers brother, (O Brutus) has already taken
away) has undoubtedly, all chances which may happen to man, in subjection
under it: and despysyng them, contempneth all worldly casualtye: and, being it
self, void of all blame, thinks, that nothing besides it it self, is
requisite unto it. But we, increasing all adversity, while it is coming,
with fear: and when it comes, with sorrow: will condemn rather those things,
which natural^ye are good, then our own pernicious error. But as well of
this fault, as also, of all the rest, we must seek the redress, in
philosophye. Into whose bosom, being, in the very beginning of my age, led
by mine own will, and earneste desire: now, after that I was tossed, with most
troublesome storms, I have even fled to the same, as to the haven, from the
which I once departed. O philosophy, the guide of our life, the searcher of
virtue, the expeller of vice, what were not we only, but generally, all the
life of man able to do without thee? Thou foundedst cities, thou reclaymedst
men, whiles they were yet wild and wanderers, to a commen societye and
feloweshippe of life: thou bredst love betwyxt them: first by neyghbourhoode,
next by marriage, and last of all by communicatinge of talk, and wrytinge.
Thou, wast the inuenter of laws, the mistres of manners, and of all good order.
To the we fly, of the we ask succor. To the, even as before for some part, so
now, I give my self wholye, to be ruled and governed. For one day, well
spent, according to thy precepts, is to be preferred, well night before
immortality. Whose aid therefore, should we rather use, then thine? Who, both
have granted us, the quietness of life, and also, have taken from us, the fear
and dread of death. But, so much it lackes, that philosophye is so much
commended, as it has deserved of the life of man, that it is, of the most
part, neglected, and of many wholly dispraysed. Who would think, that any man
durst, to disprayse the parent of his life, and so defyle him self with
parri^ide? and show him self so unnaturally unkind, as to disprayse her,
which he ought to fear, yea though he could not understand? But I think,
this error and miste, is bredde in the hearts of the unlearned, because, they
are not able to discern the truth: and for that cause, think, that they were
not philosophers, who did first help, to garnyshe the life of man. And truly
though this study, of it self, be most ancient of all others: yet the name
is but new. For, wisdom truly, who can deny to be right ancient, as well
in deed, as in word? which, obtained this worthy name, among the ancient
sages, for that, it does consiste, of the knoweledge, as well of heavenly
things, as earthlye: Of the beginninges, causes, and nature of every thing.
And for that cause, those seven which of the Greeks, are called Sophi o^r
forefathers, both counted, and also named wise. So called they Licurgus
likewise, many years before, in whose time it is reported that Homere lived,
before y^ building of our city. We have heard also, that, when the half gods
lived on the earth, Ulixes, and Nestor, both were in deed, and also were
called wise. Neither truly, had it been reported, that Atlas sustayneth the
heaven, or that Prometheus lies ^ounde to the hill Caucasus, or that Cepheus
is placed among the stars, with his wife, son in law, and daughter:
unless their knoweledge in heavenly matters, had first caused, such tales to
be raised of their names. Whom, all the rest that since have followed, and
placed their study, in the contemplation of the nature of things: were, both
counted, and also named wise.

Which name continued until the time of Pithagoras. Who (as Heraclides borne in
Pontus, a scoler of Plato, a man very well learned does write) came to
Phliuns, a city in Greece.

And there, reasoned both learnedlye and largelye, with Leo the chyefe of the
same town. Whose wit, and eloquence Leo wonderinge at, asked of him, in what
art he was most perfect. Whereunto, he answered, that he knew no art.
But, that he was, a lover of wisdom. Leo, wonderynge at the straungenes of
the name, asked of him, who were those lovers of wisdom. And what difference
was, betwyxte them, and other men. Whereunto, Pithagoras answered, that the
life of man might well be resembled, to that fair, which, with al pomp of
plays, al Greece is wont to frequent, and sole^pnyse. For, like as there, some
by the exercise of their bodies, would assaye to win some game, and crown:
and, some other, came thither, for the desire to gain, by byeng and selling
and also, there was a third sort, far passing all the rest, who sought
neither game, nor gaynes, but came thither only to behold, and see, what was
done, and how: so likewise we coming into this life, as it were into a great
frequented fair, or market, seek some for glory, and some for money.

But very few, there are, which despisynge all other things, would study
the contemplatio^ of nature. But those (he said) were they, whom he called
the lovers of wisdom. And like as there, it is counted a greater worship, to
come for the syghte of things, than to meddle with byenge and selling: even so
likewise in this life, the contemplacion and knowledge of things did far
excel all other worldly troubles. Neither truly, was Pythagoras only, the
inuentour of this name, but also an increaser of the study it self, Who, when
after this communication at Phliuns, he came into Italy, enstructed that
country, which is now called great Greece, both priuatelye, and also
openly, with most notable orders, and arts. Of whose doctrine, perhaps, we
shall have some more commodious time to speak. But that philosophye, which in
ancient time was in use, till the time of Socrates, who was the hearer of
Archelaus, the scoler of Socrates: did only treat of numbers, and motions,
and whereof al things were made, and whereinto they did end. They did also
curiouslye search out the quantity, distaunce, and courses of the stars, and
other heavenly bodies. But Socrates, first of all, turned philosophy, from the
consideration of the heavenly motions, and placed it in cities, and brought it,
even into our housen: making it, to reason of our life, and manners: of al
things that are good and evil. Whose sundry kind of reasoninge, with the
variety of the things them selves, and the sondrye compasses of men's wits,
made diverse sects of dissenting philosophers. Of all the which, I follow that,
which I suppose Socrates did use. Namelye, to conceal, mine own opinion, and
reprove other men's errors. And, in all reasoning, to enquere, what is most
likely to be true. Which custom, inasmuche as, Carneades did continue,
maruaylous wittelie, and copiously: I also, enforced my self to do the same,
of late, in my manner of Tusculanum. And the talk of our first four days, I
have already sent unto you, reported in as many books. But the fyft day, when
we came to our accustomed place, thus began our reasoninge.

Hea. I think, that virtue is not sufficient of it self, to make a happy and
a blessed life.


Mar. Truly, my friend Brutus thinks the contrary. Whose judgment (you must
give me leave to say my fancy) I do always prefer before yours.


Hea. I do not doubt thereof, neither is it now in controversy, how much you
love him. But I would hear your opinion, what you think of that which I have
proposed.


Mar. Do you deny, that virtue of it self, is sufficient, to make a man's life
blessed?


Hea. Yea truly.


Mar. What? may not a man with virtue only live well, honestly and laudablye?


Hea. Yes truly.


Mar. Can you then say, that either he which lives ill, is not wretched? or
that he, which lives well, lives not also happelye?


Hea. What else? for, even in torments, a man may live well, honestly, and
commendably.

So, you understand, how I mean to live well. Which is, to live constantly,
grauelye, wyselye, and stoutelye. For, these do stick by a man, even when he
is on the rack. Yet there is no happy life.


Mar. Why so? will you shut a blessed life only, out of the prison doare? when
constancye, grauitye, fortitude, and wisdom, may enter within the same? and
refuse no prison, punyshemente, nor pain?


Hea. Truly, if you mind to move me, you must seek some other reasons then
those: not only, because they are commen: but also, because like as cold
wines have no taste in the water: so these reasons delyghte me, rather in the
first taste, then when I have drunk them up. As this whole company of
virtues, when it comes to torments, places images and shades before our cies,
with great majesty: so, that it would seem, that blessed life would even
strayghte ways, come to them, and not suffer them to think, that she would
forsake them. But when you have, once turned your mind, from these pictures
and shades, to the thing, and truth it self: then there is this only left
bare, whether any man may be happy, as long as he is in torment. Wherefore,
hereof let us reason But you need not to fear, least the virtues should
complain, that they are forsaken, betrayed, and left of a happy life. For, if
there can be no virtue without prudence, prudence it self must needs foresee,
that all good men, can not be happy. She remembers many historyes, of Marcus
Attilius, Quintus Cepio, and Marcus Aquilius, and such others. And (if you
think good, rather to use the allusion of the images, then the things them
selves) even stays her, when she would come to the rack, or to any other
place of torment. Saying, that she has nothing to do, with gryefe, and torment.


Mar. I am well contented, to reason, even after your appointment. Howebe it
you do me wrong, in prescribyng me an order, how you will have me reason. But
first, I ask this, whether we have concluded any thing, all the other days?


Hea. Yea, and that very much.


Mar. If it be so, then, is this question almost, fullye answered.


Hea. How so?


Mar. Because, all troublesome mocions, sudden, and unadvised tossinges of the
mind, despysynge all ^eason, leave us no part of a blessed life. For, who is
there that fears either death, or gryefe, (of the which the one chances
very often, and the other does always hang over our heads) that is not
wretched? Also, if any man (as the most part do) does fear poverty, shame,
or infamy: if any dread weakness, blyndnes, or (that which has happened, not
only to pryuate men, but even to whole nations) bondage. May any man, that
fears these things, be happy? Also, he, which does not only fear such
things, when they are coming: but also can not bear nor suffer them, when
they are present: as banishement, mourning, barennes: he, I say, who being
overcome with these, and such like, does yield to sorrow: must he not needs
be wretthed? Furthermore, he that is enflamed, and even rages with desire:
rashely desiringe all things, with an insatiable gredines: and how much the
more plenty he has of pleasure, so much the more, thirsting, and desiring the
same: him (I say) might you not well think, to be of all others most
miserable? Also, he that is even puffed up with lyghtnes, and fondlye rejoices
in his vain mirth: is he not so much more miserable, as he seems to him
self to be happyer? Wherefore, as, all those whom we have rehearsed, are
wretched: so, they contraryewyse, are blessed, whom no fears affraye, no
gryeues consume, no lust en^lames, no vain joy, or effeminate pleasures do
puff up. And, like as the sea, is then thought to be calm, when no little
puff, does raise any waves at all: so, that is thought, to be the quiet and
peasible state of the mind, when as, it is void of all perturbations, that
may either move or stir it. Which, if it be so, then, he, that counts the
strokes of fortune, and all chances, that may happen to man, tolerable: so
that, for them, neither fear can vex him, neither sorrow torment him. He so,
if he be neither troubled with desire neither, have his mind puffed up, with
any vain pleasure: what cause is there, why he should not be happy? And, if
all these things, are brought to pass by virtue, what cause is there, why
virtue of it self can not make us happy?


Hea. Truly, this can not be denied, but that those, which are troubled,
neither with fear, sorrow, desire nor mirth, must needs be happy. Therefore,
that I grant you.


Mar. And truly, the other is not unproven. For we showed in our former
disputations, that, a wise man, wanted all perturbations of the mind. So this
question, seems to be fullye answered.


Hea. Almost in deed.


Mar. But this is the manner of the Mathematicians, and not of philosophers.
For, the Geometricians, when they will prove any thing, if it pertayne to any
of those things which they have before proved, they take all those things
before proved as things that ought to be granted, and are undoubted. And only
expre^se those things whereof they wrote nothing before. Philosophers, what so
ever thing they have in hand to prove, bring in forthwith all things, that
are appliable to the proof of the same. Although they have written the^, in
some other place, before. For otherwise, what needed the Stoykes, in prouinge,
that virtue is sufficient, to make a blessed life, to use so many words?
whereas, it were enough for them, to answer, that, they had showed before,
that nothing is good, but that which is honest. Which being granted, it must
needs follow, that a blessed life may, be attained by virtue only. And, like
as this does follow upon that, so likewise, by the other, this is concluded.
That, if virtue only will bring us to a happy life, then no other thing can
be good, but that which is honest. Yet nevertheless they do not so. For, both
of honestye, and also of the chiefest good, and felicity, they have written
several books.

And, although, it be hereof sufficiently proved, that virtue is able enoughe
of it self, to bring us to a blessed life: yet nevertheless, they make a
several discourse, more at large of the same. For every question, must be
handeled with his own propre reasons, proofs, and admonitions, especially
being so notable, and so large, as this is. For, I would not have you think,
that, there is any thing more clear in all philosophye, or that there is any
promise of the same more plentiful, then this is. For, mark well, what it
does profess. Namely, to bring to pass, that who so ever does obey the laws
of virtue, should be always armed, against fortune, and should have in him,
all the aids, of a blessed and happy life. And to conclude, that he should be
always happy. But we will talk in other places, of the effects of
philosophy. In the mean time, I esteem that greatly which she promyseth. For
Xerxes, being glutted with all the rewards and gifts, that fortune might
give: not contented, with an infinite company of horsemen, and footmen, with
a wonderful sail of ships, nor yet with innumerable store of gold, proposed a
reward for him, that could devise any strange pleasure. For filthy lust has
no end nor measure. I would we could get one, who for hope of reward would make
us believe this more stedfastlye.


Hea. I would wyshe so likewise. But I have one thing to say unto you. For I
do well agree, that of those things, which you even now rehearsed, the one
does well follow upon the grant of the other. Namely, that, like as if it be
granted, that only, that which is honest, is good: it must needs follow
that happy life consysteth in only virtue: so if happy life do consist in
virtue only, then it must needs be, that there is nothing good but only
virtue. But your fryende Brutus, following the advice of Aristo, and
Antiochus, thinks not so: for he thinks, that there are other sorts of
goods, besides virtue.


Mar. What? think you that I will at this time, reason against him?


Hea. Therein do as you shall think good.

For it is not my part, to appoint you.


Mar. Then, to show, how these conclusions follow, the one upon the other, we
will defer it to some other time.

For herein, when I was captive, being at Athenes, I dissented, both from
Antiochus, and Aristo. For I thought, that no man might be happy, as long as
he might be in any evil. And truly, a wise man may be combred with euels if
those, which they call the euels of the body, and of fortune, be any euels at
all. Hereunto, this was answered, which also, Antiochus has written in many
places. Namely that virtue of it self, may make a blessed life. But not the
most blessed, that may be. Also that many things, take their name of the
greater part, although some part did want or miss. As we call men strong,
helthfull, rich, honorable, glorious, because they have a great part of such
things in them, although they have not the things the^ selves, as perfect,
as they might have. So likewise, a blessed life, they said, although it halted
in some part: yet it took his name of the greater part. I need not now
curiously to pike out these things. Howebeit they seem to me, to be spoken
scarce constantly. For both, I can not understand, what he that is happy,
should lack to make him self more happy: (for if he lack any thing then is
he not happy at al). And also, whereas they say, that every thing is named
of the greater part, that is true in some other things and not in this. But
whereas they say that there are three sorts of euels: shall we say (I pray you)
that he, that is burdened with the.ii. first sorts, namely, either with the
aduersitye of fortune, orels with diseases in his body, does therefore want any
thing of a happy life? Or of the happyest of all?

This is it that Theophrastus would not say. For when he had written, that
strypes, torments, punishementes, the rasinge of our country, exyle,
barennes, and such like, were able to make our life miserable, he was ashamed
to speak stoutely, inasmuche as he wrote so fayntly, Although he does not
justly complain, yet truly he is constante in his own opinion. And therefore,
I like not them, who when they have granted the original, yet will deny or
reprove that, which necessarilye depends thereof. For they reprehende this
most excellent, and learned philosopher. But slenderly, for that he
appoints three sorts of goods. Yet they al reprove him in that book,
which he wrote of the attayning of a happy life. For that, he reasons much,
that he which is in torment, can not be blessed In that book also, they think
he says, that to the whele (which is a kind of torment among the Grecians)
happy life cannot come, truly he says in no place so. But he says as much
in effect. And truly, if I should grant to any man, that the grieves of the
body or the shipwrackes of fortune, ought to be counted euels: could I be
iustlye angrye, with the same, if he should say, that then, al good men are
not blessed? For as much as, such euels, might happen to the best me^ that
might be. The same Theophrastus, is bayted at, as well in the books, as in the
scooles of all philosophers, for that he commended this saying of Calisthenes.
Not wysedomes lore, but fortunes force, this world lo does rule.

They say, that no philosopher, might have spoken any thing more fayntly.

And therein in deed they say well.

But yet I can not see, how he might speak more constantli, following their
opinion. For, if there be so many goods in the body, and so many without the
body, subject to casualtye and fortune: is it not probable, that fortune, which
is the ruler of all outward things, pertaining to the body, should bear more
swaye in our life then prudence? Or rather should we follow Epicurus, who
oftentimes speaks many things very wisely? but little cares, how constant and
agreeable he be in his talk. He commends bare living. And truly, so it
becomes a philosopher. If Socrates or Antisthenes, had said it, and not he, who
esteems pleasure to be the end of all goods. He denies, that any man may
^lue pleasauntly, unless he live honestly, wisely, and justly. Truly, nothing
could be more sagely spoken, nor more worthy a philosopher. Unless, he did
refer that same honestye, wisdom, and justice, to pleasure. What can be
better spoken, then that a wise man ought to be contented, with a mean and
bare life? But does he say this? Who inas much as, he has not only said,
that gryefe is the chiefest evil, but also, that it only is evil: may,
even then, when he shall boast him self most against fortune, be overcome
with a little gryefe in his body? the same also, Metrodorus spoke in stouter
words. Saying, I have now taken the captive O fortune, and stopped up all
thy holes, so that thou may by no means come unto me. A notable saying, if
it had been spoken, either of Aristo, Chius, or Zeno the Stoyke.

Who would think nothing evil, but that which were dishonest. But thou, O
Metrodorus, which have placed all good in dayntie dishes, and delicate
feedinge, and haste defyned that to be the chiefest good, that does consiste in
the good health of the body, and the certain hope, that it shall so endure:

Have thou (I say) shut up all the holes ^f fortune? How: I pray the. For,
that which thou think to be so great good, thou may lyghtye lose. But,
these are your baytes, for such, as are unlearned, and such se^tences have
caused so many to be of that sect. But it is the poynct of a wise reasoner,
not to way what every man does say, but what they ought to say. As in this
self same position, which is now proposed to dispute: I say, that all good
men are happy and blessed. Whom I name good, it is plain enough. For such as
are adourned with all kind of virtues, we term both wise and good men. Now,
let us see, whom we call blessed. Truly I think, those which enjoy such
things, as are good, without the entermedling of any evil. For truly, when we
call any man blessed, we understand thereby, no other thing the^ the perfect
conioyning of such things, as are good, severed, and disioyned, from all those
things that are evil. It, virtue can never attain, if there be any thing
good besides it. For there will always be at hand, a throng of euels (if we
may well term them euels) such as poverty, baseness of birth solitarines, the
loss of fryendes, grievous infyrmities of the body, the loss of health,
weakness, blyndnes, the captivity of our country, banishemente, and bondage)
In these, and such like, a man may be good, and wise. For these things,
casualtie, and chance, bring upon us, which may happen even to a wise man.
But, if these things be euel, who ca^ justly affirm, that a wise man is
always happy? since, even in all these, he may be at one instant.

Wherefore, I will not gladly grant, neither to both our masters, nor yet to
those ancient philosophers, Aristotle, Speusippus, Xenocrates, and Polemon:
that inasmuch as they count al those things, which I have before rehearsed to be
euel) they may well affirm that a wise man should be always blessed. But, if
this fair, and glorious saying does delyght the^: being in deed most worthy
of Pithagoras, Socrates and Plato: then, let them find in their hearts, to
despise those things, with the which they are now so much delighted. namely,
strength, health, beautye, riches, honor, and substance.

And to set at naught those things, which are contrary to that which they
^ayne they do desire. Then may they plainly profess, that they are nothing
moved neither with the force of fortune, neither with the opinion of the
people, neither with gryefe nor pouertye. But that all their aid, consists
in them selves: and that there is nothing without their power, that they
esteem to be good. For it can not be by any means, that any should speak
these words which belong, to a stout and hie minded man: and yet should think
those things to be good, or euel, which the common people so counts. With
the which glory, Epicurus being moved, first rose up who (if god will)
thinks, that a wise man may be always blessed. He is delyghted with the
worthiness of this saying. But truly, he would never say it, if he did agree
to his own words. For, what is there less agreeable then, that, he, which
thinks grief to be the greatest evil, or else, that it only is evil, that
he (I say) should think, that a wise man even in his torments should say?
O how pleasant is this? We must not therefore, judge philosophers, by every
particular saying: but by their continual, and constant asseueration, in all
their assertions.


Hea. You move me somewhat to agree unto you. But, beware, lest you also may
seem to lack a point of constancy.


Mar. Why so?


Hea. Because I did of late, read your book, of the ends of good and evil.
In the which, me thought, that reasoninge against Cato, you assayed to
prove, this (which liked me very well) I mean, that betwyxte Zeno, and the
Peripatetikes, there is no more difference, the^ the straungenes of certain
terms. Which, if it be true, what cause is there, why, if Zeno think, that
virtue is of it self sufficient, to lead an honest life, the Peripatetikes
also, do not think the same?

For, I think, we ought to have regard to their meaning, and not to their
words.


Mar. You truly, work strayghtly wtth me. For, you report, whatsoever I have
said or written.

But I reason with other men, which well nie of necessity maintain the opinion
of any one sect, after this sort. We live but a short time, whatsoever seems
probable unto us, that we do affirm. Wherefore, we only, of al other are free.
But forasmuch as, I spoke somewhat before of constanry, and stedfastenes: I
mind not in this place, to dispute, whether it were true, that Zeno liked
best, and his follower Aristo: I mean, that that only is good, which is
honest: but, that, if it be so, then he should place blessed and happy life,
in only virtue: wherefore, let us grant to my friend Brutus, that according to
his opinion, a wise man should be always happy. For, who is more worthy, to
have the glory of that saying, then he? But yet, how well it does agree with
his own opinion, let him self consider. But let us hold that a wise man is
always most happy.

And although Zeno, a stranger born in Citium, a town of Cypres, an obscure
caruer of words, would gladly creep into the name of an aunciente
philosopher: Yet, the gravity of this opinion, ought first to be derived, from
the authority of Plato. In whom, this is very often repeated, that nothing
ought to be called good, but only virtue. As in his book, which he entitled
Gorgias, when one demanded of Socrates, whether he did not think, that
Archelaus (who the^ was counted most fortunate of all other) was happy and
blessed? He answered, y^ he knew not. For, he never talked with him, in all his
life. What? say thou so? can thou not know it otherwise? No truly. Do
thou doubt, then, whether the mighty king of the Persians be happy, yea or
no? Why should I not since I know not, how learned he is, or whether he be a
good man, or no? Why? thynkest thou, that happy life consysteth therein? I
truly think, that all good men are happy: and that all noughty men are
wretched. Is Archelaus then a wretch? Yea truly, if he be a vicious liver.
Does not this man (think you) place happy life in virtue only? He also, in
his book, which is entitled Epitaphium, has these words. For that man
(quod he) who within him self, has all things necessary for a happy life,
and wauereth not, depending upon the good or euel chance of any other thing,
he has even gotten, the trade of a perfect life. He is a modest, stout, and a
wise man. He, although all other forrayne commodities, either rise or fall,
will always obey the old precept, and neither rejoice neither sorrow over
much, because, all his hope is fixed only in him self.

Out of this holy and sacred spring of Plato, shall flow all our talk that
follows. From whence therefore may we better take our beginning, then, from
nature: the common parent, and author of all things? Who, what so ever she
made, not only being a living creature, but also, either any such thing, as
springs out of the ground: made it, every thing, perfect in his own
kind. And for that cause, both trees and vines, and also the low flowers,
which can not spring hie from the ground, some of the^ are always grene And
some of them, being made bare in the winter, yet reviving in the spring,
begin to bud out again. For there is none of them, that is not so
nouryshed, either with some inward motion, or else some power enclosed in it,
that it does not at certain times of the year, yield either, flowers,
fruits or beries. And all things, as much as partayneth to their nature, are
perfect within them selves, unless, they be hurt by the injury of some
forrayne force. But we may much more plainelye, perceive this power of nature
in beasts. Because, there are by nature, senses given to them. For some
beasts nature would to be swimmynge, and abiding in the waters: which are
called fishes. To other some, she gave the open aer, to inhabit: which are
called birds. Some she made crepers, and some goers, and of them all, some
she made solitarye: and some flockers together: some wild: some tame: some
hidden and covered with the ground. And of all these, every one following his
duty, and, being not able to turn into the nature of any other living
creature: abydes still, within that law, which nature has appointed it. And,
likeas, there is naturallye given to every beast, some especial property from
all the rest, which it does always keep and never part from: so is there like
wise to man. But it is much more excellent, then the other. How be it,
excellent, is not properlye spoken, but of th^se things, betwyxte the which,
there is some comparyson. But the mind of man, proceedinge first, even from
the spyryte of God, ought to be compared with no other thing, then God him
self. It therefore, if it be well garnished, and his sight so cleared, that
it be not blinded with errors: then it becomes a perfect mind, which is, as
much to say, as absolute reason. Which is eue^ the same y^ virtue is. And if
that be happy, which lacks nothing, but is perfect of it self in his own
kind, and that properlye belongs only to virtue: then needs must all such
as have attained virtue, be happy. And herein, truly both Brutus,
Aristoteles, Xenocrates, Speusippus, and Polemon, do agree with me. But I
think further, that such as are partakers of virtue, are also most happy.
For what does he lack to a happy life, which trusts on no other goods,
the^ his own? Or he that does mistrust his goods, how can he be happy? But
he must needs mistrust them, who makes three sorts of goods For, how can he
assure him self, either of the good estate of his body, or else of any stay
in fortune? But truly, no man can be made happy with any good, unless the
same be stable and sure. And what certayntye is there, of any of those goods?
None at all. To the which, that merry saying of a citesin of Lacedemon, may in
my opinion be well applied. To whom, when a certain merchant man made his
bragges, that he had set forth a great company of ships, to sundry
realms, laden with marchaundise: now truly (quod he) I like not this wealth,
that hangs all on gable ends. And is it any doubt that those things which
may be lost, are not of that sort of goods which make a hapyye, and a
blessed life? For, none of those things of the which such a life does
consyst, can either wax aged, peryshe, or moult and fall away. For he that
stands in fear of the loss of any such things, can not be happy. For we
will, that he, whom we count happy, shall be quyete, invincible, and troubled
I say, not with a little fear, but with none at all. For as he is called
innocent, which not only hurts no man lyghtlye, but also, hurts no man at
all: so he is to be counted void fear, not which fears smallye, but who
fears nothing at all. For, what is fortitude, otherwise, then a pacient
affection of the mind, as well in attempting perilous affairs, as also in
abidinge travail and grief, far from all fear? And truly, this were not
so, unless, all good did consist in honestye only. But how might he obtain
quietness of mind (which every man so greatly wysheth and desires (by
quietness, I mean the lack of all sorrow, in the which happy life does
consist) who either presentlye had or else might have, a great number of euels
fall on him? Also, how may he be stout, and hye minded, despysing al
chances, which may happen to man: as trifles (as a wise man must) unless he
think, that he needs no more help then that which is within him self?

The Lacedaemonians, when king Philip threatened them, that he would bar al
their enterprises: asked of him whether he would forbid the^ also to die? And
shall we notsoner find out this one man, who^ we now treat of, of such a
stomach, then a whole city? Furthermore, when to this stoutenes (of the which
we now talk) temperaunce is once adjoined, which is the cooler of all
motions: What then may he lack of a blessed life? whom fortitude shall defend
from gryefe, sorrow, and fear: and temperance shall revoke from gredy desire,
and vain mirth? And that these things are wrought by virtue, I would now
prove, if I had not, more largely showed the same before. And in as much, as the
perturbations, and troubles of the mind, do make a wretched life: and,
contrariwise, the quietness of the same, causes a happy life: And there are
two sorts of perturbations: the one proceedinge out of the opinion of euel,
which are sorrow, and fear: the other caused of the opinion of good: which are
desire and light mirth: inasmuche as, all these strive with reason, and
council, will you doubt to say, that he which is quyete, and rydde from
such troublous motions, repugnant and contrary the one to the other, is
blessed? But, a wise man is always so. A wise man therefore, is always
blessed. Also, we ought to rejoice, of all thing, that good is.

But that, which we ought to rejoice, of, is worthy praise: and, what so ever
is such, it also is glorious. If it be glorious, it is also commendable. But
whatsoever is commendable, the same is honest also. Therefore, whatsoever is
good, the same is honest. But those things, which these men call goods, they
them selves truly, will not say that they are honest. But that only is
good, which is honest. It follows therefore, that in honestye only,
consi^teth a happy life. And those are neither to be counted, neither yet to
be named goods: with the which, although a man do abound, yet he may be most
miserable. But who doubts but a man being in good health, perfect
strength, seemly beautye, having his senses also as quick and as clear, a^
they might be. Add thereunto, also, swyftnes, and lyghtenes, let him have
riches, honor, rule, wealth, and glory: if he, that has all these things,
be an unrighteous man, a ryotter, a fearful person, or a man of slender wit,
or none at all, will you doubt (I say) to call him wretched? Wherefore what
manner goods be these, which he that has, nevertheless, may be wretched? We
must remember, that like as a heap of corn, is made of a number of graynes,
of one sort: so likewise happy life does consist of many parts in nature,
like to it self. Which, if it be so, then must we frame a happy life, of those
goods only, which are honest. For if there be a mixtion of unlike and
contrary parts, then can there be no honestye made thereof.

Which being taken away what can there be happy? For whatsoever is good, that
ought to be desired. And whatsoever ought to be desired, ought to be
allowable. whatsoever ought to ^e allowed, the same ought well and fully to
be accepted. And for that cause it must be had in worship and reverence also.
Which, if it be so, the^ must it needs be laudable. All good therefore is
laudable. Whereof, I do conclude, that whatsoever is honest, the same only is
good. Which assertion, unless we hold fast, we shall make an infinite number
of goods. For, that I ouerpasse riches (which, inasmuch as every man (be he
never so unworthy) may have, I will never count for goods. For, that which is
good, no noughtye person may have). That I may ouerpasse also, nobility, the
brute of the people, raised by the consent of fools, and vicious persons. Yet
these tryfles which I will rehearse, will be counted goods. White teethe,
rollyng eyes, a beautiful complexion, and that which Euriala praised, when she
washed the feet of Ulires, namelye gentle speech, and tender flesh. And
these things, if we do once call goods, what more wit shall there be accounted,
in the grave wisdom of philosophers, then in the rash brute of the ^ascall
people? These things, which those men term goods, the Stoykes call
additions. Without the which, they think a happy life can not be fullye
furnished. But these men think, that without them, there is no happy life at
all. Or if it be happy, that it is not the happiest life of all. But we will
have it, to be the happyest of all.

And that we confyrme, by a conclusion of Socrates. For in this sort, that
prince and founder of philosophy, did reason. Such, as the affection of man
is, such is his talk. To his talk, his deeds be like. To his deeds his
life. But there is no affection in the mind of a good man, but good and
commendable. Then it must needs be honest also, if it be commendable. Whereof
it is necessarilye concluded, that all good men lead a happy life. For, have
we done nothing with our former disputations? Have we made a vain speak
only, for pleasure, and to spend the time, when we reasoned, that a wise man
was always free from all motions of the mind, which I term perturbations?
And, that there is always nothing, but quiet peace, within his heart?
Therefore, a temperate, and constant man, without any fear, without any gryefe,
without any excessive mirth or desire, is not he (I say) happy? But a wise
man is always so.

He is therefore always happy. Furthermore, how can a good man do any thing
else, then refer al his deeds and thoughts, to that, which is commendable?
But, he referres them al to a happy life. A happy life then is commendable.
but nothing is commendable, wythou^e virtue. A happy, and a blessed life
therefore, is attained by virtue. The same also, is concluded after this sort.
There is nothing praise worthy, either in a miserable life, or else, in such,
as is neither miserable, nor blessed. But there is some kind of life, in the
which there is some thing praise worthy, and to be desired. As Epaminundas
says. Our wittye counsels have debased, the Lacedaemonians praise.

And Africanus says. From farthest East, where son does rise, unto Meaotis
marshe.
He lives not whose feats my deeds or famous factes may pass.


Which if it be so, then a happy life ought to be desired. For there is
nothing else, that ought to be praised, or desired, Which being once concluded,
you know what follows. And truly, unless that life be happy, which is also
honest, there should be somewhat better then a blessed life. For if honestye,
and it, might be separated: every man would grant, that honesty were better.
And so there should be somethynge better then a blessed life. Then the which,
what could be said more fondly? Also, when they confess, that vice is
sufficient, to make us lead a miserable life: do they not then grant that
virtue is of the like power, to make a happy life? For of contraries, the
conclusions also are contrary.

And in this place, I would feign know, what Critolaus meant, by his balance.
Who, when into the one scale, he had put the goods of the mind and into the
other, the goods of the body, and of fortune, makes, that scale of goods of
the mind, so far to wey down the other, as the heaven does the earth and
seas. What lets him then, or Xenocrates, that most grave philosopher (who does
so much amplyfie the power of virtue, and debase and depsise all the rest) that
he can not find in his heart, to place the happyest life of all others, in
only virtue? Which truly, unless it be so, there must needs ensue, the decay
of all virtues. For, to whom sorrow may come, to him also may fear. For
fearinge is a careful waiting for sorrow, that is coming. And whosoever is
subject to fear, he must needs be combred also with all the mates of the
same: fearefulnes, dread, and quakynge. And for that cause, he must not think
him self invincible, neither that, that saying of Atreus was spoken to him.

Let no man in this wretched life, him self so ill behave,
That unto fortunes cruel stroke he show him self a slave.
But such a man, will straight ways be overcome: and not only be vanquished,
but become even a slave. And we will have virtue always free and invincible.
For otherwise it is no virtue. But if there be sufficient help, in virtue it
self to live well: there shall be sufficient also, to live blessedlye. For
truly, virtue, is able enough, of it self to make us live stoutelye. If it be
able enough, of it self, thereto, it is able also, to make us to be of a stout
courage. So that, we shall neither be feared, neither yet overcome, of any other
thing. And thereof, it must needs follow, that nothing may make us to repent:
that we may lack nothing: nor nothing can withstand us. So we shall have all
things abundantlye, fullye, and prosperouslye. And for that cause, blessedly
also. Furthermore, virtue, is able enoughe, to make us live stoutelye, and for
that cause happily also. For, as follye, although it has obtained that,
which it did desire, yet nevertheless, never thinks it self satisfied: so
wisdom contraryewyse, is always contented with that which it has, and
never repents her own estate.

Think you, that it was not al one, to Caius Lelius, to be once chosen
consul, and another time to take a repulse? Although, when a wise, and a good
man (as he was) lacks voices: the people, ought rather to be deemed, to have
the repulse from a good Consul, then that he has any repulse, of the vain
multitude. But whether would you (if you might choose) be consul once, as
Lelius was, or four times, as Cinna? I do little doubt what you will answer.
For I know to whom I speak. I would not so boldly ask the same, of some
other. For, I know, that some there be, that would answer me, that they
would prefer not only the four Consulshippes, of Cinna, but even one day of
his reign before the lives of many notable men. But Cinna, commanded the
heads of his fellow consul Caius Octauius, of Publius Crassus, and Lucius
Caesar, three most notable me^ (whose wits had been well proved, as well in time
of war, as peace) of Marcus Antonius also, the most eloquente Orator, that
ever I heard: and of Caius Caesar (in whom, in my opinion, was the perfection of
all gentleness, pleasauntnes, and mirth) to be stryken of. Is he then happy,
which put these men to death? Truly, in my opinion, he is not only wretched,
for that he caused that to be done: but also, because he behaved him self so,
that he might do it. Although, no man may lawefully sin. But I err, using
y^ wonted manner of speech. For, we say commonly, that a man may do that,
which he has power to do. Yet whether was Caius Marius more happy, then,
when he communicated the glory of his victory, which he obtained against the
Cymbrians, with his fellow in office Catulus, in wisdom an other Lelius: (for
in my opinion, they may well be compared) or else, when he, being conqueroure
in the civil battle, angrye with the friends of the same Catulus, which
entreated for him, would give them no other word, but let him dye: let him
dye. Now truly, more happy was he, that obeyed that blouddy commandment,
then he, that commanded it.

For, both it is far better, to suffer, then to do injury: and also,
willynglye to meet death, when it approaches (as Catulus did) it was far
better done, then as Marius did: by the death of so worthy a man, to stayne the
glory of his six first consulshippes: and with bloodshed, to defile the last
time of his age. Eight and thirtye years, Dionisius was tyrant of Siracusa,
coming to the kingdom, at.xxv. years of age. That beautiful city, of so
notable wealth, how did he keep in bondage? And of this man, we read thus
much written in historyes. That he used a merueylous temperate diet, and that
in all his deeds, he proved him self a maruaylous wittye, and a paineful man.
And yet nevertheless, he was of a mischievous cruel nature. Wherefore to all
such, as do well weygh his case, he must needs seem to be wretched.

For, that, which he so much desired, he could not then attain, when he
thought he might have done, what he lysted.

Who, having good and honest parents, and being come of an honest stock,
(howebeit thereof diverse men diversely do write) having also great
acquayntaunce, and familiarity with princes, and also certain young boys,
according to the manner of Greece, appointed for his love and play: yet, durst,
to trust none of them all. But committed the custody of his body, to certain
slaves, whom he him self had made free: to hired servants, and to cruel
Barbarians. So, only, for the desire he had, to bear rule: he had in manner,
shut up him self, into a prison. Also, because he would not trust any barber
to shave him, he caused his own daughters to learn to shave. So the maidens
of honor, when they had learned, that filthy and slauishe science as barbers,
shaued the beard, and hears of their father. And yet nevertheless, them
also, when they came to years of discrescretion, he would not trust, with a
raser: but, commanded that with the shales of walnuttes heated, they should
burn of his beard, and his hears. And although he had two wives, Aristomache
borne in the same city, and Doris, borne in the city of Locris: yet, he would
never come to any of them, in the night, before that, all places were searched,
for fear of treason. And then, would he have an artificial trench above his
bed, which had but one way, to pass over, which was by a draw bridge. Which he
him self when the chamber door was locked, would draw to him. And furthermore
daringe not, to come to any place of resort, he would talk to his subjects,
down from a hye tower. On a certain time, when he would play at tenesse
(for that game he used very much) it is said, that he delivered to a young
man whom he loved very well his sword to keep. which when one of his familiar
friends, espyenge, said in ^este: to him now you trust your life: and, the
young man smyled at it: he commanded them both to be slain. The one, because
he had showed the way how he might be slain: the other, for that he seemed
in smilinge, to allow the same. But, that deed afterward so much repented
him, that nothing in all his life, grieved him more. For, he had caused him to
be put to death, who^ he loved entierly. But this tirant, seems him self, to
have showed, how happy he was in deed. For, when on a time, Damocles, one of
his flatterers, did reckon up his power, might, majesty, and rule: his great
abundance of all things, and his magnificence in building, saying, that
there was no man at any time, more happy then he: wylt thou then, O Damocles,
(quod he) because this life does so much delight the, thy self taste thereof?
and, try the pleasure, of my happy chance? Whereunto, when he answered that
he would very gladly: Dionisius, commanded him, to be laid in a bed of
gold, having a couerlet of cloth of gold and hanginges of beaten gold: wrought
with very fair works. Also he set coupbordes, and chestes before him, full of
plate, both of gold, and also of sil^er gylt. Then he commanded, cer^ayne
boys of notable beautye, to attend on his person, and to be ready at his
beck. There were brought in precious oyntmentes, imperial crowns the
perfumes burnt in every place, and the tables were spredde, with the most
^ayntye dishes that might be gotten. Then, seemed Damocles to be happy. But,
in the mids of all this iolitye Dionisius commanded a glisterynge sword, to
be hanged over his head, by a horse hear. So that it might well nigh touch
his neck. Wherewyth, Damocles being feared, could neither find in his heart,
to look upon his fair boys, neither yet upon the graven gold, neither would
he reach his hand to the table, to taste of any thing that was thereon. The
crowns fell down from his head. To be short, he desired the tyrant to
license him to depart. Saying, that he would no longer be happy. Did not he
(think you) declare sufficientlye, that he can have no happiness, over whom
there hangs any fear? Yet nevertheless, he truly was not able to return
to justice.

Neither to restore to his citesens they^ liberty and laws. For, he was even
from his youth upward bred in tirannye. So that, though he would have
repented, yet he could not have lived in safety. Yet how much he desired
frendshippe (the unfaithfulness of the which, he did much mistrust) he did well
show in those two Pithagoreans. The one of the which, when he was taken for
suretye, that the other should return at a certain day to suffer death:
and, the other came in deed, at the day appointed: I would to god (quod he)
that I were worthy to be your third friend. What a miserye was it, for him to
want the company of his friends, all societye of life, and all familiar talk?
being especially, a man very well learned, a^ one, from his childehoode
vpwardes, still bred up in learning? We have heard also, that he loved musicians
very well, and, that he was a good poet, in compiling of tragedies.

But, how good he was therein, it is nothing to our purpose to talk of. For
in this kind of study, inespceiallye, more then in all the rest, every man
likes his own doings best. For I never thitherto knew any Poet (yet I was
very well acquaynted, both with Aquinius, and also with many other) who did
not think, his own doings better, then all the others. So it is always. Your
doings like you best, and mine, me.

But to return to Dionisius. He lived without any gentleness, or manners, as
it becomes a man. He lived with caytifes, cutthrotes, and barbarians. He
thought no man to be his friend, that either was worthy to be free, or would
be free. I will not now, with this man's life (then the which there could be
nothing more miserable, beastlye, or detestable) compare the lives of Plato,
or Architas, famous learned, and wise men. But I will raise up from the duste
and dungehill, Archimedes a poor, and an obscure person^borne in the same
city, who lived many years after. Whose tomb, when I was Questor, I found
out at Siracusa, all beset and ouergrowen with bushes and thorns. Whereas, the
men of the city told me, that there was no such thing. For I remembered
certain verses, which I heard say, were written upon his tomb. Which did
declare, that upon his grave, there was a sphere, and a Cilindre. But I, after
I had diligently vewed on every side, (for there is at the gates called
Agragians, a great company of graves) I espied at last, a little pillar,
somewhat higher then the bushes, in the which there was the form of a
Sphere, and of a Cilindre. Then, I told the worshipful of the city, which
were there with me, that I thought, that same was it, which I l^oked for.
The^, forthwith, certain laborers, set in with scyues, and cutting hooks,
opened the place. Into the which, when we came, at the farther part of the
bottom, there appeared an Epigramme, with the later part of certain verses,
some who lie worn away, and some, half remaining, and half worn. So, one of
the noblest cities in all Greece, yea, and in time paste one of the best
learned, had not known the tomb of this their most famous citesin, unless,
they had learned it, of a man borne at Arpinas. But I will return thither,
from whence I first came. What man is there, who has any familiarity, not
with the muses only, but either with any part of honesty, or learning, that
would not wish him self, rather to be this Mathematician, then that tyran?
If we desire to know the manner and trade of both their lives. The mind of
the one, lived in the searching and conferring of reasons with the delyght of
knoweledge: which is the swetest food, that our souls may have.

But, the mind of the other, was nourished with slaughter, and injury, and
beset with continual fear. But now bring in Democritus, Pithagoras, and
Anaragoras. What kyngedome, or what riches, would you prefer before their
studies and delyghtes? For truly, that, which we now seek: namely, the most
happy and blessed life of all others: must needs be in that part, which is
best in all the man.

But what is there in any man, better, then a wise and a good mind?

That therefore, which is the chyefe good of the mind, we must study to
attain, if we will be happy. But the chief good of the mind, is virtue.

Wherefore, it must needs follow, y^ in it is contained a happy life. And
hereof issue all those things, which we call beautiful, honest, and fair. But
we must speak this same more at large.

For all these things are full of joy.

But of continual and perfect joy, it is evident, that a happy life does
proceed. Wherefore it must needs consist of honestye. But, let us not only
in words, move the same, which we will prove: but also, propose some certain
image of the same, which may now move us the more, to the knoweledge, and
understanding of these things, For let us propose some notable man, endued
with most excellent qualities, and imagine and conceive him, only in our
mind. First, he must needs have a notable wit. For dull heads, do not so
easily attayn virtue, as those which are quick witted. Then, he must needs
have a very earnest zeal, and desire, to search out the truth.

Whereof, rise those three properties, of the mind. The one, consisting in the
knoweledge of things, and description of nature: the other, in the descrybing
of those things, that ought to be desired or avoided: and the third, in
judging, what does necessarily follow of any thing, or what is contrary to
the same. In the which, is contained both all the sutteltye of reasoning, and
also the truth of judgments. What ^oye, then, must the mind of this wise
man needs dwell in, day and night, with such pleasant thoughts? when he
shall also behold the motions and turninges of the whole world: and shall see
innumerable stars fastened in the skies, and turned, only by the motion of
the same. And other some, to hau^ motions, and courses of their own, distante
the one from the other, either in hyghnes or lowenes. Whose wanderinge motions,
keep nevertheless, a steadfast and certain course. Truly, the syghte of
those, moved and learned those ancient philosophers, to search further.
Thereof came the first searchinge out of principles, as it were of seeds,
and the enquiring, whereof all things, had their beginning and being. As
well things living, as without life. As well dumme, as speaking. Also, how
they lived, and by what natural cause they came to death and corruption. Also,
how one thing is changed and turned to another. How the earth had first his
beginning. How it was so paysed, in the midst of the world. Also, into what
vautes, it does receive, the flowing and ebbing of the seas. And how that all
heavy things naturally fall into it, as into the middell place of the world.
Which is, always the lowest, in any round body. About these things, whiles
the mind is busyed night and day, he must needs also some times remember,
that precepte, which the God of Delphos gave. Namely, that it know it self
free from all vice, and understand, that it is part of the nature of god.
Whereby, it is filled with insatiable joy. For, the very thinking, of the
power, and nature of the gods, enflames our hearts, to follow that eternitye,
and not to despair for the shortness of life. Inasmuch as, we see the causes of
all things, to be necessarilye knyt one to an other. Which even from the
beginning, cotinuing til the end, yet the mind, and reason, of men may well
comprehend, and rule. These things, he beholding, and maruaylinge at, with
what quietness of mind must he needs consider, both all earthly things, and
also all other above the same? Hereof rises the knoweledge of virtue. And
hereof spring out all the sundry sorts and branches of the same. Hereby we
find out, what is the best of al goods, and what is the uttermost, and
extreemest of all euels. Also, to what end we ought to refer all our duties,
in this life. An^ what trade we ought to chose to pass our life in. Which,
with such other like things, being once found out, then is that brought to
pass, which in this reasoning we seek to prove. Namely, that virtue is of it
self only sufficient, to make a man lead a blessed life. There follows now
the third kind, which spreads and is derived, through out all the parts of
wisdom. Which defyneth every thing: deuideth it into sundry parts: joins
thereunto such things, as may follow of it: concludes things perfectlye, and
judges them to be either true or false. I mean, the trade and oder of
reasoninge. Of the which, there ryseth, both great profit, in the weyging of
ouerye question, and also very great delyghte, and even worthy of a wise man.
But all these things, pertayne to time of leisure: let the same wise man, come
to the gouerninge of a commonwealth. Who can do it better then he? inasmuch as,
he shall see, that in his prudence and polecye, the profit of all the citesens
does consiste. And justice will not suffer him, to derive any thing, that
ought to be common, to his own pryuate commdditye. And so, in likewise, he
shall have the help of all the other virtues. Join thereto the fruit of
frendshippe, in the which, all learned men, do place both the universal and
frendlye consent, for the maynteyninge of our common life: and also, a great
joy and pleasure, in the common society, and use of neyghbourhood.

What (I pray you) may such a life lack to make it more happy? To the which,
being furnished and accomplished, with so great joys, even fortune it self,
must needs yield. Truly, if to rejoice, for the obtaining of such goods and
commodities of the mind, be to be blessed: and all wise men do feel such
pleasure, then must you needs confess, that all such are happy.


Hea. What? in thyyr pain and torments also.


Mar. Why, do you think, that I mean, y^ they are happy in some pleasant
garden. Or in a ^ed of violets, or roses? Shall it be lawefull for Epicurus
(who is a philosopher only, to the face outwardes; and gave him self that
name) to say (which saying nevertheless, I would not gladlye take from him)
that there is no time, in the which a wise man, although he were burned,
racked, or cut in pieces, would not say, how little do I esteem all this?
Whereas he him self thinks, that all euel consists in pain: and al good
in pleasure. And iesteth at those things, which we call honest and dyshonest.
Saying, that we are occupied only in vain words, and care for no thing,
but only the gentle or sharp sufferinge of the body. He therefore, whose
judgment does not much differ, from the judgment of brute beasts: may
lawefully forget him self.

And so, despise fortune. Whereas all, his good and evil, does consiste, only
in the power of fortune. He may think him self happy in pain and torments,
whereas he not only thinks, that pain is the greatest euel that may be, but
also, that it only is evil. Neither yet has he gotten these remedies against
the suffering of grief. Namely the stoutenes of stomach, shame of dishonesty,
exercise, and custom of sufferynge the precepts of fortitude, and manly
stoutenes. But he, says, he is contented only with the remembrance of his
former pleasures. As if, a man well nigh parched with heat, so that, he is no
longer able to abide the son should comfort him self, with the remembrance,
that once heretofore, he had bathed him self in the cold ryuers of Arpynas.
For truly, I see not, how the pleasures that are past, may ease the gryeues
that are present. But inasmuche as he (I say) says, that a wise man is
always happy, who, if he would be agreeable to him self, might worst of al
other speak it: what shall they do which think, that nothing ought to be
desired, or counted good which wants honesty? Truly in my opinion, let the
Peripatetikes, yea, and the ancient Academikes, cease any longer to doubt:
and plainly say that happy life, may come even into the bull of Phalaris.
For let there be four sorts of goods that we may now depart from the
brakes of the Stoykes, which I understand now that I have used more then I
would.

Let there be therefore (I say) three sorts of goods, so that the goods of the
body, and of fortune, may lie on the ground: and be counted goods, only,
because they are not to be refused. But the other, which are in manner
heavenly, may in comparison of them, reach unto the heavens. So that we need
not doubt, to call him, which has once attained them, not only happy, but
even the happyest that may be. Now, shall a wise man fear gryefe?

Whereas he is most contrary to this opinion. For against the fear of our
own death, and the sorrow that we might take for the death of our friends we
seem to be sufficientlye armed and prepared by the former days disputations.
But, pain seems, to be the sharpest aduersarye of virtue. It shakes his
brandes at us, it threateneth, that she will weaken fortitude, stoutenes of
mind, and patience. To it, shall virtue give place? Or the happy life of a
wise and constant man yield? O god, what a shame were that? The boys of
Sparta, do not so much as syghe, when their skin are even torn with stripes.
My self, saw whols companies of young men, in Lacedemon, striuinge one
against an other, with their fystes, heels, nails, and teeth. So long, that
they would be eue^ out of breath, and almost overcome, before they would
confess them selves to be beaten. What part of Barbary, is there, more wild
or rude, ^then India? Yet nevertheless, emonges them those which are counted
wise men, are first bred up, bare and naked. And yet suffer both the cold of
the hill Caucasus, and also, the sharpenes of the winter, without any pain. And
when they come to the fire, they are able to abide the heat, well nie, till
they roast. But the women there, when any of their husbands dies, are wont to
fall in contention, which of them (for they have many wives) he loved best in
his life. She that wins, being very joyful (a great company of her
friends and kinsfolk, following her) is cast into the fire, with her dead
husband.

Truly, custom would never overcome nature. For it is of it self invincible.
But we, with want^nnes, pleasure ydlenes, and sloth, do first infect our
minds. And afterward effeminating it, with perverse opinions, and evil
custom, we cause it even wholye to degenerate. Who is ignorant, of the error
of the Egiptians? who persuaded with a foolish opinion, would rather abide
any tormente, then they would hurt the beast called Ibis, or the serpent
called Aspis, or a Cat, or a Dog, or a Crocodyle. But, if they chance, to
hurt any of them unawares they will refuse no punisheme^te for the same. Hitherto
I have spoken of men. But what shall I say of beasts? Do not they suffer cold
and hunger? run both up hill and down hill, when they be coursed? Do not
they fight so for their whelps, that they are often wounded, fearing no blows
nor strokes? I ouerpasse here, what pains ambitious men take, to obtain
honor. And vain glorious men, to get that, which they think to be glory. Or
such as are enflamed with love, to accomplish their desire. Our life is full
of examples. But I will measure my talk, and return thither from whence I
first strayed. Happy life (I say) will offer it self into torments. And
will not, inasmuch as it has always before followed justice, temperance,
fortitude, stoutenes of stomach, and patience: as soon as it shall see the
face of the tormentoure, then turn back and slip away. And inasmuch as all the virtues without any fear, shall hasarde them selves, in the pain of
tormente: she only, shall not stand without the door and entry of the prison.
For what may be more filthy or ill favored, then happy life, when it is
destitute, and separated from the fair train of virtues? Which nevertheless,
can by no means be. For, neither can a man have all the virtues, without a
happy life: neither yet may there be a happy life, without virtue. And for
that cause they will not suffer it to tarry behind. But will always, take her
with them to what so ever grief, or torment they shall go. For, it is the
poynct of a wise man, to do nothiuge that may repent him, nor any thing
against his will. But, to do al things comely, constantlye, grauelye, and
honestlye. To look for nothing, as though it were certain. And also to
think nothing strange, or unaccustomed, when it is happened. To refer all
things to his own discrecion, and stand to his own judgment. Then the
which truly. I can see nothing that may be more happy. The Stoykes, conclude
this question lyghtlye. Saying, that inasmuch as, the chief end of all good,
is to agree unto nature: and to live according unto her precepts: and, it, is
in the power of a wise man. It must needs follow, that in whose power it is,
to attain the chiefest good, in his power also it lies, to lead a quyete
life. So, every wise man, does lead a blessed life. Thus you have that, which
I think to be most stoutelye spoken, of a blessed and happy life. And (as the
case stands) unless you can bring any proof, that also, which is as truly
spoken, as it may be.


Hea. Truly, I have nothing better to say. But I would gladlye entreat you,
if it were not troublesome unto you, because you are not bound to any one feet,
but only, borowe of every one, that which seems to you to be most true.
For that somewhat before, you seemed to exhort the Peripatetikes, and the
ancient Academikes, that without any fear, they would boldelye say, that a
wise man is always most happy: that (I say) I would gladlye hear, how you
could make agreeable, to their opinion. For you have spoken very much against
this opinion. Yea, and concluded it with the reason of the Stoykes.


Mar. Let us then use our liberty. The fruition of the which, we chiefly of al
other philosophers do feel. Whose talk judges nothing, but is applied
against all opinions. That it may, by it self, without any other authority be
judged. And that the gladlyer, because you seem to be well pleased, that what
soever of the same sundry sorts of opinions be true, yet virtue should be
sufficient to make us lead a happy life.

(which also Carneades was wont to dispute, and that very sharply, against the
Stoykes, whom he did always gladly reprove, and against whose doctrine, his
mind was in manner enflamed. But we will do the same quietly. For, if the
Stoikes, have well appointed the ends of good and euel: then, is the matter
dispatched. For then must a wise man needs be happy. But let us examine, the
opinions of all the rest that, this, so notable a decree, of a blessed and
happy life, may be confyrmed, with all their verdites. The opinions which yet
continue, and are openly defended, as concerning the ends of good and evil
(as far as I know) are these. First, four general, or simple opinions.
Namely, that nothing is good, but that which is honest. As the Stoykes say. Or
that nothing is good but pleasure. As Epicurus affyrmeth. Or that nothing is
good, except the lack of pain. As Hierome thinks. Or that nothing is good,
but to enjoy and increase those most excellent and principal goods, which
are given us of nature. These are the general, or simple opinions. But the
mixed or compound are these. First the three sorts of goods. The chiefest of
the mind, the next of the body: and the last of fortune. As the Peripatetikes
say. Neither do the ancient Academikes, much dyffer from them. But
Clitomachus, and Calipho, joined pleasure with honestye: and Diodorus the
Peripatetike joined the want of gryefe, with honestye. These are all the
opinions, which have any certayntie in them. For, the opinions of Aristo,
Pirrho, Herillus, and many others: are even worn away. What would follow of
all these opinions, ouerpassinge the Stoykes, (whose authority, we have
already sufficiently defended) and the Peripatetikes (whose cause is already
debated: exceptinge Theophrastus, who with his folowers, feared grief more
then he neded) let us now se. For truly, as for all the other, they may do (as
they commonly are wont) namelye, to amplifye the grauitye, and dignitye of
virtue, which, when they have extolde even to the skies, (as eloquente men
should) in all the rest of their talk they tread it under feet, and despise
it.

But they, which think, that we ought even with gryefe, to labor for praise:
must not they needs confess, that they are happy which have attained it?

For although they be in some euel, yet this name of a blessed, and happy life
extends far. For, like as tillage, is counted a gaynefull, and profitable
trade although some year, tempest or some other chance does let the success:
yet it is counted profitable, because it is so most commonly. Even so our life
not only if it be replenished with all goods but also, if it have more goods,
then euels, is to be counted happy. Wherefore, by their own reason, happy
life, must needs accompanye virtue, even to punishment. And shall go with her
into torments. Yea, Aristotle, Xenocrates, Speusippus, and Polemon, wytnessing
the same. And shall never forsake it, at the entyseme^t of a few flattering
pleasures. To the same end, shall come the opinions of Caliphon, and Diodorus:
both the which, so embrace honesty, that they think, that al such things as
are without the same, ought utterly to be despised, and set at naught. The
other philosophers stick more. And with more pain, swim out of the myer. I
mean Epicurus, and Hieronimus, and all the rest, which a say to defend, the
eloquent Carneades. For there is none of them, which thinks that the mind
ought to be the judge of all goods: or that does accustom the same, to
despise those things, which only have the apparaunce either of good or evil.
For what soever thou think O Epicure, the same will both Hieronimus, and
Carneades and also all the rest say. Yet, who of them is there, not
sufficiently provided against death or gryefe? Let us begin of him (if you
please) whom we call so wanton and full of pleasure. Does not he (think you)
despise death and pain who counts that day, in the which he shall dye,
happy and blessed? And thinks, that such as are in the greatest panges of
pain, may comfort the^ selves, with the remembrance of pleasures past?
Neither yet does he speak that, as if he did rashely blabbe it out. For his
reason why death ought not to be feared is this. Because when the life is
gone, al sense is past. And, when we are once without sense or feelinge: there
is no manner chance, that may grieve us. Also, he has certain remedies for
grief. For, if it be great he comfort him self with the shortness of the
time, that it shall endure.

And if it be long, then he thinks that space of time will make it wax
lyghter and lyghter. I pray you, in what better case, are all the grave
philosophers, against these two most dreadful ^uels, then Epicurus? Also,
against all the other, which are counted euels: are not Epicurus, and all the
other philosophers sufficiently armed? Who is there that does not fear
pouertye? And yet what philosopher is there? yea or Epicurus him self, with
how little is he content? No man has spoken, or written, more of a spare, and
bare life. For inasmuch as, he does so much au^yde all those things, which
necessarily require money. Namely, love, ambition and such like. What^ cause
might there be, why he should either desire, or care for money? Could
Anacharses a Scithian despise money, and shall not our philosophers be able to
do the same?

There is an epistle of his written in this manner. Anacharses to Hanno sends
greeting. My clothing is a beasts skin ^f Scithia. My shoes, are the hard
brawne in the sooles of my feet. My bed is the ground. My sauce is honger. My
meat is milk, butter, and flesh. Wherefore you may well come quietly unto me.
But as for those gifts, with the which, you think you should pleasure me, I
pray you give them either to your own citesins, or else to the immortal gods.
Truly, all philosophers, of whatsoever sect they were, unless they be such,
as a vicious nature has turned from the rule of reason, may well be of the
same mind. Socrates, when there was a great plenty of gold and silver brought
unto him, now lord (quod he) how little do I pass for such store? Xenocrates,
when the messengers which came to him from Alexander, had brought him twenty
talentes (which was counted at that time, at Athenes inespeciallye, a great
sum of money) he brought the ambassadors into that place, where Plato once
kept his scoole, and there made them a supper, only of so much, as was
sufficient, without any great cost. And when they asked him on the morrow, to
who^ he would have them tell the money, Why (quod he) did you not understand
by the supper, I made you ye last night that I lack no money? But when he
saw them very sad at that saying, he took thirty pounds, least he should
seem to despise, the kings liberality. But Diogenes, when Alexander asked
what he lacked, answered more like a currishe philosopher. Saying, stand out
of the son. For he stood betwixt the son and him. And he was wont to
dispute, how much he did surmount the king of Persia, in a happy life, and good
luck. Saying, that he lacked nothing, and the other would never hau^ enough.
And that he desired not pleasures with the which, the other could not be
satisfied. And yt those pleasures, which he felt, the other might never
attain. You remember (I think) how Epicurus derived the sundry sorts of
desires: although not over suttelly, yet commodiously enough. Saying, that
they are partly natural and necessary: and partly, neither natural nor
necessary. And that such as are necessary, may be contented, and suffised, well
nie with nothing. For, sufficient for nature may lightly be gotten. But the
second sort, he thinks it neither hard to obtain, neither yet to lack. And
the thrd, because they were utterly vain and fond, and were requisite,
neither for necessity, nor nature: he said ought utterly to be rooted out.
Hereabout, the folowers of Epicurus reason much, and do debase, and despise in
their talk these pleasures, very much. Which nevertheless, they do not
despise, but seek to have plentye of. For, both they say, that filthy
pleasures, of the which they have great talk, are easy, common and ri^e to be
gotten: and also, if nature do require the^, they think they ought to be
measured, by beautye, age, and hansomnes. And that it is nothing hard to
abstain from them, if either our health, duty, or fame, do so require^ And
that this kind of pleasure, is then best, when it hurts not. For it never
profyteth. And all these precepts of pleasures, he gave, to y^ end, he would
show, that pleasure, for it self only, because it is pleasure, is to be
wyshed and desired. And contrariwise, that pain only, because it is pain,
ought to be hated and avoided. And this moderation, he thinks a wise man
ought to use. Namelye, to fly pleasure, if he think that it will bring a
greater pain And to suffer pain, if he think, it will cause a greater
pleasure. And that all pleasure, although it be judged by the senses of the
body: yet nevertheless, ^ught to be referred to the mind. And that for that
cause, the body does rejoice, only so long, as it does feel the pleasure
present. But the mind, do both joy with the body, and also when ^t fores^es,
any pleasure coming: or remembers, that which is paste. So that, a wise man,
must needs have a continual and an everlasting pleasure Inasmuche as, to the
hope of such as are coming, he did join also, the remembrance of such as
are past. Such like also, is their talk, as concerning moderation of fare.
They disprayse all magnificence, and cost in bankets.

Saying, that nature is contented with a little. For truly, who knows not,
that the best sauce, is lack or want?

Darius, when in his flight, he drank muddye and stinking water, said, that he
never drank a sweter draught.

For truly, he was never before thirsty, when he drank. No ^dre had P^olomeus,
eaten at any time with honger. To whom, when (as he rode his progress in
Egipte, and strayed from his guard) a certain old man gave a house hold loaf,
in a poor cotage: he said, that he never eat sweter bred, in all his life.
They say, that Socrates walkyng earnestly, toward the eueninge, and being
demanded, for what cause he did so: answered, that, to the intent he might
suppe the better, he did hunt for hunger. What? see we not the diet of the
Lacedaemonians, in their bankets, which they call Philitia? In the which when
the tyran Dionisius, ^n a time supped, he said: that their black porridge,
which was the best part of the supper, liked not him. Then the cook which
made them, answered. It is no marvel, since you lack sauce. What sauce quod
he? Mary quod he, the labor in huntinge, sweat, runninge, from the river
Eurotas, hunger, and thirst. For these be the sauces of the Lacedaemonians meat.
And this truly, may well be perceived, not only by the custom of men, but
also by beasts The which, as soon as, any thing is set before them, which is
not contrary to nature, contentinge them selves therewyth, seek no further.
Yea whole cities, taught by custom, are sometimes delyghted with thin diet.
As we have already showed, of the Lacedaemonians. Xenophon describes the
living of the Persians. Who (as he says) eat nothing with their bread, but
only water cresses. Although, if their nature should desire any pleasaunter
meat, there are many fruytes, there both springing out of the ground, and
also, growyng on the trees, which excel, both in pleasure and plentye.

Join hereunto, the te^peratenes that comes of this continency in living:
and the conseruacion, of health. Compare herewith, those that sweat, and
belche with eating like fat Oxen.

Then shall you perceive, that they which most desire pleasure, do most
seeldome obtain it. And, that the pleasure of meat, consists in a hungrye,
and empty stomach, and not in fulness and sacietie. They say, that Timotheus a
noble man in Athenes, and chief of the city, when on a time he supped with
Plato, and was very well pleased with his cheer: seeinge him the next day
after, said. Your supper truly, is not only for the time present, but also
for many days after pleasant. Also, what a thing is it, that being much
stuffed with meat and drink, we can not use our wit at liberty? There is a
notable Epistle of Plato, written to the kynsemen of Dion. In the which, in
manner word for word, this is written. Thither when I came, that, which the
Italians, and Siracusa^s, count a happy life.

Namelye, to be fed with a great number of daynty dishes, liked me no whit.
Neither yet, to be filled twice in a day nor sit up all night. And such
like things (which do necessarilye solowe that kind of life) little pleased
me. By the which, no man may be made wise, and much less moderate. For what
nature may keep so wonderful a temperature? Wherefore, how may^ that life
be pleasant, in the which, there lacks prudence or moderation? And herein,
I remember the error of that most welthy king of Siria, Sar^anapalus. Who
commannded this, to be graven on his tomb. Those things only I think I
have which while I live, I eat.
And contrary, those I count lost which I behind me left.


What more meet thing (quod Aristotle) could a man chose out, to grave on the
tomb of an Ox, not of a king? He being dead, says he has all those
things, which even whiles he lived, he had no longer, then whiles he used
them. Wherefore then, should we feel any miss of richesse? Or where will not
poverty suffer us to be happy? perhaps in fair tables, plays, and painted
signs. Do not pore me^ enjoy the same better, than they ye are ple^tifully
stored with them? For there is great store of all such things in the common
buyldinges of our city. Which they that have priuatelye in their own houses,
see neither so many, neither yet so often: only when they go down to their
manours in the country. Whom also many times their consciece pricks, when
they remember, how, or from whence, they came by them. A whole day would be to
little for me, if I should here plead the cause of poverty. Both it is plain
enough of it self, and also daily experience sets before our eyes, how few
things, how small, and how base those are, which the nature man requires.
Shall pouertye therefore, or baseness of birth: yea or the anger and grudge of
the people let a wise man to be happy? Beware that you prove not, that this
praise of the people, and glory that every man so much desires, does bring
more trouble, then pleasure. And therefore truly, Demosthenes was to light, who
said, that it delyghted him, to hear a woman, as she went to fetch water,
(as the manner is in Greece) say unto her fellow, when he passed by. This is
that same Demosthenes. What could be more ^ondly said? Yet how famous an
orator was he? But it appears, that he was wo^te to talk much before other
men, and not to commen with his own conscience. We must therefore know this,
that neither hye place, or glory, are for them selves to be desired: neither
poverty and baseness to be feared. For, Democritus said. Come to Athenes, there
no man knows me.

A constante man, and a grave truly: which gloryeth that he was without
glory. Shall trumpetters and other musicians play and blow according as it
shall seem good to the^. And shall a wise man, whose art is far more
excellent seek out and follow not that that is truest, but what the people
lyketh? Is there any thing more foolysh? the^, that those, whom taking one and
one, you despise as slaves and fools, to think (I say) that those altogether
are any better? But a wise man truly, will despise al our ambition, and
lyghtnes. Yea, he will despise all honor, though it be proffered unto him. But
we can not despise them, before repentance drive us to it. In the books
Hermodorus a writer of natural philosophye, there is such a saying. He would,
that all the Ephesians should be put to death. For that, when they banyshed
Hermodorus their king, out of the city, they spoke in this wise. Let there no
man emonges us be above the rest. Or, if there be any, that would be so, let
him go to some other place, and among other men. Is it not so in the common
people every where likewise? Does it not spite them, to see any man, pass all
the rest in virtue? What? Aristides (for I had rather to bring forth the
examples of the Grecians, then our own:) was not he banished from his
country, because he was just above al measure, as they thought What troubles
therefore, want they, which have nothing to do with the people? Or what is
more pleasant the^ leisure bestowed on learning? Such learning I mean, as
teaches us the knoweledge of all nature: the heaven, the earth, the seas, and
all the rest.

Despising therefore, honor, and riches, What is there, that a man should
fear? Exile perhaps, which is counted one of the greatest euels. It, if you
count to be evil, because of the pleasure and grudge of the people, then how
little we ought to esteem it, I have spoken before. But if you count it a
misery, to be from your country: then truly is every province full of wretched
men, of who^ very few return home again into their country. But all
banyshed men lose their goods. What the^? have we showed nothing how men
ought to bear pouertye? And truly, exyle and banishement, if we weygh the
nature of the thing, and not the shame of the name, how much differs it
from that continual wanderinge, in the which these most notable philosophers,
Xenocrates, Crantor, Arcesilas, Lacides, Aristoteles, Theophrastus, Zeno,
Cleanther, Chrisippus, Antipater, Carneades, Panetius, Clitomachus, Philo,
Antiochus, Possidonius, and other innumerable, have spent their whole age, and
the course of their life? Who, after they once departed from their countries,
never came thither again.

And truly, it could put a wise man (of whom only our talk is at this present)
to no shame at all. Because, no such thing, can rightfully come unto him.

For such a one, as is ryghtfully banyshed, we ought not to comfort. To
conclude, to prove this, we may easily apply their opinion, who refer al
things in this life to pleasure. For in what soever place we have such
things, there we may live well and happily. And therefore, hereunto, that
saying of Tencer may well be applied.

My country (quod he) is, wheresoever I ^^ue well. And Socrates, when one
asked of him whence he was? He answered of the world, So, he thought him
self to be a (...) and an inhabitaunt of every place in the world. Also Titus
Albutius. Did he not, when he was banished, go to Athenes, and there study
philosophy? Who also, should not have been banished at all, if he holding his
peace, would have obeyed the laws of Epicurus. And then I pray you, what was
Epicurus the happyer for that he lived in his country: then Metrodorus living
at Athenes? Or wherein, was Plato more happy then Xenocrates? Or Polemon, then
Arcesilas? Or how is that city to be esteemed, out of the which good and wise
men are banished? Demaratus truly, the father of Tarquinius our king, because
he could not abide the tirants Cypselus, ca^sed all the Tarquines to forsake
Corinth. And here placed his stock, and increased his familye. Did ^e not
wisely prefer, freedom in banishemente, before bondage at home?

But now the motions, the cares, and gryefes of the mind, are swaged with
forgetting the same, and drawing of the mind to pleasure. It was not without
some cause therefore, that Epicurus durst to say. That a wise man, has
always many goods, because he is always in pleasure. Whereof he thinks
that it must necessarilye follow, that a wise man is always happy.


Hea. Yea? if he lack his sight? or his hearing?


Mar. Yea, For he despyseth even these lackes also. And first of all this
horrible blindenes, what pleasure wants it? Inasmuch as some say, that all the
other pleasures, are within the senses them selves. But those things which we
see, are not any pleasure to our eyes. As all those things, which we taste,
smell, feel, or hear, are in that self same part where we feel them. But
in the eyes there is no such thing. Our mind takes those things which we
see. But the mind may be delighted, many and diverse ways, although our body
can not see. For now I speak of a learned man, whose life is study. His
thoughts and wit require not eyes to see that, which with his mind he can
not see. Truly, if night can not let a man, but that he may be happy: why
should a day like to night do it? For the answer of Appius, the Cyrenaike,
is not so honest, although it be not much from this purpose. Whose blindenes
when certain women did lamente: what mean you quod he? Is there no pleasure
in the night think ye? We perceive, both by his offices, and also by his
deeds, that that old Appius which was blind many years, yet in that his
mischau^ce supplied his duty, both at home, and also abroad in the commonwealth. Also we have heard that the house of Caius Drusus, was wont to be full
of Clye^tes. So that whereas they that could see, could not see their own case,
they were feign to take a blind man, to their guide and counsaylour. Whiles I
was a boy, Cneius Aufidius, who had been once Praetor, being blind, did both
give counsel to his friends and write an historye in Greek, and also had
good skill in all learning.

Diodorus the Stoyke, being blind, lived many years at my house. He (which
is scarce credible) besides that, he did continually take more pains in the
study of philosophy, the^ he did before and also played on instruments, after
the manner of the Pithagoreans: and had books red unto him, day and night, in
the which studyes nevertheless he did not much need his eyes: yet besides all this I say (which may scarce be without eyes) he used the practice of Geometry.
Teaching his scolers how far, and after what sort, they should draw every
line. They say, ye Asclepiades, no base nor mean philosopher, when one asked
of him, what disco^moditi blindness had brought him he answered, that he had
more need of one boy, to wait on him. For, like as extreme poverty were
tolerable, if a man might do as certain Grecia^s may, so likewise may
blindenes easily be borne, if we lack not helps, for our necessity.
Democritus having lost his eyes, could not discern white and black. But
things good and evil just and unjust, honest and dishonest, profitable and
unprofitable, he could discern.

So, although without the sight of sundry colors he could live happelye, yet
without the knowledge of things he could not. And he also thought yt ye
judgment and quicknes of y^ mind was hindered by ye sight of ye eyes. And
whereas other men scarseli can se y^, which lies before their feet, he beheld
in his mind the whole nature of eueri thing, so y^ nothing could be hidden
from him. It is said also, that Homere was blind. But y^ they may say, y^ see
his picture, and not his poetry. For what region, what coaste, what place of
Greece, what shape of beauty, what battle, what army what stir of me^ or
beasts, is not so expressed in him? that, those things which he him self saw
not yet he has made us to se, who never beheld y^ same? The^ what delight or
pleasure of ye mind, did either Homer or any other learned man, ye was blind
want at any time? none truly. For other wise, would Anaragoras, or ye same
Demo^ritus of who^ we now spoke, have left their lands and enheritau^ce and
given themselves, to this heavenly delyght, of study and learning? Also
Tiresias the southsayer, whom the Poets feign to have been a wise man, they
never bring in complaining his blyndenes. But Homere, fayni^g Poliphemus to
have been a rude, and a huge giant, makes him talking with a ram, commending
his good chance, for that he could see to go where he would, and touch what
he listed. And truly, that talk was well applied to such a person.

For he was no wiser then the ram, with whom he talked. But in deafenes what
evil is there? Marcus Crassus was somewhat deaf. But there was one thing
worse than that, belonging to him. Namelye, that he had an evil report.
Although that truly, in my opinion, was without cause. Our Epicures can not
understand, nor speak Greek. Neither the Greek, Epicures latin. They
therefore were deaf in these men's language. And likewise, these men in theyrs.
And all men in those languages which they understand not, are no better tha^
deaf But some man will say. They can not hear the sweet noise, of any
instrument. No more can they the gratinge or iarring of a saw, when he is
whe^ted: neither the squeakynge of a pigge when he is sticked: neither, when
they are disposed to take their rest, the roaringe of the main sea. And if
they (...) so greatly delyghted with songs and instruments: they ought to
consider that before any such things were invented, there were many wise
men, that led a happy life. And also, that there may be far greater
pleasure taken, in readinge, then hearings such toys. Furthermore, as we did
before commend unto blind men, the pleasures of the ears: so we may unto
deaf men, commend the pleasures of the eyes. And furthermore, who soever can
commen secretelye with his own conscience, he shall not need the talk of
another. Now let all these miseries be put together. So that some man lack
both his sight and hearing: and furthermore be payned with extreme gryefe in
his body: which both of themselves are able at the first to kill a man or else if
they tarry any thing long, do prick a man more vehementlye, then that he
should have occasion to abide the^, yet what need we to trouble our selves?
Inasmuch as, there is always a haven and baye ready for us. Death I mean,
the everlasting home of our body, when it is once past sense. Theodorus, when
Lisimacus threatened him, that he would put him to death, said. Surely your
power is great, if you be able to do as much, as a Cantarides. Paulus when
Perses desired him, that he might not be led in his triumph: answered. That is
in your choice. Of death we spoke much the first day when we disputed purposely
of it and sumwhat also, the next day, when we entreated of gryefe, we said
thereof: which who soever does remember, there is no doubt but he will either
wish for death, or at the least wise not fear it. I think that herein, we
ought to keep that custom which the Grecians use in their feasts for they
have such a term. Either let him drink or else depart. And but right For,
either let him with other keep feloweship in drinkinge: or else, least he being
sober, should be in the company of dronkardes, he must depart before. So
likewise, the injuries of fortune, which we ca^ not abide, we ought to avoid
by flight. The same that Epicurus says, Hieronimus also affirms almost with
the self same words.

Therefore if these philosophers, which think, virtue of it self to be of no
force and that all that, which we call honest and laudable, is but a vain thing,
only colored with a fair name: if these men nevertheless, think, that a
wise man is always happy: what the^ should we look for, of Socrates, Plato,
and other more excellent philosophers? Of yt which some say, that the goods
of the mind are of such excellency, that they blemishe all the goods of the
body, and of fortune. And some other count these to be no goods at al, but
place al things in y^ mind only. Whose controversy, Carneades was wont to
finishe like an honorable judge. For he said, that there was no cause of
controversy betwixt the^, although, those things which the peripatetike^ did
call goods, yt Stoikes did count but commodities: so y^ the Peripatetikes did
attribute no more to riches, good health, and other such like, then the
Stoikes, when it comes to the pdndering of the thing it self, and not of the
word. And, as for the philosophers of other sects, how they can have any
place in this opinion, let them selves see. Yet I am glad, that they profess
some thing worthy the name of philosophers, of the ablenes of a wise man to
live well. But, inasmuch as, in the morninge we must go from hence, let us now
pen out these our five days disputations. I trust, that I shall at the
last, have some leisure to set them abroad. For wherein may I better employe
this little leisure that I have? And to my friend Brutus we will send these
five books, by whom I was not only moved, but also provoked to write of
philosophy.

Wherein, how much we shall profit other men, I can not well say. But for mine
own sharpest sorrows, and sundry troubles, that on all sides compassed me, I
could find no better remedy.


FINIS.
Faults escaped in printing.
In the first book.
fol. page. line 3 2 7 for unto, read till 8 2 2 for Hea. read Mar. 9 1 8 for
also, read ask. 10 1 23 for members, read numbers 12 2 20 for may, read any
13 2 8 for where, read are 14 2 4 for his, read this 14 1 23 for foolish, read
foolishely 15 2 16 for hearty, read hauty. 18 2 1 for which, read when 20 2 8
for exhaltacions, read exha^^ 21 1 1 for as, read and lations. 22 2 8 for
bound, read boared. 24 2 9 for self, read soul 29 2 12 for Nectari, read
Nectar 31 2 17 for now, read new 32 2 17 for motion, read mixtion. ^6 2 8 for
Aecus, read Aeacus. In the second book.
fol. pa. li. 2 2 12 for wits, read which ^ 2 16 for which, read wits 2 22
for Peripatician and Academians, read Peripate^^kes and academikes. In the
third book.
fol. pa. li. 5 2 22 for as, read are 8 12 9 for excutue, read execute. 11 1 7
for we, read no 12 1 11 for bed, read beard, 20 2 14 for goodness, read goods
34 2 1 for delayed, read deluded 37 1 9 for countenance, read continuance. 39
1 6 for bear, read minister, 39 1 20 for confirm, read conform 40 2 11 for
mourn, read mourning In the fourth book.
fol. pa. li. 2 2 1 for lined, read lived 4 2 1 for cunning, read living 10 1
10 for fear, read joy 10 1 23 for sonoe read soon 17 1 21 for for, read or
28 2 19 for valiunt, read valiant In the fifth book.
fol. pa. li. 8 2 16 for so, read also, 12 2 7 for line, read li^e 27 2 3 for
thitherto, read hitherto

Words left out.
In the first book.
16. leaf. first page, 11. line betwixt (for) and (what) bring in (for). 19.
fol. 2. pa. 13. li. betwixt (but) and (he) bring in (he thought) 23. foli. 1.
pa. 4. line. betwixt fear and for, bring in. What terroure I pray you? or
what fear? 43. fol. 1. pa. 19. line. betwixt, such, and, as, bring in, that

In the second book.
4. fol. 2. pa. 2. li. betwixt, me, and, inasmuch, bring in, for. 4. fol. 2.
pa. 22. li. betwixt, custom, and, Peripatetikes, bring in, of the

In the third book.
6. fol. 1. pa. 26. li. betwixt, is, and, written, bring in, not.16. fol. 2.
pa. 24. line. betwixt, in, and, thinkinge, bring in, two points, the one in
withdrawyng our mind from the. 27. fol. 2. pa. 12. li. betwixt, kind, and
that, bring in, is. 35. fol. 1. pa. 16. lin. betwixt, that, and, is, bring in
it.

In the fourth book.
11. fol. 2. page.17. li betwixt, mind, and, to, bring in, they defyne. 13.
fol. 2. page.

22. line. betwixt, comparison, and, may, bring in, of diseases of the body.
34. fo. 1. pa. 1. line. betwixt, that, and, therabout, bring in, there is any
love of whoredom. And.

In the fyft book.
18. fol. 2, page. 6. line, betwixt, void, and, fear, bring in, of.

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete nere to S. Dunstons church by Thomas Marshe.


