^ MARCUS Tullius Ciceroes three books of duties, to Marcus his son, turned
out of latin into english, by Nicolas Grimalde.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

Anno domini. 1556.

^ TO THE RIGHT Reverend father in god, and his singular good lord, Thomas,
Bishop of Elie, one of the King, and Queen's Majesty's most honorable privy
Counsel.
Having recourse of late (right reverend father) to y^ old studies, yt I once
applied in ye university: and getting so^me fruit of quiet life to the
perusing, and recording of those things, wherewith in time past I felt myself
greatly both delited, and furdered: I gave my mind chiefly to such kind of
lerning: as would serve best both to the order of my study, and also to the
governance of my life: so that comparing my experience, and reading together,
I might make my private diligence in studieng do ser^ to the open use ofliuing.
In following of which intent, what by incre ase of judgment for years, what by
trauatli^g abroad in y^ world, I found ever more and more so new profits, and
commodities: y^ whereas, methought, I had seen but y^ shadow of things, now I
begin more to see (as it were) the holle body thereof. And most of all, this
proof I have, in y^ greatest and most profitable part of philosophy, which
is concerning manners: and namely in the books, that of duties be written, by
Marcus Tullius Cicero: a matter containing the holle trade, how to live among
men discreetly, and honestly: and so rightly pointing out the pathwaye to all
virtue: as none can be righter, only Scripture excepted. Insomuch, that when I
had well considerd alltogither: I said with miself, concerning this, as did a
certain learned man, not long ago, by Homer: This is the fifth time, I have read
over this author: and as often as I read him, so often somewhat I find, that I
marked not before: and that has need to be deeply pondered: so yt I fansied,
at the first, he was easy: but now, methinks, he requires a very heedfull,
and a musing reader. Wherefore, not without maruailous great pleasure, espyeng:
y^ either in private life, to attein quietness, and contentation: or in
officebearing, to win fame, and honor: or in every estate, both to avoid
disorder, and enormitie, and also to keep a right rule, and comme^dable
behavior: this book plainly is y^ myrrour of wisdom, y^ fortres of justice,
the master of manliness, the school of temperance, the jewel of
co^melinesse: I wisshed, many mo to be parteners of such sweetness, as I had
partly felt myself: and to declare, that I me^t nolesse, tha^ I wisshed: I
laid to, my helping hand: endeavoring, by translation, to do likewise for my
contrieme^ne: as Italia^s, Fre^chme^, Spaniardes, Dutchme^, and other foreins
have liberally done for theyrs. So, chiefly for our vnlatined people I have
made this latin writer, english: and have now brought into light, y^ from them
so long was hidden: and have caused an ancient writing to beeco^me, in a
manner, new again: and a book, used but of few, to war common to a great
meany: so that our me^, understanding, what atreasure is among them, for the
fashioning of their life: and being by nature most of all other nations given
to civility, and humanity: when they shall be aided, and directed by these
perfect precepts: may, in all points of good demeanor, beco^me people
perelesse.

Yet judge I all this labor litleworthe, and smally, or nothing able to
prevail: without your honorable lordship were patron hereof: to who^ I do
dedicate both my good heart, and my work also: (I call it mine, as Plautus,
and Terence called the comedies theyrs, which they made out of Greek) not as
to teach your lordshipp ought, that you have not allredy: but by your
authority, to get it the more estimacion with other. For as Tullies treatise,
being so full of lerning, asks alerned man's judgment: which whosoever refuse,
they show themselves to be unwise: eue^ so such a noble Cou^seler of England
seems most meet to receive so noble a Senator of Rome into a strange
region. Doutlesse among so many honorable deeds of your lordships, it shall
not be the least honorable: if ye do Marcus Tullius this honor, to welco^me
him hither: and to be the very cause, that so famous a Roman may becomme
familiar with our English men.

So shall a worthy pere be worthylie entreated: as very courtesy requires: so
your lordshipps judgment must needs be well lyked: which is wo^te to allow
lovely knowledge, and goodness: so will the common people more hyely esteem
the thing: as it is expedient for them to do: and the sooner also will they
follow these hollsome lessons: which is full necessary, in a well ordered
state: to be short, your lordship, for a chosen patron: my translation, for a
welcome work: and Tullie shall be taken for such a Tullie, as he is. And like
as Marcus Cicero, with the authority of a father, commended these books to his
young Cicero: so when our English youth shall behold them once authorized by
so reverend a father in god: nodoute, they will be the rather in love with
them: and will count it pleasant pains taking, here to enriche themselves
with enformations of virtue, ensaumples out of stories, moral doctrine,
politic prudence, antiquity, variety of maruailous matters: so conningly, and
oratorially treated, and endited: as he was able to declare, and express: who
was the first, and the chief, that ever cladde lady Philosophy in Roman
attire. Thus, very loathe to let your lordship from your weighty affairs, I
make an end: and pray god, long to preserve your honorable lordship in health,
with increase of honor.

Your humble orator, Nicolas Grimalde.

N. G. to the reader.
ALl things in the world (good reader) be made for so^me use, and end: which
end is more worth, than all, that does service thereunto: and where both the
end is good, and whatso serves thereto: there y^ holle doing is likewise good.
In us the best end is, to use ourselves well, and worthyly: who in the order
of natural things ar of the best, and worthyest kind. For what is there, that
can use itself: unless it be enfourmed with reason, and understanding? Du^me
creatures, and liuelesse of other be used: but themselves can they never use.
Beasts endewed with life, and sense, may seem to have so^me se^blau^t hereof:
in yt, they use their feedi^g, lodging, and other necessaries: yet therbi they
obtein neither praise, nor dispraise: seeing they do it not of any free choice:
but only by the motion of kind, and as their appetite draws them. But we,
who have the great gift of wit, and reason, must not most of all stick still
in y^ appetite: to get nothing else, but pleasure, and profit: but ensewing the
heavenly guide of our nature, must be led to the desire of troth, honor, and
seemlinesse: wherwt the more that we be decked, adourned, and beautified: yt
^rder we be from the brutishness of beasts, and the nerer approach we to the
nature divine.

In as much then as every thing is borne to do that, which to his kind is
most agreeable: and us it beseems most to use ourselves: our part wtoute
doubt, and our duty shall we do best: if we employe the using of ourselves to
deeds, that be honest, and co^me^dable. Other things when we use: as land,
howses, armor, horses, howndes, money, clothes, or stuff: we can not yet use
them at all times: and with them we must enforce, and bysie ourselves also:
whereas the using of ourselves is in every place at hand, and at no season to
seek.

For whether we be doing somewhat, or at rest: whether we abide in the
country, or in the city: whether we be occupied in ernest, or in game: no
pawse there is at all, but night and day^ we use ourselves continually.

Which thing sith in every portion of a man's life it has place: if it be
well, and wisely, and conveniently done: we shall be wealfull, and in a blessed
case: if ungraciously, and fo^dly, and wickedly: wretched shall we be, and in a
woeful plight. This ar we taught tomuch, by the common life of men: who for
defaulte of skyll, how to behave themselves, be confounded in deep derknesse
of error, and ignorance: and wanting the right rule, they take chalk for
cheese, as the saying is: they can not frame their affections, nor keep them
in temper. But such manner clouds be clearly dissolved, by the beams of
Philosophy: which setts before our yiesight the very ends, and marks, that
self nature has appointed us.

For in this world here beneath, ar three kinds of living wightes: whereof
sum have no more, but life: as plants, herbs, and trees, growing out of the
ground: so^me have not only life, but senses also: as sheep, oxen, and other
beasts: ye third comprehends both these: and over life, and senses, has
the souerain ruler, Reason: as in the nature of man we see the^ all conjoined.
It remains therefore, and meet it is for him, such doings to practice: as may
both severally agree with each of these parts, and generally with the^
alltogither. To the parcel inferior (by which we receive our norishment, our
growing, and the state of our body) welfare is appointed the vttmost end:
wherein the thing consists, y^ we call profitable: which concerns the
getting, maintayning, or recovering of health. Of the soul, or life endewed
with senses, pleasure is the end, that it would enjoy. The third nature, which
is partener of reason, has this prick to shoot at (if you consider it by
itself alone) science, and knowledge of troth: if you behold it with the
other two acco^mepanied: it has honesty, worshipp, and honor.

These be the very ends, whereto man's life, and nature must endeavor to
attein: hither does Philosophy promise to bring a man, by her information.
For when she has told in a generaltie, what is honest, co^mely, vaylable,
praiseworthy, and in every point convenient: then may me^, by intelligence
perceiving the troth, truly express the same in every particular deed.

Wherefore seeing reason conteins the holle life of man: and to it, as to their
captein, the other parts be obedient, or at least wise ought to bee^: first,
mark we the peculiar property of reason: then, how with the other powers it
exercises man: afterward, the co^mely behavior, and dutiefull dealing in the
open resort, and feloushipp of men.

Man's mind is contented, and satisfied with nothing so much, as the clear
understanding, and the vndeceauable science of soothe. Chiefly stands his
mind in contemplatio^ of immortal, and perdurable things: thereto, in such
as fade, and fall, it teaches, ordeineth, appoints, commands. Whereupon y^
order, course, figure, light, influe^ce of son, moon, and ^erres it
observes: conceiueth intelligences, angels, souls, and fourmes immaterial:
proceeds from them, and so mou^teth up to the very author, and prince of this
worlds university: whom it knows, and knowledgeth to be one, the best, the
mightiest, the thetru^, the most righteous, and everlasting. Yet is the
selfsame mind by the felouship, and company of the senses, and desires, many
a time called away from that principal office, to consider these unstable,
and mutable things: and so^mtime to cast in conceit fourmes disseuered from
the matter, mathematically: and so^metime to view things sensible, that can in
no wise be sondered from the material substance: as eleme^es, beasts,
herbs, trees, metalls, stones, and such like: all the which must needs be
fensed, and fortified with the trade of debating doutes, and discerning of troth
from untruth: which is the art of Logik, the very rule of reason, and
instrument of all discourse.

Now, to speak of the using of the holleman: by the continual tenor, and
steadfast rate of bodies celestial, and natural, the mind of man lerneth
order, obedience, and concord. For like as god governs things manyfolde,
moveable, and falling away, being himself but one, vnremoouable, and
euerduring: so reason within us ought to rule raunging lusts, and rash motions
of the mind, and the other vnworthyer, and weaker parts: being itself
steadfast, sage, principal, and strongly established.

In case a man love any one part of himself tomuch: or sewe after y^ end
thereof by a wrong way, and clean out of fashion: he shall not lead a life
all eue^, and straight, but hoked, and crooked: nor easy, and quiet, but
miserably distempered. For whosoever be overmuch inclined to paumpering, and
pleasing of the vital portion: they be all bent to gather good, and holly
given to gain. They, that alonely serve their senses, and set their delight to
feel the pleasures of the same: be excessive either in ryotting, and
banketing, or in outrageous (...) or in other such pa^aunces, as be sensual.
They, which hold them content to lead a life co^te^platiue, having no
regard, ne respect to y^ forenamed percels: do prove sour, sowring, blockish,
rusticall, and far from all ciuilnesse of life. He, in whom reason ^oynes
with the senses, for to do the^ service: will enforce himself to win worldly
glory, and soueraintie. He, that can comprise in his thought no large
co^mepasse, nor deep consideration: but is faint, feeble, wavering, and full
of infirmity: will show forth himself chiefly with appareling, or with so^me
outward brag, to supply his want within.

To such sorts of annoyaunce, and disconuenience, light, and moderation is
brought by moral doctrine: the which, Marcus Lullius Cicero, in these books
of duties, professes. This lerning teaches, so much to grant the vital
part, and the netherest: as will be suffisant to preserve the life in health,
and welfare. It wills also the feeling portion so to take fruitio^ of
pleasures: that neither it defraude the lower part of the profits thereto
appropriate: nor with importune egging annoye y^ mind, which aspireth unto
verity of opinions, and uprightness of manners.

Without mo words, it assigns that for to reign, which is borne to reign:
and that to be obeysaunt, which is franied for obeysaunce.

Now, when a man is so enstructed with philosophy: that he can full
co^uenie^tly live sole, and at point device by himself: he must be brought
forth abroad into the face of the world: to the intent he may procure, not
only that beco^mes himself to do, but also the wealth of other folk. He must
remember the three fold state, and diversity, that he has espied, and
practiced in himself: and must trans^erre the same to the governance both of
his household priuatlie, and of the holle commons openly. So shall the meanest
sort, like the vital parcel in man, be occupied about the most servile,
and needful works: men of middle degree, like y^ sensiue soul, shall attend
to affairs, and sciences more liberal: the nobility in the common
government, like reason in the nature of man, shall rule all the multitude.
That thing also does Lullie touch in this treatise: and shows me^ in
authority their duties, both iu war, and peace: whereby they may make
themselves, and their subjects happy, and fortunate.

And not only them, but all sorts of men he admonishes: what they have to
do, thorough out their life: according to their age, trade, and estate: with
respect to the circumstau^ces of times, places, and persons.

In the first book, he first divides duty into the perfect, and the mean:
leaving the one (which belongs to the end of good, and is in it self right)
to men of perfection: and prosecuting y^ other, in certain rules, and
precepts: so that thereby every man may frame, and order his life. Then he
leads us to the fynding out of duties, by taking aduisement about the choice
of honest things, and refusal of the dishonest. Afterward he setts for the the
original causes, and the chief parts of honesty, with their duties, and
properties. At the last, he warns us to discern y^ more, or most honest
thing from the less, or le^: and allwaies, in the use thereof, to prefer y^
greater. In the second, rehersing profitable, and unprofitable things: he
shows, how to attein, and to use the profitable, and how to eschew the
contrary: and in the end, makes a comparison of profits: teaching to prefer
the greater before the smaller, or the mo before the fewer.

In the third, he co^pareth profit with honesty, and with every part thereof:
not as if there could indeed be contrariety bitweene them: but he means the
profit, which seems not honest, and the honesty, which seems not
profitable: or of either of the^ the apparaunt show: and he tells us, what is
to be done, when these seem so to strive, one with an other: that honesty
allureth us one way, and profit calls us an other way.

Thus the holle matter is referred, and applied to honesty, and profit, two
principal points of good: the third (which we call pleasure, and is placed
by the Peripatetiks in the noumber of good things) Tullie, like a Stoik, does
but briefly ^ouche, as a thing impertinent.

But of the other two places, containing all the doings of men, Cicer^ has
told his mind, and left it us in this book: even as fully, as in his lifetime
he conceived it in his head.

For who ever saw in so few leaves so much moral doctrine, and political,
set out with so many conning castes, and feats oratoriall? What a sort of
stories be there so notable of themselves, so handsomely applied, so elegantly
told? You shall not lightly read the like, within so little commepasse, in any
historian, that of purpose does nothing else.

How finely, and featly be y^ poets verses alleged? With what a discretion ar
so^me ancient writers reproved? With what subtilitie, and fynesse of wit be
certain controversies debated? Either of ye chief philosophy, or of all
humanity what point is there lacking? Aristotle artificially has written of
manners: but, what for the lightsomnesse, and eloquent handeling of y^ treatise,
what for y^ latin tongue, which we do use more than y^ greek: ^llie is above
him. Panetius wrote of dutiefull demeanor: but though his work in so^me
points was Tullies pattern: yet in all points, by all their iudgemets, y^ ever
saw ^he^ both: Tullie is above him. (...) the (...) wrote of duty: but seeing
diverse Greeks, who ar Tullies inferiors, were as good as he: certesse Tullie is
above him. Posidonius, a Khodiane, meddled with the same matter: but nothing to
Tullius. So did Hecato: but nothing to Tullius. And many other mo of later
time: but, lord, how far be they from Tullius? Tullius, in his grave years,
after he hadd herd a noumber of learned men: after he had read the most
approved authors: after he had endyted so many volumes: and his style was woxen
ripe, his wit sage, his (...) full, his judgment perfect: enterprised to draw
this draught, and made it of such excellence: as we may well wonder at in
viewing, and yet not attein in following. Tullius, having done many glorious
acts, in a state of government most triumpha^te, learned the most part of these
lessons by experience. Tullius out of the Greek authors, of whom also so^me
had been gouer^ours in flourishing empires: translated a great deal. Tullius
to Marcus, his wellbeloued son, abiding even at Athenes, among the best
philosophers, was not afraid to send this parcel of philosophy. Nodoute, as
welco^ it was to y^ learned Athenians: as y^ Greeks doings were to the Romans:
or as now adays, the French, and Italians welframed writings be to those
English men, that understand the^: yea and so much the more wellco^me: as it was
a rare thing then, to see that kind of knowledge expressed in pure latin. But
in Rome, in Italy, in Europa, in all quarters, where latin speech had place:
O, so it was embraced at all times, of all men, in every degree, order, and
estate. Rulers have here found much witty policy, apperteining to the
governance of realms. Householders, and parents have pyked out of these
books virtuous instructions for their children, and their servants. Doctors,
and divines have here met with moral sentence, and ensaumples very
excellent. Civil lawyers have espied, touching justice, and equity, both
rules appointed, and cases discussed. Schoolmen have taken herehence
problemes, and questions, to debate at large: and have fetched from hence
philosophical conclusions, with reasons, and arguments to prove, and to
disprove. Orators have been well furnished hereby, with sundry graces, and
ornaments of speech: and in the like manner of matter, have marked, how to
bestow their style. Rhetoricia^s, who for their exercise, do use declamatio^s:
have taken out of this, common places, like large feldes, where me^ may walk
at liberty. Schoolemasters never wist of fyner phrases, for to make their
scholars acquainted with the very vein of the latin language. At few words,
all men, that of wisdom be studious, may get sommewhat herein to sharp the
wit, to store the intelligence, to feed the mind, to quicken the sprite, to
augment the reason, to direct y^ appetite, to frame the tongue, to fashion the
manners: moreover to rule, to obei, to dispute, to determine, to teach, to
persuade, and to every needful purpose in a ma^s life. Unless theself thing
witness as much, as I say, let me not be credited: but incase both y^ book
speak for it self: and to my testimonial I am able to adioyne princely peers,
wellbeknowne, and well approved: then shall both the worthynesse of the work,
and also the weight of the authority win credit, and assente. Tullies duties
when Caesar August us had read over, still standing on his feet: as he again
delivered them to his neuiew, of who^ he had the^: Eloquent (quoth he) was this
man, eloquent he was indeed: and one, yt loved well his country. Tullies
duties had Seuerus, the noble emperor, in so great price, and reputation:
that of all the Romans books, to read the^, he thought him best apaide.
Tullies duties have I known good clerks, and well learned me^ bear about in
their boso^mes: layeng it full near their herts, y^ they would have lodged in
their heads: and entirely loving Tullies heavenly co^mepanie, which way so
ever they went. Tullies duties did Erasmus, the Roterodame, so greatly commend:
y^ in making mention of them, he could not choose but break forth into these
words. What? writes an ethnike all this to ethnikes? a profane man, to the
profane? Yet in his precepts of conversation, O lord, what an equity? what
an holiness? what synceritie? what verite? How well does all together accord
with nature? how is al framed eue^ by good reason? What a conscience requires
he of such, as govern yt state? How plainly sets he before our yies the
maruailous, and the amiable beauty fullness of virtue? How much, how
religiously, yea how like a divine does he teach of helping, and releeuing
other men? of getting, and maynteyning of love, and friendship? of the contempt
of those vanities: for which the common sort of Christen folk will either do,
or suffer, they care not what? Finally, he deemeth them full worthy, and full
meet both for schoolemasters in their schools to read unto the youth: and
also for old men again and again to use, and to peruse.

These richesse, and treasures of wit, and wisdom, as Cicero tra^sported out
of Greece into Italy: so have I fetched from thence, and conveyed the^ into
England: and have caused also Marcus Tullius (more, tha^ he could do, when he
was alive) to speak English. Maruailous is the matter, flowing the eloquence,
rich the store of stuff, and full artificial the enditing: but how I, in our
manner of speech, have expressed the same: the more the book be perused, the
better it may chance to appear. None other tra^slatio^ in our toug have I
seen, but one: which is of all men of any lerning so well liked: yt they repute
it, and count it as none: yet if ye list to compare this so^mwhat with y^
nothing: peraue^ture this somewhat will seem somewhat y^ more. How be it look,
what rule the Rhetorician gives in precept, to be observed of an Orator, in
telling of his tale: that it be short, and without idle words: that it be
plain, and wtoute derk sense: that it be prouable, and without any swaruing
from (...) troth: the same rule should be used (...) examining, and judging of
(...). For if it be not as brief, as the very authors text requires: whatso
is added to his perfect style, shall appear superfluous, and to serve rather
to the making of so^me paraphrase, or commentary. Thereto, if it be uttered with
ynkhorne terms, and not with usual words: or if it be phrased with wrasted, or
farrefetched fourmes of speech: not fine, but harsh, not easy, but hard, nor
natural, but violent it shall seem to be. Then also, in case it yield not
the meaning of the author: but either following fancy, or misledde by error,
forsakes the true pattern: it can not be approved for a faithful, and sure
interpretation: which ought to be taken for y^ greatest praise of all. These
points as I have studied to perform: so where I have not allwaies atteined
unto them: I shall desire you, gentle reader, ge^tely to consider both the
excelence of the author, who is a perfect orator: and also the greatness of y^
matter, which is profounde philosophy.

Nevertheless, such as be exquisite in both the languages allredy: may (and
that with so^me profit, and pleasure) try, what I have done, and what they can
do, all under one: if, layeng my tra^slatio^ aparte, they will set the latin
before the^, and so assay their own vein. Either they shall like themselves
the better: when they confer it with my poor workma^ship: orels perchance
conne me the more thank, for attempting, following, and acco^plishing of this
enterprise. Be it so, one has neither the latin, nor the english eloquence:
yet, by the benefit of nature, sithe a man may do much: namely if he thereto
adioyne use, and exercise: here is for him occasion both to whet his wit, and
also to fyle his tou^g. For allthough an English man has his mother tongue: and
can talk apace, as he learned of his dame: yet is it one thing to title tattle,
I wott not how, or to chatter like a iaye: and an other, to bestow his words
wiselye, orderly, pleasauntly, and pythiely. Such as have english meatly well,
and but a smatteri^g, or small taste in y^ latin: which noumber is great,
among the scholars of this realm: may hereby fail into such acquayntaunce, and
familiarity with this most excellent latin man: that neither shall his devise
seem hard, nor his art obscure, nor his style strange. I dare well say, if
this work hap into a good students hand: he will not think it enough to
run over it once: as we fare with trifles, and toys: but aduisediy, and with
good leisure, three, or four, or five times, he will read it, and read it,
and read it again: first, by the principal points, by the definitio^s, and
the divisions: to see, what is treated, how farreforthe, in what order, and
with what variety: then, to mark the precepts, reasons, conclusions, and
common places: after, unto the said places to refer all the stories, with the
verses poetical: finally, as well in the english, as the latin, to weygh well
properties of words, fashions of phrases, and the ornaments of both.
Moreover, many clerks have I known, ear this: which could conceive, and
understand full well: whose tongue nevertheless in vtterau^ce, and use of
speech, was in a manner maimed: yea and so^me, that could also speak latin
redyly, and wellfauordly: who to have done as much in our language, and to have
ha^deled the same matter, would have been half bla^k. What need mo words? I
desire, my tranail none otherwise to be taken in worth: than the diligent
peruser shall in effect find fruit thereof.

Now therefore, good reader, fare you well: and remember, how unfit (as
Aristotle says) and unprofitable hearers of moral science yongmen be: as
long as either they follow their youthly affections: or do continue unskillful,
and rude in y^ deeds, that of duty belong to man's life. For, all the while,
they yield themselves to be led away of their mad moodes: if you talk to
them of virtues, and of manners, ye do but sing the deaffe a song. And how shall
they be able to judge, what is discreetly, rightfully, valiauntly, moderately,
and worthylie done: who neither have any such quality, nor understand by
experience any point of the same? Yet forasmuch as it of necessity be known,
what is virtue, and vice: before a man can well, and wisely live, embracing the
one, and eschewing the other: either to make sou^de the sick^ mind (incase it
be miseased, and has a will to be relieved) take this doctrine, as a
medicine: orels to confirm the holle: that is to mean: incase you have been
well, and honestly trained up: more perfitely to perceive the path of good
manners: wherein you may walk with entire delight, and come to y^ honor of a
laudable life. Thus have I holden you, good reader, with my homely tale: now will
I not borowe your patience any longer: but, for your gentleness, and studious
disposition, will streightway send you from y^ scholar to the master: and from
me, to the speech of this di^ine orator, and worthy philosopher.

^ MARCUS TVLlius Ciceroes first book of duties, to Marcus his son.
ALthough you son Mark, The preface.
having now 1. Parie.
a year herd why he writes to his son of philosophy in latin.
Cratippus, and y^ in Athenes, must needs flow full of rules, and lessons of
philosophy: because of the passing great excellency both of your teacher,
and of y^ city: whereof the one may store you with knowledge, the other with
ensamples: yet as myself, to mine The study of both tou^ges.
own furderaunce, have evermore joined the latin with the greek: and have
done y^, not only in philosophy, but also in the practice of oratorie: I
think it ^ere for you to do the same, that alike you may be Two ki^des of
eloquence.
in y^ readiness of both the kinds of eloquence. To the which purpose Example
of h^elfe.
verilye, we (as we suppose) have brought great aid to our countrymen: that
not only the ignorant of the greek tongue, but also the learned reckon
themselves thereby to have atteined somewhat, both to speech eloque^t, and also
to judgment Wherefore you shall learn in deed His masters help.
of the prince of philosophers in this age: and you shall learn so long, as you
will: so long perdie ought you to be willing, as it shall not repent ye, how
much ye profit. But yet Tullies philosophy.
reading my books, not greatly variaunt from the Peripatetikes (because we will
be both Socratians, and Platonians) of the very matters use your own
judgment: for I nothing let you: but of troth, by reading my works, you
shall make The latin tongue.
your latin tongue the fuller. Nor yet I would have this supposed of a vaunt to
be spoken. For giving place to many in the knowledge of philosophy, if I
take upon Tullies eloquence.
me that, which is an orators property, aptly, orderlye, and finely to
speak: because I have passed my time in that study, I seem, after a certain
sort, as in mine own right, to calenge it. For which cause, I ernestly exhort
Conclusion o^ this pa^e.
you, my Cicero: y^ diligently you read not only my orations, but these
books also of philosophy, which now welnie to those have eeuened themselves
in quantity. For there is a greater force of eloquence inthose: but this
eeuen, and tempered kind of style is also to be regarded. And this truly I
see, has Enlargeme^t, by comparion.
happened to none of the Greeks, as yet: that one man trauayled in both the
kinds: and followed as well y^ lawierlie trade of pleading, as this quiet
form of reasoning: D. Phalereus.
except perchance Demetrius Phalereus may be counted in this nou^ber: who was
a subtle reasoner, no vehement orator: pleasant ^et, so as you may know him
for Theophrastus scholar. But how much we have profited i^ both, I referr it
to other men's judgment: certes we have followed both. I think verily, Pla^
Pla^.
could have spoken very gravely, and ple^tifully, if he would have practiced
y^ law like sort of pleading: and also Demosthenes could have done Demosthenes.
full finely, and semely: if he h^d kept still, and would have uttered those
things, which he learned of Plato. And after the same sort I judge of
Aristotle, and Isocrates: Aristoteles.
either of which, delited with his Isocrates.
own study, despised the other.

But when I had determined 2. part.
to write somewhat unto you at this What point of philosophy he will treat
upon.
season, and many things hereafter: I was most willing to begin with that,
which both for your age Co^mendatio^ of his matter.
should be fittest, and for my authority y^ grauest. For whereas many matters in
philosophy, both weighty, and profitable, be diligently, and ple^tifully
disputed by philosophers those seem most largely to sprede, which of duties by
them have been Duties.
taught, and prescribed. For no part of man's life, neither in common, nor
private affairs, neither in matters abroad, nor at home, neither if ye do ought
alone, nor if ye contract with an other, may bewtout duty: and in regardi^g
thereof rests all honesty of life, and in despising the same, dishonestie.
And this no doubt is a common matter with all the philosophers. For who is he,
which giving no rules of duty, dare name himself a philosopher?

But there be sundry doctrines, 3. part.
How he will teach.
which in setting forth the ends of good, and bad, do misturn all duty.
Sects of philosophers.
For who in such wise appoints the ^erayn good, that it has Epicurus.
nothing adioined with virtue: and Aristippus.
measures the same by his commodities, (...)
and not by honesty: it comes to pass, that this man, if in himself he
agree, and be not sometime overcome with the goodness of nature: can use
neither friendship, neither justice, nor liberality: and in no wise doutlesse
can he be a ma^ly man, who judges pain the vtterest evil: nor he a temperate
man, who counts pleasure the greatest good. Which poinctes, though they be so
apparau^t, that the thing needs no disputation: yet they be debated by us in
an other place. These doctrines then, if they will in themselves accord, can
say nothing of duty: neither of duty can there be given any precepts, sure,
steadfast, and with nature agreeable: but by them, who maintain, that either
Stoikes.
only, or chiefly, honesty for (...)
itself is to be embraced. And therefore the teaching thereof properly belonges
to the Stoikes, and Academiks, and Peripatetiks: because (...).
Aristoes, Pyrrhoes, and Herillus opinion long sins has been hyst out of the
schools: who nevertheless should have their lawful liberty to reason of
duty: if they had left any choice of things, that to the outfynding of
duty there might have bee^ an entry. We will follow therefore at this season,
and in this matter, chiefly the Stoikes: not as a translatour: but, as we are
accustomed, we will draw out of their fou^tains, after our own mind, and
judgment, as much, and in such sort, as shall seem good.

It likes me the^, since all my The treatise.
(...) to be (...).
discourse must be of duty, to define before, what is duty: which I meruail,
was ouerskaped of Panetius. For every teaching of any matter, y^ by an orderly
trade is taken in hand, must begin the process at a definition: y^ it may be
perceived, what the thing is, whereof y^ treating goes.

All the question of duty is twofolde. Duty (...).
One kind there is, y^ belo^ges to the end of good: an other, that stands in
precepts, by the which the trade of life may be fashioned in every condition.
Of the former kind such exaumples there be: Whether all duties be perfect,
or no? Whether one duty be more tha^ an other? and such, as be of the same
sort. But those duties, whereof precepts be given, though they appertein to
the end of good, yet the same does less appear: because they seem rather
to belong to the framing of life: of the which, in these ^kes, we have to open
our An other wa^ of dividing duty.
mind. And also, there is an other division of duty. For there is said to be
both a certain mean duty, and a perfect. I suppose, we may call the
perfect, or the right duty, Rectum, which the Greeks do term (...): and this
mean, or common duty, Commune, which they call (...).

And those they do thus define: Duty de^.
that the same, which is Rectum, they define to be the perfect dutie^ and that,
they say, is the mean duty, for the which, a prouable reason may be
rendered, why it is done.

Aduiseme^t then in counsel taking is threefolde, as seems to Panetius.
Outfynding of duties, by choice of things.
For first, men dout, whether it, that falls in aduisement, be honest to be
done, or dishonest: in weying Honest.
minds are diversely drawn into contrary opinions. Next, they Profitable
they take aduisement, avail or no, to commodity, and pleasantness of life,
to riches, and plentye of goods, to power, and swe^ of rule: whereby they may
help both themselves, and theirs: all which aduisement falls into the nature
Honesty, and profit compared
is: when it, that appears to be profitable, seems to strive with honesty.
For whereas profit does seem to draw to her, honesty contrariwise, to call
back to her: it comes to pass, that the mind in aduising is haled to and
fro, and it brings a perplexed study of imagination. Whereas in dividing, it
is a foul fault to leave out any thing: two things be ouerslipped in this
division. For not only whether y^ thing be honest, or dishonest, is used to
be advised upon: but also two honest things laid before us, More hone^.
two profitable things set before More profitable.
us, whether is the more profitable. So the way, which he took to be but
threefolde, is found mete to be divided into five parts. First then we have
to treat of honesty, The su^me of these. 3. boke^
but that in two sorts: next, as many ways, of profit: lastly, of the
comparison of them both.

From y^ beginni^g, to every kind of Gifts of nature.
liui^g creature it is given by nature, to defend himself, his life, and his
Things common to beas^ and men.
body: and avoid those things, which may seem likely to be harmfull: and
seek, and get all things, y^ be necessary to live withal: as feeding, as
coouerts, as other of the same sort. The appetite also of coming together for
enge^dri^gs sake, and a certain tenderness over the^ that be engendered, is a
common thing to al liui^g creatures. But bitween man, and beast, this chiefly
is the Beast.
difference: that a beast, so far as he is moved by sense, bends him
Sense.
self to that only, which is present, and at hand: very smallie perceiui^g
ought past, or tocome: but man, Man.
who is partaker of reason, whereby Reason.
he sees sequels, beholds grounds, and causes of things, is not ignorant
of their procedinges, and as it were their foregoings: compares semblaunces,
and with things present joins, and knitteth things tocome: does soon
espy the course of his holle life, and to the leading thereof purueieth things
necessary. Grounds of justice.


And the said nature, thorough the power of reason, wins man to man, to a
fellowship both in talk, and also of life: and engenders a certain special
favor chiefly to themward, that are of the^ begotten: and stirs up the
companies of me^, that they be willing both to be assembled together, and
also to be seruisable one to an other: and for those causes, that they study
to purueie such things, as may furnish them for their apparaile, and for
sustinaunce: not only for themselves, but for their wives, children, and
other, whom they hold dear, and ought to defend. Which care sturreth up also
men's sprites, and makes them of more courage to do their bysinesse.

Also searching, and tracing out of Principles of wisdom
troth, is chiefly man's property. Therefore when we be void of necessary
cares, and bysinesse: the^ we ^oouet to see, to hear, and to learn somewhat:
and we think the knoweledge of things either hidden, or wo^derous, very
necessary to good and blisfull life. Whereof is gathered, that whatso is true,
simple, and pure, is fittest for the nature of man.

There is joined to this love of Sparks o^ manliness.
espying the troth, a certain desire of soueraintie: so as a wellframed mind
by nature is willing to obey noman, but him, that enstructeth, and teaches: or
him, that, for cause of his weal, justly, and lawefullie governs: wherein
stands the greatness of courage, and the contempt of worldly vanities.

And that truly is no small power Certain seeds of sobermode
of nature, and reason, that this creature only perceiues, what is order: what
it is, that becomes in deeds, and words: and what is measure. And therefore,
of those same things, which be discerned by sight, no other creature
perceives the beauty, the grace, and the proportion of parts. Which form
nature, and reason conueying from the yies to the mind, does much more judge
a beauty, a stedfastnes, and an order in counsels, and deeds fit to be
observed: and is hedefull, that it do nothing uncomely, or womannishlye: and
thereto both in all thoughts, and deeds, y^ nothing wantonly either it do, or
imagine. Of which things is forged, and Honesty.
made that honesty, that we seek: which though it be not auaunced, yet
honesty it is: and we truly say, though of no man it be commended, is yet
commendable by nature. You see, son Mark, the very form doutlesse, and
(as it were) the face of honesty: which in case it might be beholden with the
yies, would stir up (as says Plato) a maruaylous love of wisdom.

But al, y^ is honest, springs out Dutiful demeanor.
of some one of the four branches. For it is occupied either in the insyght
wisdom.
of troth, and skilfulnesse: or in preserving the fellowship of me^, Justice.
and giving every body his own, and keeping a faithfulness in co^tractes: or
in the greatness, and mightiness Manl^sle.
of haute, and unconquerable courage: or else in the order, and measure
Temperance.
of all things, that are done, and said, wherein rests discretion, and
temperance. Which four, though they be linked, and ta^gled together: yet
certain several kinds of duties do grow out of every one of them: as out of
that branch, that first was descriued (wherein we place wisdom, and
prudence) issues Properties of wisdom.
the searchyng, and trying out of troth: and this is the very proper work of
that virtue. For whosoever thorowseeth most, what in every case is truest: and
who most wittily, and redily is able both to see, and give the reason: he
worthily is wont to be reputed the wittiest, and the wisest. Wherefore to
this virtue troth is appointed, as the matter, whereupon to work, and wherein to
be occupied. But to the other three virtues are assigned necessities, Duties
of justice, and man^nesse.
to get, and keep those things, whereby the trade of man's life is maintained:
to the intent the fellowship, and neighborhood of men be preserved: and the
worthiness, and greatness of courage may shine abroad: not only in
augmenting of substance, and procuring of commodities both to him, and his,
but also much more in despising of the same.

But order, and stedfastnes, and measure Properties of tempera^nce.
keeping, and such like, have to do^ in y^ ki^de: whereunto must be joined a
certain doing, and not only an ernest occupieng of the wit. For applieng a
certain mean, and order to such things, as be meddled with in man's life, we
shall observe both honesty, and comeliness.

Now of those four places, wherinto Wisdom^.
we have divided the nature, and strength of honesty, y^ same first, y^
Knowle^ge of ^routh.
(...) in knowledge of troth, touches ma^ns kind nerest of all. For we be
all drawn, and led to a desire of knowledge, and science: wherein to pass
other, we think it a goodlye matter: but to slide, to err, to be ignorant, to
be deceived, we count it both evil, and dishonest. In this kind faults to
(...) avoided.
of virtue, which is both natural, and honest, two fauts must ^e avoided: one,
that we take not things, we (...) of rash^ iudg^ment.
know not, as though we knew the^, and rashly assent to the^. Which fault
whosoever will esch^w (all certes ought The remedy
to be willing) must emploie to the considering of matters both leisure, and
diligence. An other fault there is, that some bestow over great Maine
curiosity.
study, and to much travail, in derk, and difficult things, and the same
nothing necessary. Which Duty in thi^ behalf.
faults avoided, whatsoever labor, and diligence shall be spent in honest
things, and worthy of knowledge, the same of right shall be commended: Good
kno^ledge.
as in Astrology, we have herd, what Caius Sulpitius was: in Geometry, we
knew, what Sertus Pompeius could do: many in Logik, mo in the civil law:
which sciences be all occupied in tracing out the troth: with y^ study
whereof to be drawn from trauailyng in matters, it is against duty. For
virtues holle praise consists in doing: from which yet Practice.
oftentimes there is had a restyng while, and there be granted many recourses
again unto study: yea and the musyng of the mind, that Speculation.
never cease, may continue us in the studies of contemplation, even without
our trauail. But let every thought, and moving of the mind be occupied either
in taking of aduisement about honest matters, and perteining to the good, and
blisfull life: orels in studies of science, and knowledge. And thus have we
spoken of the first fountain of duty.

But of the other three virtues Of justice, as it is general.
remaining, that kind extends fardest: wherein is contained the fellowship
of men among them selves, and (as it were) the enterpartening of man's life.

Whereof there be two parts: Particular justice.
justice is one, in the which is the greatest brightness of virtue, whereof good
men bear their name: and to this is joined bountiefulnesse, Liberality.
gentleness, or liberality.

But the principal duty of justice Duties of justice.
unless he be provoked by wrong: the next, that he use things common, as
common, and things private, as his own. How beit by nature things Private
things.
private be none: but either by ancient possession, as of theirs, who in old
time came into waste grounds: or by victory, as of theirs, who got things in
war: or by law, covenant, condition, or lotte. Whereof it co^mes to pass,
that the ground Arpinas is counted the Arpinatia^s: the ground Tusculane, the
Tusculanians. And after this sort is the pointing out of private possessions.
Whereupon seeing there is made a man's own of every one of those things, which
by nature were common: let every one enjoy, that to every one is befallen. More
tha^ that, if any man will covet to himself, he shall break the law of man's
fellowship. But because (as it is notably written of Plato) we be borne ^lato
to Architas.
not for our selves alone: but somedeal of our birth our country, somedeal our
parents, somedeal our friends do claim: and (as likes the Stoikes)
whatsoever is bredde The Stoiks
upon earth, all to the use of man is created: but man for man's own cause is
begotten, that they among themselves, one may help an other: herein we be
bound to follow nature Common fellowship.
our leader: and to set abroad, that may serve for common commodities, by
enterchau^ge of duties in giving, and taking: and also by arts, by trauail, by
riches, to knitte the fellowship of man with man.

But faithfulness is the foundation Faithfulness
of justice: which is in word, and covenant, a troth, and steadfastness.
Whereupon though this shall seem to some perchance ouerhard: yet let us be
bold to follow the Stoiks: which heedfullie search out, from whence words be
fetched: and let us think, that it is called faithfulness, because it is
fullfilled, which was faithed.

Contrariwise, there be two kinds Injustice.
of injustice. One of such, as offer it: an other, of those, who, though they
be able, do not defend wrong from the^, to who^ it is offered. For whosoever
vniust^ie does make assault upon any man, either stirred by choler, or any
passion, he seems as with violence, to kill his fellow: and whosoever defe^deth
not, nor withsta^deth iniuri^, if he be able, is as far in fault: as if he
should forsake his parents, his friends, or his country.

And in deed those injuries, that Occasions of wrong doing.
(...) done of purpose to hurt, do oftentimes arise of fear: when he, who
Fear.
that unless he do it to the other, he may himself be touched with some
discommoditie.

And for the most part many men Conetousnes
to comepasse those things, that they have coueted: in which ki^de of vice,
covetousness most largely shows The use of riches.
herself. Notwithstanding riches be coueted, both for necessary uses of the
life, and also to enjoy pleasures. But in those, in whom there is a greater
courage, coveting of money has an yie to power, and ableness of pleasuring: as
of late Marcus Crassus the rich.
Crassus denied any substance to be great enough for him, that in a common
weal would be a prince: while he were not able with his revenue to maintein an
army. Su^ptuous furnitures do also delight, and countenance of life, with
fijnnesse, and plenty. By which means it is come to pass, that endless is
the desire of riches.

And truly the enlargement of a man's private goods, hurtful to nobodie, is
not to be dispraised: but evermore injury is to be shonned. But the most
part of men chiefly Ambition.
be brought to forgette justice: when they fall into y^ desire of rule, honor,
or glory. For that, which is in Ennius,

In empire is no godly fellowship, nor no faith, Ennius.
reaches further. For whatsoever is of such sort, wherein many ca^ not be
chief: therein commonly happens so great contention, that very hard it is to
keep a godly society. The storm of Caius Caesar Caius Julius Caesar.
declared that of late: who turned topset toruie all the laws of God, and man,
for that souerainties sake, which he to himself, by the error of his own
conceit, had imagined. And in this kind, it is a greefful case: that desires
of honor, rule, power, and glory be commonly in the greatest corages, and
goodliest wits. Wherefore the more head must be taken, that we offend nothing
in that behalf.

But there is a great diversity in Of two sorts in wrong doing, whether is
the woorsse.
all injustice, whether the wrong be done of any stir of the mind, which
co^monlie is but short, and for a season: orels of purpose, and advisedly.
For the harms be easier, that befall of some sode^ mood, tha^ such, as be
done being devised, and prepared for. And thus we have said enough of doing
injury.

But there are wont to be many causes, why we refuse to defend an other, and
do leave our duty. For (...), why some do (...) duty, in not resisti wrong.
men be unwilling to take upon the^ either displeasure, or trauail, or charges:
orels they be so given to necligence, slothfulness, idleness, private studies,
or certain bisinesse: that they suffer the^ to be helpless, who^ they ought to
save harmless. Wherefore we must look, lest it Idle Philosophers disalowed.
be not sufficient, that is spoken of Plato, touching the Philosophers: y^
therefore they be just, because they be occupied in tracig out troth: and
because they despise, and set at naught such things, as the most part of men
greedily desire, and among themselves ar wont to be at daggers drawing for
the same. For while they attein one kind of justice, that they hurt noma^ with
doing of injury, they fall into the other. For being let with the study
of lerning, they forsake the^, who^ they ought to defend. And therefore he
thinks, they would not enter into the co^monweale, were they not co^pelied. But
it were more reason, that voluntarily it should be done. For whatso is rightly
done, the same therbie is just, if it be voluntary. There be also, who either
for love of saving their substance, or a certain hatred to me^, do say, that
they meddle only with their own matters: lest they may seem to do any
body wrong: who, while they be void of one kind of injustice, do run
into the other. For they forsake the fellowship of life: because they bestow
no study, no labor, nor substance upon it.

Seeing then after the declaring Brief rehersall of things before.
of the two kinds of injustice, we have thereto joined the causes of either
kind: and have set out those things before, wherein justice is contained: we
may easily judge, what is the duty of every season, except we favor
ourselves to far. For Care of other men's mater^
it is hard to have a carfulness over other me^nes matters: although thatsame
Chremes in Tere^ce cou^teth nothing strange to him, of ought that perteins to
man.

Nevertheless because we perceive and feel those things more: that do
happen to ourselves, either luckily, or vnfortunateli^, than such as befall to
other: which (as ye would say) we behold a great way of: we judge
otherwise of the^, then of ourselves. Therefore they teach well, that forbid
to do any thing, which ye doubt, whether it be right, or wrong. For the very
right shines of itself: but douting declares an imagination of wrong.
Exceptions in duties par teining to faithfulness.


But often there befall seasons, that those duties, which seem to be most
meet for a just man, and him, whom we call a good man, be changed, and
becomme contrarious: so that sometime it is just not to restore, that is laid
to keep: also, not to perform promise with a mad man: and to deny those
things, which concern ones troth, and honesty. For it is meet, they be
referred to those foundations of justice: which I laid in the beginning:
first, that no man be hurt: next, that common profit be served. When these be
changed by time: changed is duty, that it remains not always alike. For
there may chance some promise, and covenant: that may be unprofitable to be
performed, either to him, to who^ it is promised: orels to him, that promised
it. For (as it is in the fables) if Neptunus Of These^, and Neptunus.
had not done, that to Theseus he promised: Theseus had not been bereft of his
son Hippolytus. For of the three boones (as is written) that was the third,
which in his fury he asked, for the death of Hippolytus: and when he had
obtained it, he fell into heavy wailinges. Therefore neither those promises ar
to be fulfilled, which are unprofitable to the^, to whom you made them: nor if
they hurt you more, the^ they profit him, whom you promised.

It is against duty, the greater

Now who seeith not? that it is not meet to stand to those promises. which a
man has promised being constrained with fear, or deluded with guile. Which
things, for the most (...) ought to lean to the equity of the law.


Wrongs also oftentimes do rise upon a certain cauillacio^, and over crafty,
and subtle misco^struing of the law: whereupon y^ saying, Extreem law, extreem
wrong, is now made a welworne proverb in co^municatio^. In which kind many
things be done amiss, even in the commo^weales Cleomenes, a Lacedemonian.
matters: as he, who, when the truce was taken with the enemy, for xxx. days,
ouerra^ne his land in the night: because the truce was taken for days, and not
for nights. No nor yet our cou^treima^ is to be allowed: Q. Fabius Labeo.
if it be true, that Quintus Fabius Labeo, or any other man (for I have
nothing, but by hearesaye) being by the Senate appointed dayesman to y^
Nolanes, and Neapolitanes, about y^ bounds of their land, did common with
either of the^ aparte, when he ca^me to the place: that they should not do,
nor covet any thing greedily: and that rather they would serte back, tha^
encroche upon each other. Which when either of them had so done: there was a
percel of ground left in the mids. And so he caused their bounds to be
staked out, even as they had told him: the residue, that was in the mids,
he adjudged to the people of Rome. This plainly is to deceive, and not to
judge. Wherefore such wiliness in every case is to be avoided.

There be certain duties also to be Ponnishing of (...).
observed even toward the^, of whom you have received wrong. For in revenge,
and chastiseme^t, there is a measure to be used. And I wotte not, whether it be
sufficient for him, y^ began, to repent him of the wrong: Hitherto o^ civil
justice.
but that he be ponnished, that he commit not y^ like offense again: and yt
other also may be the slower to do wrong.

And the law of arms must in any wise be kept, in the co^mo^weale. Of
justice in war.
of contention, one by reasoning, an other by violence: and the first is the
property of man, the second, of Speech.
Force.
beast: we must flee to the latter, if we may not use the former.

Wherefore to this end, and purpose The end of war, peace.
we must enter in war: that without injury we may live in peace: and Duties
in the end of wars.
when the victory is gotten, they must be saved, who have not been cruel, nor
vnmercieful in fight: as our aunceters eue^ into the city received the
Tusculanes, the Equianes, the Uolscianes, the Sabines, and the Hernikes: but
they utterly razed Cartage, and Numance. Corinth I would, they had not: but I
believe, they chiefly respected the situation: lest the very place might
encorage the^, at any time, to move war.

After my mind certesse, it is Peace allwaies to be sought.
meet always to give counsel to peace, that shall have in it no fraud, nor
guile. Wherein if men had agreed to me: we should have had, although not the
best, yet some co^mo^weale, which now is none. And The vanquished.
not only for the^ ye must provide, whom by force you have subdued: but they
also, who come in with The yielded.
yielded weapons, upon affiaunce in the captain (although the Ra^me has
battered the wall) ar to be received: In which poincte, justice has been so
greatly regarded Example of the ancient Romans.
with our me^: that they, who had taken cities to mercy, or nations conquered
in war, should be their patrones, by the custom of our auncete^s. And the
justice of war is The ^eciall law of bidding (...).
most syncerelie descriued, in the fecial law of the people of Rome. Whereby
may be perceived, that no war is just: but which either for things in claim
is moved, or is proclaimed before, and bidden by defiau^ce. Pompilius the
Romans general kept a province: in whose army, Catoes son went for a
Conscience in keeping their oath of warfare.
young soldier a warrefare. And when it liked Pompilius to discharge one
legion: he discharged Catoes son also, who served in that legio^ as a
soldier. But when he, for love of the wars, remained in the camp still:
Cato did write to Pompilius, that if he would suffer him to remain in the
army, he should swear him soldiour again: because he might not lawfulli fight
with the enemy, the former oath being discharged. So passi^g great regard
they had in making their wars. There is a letter abroad, of Marcus Cato, the
old man, to Marcus his son: wherein he wrote, that he herd, he was discharged
by the Consul, being a soldier in Macedonie, at the Persian wars. He
warnes him therefore to beware, that he enter not the battle: for he denies,
that it is lawful for him, that is no soldier, to fight with the enemy.

And this also I note, that he, Their gentle naming their enemies, Hosts.
which by his proper name was Perduellis, that is to meane^, an open enemy,
was called Hostis: the myldenes of the word asswagi^g the haynousnesse of the
thing. For he was called Hostis, with our aunceters, who^ now we name
Peregrinum, a stranger. That the twelve tables declare, Aut status dies cum
host: and again, Aduersus bostem eterna auctoritas. What may there be added to
this kind of gentleness? to call him by so fair a name, with whom you make
war.

Notwithstanding process of time Hostis is now taken for an enemy.
makes that name now more odious: for it is gone from the signification of
Peregrinus, that is to say a stranger: and properly it stands for him, y^
bears armor against one. But when there is fighting for empire, Duties in
wars holden for honor, or life.
and glory is sought by war: yet it behooves always, that the very same
causes be therein, which I declared a little before to be y^ just causes of
war. But those wars are not so cruelly to be made, which be purposed for
the glory of empire. For as, when we strive in the city, we do otherwise, if
one be our enemy, otherwise, if he be but suter against us: for with the one
the strife is for honor, and dignity, with the other, for life, and honesty:
eue^ so war was holde^ with the Celtibers, and with the Cimbers, as with our
enemies, whether should live, and not whether should rule: but with the
Latins, the Sabines, the Samnites, the Penes, and with Pyrrhus, y^ fight was
about empire, and dominion. The Penes were leagbreakers, Annibal was cruel,
the rest were iuster me^. That is a noble saying Pyrrhus answer to the Romans.
doutlesse of Pyrrhus, about the restoring of prisoners.

No gold do I crave, no price offer me: Uerses of Ennius.
No hucsters of war, warremen as we be, With dint for our life fight we,
not with gold^. Whether you for to reign, or me the lady would Chance tryie
we by force. This ansuer eke bare: Whose manhod the hap of batell will
spare, Their freedom I purpose to favor also. Them give I, them take: the
gods will it so. A princely saying forsothe, and wellbeseemig the lineage of
y^ Aiacida^s.

Likewise if private men, driven Private pro^es to the enemy.
by occasions, shall promise ought to the enemy: they must keep their promise
therein. As Regulus did, Example of Regulus.
that was taken of the Carthaginers in the first Punik wars: who, when he was
sent to Rome, about the enterchaunging of prisoners: and had sworn, that he
would return: first, as soon as he came, his advise was in the Senatehouse,
that the prisoners should not be restored: afterward, when he should have been
stayed of his kinsfolk, and friends: he was more willing to return to
ponnishment, than to break his promise given to the enemy.

And in the second Punike wars, after Cannas feelde, the How the Cesors ponm.
^sors sessed at a yearlie fine all s^ed certain (...).
those ten (as long as any of the^ ^ued, that tarried still, and were
forsworn) which Annibal sent to Rome, upon their oath, that they should
return: except they obtained the raunsoming of those, that were prisoners there:
and nolesse they sessed him, which for the deceiving of his oath, had devised
an excuse. For when by Annibals license, upon his oath to return, he was gone
without the camp: he returned within a little while after, making his excuse,
that he had forgotten, I wo^ not what. Afterward, being gone out of the ca^pe,
he thought himself discharged of his oath: and in words he was, but not in
deed. For A gener^ rule.
alwa^S in promise must be considered, what ye mean, not what ye say. But the
greatest example A notable e^ ample of the Romans equity.
of justice toward the enemy was showed by our aunceters. When a runawaye
traitor from Pyrrhus T^ochares
had promised the Senate, that he would give the king poyso^, and kill him: the
Senate, and Caius Fabritius did deliver the ru^aw^ traitor to Pyrrhus. In such
sort, with treachery, they allowed not the death of their enemy: and such a
one, as was both mighty, and moved war unprovoked. Thus of warrefaring
duties there is enough spoken.

Let us remember also, that even Justice in housholding.
to be kept. The basest degree, and state is of slaves: whom they, Slaves.
that will ye so to use, as hired men, in requiring their work, and giving
them their due, do teach you not amiss.

But whereas injuries may be Hurtes.
done two ways, that is to sai^, other by force, or by gyle: gyle seems
Force, Gyle.
as of the for, force as of the lio^: both introuthe ar very unfit for man,
yet gyle deserves the greater hatered. But of all injustice none is more
pestilent, tha^ theirs: which when they begyle a man most, yet False
semblaunte.
so handle the matter, that they will Hitherto, of the particular justice.
seem to be wellmeaning men. Of justice here is said enough.

Let us now speak, as we purposed, Of liberality 2. part of the genesis justice.
of bountiefulnesse, and liberality, for nothing without doubt is to the
nature of man more agreeable.

Notwithstanding it has diverse exceptions. Exceptions.
For first, we must see, yt How.
those, to whom bou^tiefullie it shall seem to be done, and also othermo: How
much.
tha^ our ability: thirdly, that to euerienia^ To whom.
worthiness. For that is the fou^datio^ of justice, whereto all these must be
applied. j. For both they, yt pleasure Partia^
of honor, and glory: who do catch from so^me, that they may lavish to an
other: and these suppose, that they shall seem bountiefull to their ^endes, if
they may enriche them any manner way. But that is so far of from duty, that
nothing may be more cont^arious to duty. We must see therefore, that we use
such liberality, as may profit our fre^des, and hinder nobodie. Wherefore
^annie.
Lucius Syllaes, and Caius Cesars conueyeng of g^odes from the just owners to
strangers must not be thought liberality. For nothing is liberal, which same
is not just.

The second point of exception was, Foolelarge.
will be lauisher, tha^ their goods will bear: they chiefly offend in this,
that they be injurious unto their next akinne. For they convey thosesame riches
to fre^ne folk: which it were more reason both^ to be dealt, and left to their
kinsfolk.

And there is in such liberality a ^ortion.
greediness oftentimes of catchi^g, and pulling awa^e with injury, that there
may be sto^e to lash out. A man may see some also do much, not by nature so
liberal, as led with (...).
a certain glory, y^ they may seem bountieful: which things may be thought
to come rather of a brag tha^ of a free heart. Such a fa^sse fainig is a
nearer neibour to vanity, than either to liberality, or to honesty.

The third restraint, we s^ake of,

Howbeit because we lead not The first (...) of the third rule, touching
manners.
wise: but with such, as in whom it is a goodly matter, if there be
resemblaunces of virtue: I (...) this also meet to be considered, that we
despise no manner man, in whom any sign of virtue does appear: and
specially, that eueryman so be regarded, as echeman chiefly shall be
garnished with these gentler kinds of virtues, sobermoode, temperau^ce, and this
same justice, whereof allredie much has been spoken. For a manly courage, and a
great is commonly so^mewhat to fervent in a man, that wa^tes of perfection,
and wisdom: but those other virtues seem rather to pertein to a good man.
Thus much in manners may be considered.

But concerning love, that any ^ction toward us.
man bears toward us, this is the chief poi^cte of duty: that we give most
to him, of whom we ar most beloved. But we must measure good will, not after
the gyse of yongmen, by a certain heat of love: but rather by assur^nesse, Of
r^iting a good turn.


But in case a man's derseruing be such, that we have not to seek to creep
in favor, but to requite his kindness: a certain greater care is then to be
used. For there is no duty more necessary, than requiting of kyndnesse. And if
H^siodus wills ye, with larger measure (if ye may) to restore such things, as
ye have borrowed to occupy: what then ought we to do, provoked by benefits?
Must we not do like the fruitful feeldes, that yield much more, than they
received? For if we stick not to bestow pleasures upon them, who, we hope,
will profit us hereafter: what manner men ought we to be toward them, that have
done us good allredie? For whereas there be two kinds of liberality: one, of
doing a benefit, an other of requiting: whether we will do it, or no, is in
our own choice: but to leave ought unrequited, is not law full for a good man:
so he may do it without injury. But there Choice in (...).
be respects to be had of benefits received: and there is nodoute, but
most is due to the greatest.

Wherein specially yet is to be wesed Measure the gift by the giuers good heart.
of what mind, affection, and good will, a man has done it. For many me^
do many things of a certei^ heddinesse, wtoute discretion, or measure,
toward euerima^: or^ls with a certain soden braide of mind carried, as with the
wind: which benefits are not to be counted alike great, as those, that be
offered with judgment advisedly, and constantly. But in placing of
benefits, A general (...).
and requiting kindness (if all other things be correspo^de^t) this is a
pri^cipall poincte of duty: that as euerieman most needs help, so him most
of all we aid. Which contrariewise is done of a great meanie: for of whom
they hope most, although he has no need of them, yet to him they are most
seruisable.

But the felouship, and neibourhod The felo^ship of life.
if as eueriema^ shall be nerest us, so on him we bestow most liberalitic.

But what be natures principles of neibourhod, and the felouship of man, I
think good, to fetch so^what

For the first is that, which is to The fir^ degree of felouship.
see in the felouship of al mankind. The bond whereof is reason, and Reason,
and speech,
speech: which by teachi^g, learnig, conferring, reasoning, and judging,
wins one man to an other, and ioineth them in a certain natural felouship.
Nor by any thing further we differ from the nature of sanage beasts: in whom
we say oftentimes there is an hardiness: as in horses, and lions: but we never
say, they have justice, equity, and goodness: for they be void of reason,
and of speech. And surelic this is y^ felouship, that spreads most largely
with men among themselves, and with all among all: in the which there must be
kept a co^monnesse of all things, y^ nature has bredde to the common use of
man: so as the things, which be appointed Civil lawe^,
by statutes, and the civil law, be observed in such sort, as it is ordained:
beside which, all other things The l^we of nature,
ar so to be observed, as is in the Greek proverb: Emonge friends Things
common.
al things be common. But all those things seem common to all men, which be
of that kind: as, being Ennius,
put for example by Ennius in one thing, may be applied to many.

The m^n, that gently shows the way unto the ^andering wight,

Doth^, as if (...) a candle should at his own candle light,

That nathelesse' it light himself, when lighted is the other.

For enough is taught us by one example: y^ whatsoever we may le^d without
hinderaunce, it be granted to every body, yea to the unknown. Whereupon
these things be common: Not to forbid one the A measure in common lib.
need it: common liberalite must be referred to that end of Ennius: That
nathelesse it light himself: so as there may be an ability, wherewith we may be
liberal to our own.

There be mo degrees yet of the felouship Nerer degrees offe^ouship.
endless noumber: there is a nier degret to be of one country, of one
C^untrieme.
nation, of one language: by the which, men be chieflye knit together.

A nerer also it is, to be of one city. Citiezen^.
to citiezens among them selves: as lawcourts, churches, galereywalkes,
hyewayes, statutes, laws, judgments, voices, customs: and besides these,
familiarities, and having to do in sondrie matters, and bargains with sondrie
folk.

But a faster knitting of men together ^red.
For out of that i^numerable felouship of ma^kinde, it is driven to a little,
and a narowe comepasse. For whereas by nature this is common to all living
creatures, to have a lust to enge^dering: the first felouship is in very
wedlok: y^ next, in childern: and after yt, one house, and all things common.
And this is y^ original of a city and as it were y^ seedplotte of a
co^mo^weale. The^ follow y^ kinreds of brethern: after, of brothers and sisters
childern: who, when they now cannot be contained in one house, get the^ abroad
to other houses, as i^to neew tounes. Then follow entermariages, and aliaunces,
of which also mo kinsfolk do arise. Which multiplication, and succession is
the root of co^monweales. Surely the matching of bloodes, and good will that
rises thereof, knitteth men in love together. For it is a great matter to have
the like monumentes of au^ceters, to use al one religion, and to have the same
burial places.

But of all felouships there is none Friendship among good men.
good men alike in conditions be enfeloushipt in familiarity together. For
that honesty (which we have often mentioned) although we see it in an other,
yet it moves us and makes us fre^des to hi^, in whom the same seems to
dwell. And though al virtue allureth us to her, and causes us to love the^, in
whom she seems to harber: yet justice, and liberality works that most of
all. But there is nothing, that wins more love, nor surelier knitteth men
together, than a likeness in good conditions. For in whom be like desires,
and like minds: it happens among them, that either with other is as much
delited, as with himself: and it is brought to pass, that Pythagor as requires
in amity, that man^e beco^me one.

That common felouship also is Good tur^ done from one to an other.
to and fro give, and taken. Which while they be common from one to an other,
and pleasurefull: they among whom those happen, be tied in a fast felouship.

But when ye have per used all Love of comon^eale.
mind: of all felouships there is none more acceptable, nor derer, than the
same, which every one of us has with the commonweal. Dear be our parents,
dear be our children, dear be our kinsfolk, and familiars: but our country
conteines in it alone all the dear love of the^ all: for the which, what good
man doutes to take his death, if he may profit the same? Whereby their beastly
cruelty is y^ more to be abhorred: who have rent a so^der their ^ou^trey with all manner of mischief: and both be, and have been occupied in y^ utter
ouerthrowi^g thereof.

But if question, or comparison Comparing of degrees.
be made, to whom the greatest duty ought to be yielded: our country,
Country.
and parents be the chief, by whose Parents.
benefits we are most bound: our children, and all our holle family be the
next: which hang al upon us Childern.
alone, and can have none other refuge: Family.
then be our kinsfolk, that agree ^insfolke.
well with us: which commonly stand in the like estate. Wherefore the
necessary aides of life be due to the^ chiefly, whom I spoke of before: but
conversation, and co^monnesse of table, cou^selinges, co^munications, Friends.
exhortations, co^mefortinges, yea and chydi^ges otherwhile among friends be
most used: and that is the pleasau^test friendship, which likeness of
conditions has yoked in one.

But in doing all these duties, This order ^s often altered, as psones and
times require.
we must mark, what is most need full for every man: and what every body is
able, or unable by us, or without us, to attein. So the degrees of
frendshippes shall not d^ alike with the degrees of times: and there be duties,
which are due to some, more tha^ to other sum: as you shall sooner help your
neibour Example^
in inning his corn, than either your brother, or your familiar friend: but if
there be a trauers in law: you shall rather defend your kinsman, and friend,
than your neibour. These therefore, and such like must be thorowlie considered
in every duty: and we must Use, and exercise.
so use, and practice our selves, that we may be good countmakers of duties:
and see by adding, and deducting, what sum rises of the rest: whereupon we
may understand, how much is due to euerieman. But as neither physicians, nor
capteins, nor orators, although they have conceived the rules of their
science, can attein any thing worthy great praise, without use, and
practice: so those rules of keeping duty ar in deed taught us, that we our
selves should put them in ure: but the hardness of the matter also requires
use, and exer^se.

And how honesty, from which, ^utie springs, is setched out of those
things, that be within y^ law of man's felouship: we have in a manner said
enough.

But we must note, that, whereas (...) (...)
virtues pointed out, from the which, honesty, and duty should flow: y^
(...) of the ^ame.
seems to shine brightest: which is wrought with a great, and lofty courage,
despisig worldly vanities. And therefore in reproach it is commonly ready, if
any such thing may be said, as this:

You yongmen iwis carry women's hertes, That virgin, a man's.

Likewise if ought be like to this:

A goodly great spoil at Salmacis won: Without any blood, or swette was
it done.

And on the other side, in praises, those deeds, that be done manfully,
notably, and with great courage, I wot not how as with open mouth we commend.
Hereof came the rhetoricians large feelde upon Marathon, Salamis, Plateians,
Thermopylanes, Leuctria^s, and Stratocles: hereof our Cocles, hereof the Occians,
hereof Cneus, and Publius the Scipiocs, hereof Marcus Marcellus, and other
innume rabble, and specially the people o^ Rome did exceed in greatness o^
courage. And their desire of martia glory is declared: in that we see their
images of honor be set up, f^ the most part, in warrlike array.

But if that hawtienesse of courage Ma^h^d (...) justice falls into diverse
extreems.
which is seen in perels, and travails, be void of justice, and does not
fight for a common safety, but for a private profit: it is to be reckened
faulty. For that not only is not the property of virtue, but rather of
brutishness, setting all Brutishne^,
humanity aside. Therefore manliness is well defined of y^ Stoikes: where they
say, it is a virtue, that (...) hat is manliness,.
fights in defense of equity.

Wherefore noman, yt has atteined the glory of manliness, ever got praise by
wily trains, and craftiness. For nothing may be honest, that is void of
justice. A worthi^ saying therefore is that of Platoes, who says,

That not only the knowledge, which is severe, from ius^ee, is rather to be
called subteltie, (...) wisdom: but also the courage, which is forward to
danger, if it be set on for ones own greedi: nesse, and not for a comem
profit: may rather Foolehardinesse.
bear the name of lewed hardiness, than of man: linesse.

Wherefore who be manly men, and stouteherted: those same we wonld have also
be good, and plain, lovers The manly must be plain.
of troth, and nothing at all deceitful: which come out of the midst of
all the praises of justice.

But this is odious, that in such Impedime^tes of this virtue.
hawtienesse, and greatness of courage, there grows a wilfulness veriesoone,
Sturdinesse.
Desire of souerantie.
and an ouerseeking of rule. For as it is in Plato, that it was all the manner
of the Lacedaemonians, to be enflamed with desire of conquering: so as every
man does most excel other in greatness of courage, he will likewise be the
very highest over all, or rather without pere. And when you covet to be above
all, it is hard to keep au equity, which is most proper to justice. Whereof
commes topasse, that they can not abide to be bridled neither with reasoning,
nor with any common, and rightful order of law: and they becomme in the
commonweal for the most part giftgiuers, and partmakers: that they may
attein to y^ greatest power, and be rather by might superior, than by justice
equal. But the harder it is to master the affection, the worthier is the
mastrie.

For there is no season, that ought to be without justice. They therefore be
counted manly, and of great courage, not who do anic wrong, but who
withstand it. But a true, and wise stoutehert judges that honesty, which
nature chiefly follows, to stand in deeds, and not in glory: and had
rather The most part likes not the best things.
be, than seem the chief. For whosoever hangs upon the wavering of the
unskillful multitude, he is not to be counted among the nou^ber of manly men.
But as every Glory.
man is of the highest courage, and disirous of glory: so is he soonest egged to
unjust doings.

Which is indeed a very slipper place: because scase there is any man found,
who when he has sustained travails, and auentured dangers, does not desire
glory, as reward of his dooinges.

A manly courage, and a great The duties of manliness.
is always by two things chiefly discerned: whereof the one stands in the
contempt of outward things: Contempt of casual thiges.
when it is persuaded, that a man ought not either to esteem, either wish, or
desire any thing, but that is honest: and unseemly to yield to none, neither
man, nor affection, Doing of great entrep^ses.
thing is, y^ when you be so disposed in courage, as I said before: ye do great
entreprises, and those same right profitable: but yet very hard, and full of
trauail, and danger, both for life, and for many things, that to life do
belo^ge. All y^ glory, and honor of these two things, I add there to the
profit, stands in the latter: but the cause, and mean, that makes manly men,
is in the former. For in it is that, which Contempt of outward things.
as despise the worlds vanities.

But thissame rests in two things: if both you judge that only to be
good, which is honest, and also ^nlie honesty good.
be free from all moodinesse of mind. Uoiding of affections.
For it is to be counted the part of a great, and manly courage, both to set
light by those things, which do seem precious, and gorgeous to the greater
noumbre: and also to despise the same, with a sted fast, and grounded
judgment: and likewise it is a sign of mighty courage, and great sted
fastness, so to bear those things: which seem bitter, and be much, and
so^drie ways tossed in man's life, and fortune: as nothing you swerve from the
order of nature, nor the worthiness of a wiseman. And it is not meet, that he
be subdued The manly man is never vanquished of his own affections.
with desire, who is not subdued with fear: nor yt he be ouerco^me with
pleasure, who has showed himself unable to be ouerco^me with trauail. Wherefore
both these faults ar to be avoided, and also Couetise of money.
covetousness of money is to be eschewed. For nothing is so much a sign of a
small, and sle^der courage, as to love richesse: nothing there is honester, and
nobler, tha^ to despise money, if you have it not: and if you have it, to
bestow it in bounteousnesse, and liberality. We must also beware of desire of
glory, as I said tofore. For it pulles away the freedom Love of glory.
of the mind: for the which, all the endeavor of stouteherted men Desire of
rule.
should be. And verelie we ought not to seek for rule, but rather not to
receive it so^etime, or otherwhile to give it over. And we must be free from al
troublesome stir of mind: Uoidaunce of evil affectious.
from desire, and fear, from hertsicknesse, and voluptuousness, and
angrinesse: that we may have quietness of mind, and voidnesse of care: the
which may bring both steadfastness, and also a worthy estimacion.

But diverse there be, and have Of officebea^ing, or refusing.
been: who desiring thatsame quietness, that I speak of, have withdrawn
themselves from common affairs, and have got them to quietness. Among
these, both the noblest philosophers, and the very chief, and also certain
upright, and grave men neither could abide the manners of the people, nor of the
rulers: and many of them have lived in desert places, as delited only with
their homematers. These shoot at the same mark, yt kings do: that is, to
have need of nothing, to obey noman, and to use their own liberty: whose
property Liberty.
is, to live asye list. Wherefore sith this is common both to the desirous of
power, and those (whom I spoke of) that lead the quiet life: the one sort
do think themselves able to comepasse it, if they have great wealth: the
other, if they be contented with their own, and a little. Wherein verily the
opinion of another of them is utterly to be despised: but the life of The
philosophers life.
the quiet livers is both easier, and safer, and less grievous, or The
magistrates life.
troublesome to oother: and theirs is the profitabler for mankind, and fitter
for fame, and honor: who have applied themselves to the commonweal, and going
thorough with great matters. Wherefore perauenture both they are to be borne
withal, that take Refusing of government in the co^monweale.
not in hand the commonweal, who of an excellent wit have applied themselves
to learning: and also they, who being let either by sicklines, or so^e other
more weighty cause, have conveyed themselves away from the co^monweale: when
they were well content to leave to other y^ authority, and praise of ruling
the same. But to whom there is no such occasion: if they say they set naught by
those things, that most men have in admiration, as rule, and officebearing:
to these I think it worthy to be counted not only no praise, but also a
fault. Whose judgment it were very hard to disalow, in that they despise
glory, and esteem it as nothing: but they seem to fear the troubles, and I
fear contrary to ma^linesse.
greeues both of giving offense, and having repulses, as a certain reproach,
and defame. For there be, who do little agree with themselves in things, that
be contrary: as so^me most earnestly conte^me pleasure, and in pain be
somewhat tenderer: so^me regard not glory, and be broken with sclaunder: and
these things they do not with sufficient steadfastness. But all lingering
set aside, offices ar to be taken, and the commonweal to be served of Such as
(...) meet, must serve the co^monweale.
those: who have by nature y^ helps of dispatch of matters. For otherwise can
neither the state be governed, nor the greatness of courage be declared. And of
such as take upon them the co^monweale, nolesse than Magistrates ought to
avoid pass^s of min^e, noles^e than philosophers.
of philosophers, yea and I wott not whether more, must be used both a
majesty, and a contempt of worldly things (which I often repeat) and also a
quietness of mind, and voidnesse of care: for so they shall not be
thoughtfull, and with grauite, and sted fastness they shall lead their life.
Which things be so much the Philosophers minds be not ^pted so ma^e ways, as
magistrates.
easier to philosophers: as the fewer things lie open in their life, that
fortune may strike: and as the fewer things they stand in need of: and
because they can not take so sore a fall, if any adversity betide. Wherefore
not without cause, greater motions of minds be stirred up in them: and
greater enterprises ar meet to be compased, by the governors of the
commonweal, tha^ by the quiet livers: and therefore the more greatness of
courage, and voidnesse of greeucs ought they to use. But whosoever does come to
the doing Undertaking of e^treprises.
of matters, let him take heed: that not only this he consider, how honest
the matter is: but also that he have an ableness to discharge the same. In the
which point must be considered: that neither ouersoone he despair for
dastardlinesse, nor Despair.
overmuch have affiaunce, for greediness. Presumption.
And in all matters, before A lesson.
ye go about the^, there must be used a diligent preparation.

But whereas most men suppose Citiematers above martial feats.
martial feats to be greater, than citiecauses: this opinion is to be abated.
For many have sought war oftentimes, upon desire of glory: and it commonly
befalls in great wits, and corages: and so much themore, if they be men fit
for chivalry, and desirous of warrfare. But if we mi^de to judge truly: there
have been many citiematers greater, and nobler than martial. For though
Themistocles Exaumples of greeks. Themistocles Salamis.
be rightfullie commended, and his name is more famous, tha^ Solons: and
Salamis is cited a witness of his most glorious victory: and it is preferred
above that counsel of Solon, wherewith he first ordained Solon.
the Areopagites: yet nolesse The Areopage.
praiseworthie is this, than that, to be adjudged. For that but once auailed,
this shall for ever avail the city. By this counsel, the laws of the
Athenians, by this, The Athenians.
the orders of their elders be preserved. And Themistocles can allege
nothing, wherewith he furdered the Areopage: but Solo^ furdered Themistocles.
For yt war was maintained by the advice of that Senate, which by Solon was
established. We may say as much of Pausanias, Pausamas.
and Lysander: by whose deeds Lisander.
of arms, though the empire of the Lacedaemonians is thought to The
Lacedaemonians.
have been enlarged: yet verily they are not to be compared in the least
part, with Lycurgus laws, Lycurgus.
and order: yea moreover by these occasions, they had their armies both
forwarder, and valianter. Neither when I was a child, methought, Examples of
Romans.
Marcus Scaurus gave M. Scaurus.
place to Caius Marius: nor when C. Marius.
I had a (...) in the commonweal, Quintus Catulus, to Cneus Po^peius. Q.
Catulus.
For of small force is the ^n. Pompeius.
war abroad, unless there be good Africanus.
advise at home. Nor Africanus, both a singular man, and captein also, did
more profit y^ co^monweale in razing of Numance: tha^ at that time, Publius
Nasica, a private man P. Nasica.
did further it, when he sleew Tiberius Gracchus. Nowbeit this case in deed is
not only a citiemater. For it belongs also to the nature of martial
feats: sith it was wraught by force, and by strong hand. But yet that same
was done by citicounsell, without an army. And that is a goodly saying, where
with I hear, that I am wont to be touched of envious, and lewed persons.

To the robe above arms let glory belong, And the laurel yeeue place to the
orators tongue. For, that I may pass over other: Tullie^ Con^ship.
did not arms yield unto the robe, when I governed the co^monweale? For
neither in the commonweal was ever a sorer perell, nor yet a greater quiet. So
by our counsel, and diligence, the very weapons, full sone s^iding out of y^
boldest citizens hands, did fall to y^ ground. What enterprise, I pray you,
in war was ever done so great? what triumph is there with it to be compared?
For I may, son Mark, glory before you: to whom both the inheritance of
this glory, and the imitatio^ of my deeds does pertein. Cneus Cn. Pompeius
triumphed thrice, over the A fers, an^ the Sp^rdes, and (...) dates.
Pompeius, a man flowing full of martial praises, gave me this commendatio^, in
the hearing of many: that he said, he should in vain have borne away the
third triumph: except, by my furderau^ce, in the commonweal, he should have
had a place, where he might have triumphed. Homemanhod then is not inferior to
martial: in which also we must bestow more labor, and study, than in this.
For allwaies that honesty, which we seek in a The cause of manliness.
hawtie, and a princely courage, is wrought by y^ strength of the mind
Strength o^ the mind.
and not of the body. Yet the body Labor of the body.
must be exercised, and brought in such plight: as it may be able to follow
counsel, and reason, in executing matters, and t^steining trauail. But yt
honesty, wherafter we search allholle consists in y^ care, and casting of the
mind: wherein they bring nolesse commodity, who robed do govern the
co^monweale: than they do, who armed do make the wars. And therefore, by
their advise oftentimes, wars be either not begone, or ended, and many
times attempted: as by Marcus Catoes counsel, (...) (...).
was the third Punik war wherein the authorite of y^ dedde man auailed.
Wherefore rather wisdo^e in determini^g, tha^ ma^linesse in fighti^g is to be
desired: but we must beware y^ we take not up y^ matter by advise, more to
avoid war, than for cause of profit. And so let war be taken in war.
hand, as no other thing may seem, but peace, to have been sought.

And it is verily a token of a ma^lie The properties of a ma^lie man.
courage, and a constant, not to be disquieted in rough storms: nor in making a
hurl, to be thrust from his place, as they say: but to follow the counsel of
a present courage, nor yet to swerve from reason. Notwithstanding, the one
commes of courage: the Courage.
other proceeds of a great wit, to wit.
fore conceive in mind things ^oco^me: and so^mewhat before to appoint upon,
what may befall on both sides: and what is to be done, when any thing shall
happen: nor to co^mitt ought, yt at any time one should have cause to say,
Had I wist. These be the works of a great, and lofty courage, and leaning
upon prudence, and counsel. But for a man to use himself rashly Rash^
in feelde, and so to buckle with y^ enemy hand to hand, it is a certain
brutish, and beastlike thing: but when time is, and necessity requires, a man
must Necessity.
fight hand to hand, and preserre death before slavery, and shame.

But touching the razing, and Razing o^ cities.
sacking of cities, this greatly is to be considered: that nothing rashly,
nothing cruelly be done. And it is Justice toward the (...).
y^ condition of a stouthertedman, in y^ end of broils, to po^nish y^
offe^ders, to save y^ multitude, in every estate to maintein right, and
honesty. For like as there be (as I said tofore) who do prefer martial
feats before citiecauses: so may ye find many, to whom dangerous, and
hotebrained devises seem gloriouser, and greater, than quiet counsels. We must
never by seking to es^ Fleel. ing of perell
perell, deserve to seem cowardes, dastardes: but this we must ta^ Assailing
of ^tures.
heed of, that we put not our selue in danger, without cause: for the can be
nothing foolisher, than so (...) do. Wherefore in auenturing da^ gers, the gyse
of the physicians is (...) be followed: who do lightly cur the lightly
diseased: but to sor^ sicknesses they be driven to ministe dangerous, and
doutefull medicines, Therefore in a caulme to wish a sor^ tempest, it is a mad
man's part: bu^ to make shift in a tempest, by all manner means, it is a
wisema^s property: and so much the more, if ye attein more good, when the
thing is past, than harm, when it was in doubt. But the doing of matters be
dangerous Dangers.
(...).
partly to those, which take Common.
the^ in hand, and partly to the co^monweale. And also so^me be brought in Of
life.
hasard of their life, so^e of their glory, Of glory.
so^me of the peoples favor. We Of favor.
ought therefore to be redier to adventure A precepte of duty.
our own, tha^ common perels: and to fight sooner for honor, and glory than
for other commodities.

But there have been found many, Against them that more e^eme their own
glory. than commo^welth.
who for their country were ready to spend not only their substance, but
also their life: and thosesame yet would not be content to lose one jot of
their glory: no not though the commonweal would require it: as
Callicratides, who Callicratides
when he was captein of the Lacedaemonians, in the Peloponnesian war, and had
done many things worthily: in the end, ^uerturned all: when he did not follow
their advise: who thought good to transporte the navy from Arginnuses, and not
to fight with the Athenians. To whom he made answer, how the Lacedaemonians,
that navy being lost, might make for the an other: but he could not flee with
out his dishonor. And this was nodoute to the Lacedaemonians a metely sore
plage: but that was a pestilent plage, whereby the Lacedaemonians power fell
flat to the ground: when Cleombrotus, fearing Cleombrotus
envy, had rashely encountered with Epamiuondas. How much Q. Fabius.
better did Quintus Fabius Maximus? of whom quoth Ennius: Ennius.


One wight there is, that has our wealth
restored by delays:
For he before all rumors did
our safety set always:
wherefore, in longer course of time,
the greater is his praise.
Which kind of misdoing must Manly courage in citiematers.
be also avoided in citiematers. For there be men, who, be it never so good,
that they think, yet for fear of envy they dare not utter it.

Whosoever shall be governors of Affections, which rulers ought to resist.
the commonweal, let them observe two precepts of Platoes: one is, that
they so maintain the profit of the commons: that whateuer they do, they
refer it thereto, Mynding of private profit.
always forgettyng their own commodities: the other is, that they have care
over the holle body of the commonweal: l^ste while they Injustice.
uphold sum one part, the rest they leave destitute. For like as
gardenshippe, even so government of the commonweal ought to be used to the
profit of them, who ar co^itted: and not of them, to whom it is committed. But
whosoever provide for part of the people, and of part be recklesse: they bring
in sedition, and discord, the thing most hurtful to the co^monweale: Discord.
whereby it befalls, that sum do^ seem peoplepleasers, sum affectionate
to nobility, but few to the holle. Hereof sprange great diss^on among the
Athenians: and in our commonweal, not only sedition, but also sore civil
war: the which a grave, and stout citiezen, and worthy of rule in the
commonweal, will flee, and hate: and give himself holle to the commonweal:
and another hunt after riches, nor power: but will so defend the holle state,
as he may provide for all men. Nor by false accusations False accus^tion.
will he bring any man into hatred, or envy: but allwaies will so cleue to
justice, and honesty: y^, while he may maintein it, allthough he sore offend
other he would desire death rather, than forsake those things, that I have
spoken of. Ambicio^ nodoute, Ambition.
and striving for promotio^ is a very miserable thing: whereof it is notably
said in the same Placo: ye semblably fare they, who would strive together,
whether of them should rather rule the co^mo^weale: as if the mariners should
be at variau^ce, which of the^ should thiestie govern the helm. And the same man
has taught us: that those we take Dissension.
as enemies, which would bear armor against us: and not those, who, by their
discretion mean to preserve the commonweal: as the dissension bitwene Publius
Africanus, and Quintus Metellus was without all bitterness of malice. Neither
ar they worthy to be herd: which hold opinion, y^ we should be thoroughly
angry with our enemies: Ange^.
and do think, it is the property of a stoutherted, and a mannelie man. For
there is nothing more co^me^dable, nothing more semelie for a great and noble
man, than pleasablenesse, and mercy. But in free cities, and where there is an
equality of law, there must be used also a myldnesse, and noble courage, as
they call it: lest, if we be angry either with comers out of time, or
crauers without shame: we fall into a testifenesse of mind both unprofitable,
Frowardnes
and hateful. And yet meeknes, and mercy is so to be allowed: that, for the
commonweales sake, a severity be used: without which, a city can not be
governed. But all ponnishment, and chastisement must be void of malice: and
not be applied Malice.
to serve his tnrn, who ponnisheth, or rebukes any man, but to the
commonweales behoof.

We must also be ware, that the Rigorousnes
ponnishment be not greater, than the fault: and lest all for one matter,
Partiality.
some be corrected, sum not once spoken unto. And in ponnishing we must
chiefly refrain from Anger.
anger. For the angry man, that gothe about ponnishment, shall never keep
that measure, that is bitwene to mickle, and to little: y^ which measure likes
the Peripatetikes: and of good cause it likes them, were it so, they would not
commend angrinesse: and say, that it is profitablie Angrinesse.
given of nature. But in all cases, that affeccion is to be refused: and it is
to be wished, that such as govern the commonweal, be like the laws: which
be moved to ponnish offenders, not upon any wrath, but upon equity.

Moreover in prosperity, and when Prosperity.
things flow even at our will, let us ernestly flee pride, disdei^fulness,
Pride.
and arroga^cie. For as it is a point Disoein.
of lightness, immeasurable to bear Arrogancy.
adversity: so it is no less, immeasurable Unmeasurablenesse.
to use prosperity: and a continual Socrates and Lei^us kept ever one
countenauce.
euenesse in all a man's life, and one chere evermore, and one manner of face
is commendable: as we have herd of Socrates, and also of Caius Lelius.
Certesse I see, how Alexander over ^refull his father of more humanity.
Philip, king of the Macedonians, was excelled of his son, in prowess, and
glory: yet in myldnesse, and gentleness, he was far above him. Wherefore y^
one was allwaies noble, the other oftentimes full beastly: so y^ they seem
rightly to teach, which warn us: that howmuch the hyer we be in degree,
so much the lowlyer we bear ourselves. PanetiusAfricanes saying.


Panetius reports, how Africanus, his scholar, and familiar friend, was wont
to say, like as horses, by reason of y^ diverse fights of wars waxing
ouerhotte, and coragious, men use to put to ryders, that they may have them
the readyer: even so men unbridled with prosperity, and ouertrusting to
themselves, should be brought as it were within the commepasse of reason, and
learning: that they might thorousee the trailnesse of y^ world, and the
wavering of fortune.

Moreover in our highest prosperity, Counsel of friends.
we must most of all take the advice of our friends: and we must give them also
a greater authority, tha^ we did before: and in those seasons, we must take heed, that we open not our ears to flaterers: nor Flaterers.
suffer ourselves to be clawed with flaterie: wherein it is an easy thing to
be begyled. For we think ourselves Selfloue.
such, that of right we may be praised. Whereof do spring innumerable
faults: when men puffed up with opinion be shamefullie scorned, and be wrapte
in foolish errors. But of these matters thus far we treat.

This then is to be taken thus: y^ Rehersall of things before.
the greatest deeds, and of the greatest courage, be done by them, which govern
the commo^weale: because Magistrates
their ministratio^ reaches fardest, and to most men apperteineth. And that
there be, and have been many, The quiet livers.
even in the quiet life, of great courage: which either would try out, or take
in hand certain great enterprises: and would keep themselves within the bounds
of their own matters: orels, placed bitwene philosophers, Private house holders.
and those, that rule the commonweal, would be delited with their homegoodes:
not heapi^g up y^ same, by all manner of means, nor barring theirs from the use
thereof: Private substance.
but rather emparting the^ both to their friends, and to the commonweal, if
at any time there should be need. Which good, first, let it be wellgotten,
and with no dishonest, or hateful gain: next, let it be ready to do good to
many, so they be worthy: lastly, let it be increased with discretion,
diligence, and thrift: and not lie open rather to lust, and riot, than to
liberality, and bountifulness.

These foresaid lesso^s whosoever observes: Conclusion.
may live both honorably, gravely, and stoutelie, and also plainly,
faithfully, and friendly for y^ trade of man's life.

It folowes, that we speak of the Of (...).
other part of honesty, which remains: wherein shamefastness, and
temperaunce, as it were the certain ornament of man's life, and sober mood,
and all appeasment of passions of the mind, and the measure of things is
seen. In this place Co^melinesse.
also comeliness is contained: the which may be named Decorum in latin, for
in Greek it is called (...). The nature hereof is such, that from honesty it
can not be so^dred. For both what becomes, is honest, and also what is
honest, becomes. But what difference there is bitwene honesty, and
comeliness, it may sooner be conceived, Co^me^ a watter upon (...).
than expressed. For whatsoever it is, that becomes, it then appears, when
honesty is gone before.

And therefore not only in this ^rte of honesty, whereof in this ^nesse of
^erau^ce.
place we have to dispute, but also in the three former parts it does appear,
Comeliness in wisdom.
what becomes. For as it becomes one to use reason, and speech
discreetlie: to do, y^ he should do, advisedly: to epsy, and maintein
whatsoever is in every thing the troth: so contrariewise to be be, gyled, to
err, to fall, to be deceued, as much it misbecommeth: as to dote, and be
distraught in mind. Thereto all just things be co^melie: Co^melinesse of
justice.
all unjust things again as they be dishonest, so ar they vnco^melie. Like is
the nature of manliness. A co^melie ^sse.
For whatso is done manfully, and with a great courage, that does seem meet
for a man, and co^melie: whatso goes contrary: that as it is dishonest, eue^
so it is vnco^elye. Wherefore this co^melinesse, whereof Co^melinesse in all
honesty
I speak, does pertein to al honesty in deed: and so perteins, that not after
a certain hidden sort it is seen, but stands in open sight. For a certain
thing there is, that becomes: and the same is perc^ in every virtue: which
more by imaginacion, than in deed, may be severed from virtue. For as
goodlinesse, and beauty of body can not be parted from health: so this
Honesty, (...) health of body co^melinesse, like beauty.
co^melinesse, whereof we treat, is alltogither blended with virtue: but yet in
ones mind, and thought it may be divided.

But the description thereof is on Division.
two sorts. For both we conceive a general commelinesse to be, which in
all honesty has to do: and an other special co^melinesse under this, which
belongs to every particular part of honesty. And that former thus
Definition.
in a manner is wont to be defined: that it is co^melie, which is agreeable
General co^melinesse.
to man's excellency in that, wherein his nature is different from other
living creatures. But Particular co^melinesse.
they define the part, which is under the general, in such wise: that it they
will have to be counted commelie, which is so to nature agreeable, as in it
may appear both measurablenesse, and temperaunce, with a certain honest
show. That these be thus meant, of the philosophers, we may guess Comeliness
^call.
by that comeliness, which the poets follow: whereof, in an other place, we
are wont to say more. But then, we faie, the poets keep that grace, which
becomes: when it, that to each person is sitting, The person.
both is done, and said: as if either Eacus, or Minos should say:

Well, let them hate, all while they stand in fear^ or this,

His childrens grave the parentself now is:

uncomely it should seem: because we have herd, that they were just men. But
Atreus saying so, it is liked of y^ hearers: because the speech is fit for
the person.

But poets will judge by the person, Natural comeliness.
what is comely for every body: howbeit nature herself has put upon us a
personage of great excellence, and preeminence above all other living
creatures. Wherefore poets, in the great diversity of persons, will epsy:
what is fit, even for the wicked sort, and what becomes them. But seeing
the parts of steadfastness, measurablenesse, temperaunce, and shamefastness
be appointed us by nature: and seeing the same nature teaches us, not to be
recklesse, after what sort we behave ourselves to every man: it co^mes to
pass, that both it appears, how far that co^melinesse which apperteins
to all honesty, does reach: and this also, which is marked in every sere
kind of virtue. For as the beautifulness of the body with proportionable
making of the lymmes moves a man's yies: and deliteth them even with this,
that all the parts with a certain grace agree together: rightso this
co^melinesse, that shines abroad in our life, wins their liking, with whom
we live, by an order, steadfastness, and measurablenesse in all our words, and
deeds. There must be used therefore a certain reverence toward me^, both to
every one of the best sort, and also to the rest of meaner degrees. For it is
not only a sign of an arrogaunt body, but also of one altogether lawless,
to be reckles, what every man thinks of him.

But there is a difference bitwene justice, and shamefastness, iu every
respect, that is to be had. It (...).
is the part of justice, to offer men no violence: of shamefastness, to
Shamefastness.
offend nobodie: wherein the nature of co^melinesse is most thoroulie seen.
These things the declared: I think it sufficiently conceived, what thing that
is, which we say, becomes.

But the duty, that proceeds of Duties out of co^melinesse
commelinesse, chiefly takes this way: which leads to the agreeableness,
and preseruacion of nature: who^ if we will follow as gyde, we shall never go
amiss: and shall follow both y^, which has in it wittiness, and thorousight
by nature: and that, which is agreeable for the fellowship of me^: and that,
which is earnest, and manly. But y^ greatest effect of co^melinesse stands
in this part of virtue, whereof we now treat. For not only y^ moouings of the
body, which agree to nature ar to be allowed: but much more Motions of body,
and mind.
the motions of the mind, that likewise be agreeable to nature, ar to be
commended.

For the power of the mind, and of nature stands in two parts. In the (...)
is appetite, and reason.
The one is placed i^ apperite, which in greek is (...): and this hither, and
thither haleth a man: the other has place in reason: which teaches, and
shows plainly, what is to be done, and what to be refused. So falls it,
that reason rules, and appetite obeys. But all our doings must be without
rashness, (...).
and neclige^ce: neither ought Necligence
a man to do any thing, whereof he Dutiful ^ing.
is not able to render a proouable cause. For this in a manner is the definition
of duty. But we must ^ow appetites must be framed.
bring to pass, that our appetites obey reason: and neither run before it,
neither for slouthe, or dastardlinesse, dragge behind it: and that they be
quie^, and void of all stir, and trouble of the mind. (...).
Whereby all steadfastness, and measurablenesse (...).
shall appear in sight. For appetites, which go ouerfarre astraie: and (as it
were) ouerhatte (...) (...).
either in lo^ging after things, or in fleeing from things, be not st^ enough
by reason: these without doubt excede their bounds, and measure. For they
forsake, and set aside obedience: nor yet do yield to reason, whereunto
they be made subject by the law of nature. By such motions not only men's
minds be troubled, but also their bodies. We may see Uncomely hauior of the
body, by reason of troublesome affections.
of them, who either with any lust, or with fear be styrred, or in overmuch
pleasure do rejoice: for there with the countenance, voice, moving, and
r^sti^g of the^ all is changed. Of which things this is gathered (to the
intent we may return to the form of duty) y^ all appetites ar to be pulled
in, and assuaged: and that we must take good heed, and diligence, Our doings.
y^ we do nothing rashly, and ve^turouslie, nor unadvisedly, and necligently.
For we be not to this end e^ge^dred of nature, yt we should Pleasantnes.
seem to be created for play, and jest: but we be rather borne to sageness,
Gravity.
and to certain grauer, and greater studies. Yet we may lawfully use jesting,
and pastime: but even as we do sleep, and other restinges: at such time, as we
have sufficiently ended grave, and ernest causes. And the Ies^ing.
very manner of our jesting must not be to large, nor vnsober, but honest, and
plea^aunt. For as we give not childern al manner liberty of playeng, but such
as swarueth not from honest exercises: so in our very jesting let there appear
so^me light of Kinds of i^stin^.
honest wit. To be short, after two sorts is the manner of jesting: the one,
dishonest, rayli^g, hurtful, bawdie: y^ other, fine, ciull, witty, pleasant.
With the which kind, not Plautu^.
only our Plautus, and the old The Attiks.
comedy of the Attiks, but also the Socratians.
books of the Socraticall Philosophers be well stored: and there be of many
me^ many merry said sawes: Catoes short and feate sa^engs.
as those, that of old Cato be gathered, which be called (...) Easy therefore
is the difference bitwene honest, and dishonest jesting. The one is meet for an
honest ma, if it be done in season, and with a light heart: the other, meet for
no man, if the vnclenlinesse of the matter be increased with filthiness of
words.

Also in pastime, there is a certain Pastime.
measure to be kept: that we be not therein alltogither excessive, and puffed up
wtth pleasure, fall into so^me dishonestie. But both our Martial feeld, and
also our exercises of honting do find us honest examples of pastime.

But it belonges to the holle discourse ^he excel^ce of man's nature.
of duty, evermore to have in mind, how far man's nature exceeds the
nature of beasts.

For they feel nothing, but pleasure, Pleasure of the body.
and thereunto be carried with their holle sweygh: but man's wit is fed with
lerning: and by studieng either sercheth, or does always so^mewhat: and is
led with the delight of seeing, and hearing. Yea moreover if there be any
so^mewhat with the most inclined to pleasures: so he be not of y^ bestlie
kind: (for so^me there be not me^ in deed, but in name) but if there be any
man, that is so^mewhat more vprightlye minded: though with pleasure he be
caught, he hydeth, and dissembleth his appetite of pleasure, for very
shamefastness. Whereof it is soon perceived, that pleasure of the body is not
worthy to be matched with the excelence of man: and that it ought to be
despised, and rejected. But if there be any man, who sommedeal yields unto
pleasure: he must very warelie keep a measure, in enioyeng the same.

And therefore let the feeding, and we must feed to live, and not ^ue to feed.
apparailing of the body be referred to health, and strength, not to
voluptuousness. And thereto if we will consider, what an excelence, and a
dignity there is in nature: we shall A general co^melines^.
understand, how foul it is to ouerflowe in ryotte, and live deliciouslie,
and wantonlie: and how honest it is, to lead our life sauinglie, chastelie,
sagelie, and soberlie.

We must understand also, that we be cladde by nature (as it were) A commune
personage.
is common: because we all be partakers of reason, and the preeminece, whereby
we surmounte beasts: from which reason all honesty, and co^melinesse is
derived: and out of the which, A person proper to ech^ man.
the other is that, which properly to echeman is assigned.

For as in bodies there be great differences (for so^me we see pass other in
swiftness to run, sum in strength to wrestle: and likewise in faces, some
have a portlie look, so^me an amiablenesse) so also in minds Difference of
natures.
there be far greater diversities.

There was in Lucius Crassus, and Romans.
Lucius Philippus much pleasau^tnesse: Pleasau^tnes.
but greater, and more of set purpose, in Caius Caesar, Lucius son. And at
those days, in Marcus Scaurus, and in Marcus Drusus the yongma^, there was a
singular gravity: in Caius Lelius, Gravity.
Mirt^.
much mirth: in Scipio his familiar, Henourseeking.
both greater honourseeking, and a sadder life. But of the Grecians, Greeks.
Socrates, we have herd, was pleasant, and feateconceited, a merry Merry
conceits.
talker, and in all his words a mocker, who^ the Greeks named (...): Dry
moches.
contrariwise, Pythagoras, and Pericles atteined very hye authority,
Ernestnesse.
without any mirth at all. Of the Craftienesse.
Penes, Annibal was crafty: of our capteins, Quintus Maximus, we have herd
say, had a maruailous co^ning in cloking, in keeping in, in disse^bling, in
making a stale, in preue^ting the devises of the enemy. In which kind, the
Greeks before all other do prefer Th^mistocles the Athenian, and Jason the
Pheraian. And chiefly the subtle, and crafty deed of Solon: who, yt both
his life should be y^ safer, and so^mewhat the more he might further the
co^monweale, fained himself to be mad. There be other far unlike to these,
plain, and open: which do Plainness.
think nothing in secret, nothing with gyle, meet to be wrought: and be
lovers of troth, and enemies to disceite. And again, there be other, who would
any thing endure, and do service to any manne: so they A far fetch to
co^mepasse matters.
might obtein that, they desire: as we did see Sylla, and Marcus Crassus use
them selves. Of which sort, we have herd, Lysander the Lacedemonian A subtle
sufferaunce.
was the suttellest, and could most abide. And contrariewise, of
Callicratides: who was Plain deali^g.
admiral of the navy, next after Lysander.

And likewise we see an other man Familiarness in talk.
in talk, though he be of great authority, so order the matter, that he seeme^s
one of the common sort. Which in Catulus, both y^ father, and the son, and
the same in Quintus Mutius Mancinus, we have seen. I have herd moreover of mine
elders, y^ same to have been in Publius Scipio Nasica. And contrariwise, his
father, even him, that aue^ged Sadness.
Tiberius Gracchus wicked enterprises, to have had no gentle grace of speech.
No nor Xenocrates, who was the sagest of the Philosophers, and for the selfsame
thing became great, and famous.

Innumerable other diversities there Co^melinesse according to each man nes
nature.
be of nature, and of manners, nodeal yet dispraisable. But eueriemans own
gifts, not such as be faulty, but natural, ar earnestly to b^e maintained:
whereby y^ sooner may that commelinesse be kept, which we do seek. For in such
wise we must work, as against all nature Nature.
we never strive: which thing avoided, let us follow our own proper nature. So
that though there be^ other studies grauer, and better: yet let us measure our
own, by natures rule. For neither is it to any purpose ^o fight against
nature, nor to ensue any thing, that ye can not attein. Whereupon it more
appears, what manner of thing this commelinesse is: because nothing becomes,
m^ger Minerua, as they say: that is, nature withstanding, and resisting it.

In brief, if ought be commelie, of A continua^ euennesie of life.
troth there is nothing more seemly: than an evenness in all a man's life,
and every of his dooinges: which you can not keep, if you counterfette an
others nature, and let pasie your own. For as we ought to use that speech,
which is known to us: lest, as sum me^ne chopping in greek words, we be
worthelie mocked at: so in ou^ doings, and all our life, we ought to show no
con^rarietie.

And this di^ence of natures has so great a power: that otherwhile Going to
death.
sum one manne ought to kill himsellf, sum other in the same quarrel ought
not. For Mar^us Cato of Utica.
Cato was not in one quarrel, and the rest in an other, who yielded themselves
unto Caesar in Africa. Yet to the rest perchance it should have been counted a
reproach, if they had slain themselves: because their Deintie life. ^de manners.
life had been deintier, and their manners mylder: but when nature had given
Cato an incredible gravity, and the same he had strengthened with a continual
steadfastness: and always had remained in his intent, and determined purpose:
it was meet for him rather to dye, than to look Caesar noted for a tyrant.
upon the tyrauntes face. How mani Ulysses, for a tune, suffered every thing.
pains sustained Ulysses, in that long wandering? when both to women he did
service (if Circe, and Calypso ar to be named women) and to all men in all his
talk he would Fair speech
be fairespoken: and also at home did bear the spite of the slaves, and
n^efes: that he might once attein to the thing, which he desired. But Ajax,
Ajax.
with the courage, that he is reported of, had rather dye a thowsa^d deaths,
than to suffer those things of an other man. Which diversities when we
behold: it shall be necessary to weye, what each man has of his own: and to
order those gifts: and not to have a mind to try, how other men's graces would
beco^me him. For that becomes echema^, which is most of all echemannes Know
yo^ self.
own. Let every man therefore know his own disposition: and let him make
himself a sharp judge both of his vices, and of his virtues: le^e Plaiers.
players may seem to have more discretion, than we. For they do choose not
the best enterludes, but the fittest for themselves. For who upon their voices
be bold, they take Epigones, and Medea: who upon gesture, do take Menalippa,
and Clytemnestra. Evermore Rupilius, whom I remember, took Antiopa: not often
Esopus took Aiar. Shall a player then see this in the stage, that a wiseman
shall not see in his life? We shall chiefly therefore labor A rule.
in those things, whereunto we shall be most apt. But in case necessity
shall drive us so^metime to those things, which shall not be for our
disposition: all care, study, and diligence must be employed: that, if we do
them not co^melie, yet with as little vnco^melinesse, as may be: neither ought
we so much to endeavor ourselves to follow the virtues, which be not given us,
as to flee vices.

And unto these two persons, which Persons.
before I named, there is a third person Co^melinesse coming by fortune.
time casts on us: the fourt also is that, which we shall fashon to
ourselves, after our own mind. For Co^melinesse taken of set purpose.
riches, power, and those, which be contrary to these, being placed in
fortunes hand, be ordered according Examples of the former.
to the times: but what person we ourselves list to bear, proceeds The
fourte.
of our own free will. And therefore so^me to philosophy, so^me to yt civil
law, so^me to eloquence do apply themselves: and for the virtues, sum have
a more mind to excel in one, and so^me in an other: and whose fathers,
Folowers of their au^cet^rs
or aunceters in any commendation have been notable: y^ most part of theirs
do study in the same kind of praise to excel: as Quintus Mutius, Publius
son, did in ye civil law: Africanus, Paulus son, in f^ates of arms. But
diverse do add so^m^ of their own unto those praises, yt they received of
their fathers: as this same Africanus with eloquence increased the heap of his
martial glory: which selfsame Timotheus, Conons son, did also: who, when in
praises of war, to his father he was not inferior, did join to that
commendation the glory of wit, and lerning. But it so falls now Men newly
coming up.
and then: that sum letting go the imitatio^ of their au^ceters, do follow a
certain trade of their own: and th^rin, for the most part, they chiefly
trauail: who appoint themselves great enterprises, being borne of scaceknowne
parents. In our mind, and thought then we must cast all these things, when
we search to know, what becomes. But first of all we must determine,
Appointing upon the kind^ of life.
who^, and what manner men we would have ourselves, and of what kind of life.
Which aduiseme^t is yt hardest of all. For at ye entering in to y^ years of
discretion, when there is most ste^dernesse of counsel: every man does appoi^t
himself yt trade of leading his life, which he has loved most of all: and so
he is enta^gled with so^me certain kind, and course of life: before he was
able to judge, what should be best. For whereas Prodicus says, that Hercules
(as is in Xenophon) as soon as he waxed wheyberded, which time is granted of
nature, to chose, what way of living each man will enter: went forth into
desert: and there sitting, much, and a long while douted with himself, when he
beheld two ways, the one of pleasure, the other of virtue: whether of them
it were better to enter: this might perauenture happen Hercules had a divine
gift above na ture.
to Hercules, that was borne of Jupiters seed: but not so to us: who do
follow those, that euerieone of us list to follow, and be allured to their
studies, and fashions. Following of parents.
And for the most part, being traded with our parents precepts, we incline
to their gyse, and manner. Following of the multitude
Other be carried after the judgment of the multitude: and long after those
things most, which to the greater part seem goodlie^. Many The right trade.
nevertheless, whether of a certain luck, or of a goodness of nature, or by
the instruction of their parents, have followed the right trade of life.

But that kind of men is seldomest Few take the best (...).
found: who after they be either of excellent profoundnesse of wit, or of a
famous lerning, and knowledge, or with both these adourned, have got a time
to take aduisement: what race of life they would the rathest ru^ne: in y^ which
advise, all a man's counsel is to Nature.
be applied to echema^s proper nature. For since in all things, that be
done, out of that nature, wherewith eueriema^ is borne (as before is said) we
search, what becomes: then, in pointing out the holle life, much more regard
thereof must be had: that in the continuing of our life we may agree with
ourselves, and never haulte in any duty. Nature, and fortune.


But to this choice seeing nature has the greatest power, and fortune the
next: there must consideration be had of them both always, in choosing the
kind of ones life: but of nature, more. For nature is much the surer, and the
stedfaster: so that fortune many times, as mortal herself, seems with
immortal nature to fight. Whosoever then will apply all the purpose of his life,
according to the kind of his nature not corrupted: Stedfas^ness.
let him keep a steadfastness: for that becomes most of all: except
perchance he shall perceive, that Misgoing.
he has gone amiss, in choosing his kind of life. Which if it befall (as it
may befall) there must be made a Change of life.
change of manners, and purposes. That change then, if time shall further, we
shall y^ sooner, and more conuenie^tlie bring to pass: if not, fair and
softly, and by little and little it must be done: like as frendships, which do
not delight us, and are not well liked, wiseme^ do judge more convenient stitch
after stitch to rip, tha^ suddenly to cut asonder. And when we have once
changed our kind of life: we must by all means take heed, that we be
thought to have done it upon good aduisement. The ^ertues, not the vices of
elders must be followed.


But forasmuch as a little before it is said, y^ we must follow our aunceters:
first, be this excepted: y^ their ^ices are not to be followed: next; y^ we follow
the^ not in some things, y^ Nothing against nature
our nature will not bear: as the elder Africanus son, who adopted this our
Paulus son, could not be so like his father, because of sicklye weakness, as
y^ other was like his. (...) case therefore one be not able either to plead
causes, or to retein y^ people with orations, or to follow the wars: those
things yet he ought to perform, which shall lie in his power: as justice,
faithfulness, liberality, sobermoode, and te^perau^ce: to thinte^t the thing,
which he lacks, may be the less missed in him. Truly the best inheritance,
y^ (...)
fathers leave to their childern, and more worth, tha^ all liuelod, is the
glory of virtue, and worthy deeds: whereunto to be a stain, it is to be
accounted both vice, and shame.

And because not alike duties ar Comeliness. according to age.
assigned to unlike ages: and sum there be for yongmen, and so^me for the
elder sort: sommewhat also we have to say of this diversity. It is
Yongmenne^ ou^es.
therefore a yo^gma^s part, to reverence Reverence o^ elders.
his elders: and of these to choose out the best, and most commended: whose
counsel, and authority he may lean unto. For the unskillfulness of tender
years, must by oldemens experience be ordered, and governed.

And this age specially from lusts Stayednes.
is to be wayned: and to be brought Labor.
up in labor, and pains taking both Patience.
of mind, and body: that both in martial, and civil duties, their diligence
Endeavor.
may appear. Also when they will refresh their wits, and give themselves to
pastime: let them beware Temperau^ce Shamefastness.
of intemperaunce, and remember shamefastness: which shall be done y^ easlier,
if at such things also their elders will be in presence.

But for old men labors of the body what is com ly for old m^.
ar to be diminished, and exercises of the mind seem meet to be Exercise of
^nde.
increased: and they must give their Profiting of other.
diligence, that much they aid their friends, and youth, and specially the
co^mo^weale Counsel.
with counsel, and wisdom. wisdom.
But nothing more of age is to be taken heed of, than that it give not Slouthe.
itself to lithernesse, and idleness. (...).
As for riotte, to every age it is reprochefull, and for old age most
shameful. But if the inte^perauc^ of lust be joined with it, ^er is a dubble
inconuenie^ce: because both age self takes shame by it, and it causes
yongme^nes inte^peraunce to be more shameless.

And this truly is not out of the what becommes a magistrate.
matter, to speak somewhat touchi^g the duties of magistrates, of p^uate me^, of
citiezens, and of strangers. It is therefore the proper office of a magistrate,
to consider, he representes the person of the city: and that he ought to
maintein the honor, The hon^ of the (...).
and reputation thereof: and to keep the orders of the same: and to serte out
laws fit therefore: and to remember, they be c^mitted to his charge.

A p^uate man it behoues to live in A private man.
an equality, and likeness of law with the citieze^s: neither as an
underling, Egall law.
and abi^, nor bearing himself to hye: and also in the commonweal to seek
those things, that be quiet, and honest. For such Quietness.
a one we are wo^te both to call, and A citiezen,
count a good citiezen.

But it is the duty of a stranger, and A stranger.
alien inhabitaunt: to meddle nothing beside his own bysinesse: nor to enquire
any thing touching an other man: and nowhit in a strange co^monweale to be
curious.

Thus, for the most part, duties Conclusion.
shall be found out: when it shall be sought, what becomes: and what is
agreeable for persons, times, and ages. And there is nothing, that becommes a
man so much: as in every Steadfastness
doing, and taking of advise, to keep a steadfastness.

But because y^ same co^linesse appears Comeliness in three points.
in all deeds, and words, and in the moving, and stayeng of the body: and
the same consists in three things, wellfauourd nesse.
wellfauourdnesse, order, and furniture meet for ones doings (somewhat Order.
hard it is to express: but it Furniture.
shall suffice, so it be conceived) and in these three contained is that care
also: that we be allowed of those, with whom, and among whom we live: of these
matters likewise a few words let us say.

First, very nature seems to have Of wellfauourdnesse.
which has set most in sight our physnomie, and the rest of our shape,
wherein there is an honest show: but she has covered, and kept close the parts
of the body, given for natures necessity: which else should have an
euilfauourd, and foul sight.

Men's shamefastness has followed Shamefastnes, natures scholar.
this so conning a frame of nature. For whatso nature has hydden: the same all
men, who be well in their wits, do keep from the yie: and they do their
endeavor to serve very necessity, as closely, as they may: and of what parts
of the body the use is servile, neither those parts, nor their service by
their names they do call: and so, that, which to do it is no shame, if it be
secretly, to tell it is uncleanly.

And therefore neither the open doing unshamefastness.
of those things is void of unshamefastness: nor the talk, without
Fylthynes.
filthynesse.

Neither truly ar y^ Cynikes worthy Cynikes.
to be herd, nor any of y^ Stoiks, which are almost Cynikes: who do reprove us,
and mock at us: because Things, words.
we call those things, in words shameful to be spoken upon, which be
indeed not dishonest: and yet those things, that be dishonest, we term by
their names. As to go a theeuing, to begyle one, to commit aduouterie, is a
thing indeed dishonest: but it is told, without dishonestie: likewise to
get childern indeed is honest, but to be uttered in talk it were uncleanly.
And mo things, for that purpose, be reasoned by yt said philosophers, against
shamefastness. But let us follow nature: and shonne all things, yt Nature.
abhor the very pleasing of our yie, and ear. Let our standing, going,
Gesture.
sitting, lyeng, chere, yies, and moving of hands keep that same comlynesse.
In which things, two faults we must specially take heed of: that nothing
womannishly, Deintynesse.
or deyntily, and nothing blockishly, Blockishnes.
or cartarly we do. Neither must we agree, that these things should be seemly
in players, and orators, Players.
and left loosely in our selves. The custom of the stageplayers, even of an
old order, has so great regard to shamefastness: that noman comes on
the stage, without britches. For they are aferd: lest, if it chance by any
mishappe, that so^me parts of the body be discovered, they should be seen
vncomlye. And, as the fashion is with us: childern growing to man's Baines.
state be not bathed with their parents: nor sons in law, with their fathers
in law. Therefore this kind of shamefastness is meet to be observed: namely
when nature herself is gyde, and maistresse.

But whereas there be two kinds Of fairness.
of beauty: and in one of them there is a loveliness, in the other, a
majesty: loveliness, we must think, Loveliness.
longes to the woman, and majesty Portelynesse
to the man. Therefore all manner trimmyng, that is unsitting for man, must be
kept from his outeward form: and the like fault to this must be taken heed
of in Gesture.
ones gesture, and moving. For both yt sturring like wrastelers is oftentimes
misliked: and also many gestures like players are not without foolish toys:
and in both these kinds, those things, which be right, and natural, be
commended. Uisage.
But y^ majesty of the favor is preserved Color.
Exercise.
by goodness of color, and color, Clenlynesse.
by exercises of body. There must a clenlinesse be used besides: y^ is not
odious, nor curious, but only escheweth cartarly, and unnatural slouenry. The
like regard we must have of apparail: wherein a Apparail.
mean, as in most part of things is best. We must take heed also, we use
neither to nyce a flownesse in our pase, like pageau^tes in triu^phes: Going.
neither tomuch haste in speed making, like wyldebraines. For when it happe^s,
y^ men do so: there folowes short breathing, the countenance is changed, and
y^ face disfigured: whereof co^mes a great presu^ption, that they have no
stayednesse.

But we must much more study, y^ the affections of our mind swerve
Co^melinesse in motions of the mind.
not from nature: which we shall atteine, if we will beware, y^ we fall not
into moodes, and mazes: and if we will continue in having heedfull minds to
the keeping of co^melinesse. But the motions of minds be of two sorts: so^me
proceed of intelligence, so^me of appetite. Intelligence Intelligence
is chiefly occupied in serching Appetite.
out of truth: appetite stirs a man to be doi^g. We must provide therefore:
y^ we use intelligence about the best matters: and that we make our appetite
obedient to reason.

And because y^ power of speech is Co^mlynes in speech.
great, and the same is in two sorts: y^ one of vehement speech, y^ other
Uehement speech.
of common talk: let the vehement speech serve for pleadings in judgments,
orations in asse^blies, and debating in Common talk.
y^ Senatehouse: let talk be used in companies, in disputations, in meetings
of familiars: and let it also be at feastinges. Of vehement speech the
Rhetoricians have rules, of talk none at all: notwtstanding I wotte not,
whether such also may be. Howbeit for their studies, that will learn, there be
teachers found: but none there be, that study this: with the route of
Rhetoricians all places be replenished. Nevertheless y^ same precepts, which
be of words, and sentences, shall appertein to talk. But since we have our
voice to Speech.
utter speech: and in voice we seek Uoice.
two things yt it be clear, and sweet: Clerenesse. Sweetness.
they both ar to be fetched from nature evermore: but exercise will increase
y^ one: imitatio^ of treatable, and soft speakers will help the other. Catuli,
the father, and the son.
What was in the Catuli, that ye should suppose them to use a perfect judgment
in pronouncing of letters? Howbeit they were learned: but so were other to: yet
these were thought to use the latin tou^g best. Their sounding was sweet:
their letters neither to much mowthed, nor drowned: lest either it should be
vnherd, or over harshe. Their voice was without straining, neither faynte, nor
shryll. The speech of Lucius Crassus was Lucius Crassus.
more plentiefull, and nolesse feateconceited: but, for well speaking, y^
Catuli were in as much estimation. Caesar was sawced with mirth, and Caesar.
merry conceits: Catulus uncle exceeded Catulus uncle.
all: so that in that lawierly kind of pleadi^g, he with familiar speech
passed the vehemence of other. In all these therefore we must labor, if in all
we search, what becomes.

Let then this familiar talk (in Talk.
Gentle.
which y^ Socratia^s most excel) be Not obs^inate.
gentle, and nothing obstinate: let there be therein a pleasantness. No nor
Pleasant.
let a man keep out other, as though he were entered into his own possession:
but as in other matters, so in common talk, he must think an Chaungeable cour^e.
enterchaunged course oftentimes meet to be used. And let hi^ see, first of
all, of what matters he speak: Applieng to the matter.
if they be ernest, let him use a sagenesse: Sagenesse.
it they be merry, a pleasantness. (...).
Specially let him foresee, y^ his talk bewray not so^me vice in his manners:
which then chiefly is wont to befall: when either in mockage, or ernest, men
do bysie themselves to speak rayli^gly, and spightfully of the absent, to
their sclaunder. Sclaunde^ig
But this common talk, for the The matter of talk.
most part, is had either of householde matters, or of the commonweal, or of
lerning, and teaching arts. We must therefore give good heed: that when the
communication begin to straye to other things, to these it be returned: yea
howsoever the matter falls out, that is in hand. For neither all with one
matter, nor at every season, nor alike we are delited. We must mark also,
Delectation.
how far our talk has in it a liking: and as there was a way to begin it,
so let there be a measurable Measure.
mean to end it. But because it is very well taught: that in all our life we
flee passions, that is to say, (...) of the mind.
unmeasurable moodes of mind, not ruled by reason: likewise our talk must be
void of such moodes: lest either anger arise, or sum greedynesse, or
slothfulness, or cowardlinesse, or so^me such thing appear. And most of
all, we must have regard: that those, with whom we keep talk, we seem
both to reverence, and to love. Chyding.
Chyding also many times co^mes in place, as necessary: in which, one must
use perauenture both a greater strayning of voice, and a sharper gravity of
words. It must also be provided: y^ we seem not to do those things, as
irefull: but as physicians do come to searing, and cutting: so let us seldom,
and unwillingly fall to such manner of rebuking: and not at all, unless it be
of necessity, when there will be found none other remedy. But Anger.
yet let it be clear without anger: wherewith nothing rightly, nothing
discreetely can be done. And for the most part, we may use a gentle Rebuking.
manner of rebuking: yet tempered with a gravity: so as both a sowrnesse be
showed, and all spite refrained. Yea and that same bytternesse, which chyding
has in it, must be declared, to be used for his sake, who is chydden. It is
good Braules.
also, even in those braules, which be made with our vtterest enemies,
although we hear words unmeet to be spoken to us: to keep yet a gravity,
and to suppress the Gravity.
angry mood. For those things, that be wrought with any passion, neither can
be co^sta^tlie done, nor allowed of those, that are present. Euilfauourd also it
is, to tell praises of a man's self, specially if (...).
they be untrue: and, with the mocking of the hearers, to resemble the glorious
soldier.

And because we go thorough al ma Of furniture.
ters, or at y^leste be minded so to do we must tell also, what manner of
house, it likes us, an honorable A princes house.
man, and a prince should have. Whose The use.
end is the occupieng thereof: according to the which, the platte of the
buildyng must be made: and nevertheless there must respect be had to The buyldig
a statelynesse, and hand somnesse in the same. We have herd faye, it was an
honor to Cneus Octauis, Cneus Octauius.
who the first of that family was made Consul: because in the palaice, he had
builded a gorgeous house, and full of statelynesse: which, when people
resorting thither had seen, was thought to further the master, a man neewly
common up, to the atteining of the Consulship. This did Scaurus pull down, and
(...).
enlarge the room of his howses. And so Octauius into his house first brought
the Consulship: this other, a noble, and famous man's son, into his enlarged
house not only brought repulsse, but also a stain, and misery. For a man's
honor must be set out by his house, and ^ot all his honor sought by his
house: nor by the house the master, but by the master y^ house must be
honested. And as in all thiges else, regard is to be had not of a man's self
only, but of other also: likewise in a noble man's house, into the which
both many geastes ar to be received, and a number of me^ of every sort is to
be admitted: there must be made a provision Large (...)
for roomethinesse. Otherwise, a large house proves to the master oftentimes
a shame: if there be in it a solitariness: and specially if once, with an
other master, it was wo^te to be well filled. For an odious thing it is, when
of the bygoers it is said:

O ancient house, alas, we may see, How unlike a lord has lordship on thee.

Which, a man may truly say now a days of many. Ye must beware also, namely
if yourself be a buylder, that beyond measure, in su^ptuousnesse, Costlynesse.
and great cost, you do not exceed: in the which kind, eue^ of the ensample
much harm arises. For diligently most me^, specially Ensample.
in this point, do follow the doings of princes: as, of Lucius Lucius
Lucullus.
Lucullus, a singular man, who enseweth the virtue? how many yet have followed
the great costlynesse of his manourplaces? In which things there must doutlesse
be used a measure, that to a meankeping must be reduced: and the same
meankeping must be referred to the common use, and countenance of the life.
But of these hitherto.

Now, in every deed, we take in Three rules ^n men's do ^nges.
hand, three points ar to be kept. First, that appetite obey reason: for
nothing is meeter than that, Reason.
for the maynteyning of duties. Next, that it be considerd, how great a thing
it is, which we mind to bring to pass: that neither less, neither more care,
and Care.
pain be taken, than the case requires. The third point is, that we have an
yie to use a measure in those things, which pert^in to an Comelynes.
honest show, and seemlie grace. The best measure is to keep the very
seemlynesse, whereof we spoke before: and not to pass those bounds. But of
these three the chiefest is, that appetite obey reason.

Hereafter, touching order of things, Of (...)
have to say. And this knowledge co^teineth that, which the Greeks do name
(...): not this, which we interpret Modestia: in the which word, Modus is
comprehended. But that is (...), wherein is meant a keeping of order. And
therefore, y^ we may call the same Modestia, thus it is defined of the Stoikes:
ye (...)
Modestia (that is to say) discretion is y^ knowledge of setting those
things, which are done, or said, in their proper places. And so of order, and
placing there seems to be all one Placing.
Order.
property. For thus also they define order, to be a framing of things in
Place.
apt, and convenient places. And place, Opportunity.
they save, concerns the doing, opportunity the time. And time convenient
for the doing, in Greek (...), in Latin is called Occasio. Occasion.
So falls it, that this discretion, which we interpret, even as I Discretion
said, is the knowledge of opportunite of fit season to do a thing. But the
same definition may be of Prudence.
prudence: whereupon we treated in the beginning. But in this place, we search
after measurekeeping, and te^peraunce, and other like virtues. Therefore, what
were y^ properties of prudence, in their place we have spoken. But what
properly belo^ges to these virtues, whereof here we have begone to speak,
which pertein to shamefastness, and to their liking, with whom we live: we
must now declare.

Such an order therefore in our doings Circumstau^ces.
is to be used: that as in an oration well builded, so in man's Agreablenesse
life all things be accordaunt, and agreeable together. For a foul hearing it
is, and very faulty, in a sage matter to bring in any table talk, or wanton
words. Pericles said well, when he had Sophocles Pericles.
joined Praetor with him: and they were commoning about their office: and, as by
chance a well favored child passed by, Sophocles Sophocles.
said: Oh, there is a fair boy, Pericles: he answered: It beco^mes a Praetor,
Sophocles, to have not only for beari^g hands, but yies also. If Sophocles had
said this same, where wrastelers be allowed: he had been free from just
reproof.

So great a force there is both of place, and time. As for example, if a man,
that shall plead a cause, be musing to himself in his journey, (...).
or inhis walk: or if any other thing he myndeth heedfully: he is not
reproved: but if he do the like, at a feast: he may be thought uncivil, for
having no regard to the time.

Howebeit those things, which far disagree from all humanity, as if (...).
any ma^sing in the streate, or if any other great disorder there be: by and
by they appear: and they greatly need not our admonition, or rules: but from
these, which seem to be small faults, and of many can not be perceived, we
must the more diligently refrain. As in instruments sou^ding by strings, or
blast, though never so little they jar, yet Deeds mus^ be like tunes.
that of a conning man is wont to be fownde: so must we live in this life that
nothing chance to jar: yea and so much the more, as the co^corde of deeds
is greater, and better, than of tunes. Wherefore as in instruments, musicians
ears do feel even the least discord: so, if we will be sharp, and quick
judges, and markers of faults: we shall understand oftentimes great things
by small. We shall soon judge by the setting of the yie, b^ smothe looking,
Cou^tenau^ce.
or bending of y^ browze, by sadness, mirth, laughter, speaking, silence,
Speaking.
strayning, and falling of y^ voice, and other such like: what is sitti^gly
done: and what from duty, and nature swarueth. Others life our glass.
In which kind of things, it is not inconvenient to judge by other, of what
sort each of the is: y^ if ought misbeco^meth an other, we sho^ne it also in
ourselves. For it co^mes to pass, I wot not how: y^ we see more Others li^e.
in other, tha^ in ourselves, if ought be done amiss. And therefore veriesoone
those scholars be corrected: whose faults their masters do cou^terfett, for
to make the^ame^ded. Nor truly out of the way it is, in The judgment of the
^kilfull.
chosing of things, which bring a doutefulnesse, to take learned me^ns advise,
or skillful by experience: and so to search, what likes them, concerning every
kind of duty. For the greater part is co^monlie wo^te thither to be carried,
whither of very nature they be ledd. In which, we must see, not only what
echema^ says: but also, what each man thinks: and for what cause, each man
so thinks. For as painters, and they that grave images, and y^ right poets
also, be willing to have their works seen of all sorts of me^: that incase
The common people.
ought be reproved of many, it may be corrected: and therein both with
themselves, and with other, they examine, what is done amiss: so after the
judgment of other, many things of us both must be done, and left undone, and
also changed, and amended. Civil manners.


As for things, which are done after custom, and civil ordinances: there is no
precept to be given of them. For they be precepts of themselves: neither it
behooves any man to be led with this error: Philosophers
if Socrates, or Aristippus have done, or spoken any thing again^ civil order,
and custom: that he shoulda think the same lawful for him to do. They obtained
such a large liberty of faultefynding, by their great, and heavenly gifts.
But the holle fashion of the Cynikes is utterly to be refused.

For it is enemy to shamefastness: without which, there can be nothig
upright, nor nothing honest.

But those we ought to reverence, Men of deserts.
and give attendaunce upon the^: whose life has been tried, in honest, and
worthy matters: who do mean well to y^ co^monweale, and have welldeserued, or
do deserve well thereof: and to anyhonour, or rule be aduau^ced: Old age.
also we must have old age in great estimacion: and must give place to those,
y^ bear office: and make difference Officers.
between a citizen, and a stranger: The citezen.
The stranger
and in the very stranger also we ought to consider, whether he ca^me of
private bysinesse, or for the commonweales affairs. In a sum (that I treat
not of every particular) we are bound to love, mayntein, and preserve the
common atoneme^t, Felou^ip.
and felouship of all mainkinde.

Now, concerning occupations, and gainful sciences, which are to Of occupacions
^ (...).
be counted honest, and which are of base reputacion, thus co^monlie we Gainings.
have learned. First, those gaynyngs be disalowed, that run in hatered with
all men: as the gain of tollfarmers, Tolfarmers. Ufurers.
and usurers. Out of estimation also, and base be the gains that men in wages
do take: whose labor is bought, and not their conning. For in the^ the very
hyre is as Hirelinges.
it were y^ obligation of their bondage. They moreover ar to be counted of y^
Retailers.
baser sort: who bye of merchants, that out of hand they retaile again. For,
nothing they profit, unless they lie apace: and truly dishon^ster thing is
there none, tha^ a vain tongue. Handycraftesmen.
And all kind of handycraftsmen serve in mean occupations.

Neither can the workshoppe truly have in it any gentlemanly doing: and nodeal
to be praised ar these occupatio^s, Belliseruers.
which be seruers of pleasure: as Trinkermen, butchers, cooks, puddingmakers,
fisshermen, which Terence speaks of. Putt to these, if ye list,
Pleasurefeeders.
perfumers, dau^cers, and all hazarders.

But those sciences, wherein is greater Physi^.
Building.
wisdom, and no mean profit Lerning.
fought: as physik, casting of buyldinges, and lerning of worthy knowledge: be
honest for the^, with whose Marchaundise.
estate they agree. And merchau^dise, if it be small, is to be counted of little
estimation: but if it be great, and well stored, conueyeng many commodities
round about: and disparsing those same into many men's hands, without
vain words: it is not much to be dispraised: and fardermore, if being
satisfied with gain, or contented rather, as it has often come from the sea
to the haven: so it change from the haven into lands, and possessions: it
seems, of very good right it may be commended. For of all things, whereoute
any gain ^ulbandrie.
is sought, nothing is better than grou^dtilth and trimmyng, nothing
yeeldinger, nothing sweeter, nothing meeter for a freeborne man. Whereof because
in Cato the elder we have spoken enough: thence shall you take, whatso to this
place shall appertein.

But how duties do proceed from those parts, which belong to honesty: I
think it sufficientiie declared. Now in thosesame things Comparison of honest
things.
which be honest, there may befall oftentimes a question, and comparison, of
two honest things whether is y^ honester: which point is passed over of
Panetius.

For whereas all honesty springs out of four branches: whereof one is of
knowledge, an other of common feloushippe, the third of great courage, the fourt
of measurekeeping: it must needs be, that in choosing of duty these be
often compared together. We think therefore, those duties be more agreeable with
nature, which be Common felouship ^ust be preferred before knowledge.
borrowed from common felouship: than those, which be fetched from knowledge:
and that may be proved by this argument: because The. ^. argument.
if a wisemanne happen on such a life: that he be enryched with a flowing
plenty of all manner substance: though with very great leisure he consider,
and alltobeholde with himself those things, which are worthy of knowledge: yet
if his solitariness be so great, that he ca^ not have the sight of a man: he
would wish to be out of y^ world. And y^ wisdom, which the Greeks do term
(...), is the princess The. 2: arg.
of all virtues. For prudence, which the Greeks do call (...), we take to be
of an other nature: Prudence.
which is the knowledge of things to be desired, and things meet to be
eschewed.

But that wisdowe, which I named Sapience.
the princess, is the science of heavenly, and worldly things: wherein is
contained the co^mo^nesse of godds, and men, and their society together. Which
virtue in case it be the greatest, as it is in deed: it must needs follow,
that the duty, which is borrowed of commonnesse, also is the greatest. For the
knowledge, Knowledge.
and consideration of natural causes should, after a certain sort, be
maimed, and imperfect: if no performaunce of deeds should follow. Doing.
And deeds must appear in defending of me^nes commodities. They belong
therefore to the felouship of men: and for that cause ar to be preferred before
knowledge. The. 3. arg.


And this every bestdisposed man, The common judgment o^ men.
when it commes to the point, does show, and declare. For who is so
desirefull of thorowseeing, and lerni^g the nature of things? but, in case
while he were treating, and viewing of matters most worthy of knowledge: in
the mean season he should suddenly hear tyding of the hazard, and danger of
his country, which he is able to succor, and withstand: he would leave, and
set aside all those studies: yea though he thought, he were able to number the
sterres, or to measure the huge comepasse of y^ world: and the same man also
would do as much, in his parents, and in his friends cause, and perell.

By which things it is gathered: y^ before y^ studies, and duties of
knowledge, the duties of justice ar to be preferred: which do belong, to y^
profit of men: than the which, a man ought to hold nothing derer. The. 4. arg.


Also they, who have spent their The end o^ conte^plation.
holle life, and study in knowledge of thiges, have not yet withdrawn
themselves from helping to increase men's profits, and commodities. For they
also have enstructed many, The ^ude^tes life profitable to the co^monweale.
to make the^ the better citiezens, and the more profitable in their
commonweales: as Lysis the Pythagorean L^s scholemai^er to Epaminonvas, Plato
to Dion.
scholed the Lhebane Epaminondas: Plato taught Dio^ the Syracusian: and many
other, many mo: and whatsoever we ourself brought to the commonweal, (if any
thing we have brought) we ca^me to it, enfourmed by teachers, and furnished
with lexning. And Lorlled men profitable, even after their death.
they, not only while they live, and be present, do school, and teach the
studentesof lerning: but after their death also, by their monuments of lerning,
they ^o the same. For they have not ou^passed one point, y^ concerns laws,
custo^es, ^ the commonwelth knowledge: so as they may seem to have employed
their quiet studies to our common affair^s.

Thus they being themselves given to the studies of lerning, and wisdo^e, do
chiefly bestow their wisdom, prudence, and understanding to men's
commodities. For the same cause also, it is better to utter plentyfully, so it
be discreetlie, than without eloquence to conceive never so wittyly: because
Co^ceiuing of matters.
ones conceit serves only within it self: whereas eloquence gettes Eloquence.
within her reach those, with whom we ar joined in common fellowship. And
as swarms of bees do cluster together, not to this end, to make combs: but
being swarming by kind, they work their combs: so men much Common felouship.
more, than they, by nature swarming, do use their conning of doing, and
devising.

Therefore unless thatsame virtue, which consists in defending me^, that is
to say, the fellowship of ma^kinde, does meet with the knowledge of things:
it may seem a very bare, and alonewandering knowledge: and likewise
greatness of courage, severed from common (...).
feloushippe, and neybourhod of men, must needcs be a certain savageness,
and beastly cruelty. So it falls out, that the accomepanieng, and common
fellowship of men far surmountes the study of Prudence.
knowledge.

Neither is it true, which is said of some: that this common knott, and
felouship is had among me^, even for necessite of life: because wtoute other,
we might not get, and bring to pass those things, y^ nature does desire:
and that, if all things were fownde us, even by the grace of god (as they say)
which appertein to food, and furniture of life: then would every one of a good
wit, all bysinesse laid aside, settle himself holly in knowledge, and
science. But that is not so. For he would both flee solitariness, and choose
a companion of study: both teach, and learn: both hear, and speak.
Wherefore all duty, Conclusion.
which avails to maintain neybourhod, and fellowship of men, is to be
preferred above y^ duty, which consists in knowledge, and science. (...)
sometime is above the particular (...).


This question perauenture may be well moved: whether this common felouship,
which is most of all agreeable to nature, be also always to be preferred
before mean, and measure keeping. I think not so.

For there be so^me things partly so filthy, partly so heinous: that a wise
man would not do them, no not to save his country. Uerie many such,
Possidonius has gathered together: but sum of the^ so foul, and so filthy:
that even to be spoken they seem shameful.

Those therefore ought noman to take in hand, for the commonweales cause: another
would the commonweal for her sake have them enterprised. But this matter
stands in better case: for that there ca^ befall no time: y^ the commonweal
should need to have a wiseman do any of them.

Wherefore let this be concluded, in Ju^ice ge^rallie above all.
choice of duties: that such kind of duties most excel, as concern the
felou^ippe of men. For advised Aduise^ doing.
doing will follow knowledge, and wisdom. So it comes to pass, that to do
advisedly is more worth, than wisely to devise. And hereof thus far. For this
place is plainly enough set out: that it is not hard, in serching out of
duty, to perceive, among them all which before other is to be preferred.

Yet even in common fellowship there Degrees of duties lo^ging to justice.
be degrees of duties: whereby may be known, what one is above the other: so as
the first duties be due to the godds immortal: the second, to our country:
the third, to our parents: and so forth by degrees, the rest to the rest.

Of the which matters, briefly debated, The order of his treating.
may be gathered: how me^ ar wont not only to doubt, whether a thing be
honest, or dishonest: but also two honest things laid before them, whether
is the honester. This point (as I said before) is ouerslipped by Panetius.

But now to the residue let us proceed.

MARCUS TVLLIVS (...) second book of duties, to Marcus his son.
AFter what sort, duties The preface.
should be taken out of 1. part.
honesty, son Mark, and from every kind of virtue: I suppose it
sufficiently declared in my former book. It folowes, yt we go forward with these
kinds of duties: which belong to power, to riches, to y^ furniture The
co^tent^ of this book.
of ma^ns life, and to the pleintie of those things, y^ men do occupy.
Wherein, I said, it is sought: both what is profitable, what unprofitable:
Profit.
and also of profitable things which is the more profitable, or which the
most profitable. Of the which I will enter to speak: if I shall say a word,
or two before, of my purpose, and meaning.

For though our books have stirred 2. part.
up many me^ to y^ study not only why he gave h^self to ^udie philosophy.
of reading, but also of writing: yet other while I fear, lest y^ name of
philosophy be hateful to so^me good me^: and that they maruail, I be^owe in
it so much trauail, and time. In deed as long as the weal was governed by
them, to whom she had committed herself: I did emploie all my care, and study
upon it. But when one man kept al in thraldom: and there was no place at all
for Caesar's monarchi^.
counsel, and authority: and I besides had for gone my co^panio^s of
preserving y^ state, who had been singular me^: neither I gave myself to
greeues, where with I should have been wasted, unless I had resisted the^: nor
again, to pleasures unseemly for a learned man. And would god, y^ co^monweale
had stood in y^ state, wherein it began: and had not light upon men, who were
not so desirous of altering, as overthrowing of things. For first, as we were
wont to do, when y^ co^mo^weale was standing: we would take more labor in
pleading, than in writing: afterward, in very writing we would not putt the
thiges, ^ullies orations.
y^ we do now, but our pleadings, as we have done diverse times.

But when y^ co^monweale, in which all my care, study, and trauail was wont
to be bestowed, was none a^ all: verily those la^ierlie, and Senatehouse
lerninges were hushed.

But seeing my mind could not The euer^irring soul.
^hoose, but be doing: having been occupied in those studies, from the
beginning of my young age: I thought, sorrows might be put away most
honestly, if I returned miself to philosophy. Whereunto when being young I had
given much time, to learn it: after that I began to attend honors, and betook
miself holle to the commonweal: so much leisure was left for philosophy: Time
borrowed for ^udie
as remained of the times spent about my friends, and the commo^weales causes.
And y^ was all bestowed in reading, for writi^g I had no time. In our most
miseries ther^re, we seem to have gotten this so great a commodity: that we
might put those matters in writing: which were not sufficiently known to our
men, and yet were most worthy of knowledge. For what is there in Praise of
p^losophie.
faith more wish full, than wisdom? what more excellent? what to a man more
worth? what for a man more honorable? They then, who do desire this, be
named philosophers: neither is philosophy ought else, if if ye will tell y^
meani^g of y^ word, but y^ study of wisdom. And wisdom wisdom.
(as it is defined of ancient philosophers) is y^ science of heue^lie, and
world lie things, and of the causes, whereby these things be vpholde^. And whosoever
dispraiseth y^ study thereof: I wotte not verily, what there may be, y^ he
would deem praisworthie. For whether y^ deliti^g of y^ mind be sought, and
quieti^g of cares: what may be compared with their studies, who always gather
so^mewhat, y^ te^deth, and avails well, and wealfullie to live? or if the
way of stedfastnes, and virtue be sought, either this is the art, or there is
none at all, whereby we may attein them. To uphold, there is no art of the
greatest things, seeing none of the least be without art: it is a token of me^
speaking with small aduiseme^t, and erring in the greatest matters. But if there
be any science of virtue: where shall it be sought, when you be gone from
this kind of lerning? But these things Tullies book called Hortensius, now lo^.
ar wont to be more exactly discoursed, when we exhort men to philosophy:
which in deed we have done, in an other book. But at this present, only it
was to be declared of us: why we got us chiefly to this study, when we were
bereft of our commonwelth offices.

But it is gainsaid us, and that of Of his sect and his liberty in writing.
whether we seem to do constantly enough: who allthough we hold, yt nothing
can be surely known: yet both we are wont to dispute of other matters, and at
this same time we prosecute precepts of duty. To who^ I would our opinion were
wellknowne. As the Pyrrhonians.
Forwe are not they, whose mi^de wa^dereth in error, and has not at all, what
to follow. For what a mind should this be, or rather what a life? where y^
mean not only of disputi^g but also of living is taken clean away. But as
other, who do say so^me things be certain, so^me uncertain: so we, disse^ting
from the^, do say again, so^me things be proouable, so^me vnproouable. What is
there then, that should let me to follow those things which to me do seem
proouable? which contrariwise, to disprove? and to void the presumption of
affirming? and to flee rashness, which disagreeth from wisdom most of all?
But by our men there is disputing against all things: because this same thing,
y^ is proouable, can not shine for the: except there should be a conference of
reasons expressed upon Tullies Academicall disputations.
both sides. But these matters, as I suppose, be dilige^tlie enough made plain
in our Academiks.

But allthough, my Cicero, you Exhortation to his son.
be exercised in the most ancient, and most noble philosophy, Cratippus
being your author: a man full like unto those, who have teemed these notable
things: yet I would not, these of ours, very nere unto yours, to you should be
unknown. But now let us go on to our purpose.

Seeing then five ways be setts The treatise.
Account of his order in the holle work.
out of treating upon duty: whereof two do pertein unto co^melinesse, and
honesty: other two belong to the commodities of a man's life, to abundance,
power, riches: the fifth does serve to the judgment of choosing, if ever
those, which I spoke of, should seem to strive together: the part touching
honesty is made an end of: which truly I desire to be veriewell known to
you. But this, whereof we treat The present purpose.
now, is the veriesame, that is called profitable. In the which term custom
failing, has swarued out of The nature of profit.
the way: and by little and little is brought to this point, that it would sever
profitable from honest: and would make sommething honest, which should not be
profitable, and so^mething profitable, which should not be honest: than the
which, no greater danger could be brought to man's life. Philosophers
surely of very great authority do, gravely no doubt, and honestly, in
imagination sonder these three co^fused kinds. For whatsoever is just, they
also judge the same to be profitable: and likewise, whatso is honest, they take
the same to be just: whereof is concluded, that whatsoever is honest, y^ same is
profitable. The which thing who smallie foresee: they oftentimes having in
admiration suttlewitted me^, and crafty, do repute their wiliness for wisdom.
Whose error must be taken away: and their holle opinion is from that to be
brou^ht unto this hope: that by honest counsel, and good deeds, not by guile,
and craftiness, they under stand themselves in possibility to attein such
things, as they would.

So^me things then, which appertein A division of things profitable and
unprofitable.
to the mainteinau^ce of man's life, be liueless: as gold, and silver, as
those, which are gotten out of y^ earth, as other of the same sort: so^me be
living, and feeling: which have their Liuelesse.
motions, and appetites to things. And Living.
so^me of the^ be void of reason, so^me have the use of reason. Uoide of
reason Uoide of reason.
be horses, oxen, and other catel, and bees: by whose work, so^mewhat is made
for man's use, and life. But Having reason God.
of those tha^ ^aue use of reason, two kinds there be put: one of gods, an
other of men. Devotion, and holiness will make the godds favorable. But next of
all, and after the godds, men to men may be most profitable. And again, there
is the same division of those things, which Man to man does most hurt or profit
annoie, and hurt. But because men do not think, y^ godds do harm: these
excepted, they suppose men to men to do most hurt, or profit. For Things
liuelesse.
the most part of thosesame, which we called liuelesse, be the effects of
man's work: and neither we should have them, except hand, and craft had been
put thereto: neither, weout men's service, we should use the^. For neither
preservation of health, nor sailing, nor ground tilth, and Health.
trimming, nor the inning, and saving Navigations.
of corn, and other fruits, Husbandry.
without labor of men, could have been any at all. Now moreover, both
carriage out of those things, Merchau^dise
wherewith we were stored, and conueiau^ce i^ of those, which we should need,
there could be doutlesse none: e^cept men should do these offices. And in like
manner, another stones Stones.
should be hewed out of quarreis, necessary to our use: another iron, Metalls.
gold, brass, silver deep hidden could be dug up, without the labor,
and hand of man. Howses also, Houses.
whereby both y^ sharpness of cold might be def^nded, and the noiau^ce of
heat might be assuaged: from whence either at y^ beginning, might they have
been given to ma^ki^de? or after do ease, if either by violence of tempest, or
by earthquake, or oldeness, they had gone to wrack? except common life had
learned of men to ask the aid for these things. Add herunto conduits of
water, turning of rivers, letting in water Water.
over grounds, wharts made against streams, havens cast by Havens.
hand: which, without men's work, we might not have. By all which, and many
other things, it is evident: that by no means, without man's hand, and
trauail, we could have received the fruits, and profits: which be gotten of
those things, that be liuelesse. What fruits also of beasts, Liui^g things
or what commodity could there be taken? but if men should help thereto. For
even they doutlesse were men: who were the chief in devising, what use we
might have of The use of (...).
each beast: nor at this season, without men's service, might we either keep
horses, or break them, or save them, or of them take seasonable commodities:
and by men also both those beasts be killed, which do hurt, and those be
taken, which may do service. What Arts.
should I noumber up a heap of arts? without which, man's life could have
been none at all. For who should ease the sick? What delight should there be
among the Physi^.
healthful? what diet? what apparaile? unless so many arts should serve us.
With which things ma^s life being furnished, is becomme so far different
from the feeding, and cote of beasts. Cities also, Co^m^ government.
without the assemble of men, could neither be builded, nor peopled. Cities.
Whereupon ordinances, and customs Laws.
were made: also an indifferent Customs.
setting out of law, and a sure rule to live after: by which, the life is
led well, and wealfullie. Which things both the myldnesse of minds, and
shamefastness has followed: and it is brought to pass, that our life should
be the more safegarded: and that, by giving, and taking, and entercha^unging
of goods, and pleasures, we should want nothing. We be longer in this place,
than need requires. For who is he, to whom those things are not manifest, which
in mo words be recited of Panetius? that neither any captein in war, nor
prince at home, could have achieved great feats, and auailable, without
me^nes endeavor. Kehersed of him is Themistocles, Pericles, Cyrus, Agesilaus,
Alexander: whom he denies to have been able to commepasse so great thirgs,
without the aid of men. In a matter nowhit doutfull, he uses witnesses nowhit
necessary.

And as we obtein great commodities, by the like mind, and consent The
eruelnes of men, one against another.
of men: so there is none so lothesomme a pestilence, which does not grow to
man by man. There is a book of Dicearchus, Dicearchus book of the death of me^.
upon the death of men: who was a great Peripatetik, and plentiful: and after
the other causes gathered together, as of waterbreakes, of pestilence, of
destruction, yea and of the sudden flocking together of beasts, by whose
violence he shows, how certain kinds of men were consumed: afterward, he
makes comparison, how many mo men have been destroyed by men's violence (that
is) by war, or rebellion, than by all other misery.

Seeing then this place has no manner of doubt, but that men both profit, and
hurt men veriemuch: By virtue must men be won to our use.
I point this to be a property of virtue, to win men's hearts to her,
and bind them to her use. Therefore whatso in things liuelesse, and whatso in
the use, and occupyeng of beasts is done profitablie to man's life: it is all
appointed to the laboursomme trades. But men's good wills, that be priest,
and ready to the advancement of our estate, be stirred up by the wisdom,
and virtue of excellent men. For all virtue in a manner Virtue slads in three
points.
consists in three poinctes. Whereof one is in thorowseeing Wisdow.
what in every thing is true, and perfect: what agreeable to each thig: what is
the sequel: whereof all things grow: what is the cause of every thing. The
other, to keep in Temp^u^ce.
the troublesomme moodes of the mind, which the greeks name (...): and to make
the appetites, which they call (...), obedient unto reason. The third, to use
them soberlie, (...)
and skilfullie, with whom we be conuersaunt: by whose good wills, we may have
those things at fill, and heaped, which nature desires: yea and by them, if any
harm be brought upon us, we may it avoid: and may be wreaked of those, which
have gone about to hurt us: and may pay them with so much ponnishment, as
equity, and man's gentleness does bear. But by what means we may attein
this power, that we may commepasse men's good wills, and retein the same: we
shall say, and that, not long hereafter. But a few words ar to be said
before.

That a great power there is in fortune, on either side, either for The stroke
of for^ne.
welfare, or euillfare: who is ignorant? For both when we enjoy her
prosperous blast, we are carried to our desired ends: and when her wind is
turned, we ar afflicted. This same fortune then has other chances, which be
seldomer: first, that comme from things liuelesse: as seastormes, te^pests,
shipwracks, dounfalls, burnings: then, from beasts, as stripes, bytinges,
ouerru^nings. These therefore (as I said) be seldomer. But the destruction of
armies, as alate of three, often of many: slaughter of capteins, as lately of
a noble, and singular man: the enu^engs moreover of the multitude: and by
reason of the same, oftentimes the banishments, the miseries, the fleeinges
away of the welldeseruing citieze^s: and again, prosperity, honor, empire,
victory, although they be in fortunes hand: ^et without me^nes trauails, and
studies, on neither side they can be brought to pass. This then known: we
must declare, by what means we may allure, and stir up men's good wills
to our profits. The which process if it be sommewhat long, let it be
compared with the greatness of the profit: so perhaps even so^mewhat to short
it shall seem. What Causes moving men's good wills.
soever then men give to a man, to enriche, and advance him: either they do
it for good will, when for so^me cause they bear affection to any: orels for
honors sake, if they reverence any man's virtue, and think him worthy of
most fortunate estate: or in whom they have a trust, and do suppose the^ to
provide well for their matters: orels whose power they fear: or contrariewise
of whom they look after sommewhat: as when usurpers and peoplepleasing men
lay large gifts before them: or at last, they be led by meede, and reward.
Which indede is the vilest way, and the fowlest both to them, who ar caught
with the same, and to those, who do seek to have refuge thereunto. For the matter
goes not well: when the same that should be wrought by virtue, is attempted by
money. But because many times this help is necessary: we will tell, how it
ought to be used, if first we shall have spoken of those things, which be
nerer to virtue.

And likewise men make themselves Causes of Obedience.
subject to the rule, and authority of an other, for diverse causes. For they
be led either with good will, or gretness of benefits, or excelence of
honor, or hope, it shall be profitable to them: or fear, lest by power they
be drieuen to yield: or as taken with hope of large gifts, and promises: or at
last, as we see often in our commonweal, even hired for meede. Of good will
and fear.


And certesse of all things neither is there any fitter to maintain a power
tha^ to be loved, neither any unfitter than to be feared. Notably says
Ennius:

whom they fear, him they hate allwaie the most: whom any man hates, he
wishes him lost.

But if before it was unknown, Against Caesar.
since alate it is well known, that no power can withstand the hatered of
many. And truly not only the death of this tyrant, whom the city being
oppressed with force of arms did suffer, does declare, how much the hatered
of men preuails to destruction: but the like ends of other tyrau^ts do show
as much: of whom The ends of ^aunts.
scaselie any has escaped the like death. For, fear is an evil keeper Fear.
of continuance: and contrariewise, good will is faithful, yea for ever. But
let a roughness hardilie be used of them: who by rule do keep strait
such as be brought under by force: as of masters over servants, if they can
not otherwise be stayed. But who in a free city so order themselves, that
they be feared: there can nothing possibly be madder, than they be. For
although the laws be sounke by so^me man's might: allthough liberty be
alltoshaken: yet at length they swim out again, either by secret judgments,
or by privy voices in auauncing to honor: and certesse the stinges of ceased
liberty be sharper, tha^ of liberty continued. Let us then embrace yt, which
most largely spredeth: and most avails not only to safety, but also to
wealth, and power: that fear be ba^nished, and love retained. So most easily
we shall obtein what we desire, both in private matters, and in the commonwelth.
For whosoever will themselves to be had in fear: it must needs be, that they
themselves fear thosesame, of whom they be feared. For what think we of the
first Dionysius? Dionysius the tyrant, a mo^g the Syracusians.
with what torment of fear was he wont to be troubled? who, fearing the
barbers razers, with a reddehot cole singed of his own berde.

What of Alexander the Pheraian? Alexander the Pheraian.
with what an heart, do we suppose, he lived? who (as we read written) when
exceedingly he loved his wife, Thebe: yet coming to her from banketing Thebe,
this (...) wife.
into the chaumber, he commanded a kerne, and him also (as it is written)
beprinted with Thracian marks, to go before with a drawn sword: and he sent of
his guard before, to ransacke the women's coffers: and seek, that no weapon were
hidden in their garments.

O miserable manne, who thought both a kerne, and an yronbronded slave
faithfuller, tha^ his wife. And his opinion did not deceive him: for by her he
was slain for a jealousy of spousebreache. And truly there is no strength of
empire so great, which with suppressing by fear can be long continuing.
Phalaris.


Witness is Phalaris, whose cruelty is famed above others: who perished not
by treason, as this Alexander did, whom eue^ now I spoke of: nor by a few, as
this our man: Caesar.
but against him the holle commons of the Agrigentines rose with violence. What
the Macedonians? did they not forsake Demetrius, and allholle Demetrius.
got them to Pyrrhus. What y^ Lacedemonia^s, ruling vnrightfullie?
Lacedaemonians.
did not welnie all their leagfrendes suddenly forsake them? and showed
themselves idle lookers on of the overthrow at Leuetra? Foreign examples
gladier, tha^ homedeedes I rehearse, in such a case. Nevertheless as long, The
Romans state.
as the empire of the people of Rome was vpholde^ by worthy acts, not by
wro^ges doi^g: and wars were made, either for defe^se of leagfre^des, or for
empire: then were the ends of wars, either merciefull, or necessary. The
Senate was the haven, and refuge of kings, of peoples, of nations. And our
magistrates, and capteins endeavored to get great praise, by this only
mean: if provinces, if leagfrendes, in right, and truth, they had defended.
Therefore it might have been named the protection more truly, than the empire
of the world. By little and little we abated this custom, and order, so^mewhat
a^ore: but after Sylla^ victory, utterly we lost it. For men ceased to
account Sylla the vic tors cru^ltie against the ^arians.
any thing unreasonable toward leagfrendes: when so great cruelty was showed
even against citiezens. Therefore there followed in him of an honest quarrel an
dishonest victory. For when the (...) was pight: and in the market place he
sold y^ goods both of goodme^, and rich, and those even citiezens: he was
so bold to say, that he made sale of his lawful booty. One succeeded, who in
a wicked cause, and a more shameful victory, not Caesar crueller than Sylla.
only put the goods of every one of the citiezens to open sale: but in one
state of misery enwrapped holle provinces, and regions: and so foreign nations
being vexed, and undone: we saw Mastilia borne about Mastilia, a goodly
city of Gallia Narbone^sis, by Caesar borne about in triumph.
in triumph, for a show of our empire lost: and triumph made over that city:
without which, our capteins of wars never got any triumph, beyond the
alps. I could rehearse many mo cursed deeds beside, done against our
leagfrendes: if the son had seen ought, more heinous, than this one. Justly
therefore ar we skourged. For, had we not suffered the wickedness of many to be
vnponnished: such a lawless liberty had never come to the hands of one:
from who^ soothelie the inheritance of his goods ca^me to few, but of his
greedy desires, to many naughty men. Nor truly the seed, and cause of civil
wars shall ever fail: as long as mischievous me^ shall both remember, and
hope after that bloody sales^affe: Syllaes, and Cesars salestaffe.
which when Publius Sylla had shaken, his nigh kinsman being Dictator: the same
stepped not once back from the shaking of a like more mischievous staff, y^
sixth and thirtieth y^re after. But the other, who in yt Dictature had been
Secretary, in this was Treasurer for the city. Whereupon ought to be
understood: that while such booties be laid before men, civil wars shall
never want. And so, only the walls of the city do stand, and remain: yea
and thosesame euennow dreeding their last mischief: but the commo^weale we have
utterly lost. And into these destructions we are fallne (for we must return to
our purpose) while we had rather to be feared, than to be dear, and
well-beloved. If all this could befall to the people of Rome, ruling
vnrightfullie: what ought every sere man to think? Which thing sith it is
evident, that the power of good will is great, of fear, (...): it folowes,
that we make discourse: by what means we may soonest, with honor, and
uprightness, attein that love, which we desire.

But all we do not alike stand in Certain exceptions.
need of y^ same. For to the trading of echemans life it must be applied:
whether it be needful, of many, or sufficient, of few to be beloved. Let
this therefore be certain: as yt thing, which is both principal, and most
necessary: to have faithful familiarities of friends, loving us, and
Friendship,
hyelie esreeming our virtues. For this is the only mean in deed: that there
be not much difference bitwene great, and mean men: and it must be procured,
in a manner, of them both. Not all parchaunce do stand in like need of
honor, and glory, and citiezens good will: but yet whosoever has them: they
^urder sommewhat both to other things, and also to the purchasing of
frendshippes. Tullies book of friendship.
But of friendship we have spoken in the book, which is entitled Lelius: now
let us speak of His books of glory be ^ost.
glory, though of that matter also there be two books of ours: yet let us
touch it, because the same avails much, in executing of greater matters.
Things per te^ing to glory.


The highest therefore, and perfect glory stands of these three: if the
multitude favor us: if they have a Good will.
trust in us: if with a certain admiration Credit.
they count us worthy of honor. Admitation.
And, if we must speak it plailie, and briefly: as these be gotten at the
hands of every sere man, by the same meancs in a manner they be obtained of the
multitude. But there is also a certain other enterau^ce into yt multitude, yt we
may (as ye would say) flow into y^ hertes of the holle. And first, let us see
touching those Of getting good will.
of good will: y^ which nodout Benefits.
is caught most of all by benefits. And secondarilie good will is allured by
a welwillig mind, although Good heart.
perhaps ability suffiseth not.

But wonderoustie the love of the Estimation for honesty.
multitude is alltosrirred with the fame, and opinion of liberality,
bounteousnesse, justice, faithfulness, and of al those virtues, which appertein
to the myldenesse of manners, and gentleness. For that veriesame, which we name
comely, and honest, because ofit self it likes us, and with his own nature,
and beauty moves all our minds: and principally shines (as it were) out of
those virtues, which I have reherced: therefore by very nature we are enforced
to favor them, in whom we think those virtues to be. And these verily be the
weightiest causes of favoring: for othermo lighter there may be beside.

But, that a trust may be had in us, How to get a credit.
to pass: if we shall be thought to have atteined prudence joined with
justice. For both to them we have Prudence with justice.
a trust, whom we suppose to understand more, than ourselves: and also to them,
who, we believe, be able both to foresee things tocomme: and also to
dispatche the bysinesse, and forth with to take counsel: when the matter is in
hand, and sta^des in hasard. For all men do judge this the profitable, and true
prudence. But in such wise credit is given to just, and trusty me^ (that is)
to good me^: that in them there is no suspicion of deceit, and injury.
Therefore to these our life, to these our goods, to these our childern we
suppose very well to be committed. Of these two then justice is of more power
to wi a credit: because it without prudence has sufficient authority,
prudence without justice is nothing worth Prudence, without justice, is
suspected.
to get credit. For, the sutteler, and the craftier that a man is: so much the
more he is hated, and suspected, when the opinion of his honesty is pulled
away. Wherefore justice joined with understanding, shall have as much power, as
it list, to purchase credit: justice wtoute prudence shall be of much power,
prudence without justice shall be nothing worth. But lest so^me man have
maruail: seeing amongst all philosophers it why he seuereth virtues, coupled by
nature.
is plain, and by miself disputed often: him, that should have one virtue, to
have all the virtues: why I do now sonder them so, as though there may any man
be just, which same is not prudent: of one sort, is yt suttlenesse, when very
troth is leueled in disputation: and of an other sort is yt talk, when it is
all applied to the common opinion. Wherefore we speak so in this place, as the
common sort do: that we call so^me one sort manly, so^me other good men,
so^me other prudent. For with the peoples words, and usual terms we must
treat, when we speak of the ^onron peoples opinion: and that did Panetius,
after the same sort. But to the purpose let us return.

Of y^ three therefore, which should That we may be reckened worthy of honor.
appertein to glory, this was the third: that with admiration of me^, we might
by them be thought worthy of honor. Generally the^ they have in admiration
doutelesse all (...) things
things: which they have noted to be great, and beyond their wening: and
severally in every sere man, if they perfitlie see good things unlooked for.
Therefore they honor those men, and with highest praises set them alofte: in
whom they think themselves to behold certain passing, and singular virtues.
But those Despiseme^t.
they despise, and set at naught: in who^ Despiseme^t.
no virtue, no courage, no strength they judge. For all men do not despise them,
of who^ they think evil. For whom they deem dishonest, misreporters,
gylefull, and redieframed to do wrong: those they despise not certesse, but of
them they think evil. Wherefore (as I said before) they be despised: who neither
to themselves, nor to other do good, as they say: in who^ there is no
painfulness, no diligence, no caring: but they Admiracion, for ^tayedness.
be reuere^ced with a certain admiration: who ar thought to go before others in
virtue: and to be without both all vnseemlinesse, and also those vices, which
other can not easily wtstand. For both pleasures, full flatering Pleasures
^ter^g dames.
^ames, do oftentimes wrest the greater part of the mind from virtue: and
also when the brondes of Brondes of pains.
pains be laid unto the^, most me^ beyond measure be alltofrayed.

Life, death, riches, poverty, most Admiration for (...).
mightily move all men. Which things whosoever on either side, with a lofty, and
great courage do despise: and when before the^ is offered any goodly, and
honest thing, it turns, and haleth them holle to it self: then who does not
maruail at the brightness, Admiration for justice.
and beauty of virtue? Therefore both this despisig mind causes a great
wondering: and specially justice, of which virtue alone good men be named,
seems to the multitude a wonderful thing: and not without cause. For none
can be just, who dreedeth death, pain, banishment, or poverty: nor any, yt
before equity prefers the contraries. And most of all, they wonder at him,
Admiration, for despysing of money,
who is not tempted with money: ^ in what man that is well tried, him think
they worthy to be regarded. Therefore justice does work all Justice, a worker
of ^oue and glory.
those three, which be pointed out for glory, and gettes good will also:
because it means to profit very many: and for the same cause, it works
credit likewise, and admiration: because it despises, and nough^ regards
those things, whereunto most men enkindled with greediness be haled. And
surely, after my judgment, every trade, and order Man's aid.
of life requires the aids of men: ^ chiefly that ye have sum, with whom
you may debate in familiar talk: which is hard, unless ye bear upon you the
show of an honest man. Therefore opinion of justice is necessary How
necessary it is, to be taken for just.
even to the aloneliuer, and one that leads his life in yt feeldes: yea and so
much the more, because if they have it not, unjust they shall be counted: and
being guarded with no defense, shall be vexed with many injuries. And to these
also, who do sell, bye, hyre, let, and be enta^gled in bargaining bysinesse,
justice, to go through which their matters, is necessary. Whose power is so
great: y^ even they, who be fed with evil doing, and mischief, ca^ not
possible live without sum percell of justice. For who steals, or priuielie
Robbery.
pyketh any thing from any of the^, with whom he goes a theeuing: he leaves
not himself a place, no not in robbery. And unless he, who is named the
archpirate, divide the prise egallie: either he shall be slain of his mates,
or else forsaken.

Yea and it is said, there ar laws among Lawe^ o^ thieves among themselves.
thieves: whereto they obey, and do observe them. And so, by reason of the even
portioning of Bargulus.
the prise: both Bargulus, the Illyrian robber, of whom mention is made in
Theopompus, had great Uiriatus.
riches: and much greater had Uiriatus the Lusitane: to whom of troth even
our armies, and ^aptains Caius (...).
gave place: whom Caius Lelius, he that was commonly called the wise, being
Praetor, did discomfite, and abate: and so alayed his fersnesse, that he left
an easy war to other. Seeing then the strength of justice is so great: yt it
also stablisheth, and encrcaseth robbers richesse: how great suppose we yt
power thereof to be, among laws, and judgments, and ordinances of a common
weal? Certesse methink, not only among yt Medes (as tells Herodotus) but
also The Mebes.
among our au^ceters, in old time, wellco^ditioned kings have been ordained,
Kings.
for yt end of enioye^g justice. For at the beginning, when y^ multitude was
oppressed by them, who had y^ greater power: for refuge they fled to so^me one,
excelling in virtue: who, when he saved the weaker from injury, by p^inting
out an equity, Laws.
kept the highest with the lowest in indifference of law. And the like cause there
was of making laws, as of kings: for evermore an egall right has been
sought: for otherwise it were not a right. If they obtained ytsame Right.
at the hands of one just, and good man, with him they were contented: when yt
chanced not, laws were devised: which with all men always, in one, and alike
voice should speak. Wherefore this is doutlesse a clear case: y^ they were
wont to be chosen to govern: of whose justice the opinion of the multitude was
great. And this thereto adioined, yt they also might be counted wise: there was
nothing, y^ men, under those guides, should wene themselves unable to attein.
Justice therefore is by all manner means to be regarded, and maintained: both
it for itselfsake (for else it were not justice) and also for y^ enlargement of
honor, and glory. But as there is a way not only of getting money, but also
of bestowing it: which may suffice for continual charges, not only such as
be necessary, but also liberal: so glory must be both gotten, and ordered by
a mean. Notwtst a^ding Socrates.
notably Socrates did say: this The hye way to glory.
to be the nerest, and (as it were) the gain way to glo rye: if a man would
endeavor this, to be in deed such as he would be counted. And if any do deem
themselves able to attein steadfast Faining.
glory, by false pretense, and vain Bragging.
outshow, both with fained spech, and cou^ tenau^ce: they be far out of y^
way. The true glory takes deep root, and also shootes abroad: all
counterfeit things do soon shed, as do the little flowers: neither can there
any forged thing be durable. Witnesses very many there be on both sides: but
for shortness sake, we will be contented with one family.

For Tyberius Gracchus, Publius Tyberius Gracchus.
son, so long shall be praised, as remembrance of the Roman state Tyberius
and Caius Gracch^, both siayne for sedition.
shall stand. But his sons neither tiuing were liked of good men, and dedde go
in the noumber of men rightfullie pu^e to death. Let them then, whosoever the
true glory will atteine, perform the duties of justice. What those were, it
was told in y^ former book. But to y^ end y^ soon we may seem such manner
me^, as we be: although the greatest effect is even in this point, that we
Precepts of purchasing glory.
be such, as we would be counted: yet certain precepts ar to be given. For
Youth.
if any from his first entered age has cause of name, and fame: either
received of his father, which to you, my Cicero, I suppose to have Nobility.
happened, or by any chance, and fortune: on him al men's yies ar cast: and of
him there is serching, what Noble men mus^ not stain their s^ocke, with
re^rochefull life.
he does, and how he lives: and so, as though he should lead his life in
mo^e open light, another word, nor (...) of his can be unknown. But whose
first age is New comers up need great vertue^
passed without men's knowledge, by reason of baseness, and unknown name:
these, as son as they begin to be yongemen, ought to look after great
things: and Great c^rage
to prease unto the same with direct studies. Which they shall do with so much
the better courage: because that age is not only not (...), but also favored.

The chief setting forth (...) (...) ^ Rules of (...) (...) (...).
yongman to glory is, it an^ (...) may be gotten by seats of (...) wherein
many have showed themselves, (...),
among our aunceters: for wars were almost (...) (...) son.
kept. But your age chanced upon that war: where the one side had Cesars
side.
tomuch mischief, the other, little (...) side.
good fortune. In which war yet, when Pompeius had made you captein of the
one wing: both of a m^ most noble, and of the army, you got great praise,
with riding, with throwing the darte, and susteining all things with a
souldiourlike painfulnesse. And verily that your praise, and the commonweal
fell together. But of me this treatise is not taken in hand touching you, but
touching the holle generaltie. Wherefore let us go forward to such things, as
do remain.

As then in other matters, the works works of the mind.
of ^he mind be much more, tha^ of the body: so those things, which with
wit, and reason we go through, be of more grace, than those, which we do with
strength. The first commendation then proceeds Soberness.
of sobermoode: the next, of (...) love.
Good will.
natural duty toward pare^tes: the third, of good will toward theirs. But to
the best co^me^dation, yongmen be known soonest of all: who Iinitation of
worthy men
have bestowed themselves with noble, and wise men, well counseling the
co^monweale: on whom if they be attendaunt, they bring the people in belief:
that they will prove like them, whom they have chosen themselves to follow.
Publius But^s.
Mutius house did set out Publius (...)us youthstate, for (...) (...)
(...) of harmless life, and of knowledge in the law. For as for Lucius (...).
in (...) youth, go^ a great fame. (...) (...) Caius (...).
Crassus, when he was a very yongman, he (...) not from any other place, but
wanne himself a very great praise, by that noble, and glorious accusation.
And in Eloquence.
which age, they, who have exercises, ar (...) to be (...) with praise: as we
have heard by (...): in the same age Lucius Crassus did show himself in open
court, to do that veriewell, having forestudied: which (...) then at home with
praise he might have exercised.

But whereas there be two ^ortes Talk.
of speech: whereof in the one is familiar talk, in the other, (...): (...)
speech.
it is no doubt, but the (...) of sp^he may do mos^e, and has the greater
furderaunce to glory. For yt is y^ thing, which we do call eloquence: but yet
it is hard to tell, Eloquence.
Genile (...).
how much a ge^tlenes, ^ familiarnes of speech wins menes minds. There be
letters abroad of Philippus Letters of Philippus, Antipater, and Antigonus.
to Alexander, and of Antipater to Cassa^der, and of Antigonus to Philippus,
three very wysemen (for so we have heard) in which they give rules: that with
gentle speech they allure the hertes of the multitude, to owe their good will:
and that they please their soldiers, by speaking to them with fair words.
But ye oration, which is made among the multitude, with vehemence, oftentimes
raises an universal glory. For great is the wo^derment Admiration, for (...).
at him, that plentiefullie, and wisely speaks: whom the hearers do judge
also to understand more, and to be wiser, than other. And if in the oration
there be a grauenesse Gravity.
mingled with sobermoode: Soberness.
nothing there can be done more wonderful: and so much the more, if those be in
a yongeman. But whereas there be very many kinds of causes, which do require
eloquence: and many yongmen in our commo^weale, both before the judges, and
before the Senate, have atteined praise, by speaki^g in matters: y^ grea test
admiration is in judicial causes: Judicial cau ses.
y^ nature whereof is in two parts. Accusation.
For it stands in accusation, and Defense.
defense: of which albeit defense is the more commendable, yet also accusation
is oftentimes allowed. I spoke of Crassus, a little before: L. Crassus.
the like did Marcus Antonius, being M. Anton.
a yongman: an accusation also P. (...)
brought Publius Sulpitius eloquence to light: when into judgment he called
the seditious, and unprofitable citiezen, Caius Norbanus. But this sothelie is
not often to be done, nor at any time: unless either for the commo^weales
cause: as did the two Luculli: or for protection Luculli.
sake: as we did for the Sicilians, Ciceroes accusation of Uerres.
and for yt Sardines: Julius Caesar, for Marcus Albutius did yt Julius Caesar.
like. Also, Lucius Fusius diligence was known in the accusing of L. Fusius
Marcus Aquilius. Once then it may be done, not often certesse. But in case a
man must needs do it often: let him ascribe this office to the commonweal:
whose enemies to revenge often, is not to be reproved: yet let there be a
measure present.

For of a hardherted man, or rather scace a man it seems, upon many to bring
the danger of life: for that both is dangerous to himself, and also a
shameful blotte in his name: to give cause, that he be named a promotour. Which
chanced to M. Brutus, a ^ore accuser.
Marcus Brutus, borne of a noble stock, his son, who was very well skilled
in the civil law. And thereto, this rule of duty must be dilige^tlie kept:
that ye bring no innocent, at any time, in judgment upon life: for that can
in no wise be done without heinous wickedness. For what is there so
unnatural, as to turn eloquence, being given of nature for the safegarde, and
preservation of men, to the harm and destruction of good me^? And yet, as thi^
is to be ^schewed: so is it not to be counted contrary to godliness, to
defend the guilty otherwhile, and mischeuous, and wicked. This the multitude
desires, custom bears, humanity also works. The judges part is,
evermore in causes to follow the troth: the counselers part, many times to
defend the trouthlike, though it be not so true: which to write I would not be
bold, namely seeing I treat of philosophy: but that the same liked Panetius,
Panetius.
the grauest of the Stoikes. But most of all, by defending, both Defense.
glory, and favor is gotten: and so much the more, if ever it befall, that he
be defended: who does seem to be besette, and pressed with the richesse of
any man of power: as ourself did, both often Ciceroes oration at. 27. yea res
of his age, for (...) Roscius.
at other times, and also being young, for Sextus (...) the Amerine, against the
might of Lucius Sylla, bearing swey: which oration (as ye wotte) is abroad.

But now we have set forth Liberality.
young men's duties, which avail to the atteining of glory: hereafter we must
speak of bountiefulnesse, and liberality. Whereof two manner ways there ber.
For liberal dealing is showed to Trauail.
such, as need, either by trauail, or with money. This latter is the Money.
easier, specially to the possessioner:

but that other is the goodlier, and more glorious, and meeter for a manly,
and a noble man. For though there is a liberal will of pleasuring in both: yet
the one out of the coffer, the other out of virtue is taken: and the
lauishing, which is made Lauishing.
of a man's housegoodes draws dry the very fountane of liberality: so
liberality is by liberality wasted: and toward y^ mo that you do use it, the
less ye can be able to use it toward many. But whosoever ^ing.
shall be bountiefull, and liberal of trauail (that is) of virtue, and
diligence: first, the mo they have profited, the mo furderers they shall have
toward dealing liberally: afterward, by customable using of bou^teousnesse,
the redier they shall be, and (as it were) the more practiced to deserve well
of many.

Princely does Philippus, in a Philiphus to Alexander
certain epistle, accuse Alexander, his son: that, by lavishness, he hunteth
after the good will of the Macedonians. What reason, in a mischief, quoth he,
has brought you into this hope? that ye should think, those would be to you
faithful, whom you had corrupted with money.

Why? go ye about this, that the Macedonians may think you not their king,
but their servant and briber?

Well, he said, servant, and briber, because it is vile for a king. Better
also he said, in that he called largegiuing corruption. For he, that receives,
is made the worsse thereby, and the redier always to look for the like. This
said he to his son: but let us think it given in precept to us all. Wherefore
this certeinlie is no doubt: but that same liberality, which stands in
trauail, and diligence, both is honester, and also spreddeth farther, and is
able to profit mo. Oftentimes yet a man Gifts giui^g.
must give largely: and this kind of liberality is not to be utterly cast
of: and we must many times give part of our substance to mete men, that
have need: but we must do it heedfullie, and measurablie. For diverse have
spoilde out their liuelod, by lauishing it unadvisedly. wastefulnes.
But what is folisher, than to cause, that you ca^ no longer do the thing,
which ye love to do? And also spoil follows of lavishness. For when by
giving they begin to be needy: they be driven to lay hand on other men's
goods: so when Extortion.
they would be beneficial, for cause of goodwill getting: they purchase not so
great love of theirs, to whom they gave: as of them they get hatered, from
whom they took. Wherefore neither a Couetise.
man's substance is so to be Prodigality.
shut up, that liberality can not open it: nor so to be unlocked, that it
lie abroad for every body.

A measure is to be kept, and let it be referred to ability. In any wise we
must remember that: which with our men is very often in usage, and now is comme
into the custom of a proverb: that Lavishness finds no bottom. For what
Lavishness.
stay can there be? when both they, who ar wont to it, and other do desire
one thing? In all, there be two sorts of largegiuers: of which the one be
called foolelarge, Large giuers
the other liberal. Foolelarge we call them, who with open feasts, Foolelarge.
and fleshgiftes, and fenseshowes, and furniture of sightes, and hontinges,
power out their money on those things: whereof they shall leave a memory
either short, or none at all. But liberal they Liberall^
be named, who with their riches do ransom men taken by preyeseekers: or for
their friends sake, do become sureties for debt: or do aid them, in their
daughters preferment of marriage: orels do help them either in getting, or
increasing their goods.

And therefore I maruail, what Theophrastus praises sumptuousness.
camme in Theophrastus mind, in that book, which he wrote of riches: wherein he
spoke many things notably, but this, out of course. For he is much in
praising great sumptuousness, and furnishment of peoplepleasing shows: and
he deemeth the ableness of such charges to be the fruit of riches. But
methinketh that fruit of liberality, whereof I have put a few examples, is
both greater, and more certain.

How much more gravely, and truly does Aristotle reprove us? who Aristotle's
judgment, of sumptuousness.
are not in a wondermet at these lasshinges out of money, which be done to
clawe the multitude: but in case they, who ar besieged of enemies, should be
driven to bye a quarte of water for te^ne crowns: that this, at first hearing,
seems to us incredible, and all make a maruail at it: but when we have given
good heed thereto, we hold with necessity: yet we make no great maruail at
these exceeding losses, and endless charges: when specially neither
necessity is relieved, nor worship increased: and that selfsame clawing of y^
multitude shall endure for a short, and a small while: yea and that, with every
of the lightest minds: and yet in the very same, even together with the
fullness, the remembrance also of the pleasure dies. It is also well
gathered: that these shows be wellliked of Childern, and women, and slaves,
and freeme^ most like unto slaves: but yt no ways they ca^ be allowed of a
sage man, and one, yt with a grounded judgment weyeth those things, that be
done.

Nevertheless I perceive, in our The ^lles office.
city, it has grown into use, now in this good world: that the gay shows
of the Ediles office is looked for, ^uen of the best men. Therefore Publius
Crassus, the rich.
Publius Crassus, both by surname rich, and also in substance, kept his
Edileoffice marvelous su^ptuously. And soon after, Lucius Lucius Crassus, the
orator.
Crassus, with Quintus Mutius, the greatest meanekeper of all me^, Q. Mutius
Sceuola.
kept the time of their Edileoffice most royally. Then, ca^me Caius C. Claudius.
Claudius, Appius son. Afterward Lucullus.
succeeded many, as Lucullus, Hortensius^
Hortensius, Silanus. But Silanus.
P. Lentulus.
Publius Lentulus, when I was Scaurus.
Consul, passed all his predecessors. Scaurus followed him.

But our Pompeius shows, in his Pompeius.
second Consulship, were y^ costliest of all: in eueriedeale whereof, you see,
what likes me. We must yet avoid suspicion of covetousness.

For the refusal of the Edileship Mamercu^
brought to Mamercus, a very rich man, a fall for the Consulship.

Wherefore the thing is to be done, Large gifts, with measure and for honest
causes.
both if it be called for of the people: and good men, though they do not
require it, do yet allow it: so it be according to ones ability, as we ourself
have done: and also, if any greater, and more profitable thing is won at
any time, by peoplepleasing largess: as of late, Orestes feasted the people.
a great honor to Orestes were the dynings in open ways, in name of his
tenthes. No nor it was not M. Seius, liberal to the people.
counted a reproach to Marcus Seius: that in a derth of corn, he gave to the
people for four pe^ce a busshell. For from a great, and a lo^gefestred envy
he deliuerd himself, neither by a dishonest loss, seeig he was Edile, nor yet
very great. But alate, it Milo suppressed Clodius atte^ptes
was pau^i^g hie honor to our Milo: because for the co^monweales sake, which
in our safety consisted, with hired fe^smen he suppressed all Publius Clodius
atte^ptes, and rages. There is therefore cause of largess, if Necessity.
either it be necessary, or profitable. Profit.
And yet in thesesame, the rule of meankeeping is best. Certesse Lucius
Philippus, Quintus son, a man of great wit, and most L. Philippus who
without any large gifts came to great digni^ies.
famous, was wont to glory: that he, without any gift giving, had atteined
al manner dignities, which were counted most honorable.

The like said Cotta Curio. We Cotta Curio.
Ciceroes Edileship.
also in this may glory, after a certain sort. For doutlesse small was the
cost of our Edileship: in respect of such large honors, as by allmennes voices
we atteined, eue^ in our year: which has befallne to none of them, whom I
named ^while. And also these expenses In what things such cost is better
bestowed.
be better: which are bestowed upon citiewalles, shippedockes, havens,
conduites, and all, that appertein to the use of the co^monweale. Although y^
is more pleasant, which presently is given (as it were) in hand: yet for
time to come these be more acceptable. Sightcourts, galereywalkes, and new
churches, the more reverently I find fault with, for Pompeius sake: but the
best learned men do not allow them: as both this same Panetius, who^e I have
followed much in these books, Panetius,
and yet not translated him: and also Phalereus Demetrius: who dispraised
Demetrius Phalereus disco^mended. Pericles.
Pericles, the prince of Greece, because he laid so much money upon those
goodly porches. But of this kind universally, it is Tullies books of a
commonweal. now lost.
dilige^tlie disputed, in those books, which I wrote of a commonweal. The
holle manner then of such largess generally is faulty, yet for certain times
it is necessary: and then the same is both to be referred to ones ability,
and to be tempered with a meankeeping.

But in that other kind of largegiui^g, Liberality.
which proceeds of liberality, not all alike in causes unlike, we ought to be
disposed. Otherwise is his case, who is pressed with misery: and otherwise
his, who seeks more wealth, having no adversity. Toward the miserable,
liberality Relefe to the miserable.
ought to be forwarder: except peraueture they shall be worthy of misery. We
ought yet in no wise to be altogether pinching toward those: who would have
themselves to be helped, not that they may feel no affliction, but that they
may rise to hyer degree: nevertheless in choosing Worthiness.
out meet me^, we ought to use a discretion, and a diligence. For notably
says Ennius:

Good deeds, in case they be evil placed, Ennius^

Evil deeds I count, and clean disgraced.
But whatso is given to a good man, and a thankful: thereby both there commes
fruit from him, and also from other. For so rashness be avoided, liberality
is very pleasureful: and so much themore earnestly most men praise it: because
every great man's goodness is the common refuge of all. Our endeavor
therefore is to be done, that we reward them with very many benefits: to
whose children, and offspring a memory may be left: so yt of good right they
can not be unthankful. For all men do hate the forgetter of (...) nesse.
a good turn: and do deem that wrong even to themselves to be done, in
frayeng away ones liberality: and they take him, who causes it, to be a
common enemy of the poor. And this liberality also is profitable to the
commonweal, to have prisoners redeemed out of captivity, and the poor
enriched.

Which we see written at large in y^ oration of Crassus: y^ it was wo^t to be
Crassus oration.
done abroad by us of y^ Equestriall order. I place therefore this usage of
liberality before lavishness in shows. This is for grave me^, and great:
that other, (as it were) for flaterers of y^ people, tickleling, as ye would
say, y^ lightness of the multitude with pleasure. But it is meet for a man,
both to be liberal in giving, and nothing eyger in requiring: and also in
every matter of bargaining, selling, Justice.
bying, hyring, letting, nyedwellinges, Gentleness.
and partieboundes, to be just and gentle: and to remitt much of his due to
many: but from trauerse in law to refrain as much, as he may: and I wott
not, whether S^mewhat to remitt of a manns own right.
somewhat more also, than he may. For it is not only a liberal point, to for
go so^mwhat of his right otherwhile, but so^mtime also profitable. But regard
of a man's wealth must be had: which verily to suffer to decay, is a foul
fault: but so, as suspision of niggardlienesse, and covetousness, be avoided.
For nodoute it is the greatest fruit of money: y^ a man be able to use
liberalite, not making spoil of his liuelhod. Well also, is hospitality
praised of Theophrastus. Hospitality, Theoprhast^.
us. For it is (as methinketh) very seemlie, noble me^nes howses to be open
for noble geastes. And yt also is an honor to the state: that outelandish men
in our cite do not want this kind of liberality. It is also exceeding
profitable to them, who honestly desire to be able to do much: to prevail in
power, and favor, by their geastes, among foreign nations. Theophrastus
indeed writes: Cimon^
y^ Cimo^ at Athenes also was a good housekeeper, for y^ Laciadans of his
ward. Because he took order so, and commanded his bayleis: that all things
should be offered to whatsoever Laciada^ turned ito his manor. Liberal
endeavor.


But these benefits, which be bestowed by travail, and not by largegiftes,
ar employed both upon the holle co^mo^weale, and upon every Advise.
citiezen aparte. For in law to give Counsel^
advise, with counsel to help, and to further very many with this kind of
science: it avails veriemuch, both to the increase of riches, and also to
favor. Therefore as there were many worthy things of our aunceters: so
always in great price was the knowledge, and ye opening of the right Ciull
law, had in price with aunci^t rulers.
well ordained civil law: which truly, before this turmoile of times, rulers
retained in y^ due estimation: now as honor, and as every degree of worship,
so the glory of this science is blotted out. And that is so much y^
shamefuller: because this happened at yt time: when he reigned, Ce^ar.
who in knowledge clerelie exceded all his foregoers, to whom he had been pere
in honor. This trauail therefore is pleasurefull to many, and very fit, to
bind men with benefits. And y^ grauer, and gracefuller, Eloquence, a grace
most commendable.
and trimmer feate of oratorie is nere coosin to this science.

For what is more praiseworthy, and better, than eloquence? either for y^
admiration of the hearers, or the hope of the needers, or for their cause, who
have been defended.

Therefore to this likewise a preeminence in all honor was given of our elders.
The benefits then, and the pleading of a finespoken man, and gladly taking
pains, and (as it is in his country fashion) both not unwillingly, and also
freely defending many men's causes, be far spredd abroad.

The matter has put me in mind: Discontinuaunce of eloquence.
that in this place also I should bewail the discontinuance, I will not say
the destruction of eloquence: but yt I feared, lest touching miself somewhat I
should seem to complain. Notwithstanding we see, what notable orators have
been putt out of the way: and how in a few a hope, in fewer a skill, in many
a boldness there remains. But Of smaller trauail also how favor is won.
seeing neither all, nor yet many can be either conning in the law, or
wellspoken men: one yet with his travail may further many: that seeweth for
their commodities: that speaks in their favor to the judges, and
magistrates: that slepeth not out an others cause: that entreats thosesame,
who either be counselers, or defenders: which whosoever do, they attein very much
favor, and their painefullnesse fioweth all abroad.

Now they are not to be admonished of this (for it is wellknowne) yt they
Justice.
O^ence.
take heed: when they will help other, that they offend none. For oftentimes
either they hurt the^, who^ they should not: or them, who^ it is not
behooueable: if vnwarelie they do it, of neclige^ce it is: if witti^glie, of
rashness it co^mes. You must use also to the^, who^ you offend against Offense
must either be ^uoided, or ^uaged.
your will, such an excuse, as ye may: for what cause the same, y^ you have
done, was necessary, and you could not do otherwise: and y^ which was done
offensiuelie, shall be reco^pensed with other trauails, and friendly doings.
Trauail for the poor rather, than the rich.


But whereas, in helping men, either their conditions ar wont to be considerd,
or their estate: indeed it is soon said, and so they do co^monlie speak:
that in bestowing their benefits, they regard me^ns manners, Manners.
and not their estate. An honest Estate.
saying it is: but who is there at all, which in bestowing his travail, does
not prefer the favor of a richeman, and one of power, before y^ poores, and
a right good man's cause?

For from who^, we think, a speedier, and redier recompense will come: to him
ward commonly our good will is the more inclined. But we must mark more
diligently, what is the nature of things. For verily though yt pooreman can
not render due thanks: yet if he be a good man, owe them for soothe he may.
This surely was in place, whosoever said it: Money who haueth in hand, has To
pa^e money.
not paid: and who has paid, haueth in mind: but thanks both who has To
render thanks.
paid, haueth in mi^de: and who haueth in mind, has rendered. But these, The
rich.
who count themselves rich, honorable, and wealfull, will not be once bound
to a man for a pleasure: but they think rather, yt they have done a pleasure:
when, yea although they have taken so^me great thing, they suspect somewhat
likewise of the^ either to be craved, or looked for: but they reche^ it eue^
like a death: yt they should seem to have used ones furderaunce, or should be
called hangers on. But y^ other porema^, thi^king himself regarded, and not his
state, when any thing is The poor.
done unto him: desires, yt he may be thought tha^kfull not only to him, who
have deserved it: but also to the^ (for he stands in need of many) of whom
he looks for ought. Nor yet with words he setts out his service, if perhaps
he do any, but also abaceth it. And thissame point is to be considerd: that
if you defend a rich, and a welthie man: y^ thank remains in him alone, or
perchance in his children: but if you do it for him, that is poor, and yet
honest, and discrete: all the mean degree, being not dishonest, (which is a
great multitude among the people) do se succor prepared for them. Wherefore
Set the good before the rich.
I think a benefit better to be bestowed upon good men, than upon rich. Yet
allwaies we must give our endeavor, that we may content all manner of men: but
if the matter shall come into comparison: verily Themistocles is to be taken
for an Themistocles
author: who, when he was asked counsel, whether one should bestow his
daughter upon a good poorema^, or a rich manne not so honest: I (quoth he) do
rather like a man, who lacks money, than money, which wants a man.

But manners be corrupted, and Love of riches.
marred, by ouerregarding riches. What do the the great store thereof pertein to
every one of us? Perauenture it helps him, that has it: and that, iwis not
allwaies. But grant, it helps: indeed he may be the mightier, but which way
may he be the honester man? And if the richeman be also a good man: let not
his riches hinder him, and cause him to find thelesse help, so they Discern
me^ by their virtue, not by their fortune.
further him not: and let a man's holle judgment be, not how rich, but what
manner man echone is.

And in bestowing benefits, and In a shameful cause no trauail is to be spent.
trauail, the last lesson is: that you labor nothing against equity, and
nothing with wrong.

For justice is the ground of a continual commendacion, and fame: without
which, nothing can be praisable.

But seeing we have spoken of such Benefite^ upon the commonweal.
kind of benefits, as belo^ge to each several manne: hereafter we must
treat of those, which pertein to all men, and to a commonweal.

And some of thosesame be of such sort, that they pertein to the holle The
hol^e
nonmbre of citizens: so^me that they Euer^eone.
concern every sere man: which be also more fauourfull. A diligence doutlesse
there must be given, if it may, that it be provided for both: and nolesse
also, for euerieone: but so, as the thing either may further, or at least not
hinder the commonweal. Caius Gracchus, to large a giver.
Caius Gracchus cornedole was great: he wasted therefore the treasury: Marcus
Detauius made such Marcus ^ctauius, in large gifts measurable.
a one, as was measurable, and as the commonweal might bear, and necessary
for the people: and therefore wealfull both to the citizens, and also to yt
state. But specially it must be seen to of him, who shall govern the
commonweal: that euerieman keep his own: and that there be no impayring of
private me^ns goods, Philippus, a peoplepleaser.
for common charges. For Philippus did dangerously in his Tribune^ ship, when
he made the law concerning lands: which yet he soon sufferd to be repealed:
and therein marvelously he showed himself a sober man: but as he did evil,
in setting for the many things people pleasinglie: so this he spoke evil: y^
there were not in the city two thousand men, who had any substance.

It is surely a mischievous saying, Making of goods common.
and sounding to y^ making of goods common: and what greater pestilence ca^
there be, tha^ that? For co^mo^welths, Countries.
and countries ar ordained to this end specially, that men may keep their
own. For although me^ assembled together, nature being guide: yet they sought
the defenses of cities, Cities.
for hope of safekeeping of their goods.

There must also good heed be given: Exacting of tributes is to be avoided.
that (as often it happened among our aunceters) for the poorness of the
treasury, and continuance of y^ wars, a tribute be not needful to be paid.
And long before it must be provided, that it may not befall. But if any
necessity of this duty shall happen upon any co^monweale: (for I had rather
prophecy to so^me others, than to owres: and yet I reason not of owres, but of
every co^monweale) there must be given a diligence, that all men may
understand: that if they will be in safety, they must obey necessity.

And moreover all such, as shall Store of necessary things.
rule the commonweal, ought to provide: that there be store of those things,
which are necessary. Of which it is not needful to dispute, what a provision
is wont, and ought to be made: for y^ matter is manifest: this place was
no more, but to be touched.

But the chief poincte is, in all administration Covetousness.
of matters, and commonweal offices: that even y^ lest suspision of
covetousness be avoided. Would god, quoth Caius Pontius the Samnite, fortune
had Caius Pontius.
reserved me to those days, and I had then been borne: when the Romans Bribes.
bego^ne once to take bribes: I would not suffer them any longer to rule. He
needed not iwis to have tarried for many worlds.

For of late this mischief entered into this commonweal. Therefore I am well
content, that Pontius rather lived then: if there was in him so much manhod
indeed.

Not yet a hundred, and ten years be past: sins the law of pillage A law
for pillage.
was made by Lucius Piso: whereas none before had been. But Lucius Piso^.
Tribune of the people, when Censorinus, and Manilius were Co^suls.
afterward followed so many laws, and every of the later, the harder: so many
accused, so many condemned: so great an Italian war, raised for fear of
judgments: when laws, and judgments wertaken away, so great polling, and
robbing of leagfrendes: y^ by the weakness of other, not by our prowess, we
do prevail. Panetius praises Africanus, Panetius.
Africanus, praised for ^ refrayning hand.
because he was no taker.

Why should he not be praised? But other greater things there were in him. For
the praise of restraining from taking is not only the man's, but also that
times. Paulus got all Paulus Emilius.
the Macedonians treasure, which was exceeding great: he brought so much riches
into the treasury, yt one capteins booty made an end of tributes: but he bore
nothing into Scipio Emylianus, who was called Africanus minor.
his house, save an everlasting memory of his name. Africanus followed his
father, nowhit the more enriched by Cartage razed. What of Lucius Mummius, who
was his L. Mummius Achaicus.
officefelow in the Censorship? was he aniedeale the richer, when by the
ground he had overthrown the most rich city? He was willing Cori^thus.
rather to bewtifie Italy, than his own house: allthough Italy being
beautified, his very house seems to me the beautifuller. No vice then is
there fowler (that thither my talk may return, from whence it is strayed) than
covetousness: specially, Covetousness, a very foul vice.
in princes, and commonweal rulers. For it is not only dishonest, but wicked
also, and shameful, to make a gain of the co^mo^welth. Therefore whereas Apollo
Pythius Apolloes answer, that Spartaes fall should come by couetise.
gave out by oracle: that Sparta no other way, but by covetousness should
come to destruction: the same he seems to have prophesied not only to the
Lacedaemonians, but also to all welthie peoples. For they, who rule over the
commonweal, may by no means sooner win the good will of the multitude: A
refraining hand.
than by a refraining hand, and stayednesse. But woso will be peoplepleasers:
Stayednesse.
and for that cause, do The law for laying out of lands.
either attempt the matter of lands, that the owners may be driven from their
holds: orels do think meet, that loned money be remitted to the detters:
they shake the foundations of the commonweal: first, they take away co^corde:
which can Concord.
not be, when money is pulled from so^me, and forgiven to other so^me: next,
they ba^nish equity: which is hollie Equity.
rooted out: if it be not lawful for every man to have his own.

For that is the proper end, as I said before, of a city, and borough: that
there be a free, and no troublesome keeping of every man's own good. And in
this mischief of the commonweal, they do not attein such favor, as they
suppose Favor.
they do. For he, from whom goods be taken, is beco^me an enemy: he also, to
whom they ar given, makes, as though he is not willing to take them: and most
of all he hydes his joy in loned money forgiven: lest he may seem to have
been unable to pay it.

But surely, he that receives the wrong, both bears his grief in
remembrance, and shows it in sight: neither if they be mo, to whom
wickedlie it has been given, than they, from whom unjustly it has been
taken: it follows, that therefore they be also more in power. For these things
be judged not by noumber, but by weight. And what equity is in this? yt he
should have land, who has had none: and he should forgo land, who has
had it many years, yea or hunderds of years before continued in possession.
The Lacedaemonians.
But, for this kind of injury, the Lacedaemonians drove out Lysander Lysander
expulsed.
the Ephorean: and they sleew Agis y^ king: which had never happened Agis,
slain.
among them before. Whereof followed, at that time, so great dissensions: y^
there arose tyrauntes: and their noble men were exiled: and a very well ordered
commonweal went to ruin. Nor truly their state only had a fall: but also
it ouerthreew the rest of Greece, with the infections of mischiefs: which
springing from y^ Lacedemonia^s, did flow farther abroad. What of our Gracchi,
Tiberius Gracchus, Gracchi, lost by la^dstrifes.
the noble man's sons, Africanus childerns childern? did not landstriues
bring them to destruction? But in deed Aratus the Sicyonian Aratus the
^icyonian, a right good co^m^ eaithman.
is rightfullie commended: who, when his c^tie was fifty years witholden by
tyraunts: being departed from Argos to Sicyon, with a p^sto^ entry, g^tte
possession of the city: and when, (...) (...) (...), he had ouer^ ^n the
tyrant, Nicocles: he (...) h^me again six hundred ba^sht men, who had been the
greatest possessioners of yt city: and, by his coming, set the ^ommo^weale
at liberty. But when he perceived the great inconvenience in the goods, and
possessions: because both he thought it very unreasonable, yt they should
^acke, who^ he himself had restored, whose goods other had possessed: and
again to remove fifty years possession, he judged it not very indifferent:
because that in s^ l^ng a space, much by inheritance, much by sale, much by
dower, was holden: with out wrong he thought it was necessary: neither the
goods to be taken from them, nor those to be unsatisfied, whose they had
been before. When he had then determined, yt he should need money, for the
ordering of y^ matter: he said, he would make a viage to Alexandria: and
commanded, the matter to remain untouched, until his return. And he with spe^e
went to Ptolemeus, who had been his entertainer: which then reigned the
second, after the building of Alexandria: to whom when he had declared, y^ he
was minded to set his country at liberty: and had enfourmed him of the case:
the noble man soon obtained of the rich king, to be aided with a mass of
money. Which when he had brought into Sicyon, he took to him in counsel fift^
one of his nobles: with who^ he examined the cases both of them who did
withholde othermennes, and of theirs, who had lost their own: and did put
these fifteen in commission for the valewing of possessions: and to persuade
sum, that they would be willinger to take money, and ^ease their possession:
and other sum, to think, that to have as much paid them in valeew, it were
more profit, than to recover their own. So it camme to pass, that they all
departed without complainte, by a wellordered concord. O manne of much
honor, and worthy to have been borne in our commonweal. Thus it is meet to
deal with citiezens: and not (as twice allreadie we have seen) to pitche a
salestaffe in the marketplace: and to put the goods of the citiezens in y^
cryers mouth. But that Greek thought meet to provide for all: which was the
part of a wise, and a worthy manne. And that is the greatest discretion, and
wisdom of an honorable citiezen, to defend, not to pull away the citiezens
commodities: and to contein them all within one manner of equity. But so^me
will say, men Equity.
may dwell rentfree in an others house. Why so? That when I have bought it,
have builded it, do repair it, do lay charges upon it: thou should have
y^ use of mine, against Unlawful pa^ting of lands.
my will? What is this else, but from sum to take their own, and to so^me to
give other (...)? And The neew tables for relea^ing of det.
as for the neew tables, what reason have they? but that you may bye land with
my money, and possess it yourself: and yet I may not have my money. Wherefore
it must be provided: y^ there be no dett, which may hinder the co^mo^weale:
which thing may be looked too, maniewaies: if this be not suffered: that
possessioners loze their own, nor detters gain other men's. For nothing more
strongly preserves a commonweal, tha^ faithfulness: which can be none at
all, except Faithfulness
there be of necessity a payment of things loned. For never more earnestly it
was gone about, tha^ when I was Consul, that there should be Cicero Consul.
no paiments. The matter was attempted with spear, and shield, by every sort,
and degree of men: whom in such wise I withstoode, y^ this so great a
mischief was rooted out of the commonweal. Never was there more derte, another
better, nor easlier paid. For when hope of defrauding was taken away,
necessity of payment followed. But this our conqueror, now verily Caesar.
conquered, has commepassed those things, which he purposed: whereas now he is
never awhit the be^ter. So great was his desire to do (...): yt even the very
doing of noughtinesse delited him, although he had no occasion. They then, who
shall uphold the co^monweale, must keep them away from this manner of large
gifts: that to sum they be given, and from other they be taken: and
specially must give their diligence: that by equity of law, and judgment,
euerieman may hold his ^wne: and neither the poorer sort, for their sma^l
ability, be deceived by couine: nor envy may hinder y^ rich, either to
keep, or recover their own: moreover, by what means soever they can, either
in war, or peace: let them enlarge the commonweal, with dominion, land,
and custom. These be the deeds of Conclusion.
noble men: these were practiced among our aunceters: these kinds of duties
whosoever follow: shall, with very great profit to the commonweal, get
themselves both great favor, and glory. Way prepared to the res^


But in these precepts of profit, Antipater of Tire, the Stoik, who Antipater.
alate dyed at Athenes, thinks, that two precepts be ouerscaped of Panetius:
tendering of health, and provision of money. Which things I Panetius defended.
suppose to have been ouerpassed by the noble philosopher, because they were
light matters: yet without dout they be profitable.

But health is preserved, by knowledge ^fhelth.
of ones own body: and marki^g those things, which are wont either to do good,
or harm: and by a stayedness both in all a man's diet, and apparail, for
cherishing of the body, and also in forbearing pleasures: and lastly, by
their conning, to whose science these things pertein.

But a man's substance must be Private goods.
gotten, by those things, which be far from dishonestie: and must be saved,
by diligence, and honest sparing: and by thosesame means also, it must be
increased. Xenopho^ Xenophons book o^ ordering an household.
the Socratian has gone through these things very handsomelie, in ye book,
which is entitled Economicus: the which we turned out of greek into latin,
when we were at the same age in a manner, as you ar now.

But co^paring of profits (because Of two profitable things w^ether is the more
profitable.
this fourt place was ouerpassed by Panetius) is oftentimes necessary. For
both ^he gifts of the body ar wont to be compared with fortunes gifts: and
also fortunes gifts, with the bodies gifts: and those of y^ body, one with an
other: and those, that fortune gives, likewise one with an other. The bodies
gifts be compared with fortunes, after this sort: that ye had rather be in
health, than be (...): fortunes gifts be compared with the bodies, in this
wise: that you had rather be rich, than of very great strength of body.
Those of the body be compared one with an other, thus: that good health be
preferred before pleasure, and strength before sw^ftnesse. But fortunes gifts
be compared together, this way: that glory be esteemed before riches, and
^itietribute before the (...) t^lde, wh^t is the ^
countries. Of the which kind of comparison is (...) ^aying of Cato, the
oldeman^ of whom when it (...) deman^ded, what (...) (...) (...) (...) for a
man's substance: he made answer, To feed well: what the second, To feed
sufficiently well: what y^ third, To clothe well: what the fourte, To plow:
and when he, who had moved the question, had Usurie.
said: What, to le^d upon usury? then, What is it, quoth Cato, to kill a man?
Whereupon, and of many other things it ought to be gathered, y^ comparisons of
profits ar wont to be made: and that this is veriewell adjoined for the fourt
point of serching out of duties.

But of this holle matter, of getti^g Referring of the matter to (...).
money, of bestowing the same, and also of using it: far better it is disputed
by certain honest me^, sitting A place in Rome, so called, because Ianus images
were there to be seen.
at the middle Jane, than of any philosophers in any school. Yet ar they to
be known, and of them in this book we have treated. The rest will we
prosecute hereafter.

MARCUS TVLlius Ciceroes third book of duties, to Marcus his son.
The Same Publius Scipio, The preface. 1. part.
son Mark, who the first Africanus was why he sp^ds his vacant time in
philophie.
named, would commo^lie say: as Cato has written, who was in a manner his like
in years: That he was never more leasurelesse, tha^ wha^ he was A ^eate saying
of Scipio, touching leisure, and solitariness.
leasurefull: and never less alone, than when he was all alone. A noble saying
surely, and meet for a worthy, and wise man: which declares, that he both
in his leisure was wont to muse of matters to be done: and also in his
solitariness, to debate them with himself: so as he was nothing idle at any
time, and sometime neded not the communication of other. And so these two
things, leisure, and solitariness, which bring a dullness upon other, His own
vacatio^ compared with Scipioes.
made him y^ quicker. I would wish, that we likewise might truly say the very
same. But allthough by (...) we are not able to attein so great excelence of
wit: yet doutelesse in desire we comme very nere him. For both by wicked
war, and power, being put of from commonweal matters, and judicial causes,
we take our quiet leisure: and for that cause leaving the city, and walking
abroad in the country, oftentimes we be alone. But neither this leisure is to
be compared with Africanus leisure: nor this solitariness, with that of his.
For he ceasing from the goodly ministration of the commonweal, took himself
leisure otherwhile: and from the prease, and resort of men, now and than into
a solitary place, as into a haven, withdrewe himself. But our leisure commes
Leisure.
not of desire of rest, but for lack of hysinesse. For seeing the Senate is
deposed, and judgments abolished: what is there, that either in court, or in
place of plea, meet for us, we may do. Therefore we, who in the greatest
assemble, and in the yies of the citiezens sommetime have lived: now ^leeing
the sight of the wicked, with whom all places swarm: do Solitariness^.
withdraw ourselves, as much as we may, and ar oftentimes alone. But because
thus we have herd of learned men: y^ not only we ought of evils to choose the least: but also if there were any goodness in them, Good out of evil.
to pike it out: therefore both I enjoy quietness: not such ywis, as he ought
to have, who once procured quietness to the holle city: and also do not
suffer that solitariness to wax idle: which necessity brings upon me, and not
mine own desire. Allthough Africanus did get greater praise, even in my
judgment: yet no monuments of his wit put in writing, no work of his quiet
life, no fruit of his solitariness remains abroad. Whereof it must needs be
gathered: that he, by earnest occupyeng of his mind, and by beating out those
things, which by musing he atteined: (...).
was neither idle, nor at any time alone: but we, who have not so great
deepenesse of wit, that by secret musing we be drawn from solitariness: do
turn all our study, and endeavor to this travail of Writing.
writing. And therefore we have written more in a short space, sins the state
was overthrown: than in many years, when it stood.

But whereas all philosophy, my Exhortation to his son. Philosophy.
nor any part thereof is barrein, and waste: yet no place therein is more
yielding, nor more plentiefull, than the place touching duties: from which be
borrowed Duties.
the precepts of living constantly, and honestly. Wherefore although I trust,
you daily hear, and receive this same of our Cratippus, His sons
scholemaister.
prince of Philosophers in these days: nevertheless I hold it profitable,
that I ring about your ears with such soundes, on every sid^: and that they,
if possibly it may be done, hear none other thing. Which both is to be
done of all those, that mind to enter the honest life: and I wott not, whether
of any man more, than of yourself. For you carry an expectation, not small of
following His (...).
our trade, great of coming to our honor, sum paraduenture His bringing up.
of atteining to our fame. You have taken upon you moreover a great charge,
both by reason of Athenes, and also of Cratippus: to the which seeing, as to
the mart of good sciences, you have t^auailed: to return empty, a g^eate
reproach it is, st^ining the woorshippe both of the city, and also of your
master. Wherefore as much as by wit you ar able to commepasse: as much as by
pain^ (...) can endeavor (if to study be rat^er a pain, than pleasure) so
^uch ^ee, that you do in deed: and give no occasion, that seeing all things a^
suffised by us, you should seem to have disapointed yourself. But of these
matters hitherto. For we have oftentimes written much unto you, in wa^e of
exhortation. Now to the part remaining of the foresaid division let us
return. The treatise. He remoueth (...), suppl^eng the perceil, that his
au^hour did not prosecute.


Panetius therefore, who without doubt of duties has most vilige^tlie disputed:
and whom we, using (...) certain correction, have chiefly folowe^: when h^ h^d
setteforthe three (...), (...) (...) men w^r w^nt to counsel, and advise
themselves How '(...) wrote of duties.
of duty: the one, when they should doubt, whether it, wherewith they were in
hand, were honest, or (...): the other, whether it were profitable, or
unprofitable: the third, if that, which should have the ^howe of honesty,
should strive with it, that seemed profitable: how it should be necessary
thosesame to be discerned: of the first two kinds, in three books he opened
his mind: and of the third kind, he wrote, he would speak afterward: and
that did he not perform, which he had promised. Where at I mar^aile
Possidonius, Panetius scholar.
the more: because it is written by his scholar Possidonius: that Panetius
lived thirty years after he had settefoorth those books. Which place I
wonder, it was so briefly touched of Possidonius in certain (...): specially
seeing he writes, there is no place in all ^hilosophie so necessary. But in
nowise I agree with them: which deny, this place did ouerskape Panetius: but
that of purpose it was left out: and that it was not to be written at all:
because profit might never strive with honesti^. Touching the which, the one
may have in it a doubt: whether this part, which in Panetius division is the
third, was to be added, or utterly to be left out: the other can not be
douted of: but of Panetius it was taken in hand, and yet left vntreated. For
whosoever of a threeparted division two parts has finished, to him the third
must needs remain. Moreover, in his third book, toward the end, he
promises, that afterward he will speak of this part. Hereto comes a
substantial P. Rutilius Ru^us, Pane^us scholar.
witness, Possidonius: who also writes in a certain letter, that Publius
Rutilius Rufus, which The notable image of Uenus: whose hedde only Apelles
finished and left her body no more but shadowed.
had herd Panetius, was wont to say: like as no painter might be found, who
could finish up that part of Uenus, which Apelles had left unfinished: (for
the beauty of her face took away the hope of cou^terfetting the rest of her
body) so those things, that Panetius had ouerpassed, and had not finished,
there was no man to prosecute: because of y^ excele^ce of those matters, which he
had gone thorou withal. Wherefore of Panetius judgment it can not be douted:
but whether he to the serching out of duty this third part adjoined well, or
no: thereof parauenture it may be douted. For whether honesty be the only
good, The Stoiks appoint one thing only good: the Peripat^tiks make an order
of good thigs.
as likes the Stoiks: orels honesty in such sort be the souerain good: (as
seems to our Peripatetikes) that they count all things, set on the other
side, of very small weight in comparison: it is not to be douted, but that
profit can never be Profit.
at strife with honesty. Therefore, ^onestie.
we have herd say, Socrates was wont to curse them: who first parted a sonder
in opinion these, that by nature were coupled together. To whom doutlesse the
Stoiks so assented: that whatso were honest, the same also they judged to be
profitable: nor any thing to be profitable, which were not honest. If Panetius
were the man, who would say: y^ virtue therefore should be honored, because it
is y^ causer of profit: as they, who measure things meet to be desired either
by pleasure, or vngreffulnesse: he might maintein, that honesty sommetime
strives with profit. But seeing he is Good.
the man, who judges that only good, which is honest: and that ma^s Honest.
life is made neither y^ better, by increase of such things, as be repugnaunt
to honesty under a certain show of profit: nor by decrease of the^, the
worsse: it seems, he should not have brought in such manner taking of
aduisement: wherein that, which should seem profitable, should be compared with
that, which is honest. For that, which of the Stoiks is called the souerain
good, as to live agreably to nature: it has (as I suppose) this meaning: with
virtue To li^e agreably to nature.
always to agree: and other things, which should be according to nature, so
to chose: if to virtue they were not repugnaunt. Which seeing it is so: sum
suppose, this comparison was not well brought in: nor any thing at all,
touching that branch, should have been taught. And surely that honesty,
which is properly, and truly so called, is in the wise only: and from virtue
can never be severed: but in those, in The true virtue is only in perfect
wisemen.
who^ is not perfect wisdom, doutlesse that same perfect honesty ca^ in no
wise be: semblaunces of honesty there may be. All these duties therefore,
whereupon in these books we dispute, the Stoikes call the mean The mean
duties.
duties: and those be common duties, and do spread far: which many attein,
both by goodness of wit, and by going forward in learning. But that, which
they call R^etum, The perfect duty.
is the perfect, and absolute duty: ^, as they also say, it has all his
parts: neither can happen to any, but a wiseman. And when any thing is done,
wherein the mean duties may appear: it seems to be fully perfect: because
the common people al most understands not at all, what it wa^teth of
perfect: but as far as they understand, they think, nothing is left undone.
And where as it commonly chau^ceth in meeters, and paintinges, and in other
things mo: y^ the vn^kilfull be delited, and praise those things, y^ are not
to be praised: for y^ Of arts none can (...) (...) judge, but the craft^master:
and of virtue none but the wi^e.
cause, I believe, they do so: y^ in those there is so^me good grace, y^ catches
the ignorant: who in deed be not able to discern, what fault is in every
thing. And therefore, when they be taught of the skilful, they soon fall from
their opinion. The Stoiks then say, y^ these duties, whereupon in the^e ^okes we
treat, be (as who says) certain second sorts of honesty: not proper only
to the wise, but common also to all manner of men. Therefore all be allured with
these, in whom there is a forwardness of virtue. ^ecii, the father, and the
son.
And when the two Decii, or y^ two Scipioes be vouched for ma^lie me^: orels
when Fabritius, or Aristides Scipioes bre the^.
be alleged as just: neither of them for manliness, nor of these for (...)
Fab. a despi^er of gold.
the example is brought, as of perfect wisemen. For none of these (...) of a
thens deier ^ed this surn^me, ^ust.
in such sort is wise, as in this place we will have a wise manne taken: nor
Marcus Cato, and Caius Lelius, Cato. and Lelius, surname ^ the wi^e.
who were counted, and called wise, were perfect wise men: no nor those seven
sages of (...) The. vii. wise masters of Greece.
but by the often using of the mean, and common duties, they bore a certain
semblaunce, and show of wiseme^. Wherefore neither it is lawful, that the
thing, which in deed is honest, be compared with the contrariety of y^
profitable: neither y^, which co^monlie we call honest, and which is exercised
of them, who will have themselves good me^ to be counted: with commodities at
any time is to be compared: and as well that honesty, which falls into our
understanding, is of us to be maintained, and kept: as that is, of the wise:
which properly is called, and indeed is honesty. For otherwise it ca^ not be
holden on, if there be atteined any proceeding to virtue. But this we say by
them, who by keeping of duties ar esteemed for good men. Epicureans.


But who do measure all things by profits, and commodities: and will not the
same to be ouerweyed with honesty: these ar wont in aduiseme^t taking to
compare honesty with it, which they reckon profitable: good men use not so to
do. Therefore I think, Panetius, when he said, me^ Panetius.
ar wont in this comparison to dout: meant the veriesame, that he spoke: that
me^ only ar wont, but not, yt To be wont.
they must needs. For not only to To do of necessirie.
judge the thing, that seems profitable, more worth tha^ that, which is
honest: but also to compare these together, and in them to cast doutes: a very
foul shame it is. What is it then, that many times is wont to bring a
doutefulnesse? and seems meet to be considered? I suppose, it is, if at any
time there befall a doutfullness: what manner of thing it is, whereof
consideration is taken. For often, by the time, it co^mes to pass: that it,
which for the most part is wont to be counted dishonest, is found not to be
dishonest. For examples sake, let there be put so^me case, that more largely
extends. What greater mischief can there be, than one to kill not only a
man, but also his familiar? Has he then giltied himself of murder, who has
slain a tyrant, all were he his familiar? To y^ people of Rome doutlesse it
seems not so: who of all worthy deeds esteems that the noblest. With them
therefore profit passed honesty: yea rather honesty followed after profit.

Therefore, that without any error what to determine, ^here profit seems to
strive with honesty.
we may be able to judge: if ever yt, which we call profitable, shall seem to
strive with it, which is known for honest: a certain rule is to be appointed:
which if we will follow in the comparison of things, from duty we shall never
swerve. And this why he folowes chiefly the S^oikes.
rule shall be most agreeable with the trade, and doctrine of the Stoiks:
which verily, in these books, we therefore follow: because although of the
ancient Academiks, and our Peripatetiks, (who were once all one with the
Academiks) those things, Honest.
which be honest, be preferred before such, as seem profitable: yet these
Profitable.
more goodlily be disputed of y^ Stoiks: to who^ whatso is honest, y^ same
seems profitable: and nothing semes profitable, which is not honest: tha^ it
is of those: who reckon so^mewhat to be honest, and not profitable, or
sommewhat profitable, and not honest. The Academian schole.
But to us our Academia gives great liberty: yt whatsoever most proueable
^o^mes in place, the same by our prerogative we may lawfully defend. But I
return to y^ rule.

To pull away then any thing A precept of justice.
from an other, and a man to increase his commodity with an other ma^s Profit
by an other ma^s dis commodity.
discommoditie, it is more against nature: than death, than poverty, tha^
pain, and other things, which may happen either to the body, or to the
outward state. For first of all it takes away the conversation, and fellowship
of men. For if we shall be so disposed: that every man, for his own
commodity, spoil, and wrong an The fellowship of men.
other: that fellowship of mankind, which is most according to nature, must
needs be broken. As if every Comparison between ma^s society, and the parts
of his body.
part of yt body should have this imagination: to think, it might be strong,
if it had conveyed to itself the strength of the next limbs: of force it
should follow, that the holle body should be weakened, and perish: euenso if
euerieone of us catch to himself the commodities of other, and pulls from
each man what he can, for his own profits sake: y^ fellowship, and common
company of men must needs be overthrown. For it is sufferable, and nature
not against it: that euerieman be more willing for himself, than for an other
man, to get whatso pertains to the use of his life. This doutlesse nature
does not suffer: that, with the spoil of other, we increase our riches,
substance, and wealth. And not only it is ordained by nature, that is to
wit, by the universal law of nations: but also in like Laws.
manner, by the laws of people, whereby in every city the commonwelth is
vpholden: that it should not be lawful, for a man's own profits sake, to
hurt an other. For the laws tend to this, and this they mean: that y^
fellowship of citiezens be in safety: which whosoever riue a so^der: those with
death, bannishment, prisonme^t, and penalties, they ponnish. And this much more
does the very course of nature require, The law of nature.
which is the law of God and man: the which whosoever is willing to obey (all
truly will obey it, that have a mind to live according to nature) shall never
so offend: yt an other ma^s goods he would covet: and take to himself, that he
has pulled from an other. For much more according to nature is the hynesse,
and greatness Great courage.
of courage: and likewise common fellowship, Common (...).
justice, and liberality: than pleasure, than life, than richesse. Which
things doutlesse for a man to despise, and set at naught, in comparison of
common profit: is a sign of a great, and hawte courage. But to pull from an
other, for ones own wrong doing is against nature.
profits sake, is more against nature: than death, than sorrow, than the rest
of y^ same kind. And in like manner, more according to nature it Common safety.
is, for the saving, and ayding of all nations (if it may possibly be done) to
undertake great trauails, and pains: following that notable Hercules,
Hercules, for his worthy deeds, was taken as a god.
whom men's report, the recorder of deserts, has placed in y^ company of
the^ above: than to live in solitarienesse, not only without any pains, but
also in great pleasures, flowing full of all richesse: yea though moreover you
may excel all other, in beauty, and strength. Wherefore euerieman of the best,
and most noble disposition, prefers that life far before this. Whereof it
co^mes to pass, yt a man obedient to nature ca^ not hurt a man. Furdermore,
Doing of injury.
whosoever wrongeth an other, y^ himself may get so^me commodity: either believes,
that he does nothing against nature: or wenes, yt he should sho^ne death,
poverty, sorrow, the loss also of childern, kinsfolk, friends, rather than
the doing of injury to any man. If he thinks nothing to be done against
nature, in wronging of men: what should you reason with him, which clean takes
away man from man? But if he plainly thinks that meet to be avoided: and
yet these he deemeth much worsse, death, poverty, sorrow: he is in this point
out of the way: that he takes any discommoditie either of the body, or of
fortune to be sorer, tha^ the vices of the mind. Therefore there must be in all
men one intent: that alike may be the profit of every sere man, and of all
universally. Which The law, and right of ma^s fellowship.
profit if each man pluck unto himself, all man's fellowship shall be (...).
And if nature does also appoint this: that man woloe have The law of nature.
manne provided for, whatsoever he be: yet even for thissame respect, because
he is a man: it must needs follow, that according to the same nature, the
profit of all be in common. Which if it be so: we all be contained in one, and
the like law of nature. An^ if the same be so: doutelesse, by the law of
nature, we ar forbidden one to wrong an other. Now, the antecedent is true:
therefore true also is the consequent.

For that verielie is reasonlesse, that sum say: from their parent, or
brother, they will take nothing away, for cause of their own profit: but of
other citiezenes, that there is an other respect to be had. The right of man's
society mu^ be kept, not only with (...), but also with all men universally.
These be in opinion, that they have no law, nor fellowship to keep with
citize^nes, for a common profits sake: which opinion does rippe a sonder all
the society of a city. And they, that say, there must regard be had of
citie^enes, and none of forainers: do ry^e asonder the common fellowship of
ma^kinde^ which being destroyed: all bountiefulnesse, liberality, goodness,
and justice is utterly rooted up: which whosoever take away, even toward the
gods immortal ar to be counted irreligious. For such do overthrow the
fellowship by them among men ordained.

Of the which fellowship the surest The bond of man's fellowship.
bond is: to think it to be more against nature, for one manne to use
extortion to an other, for his own profits sake: than to suffer all
discommodities, either outward, or of the body, yea or of y^ mind: which
happen without just deserving. Justice.


For this virtue, Justice, of all virtues is the lady, and queen.

Perauenture, ^me will say: Shall Questions (...).
not then the wiseman, if he be driven by famine, take away meat, from an
other man good for nothing? No doutlesse. For my life is no more profitable to
me: than such a disposition of mind, that I wrong uobodie for my profits sake.
What if a good man could spoil the cruel, and beastly tyrant Phalaris of
his clothing: that he should not d^ for cold himself? might he not do it?
These be full easy to judge. For if you take ought, from a man on no behalf
profitable, for love of your own commodity: ye shall do vnkindelie, and
against the law of nature: but if you be the man, who may bring much profit
unto the common weal, and the fellowship of me^, if you remain alive: incase
ye take away ought from an other, upon that consideration: it is not to be
reproved: but if the matter stands not even so: every manne must rather bear
his own discommoditie, than pull away of an others commodities. Sickness
then, or poverty, or any such like is not more against nature: than extortion,
and greediness of an other man's goods. But to leave alone the common profit,
is against nature: for it is unjust.

Therefore the very law of nature, which preserves, and mainteineth men's
profit: appoints without doubt: that from the ^dle, and unprofitable man,
necessary things to live with be conveyed to the wise, y^ good, and the manly
man: who, if he should dye for want, should draw away with him much of the
common profit: and yet so he must do it: that neither by ouerweeni^g in
himself, Selflyking.
nor loving of himself to well: Selfloue.
he make this a pretenced color to do wrong. Therefore always let him do his
duty: providing for the profit of men, and that fellowship among men, which I
oftentimes repeat. For as touching Phalaris case, y^ judgment is very easy.
For with tyraunts we have no society, (...).
but rather be at extreme dissension with them: neither is it against nature
to spoil him, if ye can, whom it is honest to kill: and all such pestilent,
and wicked rables ar to be driven out of the companies of men. For even as
certain limbs be cut of: if they once begin both to lack blood, and life
(as ye would say) and also do hurt the other parts of the body: so this
savageness, and cruelnesse of a beast, under the shape of a man, must be
parted (as it were) from the common naturalnesse of man's body.

Of this sort be all those questions, wherein duty is sought out by
circumstaunce of time. Such matters He excuses Panetius.
therefore I believe, Panetius would have treated: had not sum chance, or
bysinesse prevented his purpose. Concerning which manner of taking aduisment, in
my books before, many things be sufficiently taught: by which, it may be
per^iued, what is to be avoided, for dishonestie: and what is not to be
sho^ned, because it is nothing dishonest. But for as much as of our work
begone, yet allmoste ended, now (as who says) we set on the roof: as the
Geometers ar wont not to prove all: but to require, yt certain things be
granted them: to the intent, they may more easylye set out their purpose:
so do I require of you, my He requires one principle to be granted him.
Cicero: that ye grant me, if ye may, that nothing but that, which is
honest, is for itself to be desired. But if it may not be granted, Ponessie,
for itself, either one^y, or chief lie to ^e desired.
because of Cratippus: yet this nodoute you will grant me: that the thing
which is honest, is chieflye for itself to be desired.

Whether ye will, is enough for me: and both the one, and the other semes the
more proueable: neither any thing else appears proueable. And first, in this
point, Panetius is to Panetius defended.
be defended: because he said not, that profitable things at any time strive
with honest (for it was not lawful for him so to say) but those, which seem
profitable, might strive with honesty. But he often witnesses, that nothing
is profitable, whichsame is not honest: nor honest, whichsame is not
profitable: and he denies any greater pestilence to have crept into man's life:
tha^ their opinion, who have divided these two asonder. Therefore he brought
Repugnau^ce in seeming, and not in deed, bitweene honesty and profit,
in that repugnaunce: which did seem to be, and was not in deed: not that,
at any time, we should prefer profitable things before honest: but that
without error, we might discern them, if ever they fell in place. This part
therefore, left untouched, we will supply: with no others aid, but (as they
say in war) even with our own force. For touching this percel^, there has,
been, sins Panetius wrote, not^g (...), that liked me: of all, that ever ^me to
our hands.

Therefore, when any show of profit Profit from (...) is not t^ be se^ered.
is offer^ us, we must needs be styrred: but if, when ye give good heed, ye
se dishonestie ^yned wi^h Dishonestie. A ^owe of profit.
that thing, which brings a show of profit: then the profit is not to be
desired: but we must think, where dishonestie is, there profit ca^ not be. Now,
if nothing there be so much against nature, as dishonestie: (for nature does
desire good, and co^ueuient, and sted fast things, and despises the
contrary) and again there is nothing so according to nature, as profit:
dout^lesse in the same profitable thig dishonestie ca^ not be. And also, if we
be borne to honesty: and it is either Honesty.
only to be desired, as to Xeno it seemed: or in all estimation, is to be
counted of more value, tha^ all other things: as pleases Aristotle: it must
needs be, y^ the thing, which is honest, is either y^ only, or yt souerain
good: and what so is good, y^ same doutelesse is profitable. And so all, yt is
honest, is profitable. Wherefore when the error of men not honest has caught
hold of so^mewhat, y^ seems profitable: by and by it diuides the same from
honesty. Hereof ^inhonest profit, mother of all iuischief.
murders, hereof poysoninges, hereof counterfeit wills do spring: hereof felony,
hereof robbing y^ treasury, pyllage, and extortions from leagfrendes, and
citiezens: hereof grows the power of to exceeding richesse, not to be
suffered: and finally in free cities th^r be the des^res of ruling: whereas
nothing either more cruel, than they, or more detestable can be imagined. For
with deceauable iyes they see the gain of things: but the ponnishment, I will
not say, of the laws, which they often break thorough: but of dishonestie it
self, which is sorest of all, they see not. Wherefore The (...) of shame.
let such takers of aduiseme^t be driven from among us (for they are alltogither
wicked, and ungodly) who use ad uisement: whether they may follow yt, which
seems to be honest: or wittigly stain the^ selves with dishonestie. For in y^
very douti^g a great fault In a shameful matter,
there is, allthough they never come to y^ doing of it. Therefore those th^ges
shameful is the very deliberation.
ar ^ot to be advised on at all, in which y^ very taki^g of aduiseme^t is
dishonest. And also in all deliberation, y^ hope, and opinion of co^cealing,
and hy^ig of matters is to be put away. For fully (in case we have aniwhit
profited in philosophy) we ought to A golden pre cept.
be persuaded: though we could hide it from all gods, and men: yt nothing yet
couetously, nothing unjustly, nothing wantonly, nothing vnstayedly is meet to
be done.

Herupo^ yt Gyges is brought in by The tale of the (...) ^oyges.
Plato: who, when the earth had opened in certain great storms, went In pla^oes
second book of a commonweal.
down into that gaping hole: and spyed a brazen horse, (as the fables tell) in
whose sides were doors: which being opened, he saw the corse of a dedde man, of
an unwonted hugeness: and a gold ring upon his finger: which as soon as he
pulled of, he put it on his own finger. This Gyges was the kings sheppard.

Then he got himself again to y^ co^mpanie of sheppardes. There when he had
turned the head of that ring toward the paulme of his hand: he was seen of
nobodie, yet he saw every thing: and he was seen again, when he had turned
yt ryng in sight. And so vsig this vau^tage of y^ ring, he lay with the quecne:
and by her aid, he sleew the king, his master: and made dispatche of them,
whom he thought to stand in his way. Neither could any man see him, being
about these mischeuous dcedes.

So, by the commodity of his ring, he became suddenly king of Lydia. This same
ring then if a perfect wiseman should have: he would think it no more lawful for
him to offend, than if he had it not. For honest things, not secret things by
good me^ be sought. And in this place, certain philosophers, and those not of
the worste, but yet not all of the finest say: that Plato told a fained, and
devised fable: as though he defends, that either the thing was done, or was
po^ble to be done.

This is the effect of this ring, and The meaning of this fable.
of this exaumple: if noman should know, or noman should once suspect: when
you should do any thing, for regard of riches, power, rule, or lust: yea if it
should be unknown for ever both of god, and man: whether you would do it, or
no. They deny it possible to befall: and allthough it can not so befall in
deed: yet I demand, incase yt might befall, which they deny to be possible,
what would they do? They force on, grossly in good soothe. For they hold, it
is impossible, and therein they stay still. What this word (if) imports, they
se not. For when we demand, if they be able to co^ceale, what they will do?
we do not demand, whether they be able to co^ceale it, or no: but we lay
before the^ as it were yt rack, and certain manikles: y^ if they ansuer, they
would do, what the^ liked, being sure to skape scotfree: they confess
themselves to be wicked: if they say, they would not: they grant, all
dishonest thiges, for themselves, meet to be eschewed. But now let us return
to our purpose.

There do oftentimes befall diverse matters, which trouble me^nes minds, under a
show of profit: not when this is advised upon, whether honesty is to be left
for the greatness of profit (for that plainly is The thing. that (...)
profitable.
wicked) but whether the thing, which seems profitable, may be done without
dishonestie. Br^tus did wellynough, in expulsing (...).


When Brutus took away the rule from Collatinus Tarquimus, his officefelowe:
he might have (...) thought to do it unjustly: for, in driving out the
kings, he had been Brutus assist au^t, and ayder also of his counsels. But
when the rulers had agreed thus in counsel: that the kindred of Superbus, and
the name of the Tarquinians, and the memory of y^ kingdom should be utterly
driven out: because it was profitable to provide for their coun try: the same
was in such wise honest, y^ even very Collatinus ought to have liked it. And
so profit prevailed, because of honestrie: wtoute which, profit could not have
been at all. But with y^ king, who builded (...) did not well ^n that he slew
Remus.
this city, it fared not so. For a show of profit struck in his mide: to
whom when it appeared more profitable, for him to rule alone, than with an
other: he slew his brother. This man forgotte both godliness, and
naturalnesse: that he might obtein the thing, that seemed profitable, and was
not so indeed: and yet his brothers leaping over the wall he alleged, for a
color of honesty, neither alowable, nor sufficient Romulus Quirinus.
enough. He offended therefore: yt by Quirinus, or Romulus favor, I may say
it. Notwithstanding we must seek our own pro fit, without others hurt.
we ought not to leave our own commodities, and give them to other, when
ourselves do need the same: but every man must serve his own profit so far,
as without an others injury it may be done. Feately said Chrisippus in this,
as he did in many things mo: Whosoever, quoth he, ronneth in the A feate
comparison, made by Chrysippus.
race: ought to endeavor, and labor, as much as he may, that himsef may win
the game: but in no wise he ought to trippe him, with whom he ronnes, or to
keep him of with his hand. So in this life it is not unlawful for every man
to get himself, that may serve his use: but to pull from an other, it is no
right.

But most of all, duties be put out Nether deny, nor grant your friend every
thing.
of order in frendshippes: in the which, it is against duty: both not to do,
that rightfully you may, and to do, yt is not lawful. But of all this matter a
short, and no hard rule there is. For these, which seem profitable, Set not
your profit before friendship.
honors, riches, pleasures, and other of the same kind, ar never to be
preferred before friendship. And (...).
a good man, for his fre^des sake, another will do against yt co^monweale Oath.
another against his oath, and promise: no not though he shall be judge upon his
own friend. For he puttes of Judgment.
the personage of a friend, when he takes upon him the person of a judge. Thus
much he shall lean to friendship: that he had rather, his friends cause were
true: and that he will grant him time thorouly to plead his cause, as much as
by the laws he may. But when by his oath he is to give sentence: he must
remember, he takes god to witness, that is to mean (as I suppose) his
conscience: for nothing more godlike, than it is, has god himself given to
man. Therefore of our aunceters we have received a goodly The old manner of
requiring the judges favor.
manner of desiring the favor of a judge: if we would keep it: To do what he
may, saui^g his oath. This request is referred to those things: which, a little
before is said, might honestly be granted by a judge to his friend. For if all
things should be done, which friends would desire: such were to be counted not
amities, Amity.
but co^spiracies. I speak now Conspiracy.
of common frendshippes. For in me^ wise, and perfect, there ca^ be no such
thing. Men say, that Damon, and Damon, and Pythias, a notable couple of friends
Pythias, the Pythagorea^s, were so affectioned, one toward an other: that when
Dionysius, the tyrau^t, had appointed one of them his dyeng day: and he, who
was condemned to dye: had required certain days of respite, for the disposing
of his things: the other becamme bound body for body, for his forthco^ming:
upon condition, that if he returned not at his day, he would himself dye for
him. Who, when at his day he was comme again: the tyrant wondering at their
faithfulness, required, that they would take him in for the third in their
friendship.

When therefore that, which in friendship seems profitable, is compared with
that, which is honest: let the show of profit yield, and honesty For your
fren des sake, do nothing against honeslie.
prevail. But when in friendship those thiges shall be required, which be not
honest: let religion, and uprightness be preferred before friendship: and so shall
that choice of duty be had, which we seek after.

But under the show of profit, in For a common weal howfarreforthe we must do.
the co^monweale there is oftentimes doing amiss: as our men did in the razing
of Corinth. Sorer also dealt Cruelty of Athenians to Egine^es.
the Athenians: who made a decree, that the Eginetes thombes, who were skilled
in navigations, should Egina, an isle right over against Attica.
be cut of. This was thought profitable: for Egina did tomuch over look
Pireu^, by reason of the nere Port Pireu^, by Athenes.
bordering. But nothing, yt is cruel, is profitable. For to man's nature,
which we ought to follow, cruelty is most enemy. They also do evil, who
bar strangers from using Strangers.
their city, and do bannish the^: as did Petronius, in our fathers days: and
Papius, of late years. For, one to go for a citiezen, who is no citieze^, it is
reason, it should not be lawful: the which law the very wise Consuls,
Crassus, and Sceuola, Consuls.
Crassus, and Sceuola did make: but to forbid strangers the use of y^ city,
it is doutlesse an uncivil Profit.
part. Those doings be notable, Honesty.
wherein show of common profit is despised, in respect ofhonestie. Our
co^monweale The Romans stoutn^e in the second Punik war
is full of examples, both often at other times, and chiefly in the second
Punike war: which, after y^ overthrow taken at Cannai, had greater corages,
tha^ ever in prosperity: no token there was of fear, no mention of peace. So
great is the force of honesty, ye it dymmeth the show of profit. When the
Athenians no way were able to wtstand y^ Athenians assaulted of the Persians.
assault of the Persians: and were determined, yt leaving y^ city, and
setti^g their wives, and childern in Tro^, they would take their ships: and
defend the liberty of Greece, with Cyrsilus.
their navy: one Cyrsilus they stoned to death: who persuaded with the^, to
keep still the city, and receive ^res. And he seemed to follow profit: but
that was none, where honesty gainstoode it. Themistocles, after yt victory of
y^ battle, which was holden with the Persia^s, said in the open assemble: that
he had wealfull counsel for the state: but it was not expedient, it should be
openly known: he required, that the people should assign sum man, to whom
he should tell it. Aristides was appointed. He told him, the (...), a notable
harbrow for ship pes, with the Lacedaemonians.
navy of the Lacedemonias, which was conveyed to Gytheum, might privily be set
a fire: by which act, the Lacedemonia^s strength should of necessity be
abated. Which thig when Aristides had herd: he ca^me to the open assemble, with
their great expectation: and said, it was very profitable counsel, which
Themistocles did give, but nothing honest. Therefore the Athenia^s, the thing,
The Athenians refused Themistocles counsel, in a general sum (...) by
Aristides.
that was not honest, did not count profitable at all: and, being advertised
by Aristides, they rejected the holle matter, which they had not once herd.
Better did they, than we do: who have pirates vnponnished, and leagfrendes
tributarie. Let this therefore stand for a conclusion: A conclusion that no
dishonest thing is profitable.
that y^ thing, which is not honest, is never profitable: no not eue^ then,
when ye attein y^ thing, which you recke^ to be profitable. For the same to
think profitable, which is dishonest, a miserable case it is. In bargains what
is honest, or profitable.


But oftentimes (as I said before) there so befall cases, when profit seems to
strive against honesty: that it is to be considered: whether altogether it
does gainstand it, or may be made agree with honesty. Of A question, of a
cornmerchaunt.
that kind be these questions: If, for examples sake, a good man departing
from Alexandria, shall bring to Khodes a great quantity of corn, in the time
of scarcity, and famine, and extreem derth of corn among the Khodians: in
case the same man know, that many merchauntes be all ready set for the from
Alexandria: and saw their ships, freighted with corn, in their course making
toward Khodes: whether he ought to declare it to the Khodians, Byeng.
or with silence should sell his Selling.
own for as much as he might. We put the case here, of a wise, and good man:
touching his deliberation, and taking of aduisentent, we question: who would
not hide it from the Rhodians, if he thought it dishonest: but he douteth,
whether it be dishonest, or no.

In such manner cases, oue thing A pleasant disputation bit wene Diogenes, and
Antipater.
Diogenes the Fabyloniaa^, a great, and grave Stoik, is wont to think: an other
thing, Antipater, his scholar, a very sharpwitted man. Antipater holds, yt
all must be opened: Antipaters opinion.
that the byer be ignorant of no manner thing, which the seller knows:
Diogenes says, the scller Diogenes.
ought to tell the faults, as far as is appointed by the civil law: and
Civil law.
the rest to do without deceites: and sceing he sells, to desire with the
best advantage to sell. ^ither have I brought it, I have set it forth to sale:
I sell mine for no more, than other do: perchance also for less, seeing I
have greater store: to whom is the wrong done? There Antipater.
grows a disputation by Antipater, of y^ contrary side: What go ye about?
Sithe^s ye ar dou^de to profit Law of nature.
men, and to serve the felouship of Common profit.
man: and year born under such a law, y^ ye should keep those principles
ofnature, which ye ought to obey, and always to follow: that your profit
should be common profit: again, and as well, common profit should be youres:
will you hyde from men both what commodity, and what store also is at hand
for them? Diogenes peraue^ture will ansuer Diogenes.
thus: It is not all one thing to hide To hyde.
from men, and to hold ones peace: To hoide ones peace.
neither do I now hyde it from ye: though I tell ye not, what is y^ nature of
gods, what is the end of good: which things well known would profit you
more, than the cheapnesse of wheat. But it is not necessari for me to tell,
whatsoever is profitable for you to hear. Yes Antipate^.
verily, says he, it is necessary: if so be, you remember the fellowship knit
Common.
among me^ by nature. I remember Diogenes.
it, says y^ other: but is this felouship such, that echeman may have Priuat^
nothing of his own? In case it be so, nothing doutlesse is to be sold, but
to be given.

You se, in all this controversy, this is not said: though it be dishonest, yet
because it is profitable, I will do it: but that in such wise it is profitable,
as it is not dishonest: and of the contrary side, that therefore it is not to
be done, because it is dishonest.

Put the case, a good man sell a A question, of selli^g a house
house, for certain discommodities, which he knows, and other know not: set
case it be contagious, and is taken for wholesome: be it so, it be unknown, that
in all the chaumbers do appear venomous creeping beasts: and that it is
euilltimberd, and ready to fall: but this none knows, but the owner: I
demand, if the seller open not this to y^ buyers: and selles the house for
much more, tha^ he thought, he should have done: whether he does justly, or
vnhonestlie? He verily does dishonestly, says Antipater. For what other
Antipater.
thing is it, than not to show the wa^derer his way, (which at Athenes was
forbidden, upon pain of common curses) if this be not it? to suffer y^ byer to
rush suddenly, and ru^ne hedlong by error into a great deceit? Yea it is
more, than not to show a man the way. For it is wittingl^ to lead one out of
the way into a false belief.

Diogenes replieth again: did he Diogenes.
compel ye to bye, who not once moved ye to it^ He set to sale, that liked
him not: you bought, that liked ye. If they, who offer to sell a good farm,
and well builded, as they set it out, be not thought to have deceived:
although it be neither good, nor wellbuilded: much less then they, who have
not praised their house. For where the buyers yie is his chapman, there what
deceit can there be of the seller? and if every saying is not to be
performed: think ye that meet to be performed, that was not said? But what
is more foolish, than the seller to tell the faults of the thing, which he
put^es to sale? And whatso fond a hearing is there: as if, at y^ owners
commandment, the crier thus should make a noyes^ I have a contagious house to
sell.

Thus therefore, in so^me doutefull cases, of the one part is honesti^ defended:
of the other part, there is speaking of profit: y^ it is not only honest to
do, but also dishonest not to do it, y^ seems profitable. This is y^
disse^sio^, which seems often to befall bitwene profitable things, and honest:
which points ar to be discussed. For we have not set the^ for the to make
questions, but to open the^.

Methink then, neither thatsame Rhodian cornmerchaunt, nor this (...) opinion,
touching these questions.
houseseller ought to have hidden the foresaid things from the buyers. For
whatsoever you keep in silence, you do not fullye so much, One thing it is,
to hyde, and an other, to keep silence.
as it is to hyde: but when, for your profits sake, ye would have those
ignoraunte of that, you know, whom it stands upon to know it. Now this kind
of hiding of what nature it is, and what manner of man's, who sees not?
Doutlesse it is a part not of a plain, not of a simple, not of a gentlemanly,
not of a just, not of a good manne: but rather of a suttlewitted, close, wily,
deceitful, gylefull, crafty, foxlike, and a very dubbler. These so many,
and other mo names of vices to enter into, is it not unprofitable? If they be
dispraisworthie, Shame, to hide a thing, that is: more ^ame, to lie in a thing,
that is not.
who have held their peace: what is to be thought of those, who have used a
vainness of talk?

Caius Canius, of the Equestriall order in Rome, a man not unpleasant, A merry
tale, how a greek (...) a Roman.
and wellynough learned, when he had got him to Syracusai, even for pleasure,
and not for bysinesse C. Canius.
(as he was wont to tell) he bruted, that he would bye sum place of
pleasure: whither he might bid his fre^des: and where he might delight himself
without troublers. Which when it was spread abroad: one Pythius, who kept a
bank of Pythius.
exchau^ge at Syracusai, said: y^ he had in deed a pleasant plat, howbeit not
to sell: yet Canius, if it pleased hi^, might use it as his own: and therewith
bad him to supper, against the next day. When he had promised: then Pythius
like a ba^ker, who was well in favor with all degrees, called unto him certain
fisshermen: and required them, that the next day they would fish before his
ground: and told them, what he would have them do. Canius camme at his time
to supper. Su^ptuouslie y^ chere was prepared. A nou^ber of fissherbotes were
before their yies. Each man, for his part, brought, y^ he had taken. The fish
was powered down at Pythius feet. Then quoth Canius, I pray ye Pythius, what
is this: that there is so great store of fissh, so goodly a sort of botes?
What maruail? quoth he again: for whatsoever fish there is about Syracusai, it
is in this place: here is y^ watering place: this ground these citiezens can
not well spare. Canius kindled with a desire to it, was ernest with Pythius,
that he would sell it him. He made it strange, at the first. What need many
words? He obteineth it: the man being in love with it, and rich, bought it
for so much, as Pythius would ask: and bought it furnished: he puts in
sureties: and makes up the bargain. Canius, the next day, desired his
acquaintance thither, and came himself bitimes: he saw never a boat: he
enquired of his next neybour, whether it were not so^me holidaie with the
fisshermen, because he saw none of them. None, that I know, quoth he: but here
none of them ar wont to fissh: and therefore yester day I maruailed, what
^haunce was befallne. Canius began to chafe: but what could he do? For as yet
Aquilius, my officefelowe, and familiar, had not setforth the cases, that
should be counted couine. Aquilius definuion of couine.
In the which same, when I demanded of him, what was Couine: he answered, when
one thing is pretended, and an other done. This doutlesse was very plainly
answered, as of a man skillful in defining. Therefore both Pythius, and all, yt
do one thing, and pretend an other, be false, wicked, and gylefull. No deed
then of theirs can be profitable, when it is with so many faults bespotted.
If Aquilius definition be truc: out of all man's life must false pretending,
and dissembling False pret^.
be bannished. So every D^mulatio^.
good man shall neither falsely pretend, nor dissemble, that he may bye, or
sell the better. And this couine also was ponnishable by the Couine ponnishable.
laws: as deceitful gardenship, in the twelve tables: and crafty beegyling
yongmen of their goods, by the law Plectorian: and without law, by
judgments, where the byll is put in, Upon good conscience. But of all other
judgments these words be most notable, that be of course in a case of
arbitriment of marriage: The better, The iuster: and in a Terms of law.
case of trust, or confidence: That among honest men there be honest dealing.
What then? Either in that, which is, The better, The iuster, can there be any
point of couine? or when it is said, Among honest men let there be honest
dealing: can any thing deceitfullie, or gilefully be d^e? But couine (as
says Aquilius) wherein couine stands.
is contained in fained pretense, and dissimulatio^. All lyeng therefore in
making of bargains is utterly to be excluded. Let not the seller set a
raiser of the price against the bier: Lyeng in bargaining.
let not the byer set one, that may low y^ price again for him. If they
both come to communicatio^: the^ shall talk but once of y^ matter. When
Quintus Sceuola, Publius son, Sceuolaes conscience in ^yeng.
had required: y^ the price of y^ ground, whereof he was a cheaper, should once
be showed him: and the seller had so done: he said, he valued it moreworthe,
and gave him more by. xxv. honderd crowns. There is noma^, y^ can deny, but
this was the part of a good man: a wise man's part Good. wi^.
they deny it to be: even as if the other should have sold it for less,
than he might have gotten. This therefore is the mischief: because they reckon
good to be of one sort, and wise, of an other. Whereupon quoth Ennius:

The wiseman his wit very vain he may call, Ennius in Medea.

If profit he can not himself therwithall.
It were true indeed: if I agreed with Ennius, what it is to profit. I see,
Hecato, the Khodian, Hecato, (...) scholar, wrote syx books of duties.
Panetius scholar, says in those books, which of duties he wrote to Quintus
Tubero: that it is a wise man's part, doing nothing against customs, laws,
and ordinances: to have a respect to his substance. For we covet not only
Increasing of private goods.
for our selves to be rich: but for our childern, our kinsfolk, our friends,
and specially for the commo^weale. For the substance, and wealth of every
sere man is the richesse of a city. Sceuolaes doing, whereof I spoke a little
before, can in no wise like Hecato: for Sceuola utterly denies, that he will
do ought, for his own gaynesake, y^ is not lawful. To this man another great
praise, neither thank is to be given. But whether both false pretending, and
also dissembling be couine, or no: few matters there be, wherein this couine
has not a do: and Couine.
whether he be a good man, who Good.
profits whom he may, and hurtes nobodie: full well a just man, but Just.
not lightly a good man we shall find. It is never profitable then to
Profitable.
do evil, because it is evermore dishonest: and because it is always honest
to be a good man, it is always Honest.
profitable.

And surely touching the title of Selling of land.
land, it is ordained with us by civil law: that in selling of it, y^ faults
also should be told, which were known to the seller. For whereas by the
twelve tables it was sufficiently provided: that those things should be
performed, which were declared in word: which whosoever would deny, should
forfette double damages: there was also, by y^ judges of the law, a pain set
for concealment. For whatsoever fault Concealment
were in the la^d: if the seller knew it, except expresslie he had declared it:
they decreed, that it ought to be made good. As when in y^ tower the The
Augurs. Cl. Centimalus, commanded to pull down certain houses.
Augurs were about their prophecyeng by fouleflight: and had commanded Titus
Claudius Ce^timalus, who had houses in mount Celie, to pull those down, whose
height should let their prophecieng: Claudiusdid set the^ to sale, and sold y^
yland: Publius Calphurnius Lanarius bought it. He was commanded y^ veriesame
by the Augurs. And so, when Calphurnius had pulled them down: and Calphu^us
drove Claudius to arbitriment, for concealment.
understood, y^ Claudius had set the houses to sale, after he had been
commanded of the Augurs to pull the^ down: he drove him to arbitrime^t: Cato.
For all, that he ought in that case, to recompense him, of good conscience.
Marcus Cato, this our Catoes father, made the awarde. For as other ar named
from their fathers: so this, who begatte such a star, is to be named from
his son. He therefore, as In Claudius concealment was condemned for deceit.
judge, gave sentence thus: that seeing he knew the thing, at the putting of
it to sale, and did not declare it: he ought to render the byer his damages.
Catoes judgment.
He therefore judged, it stood with good conscience: that the fault, which the
seller knew, should be known to the bier. That and if he gave a true
judgment: neither well did the cornemerchaunt before, neither well did this
contagious houseseller in holding his peace. But such manner of concealments can
not all be comprehended in the civil law: but such as may, be perfitly
contained. Marcus How Marius sold Ser^us a house.
Marius Gratidianus, our kinsman, had sold to Caius Sergius Orata that house,
which he had bought of him a few years before. This house did a certain
service to Sergius: but Marius had not declared the same in the liuerie of
seisine. The matter was brought to the law. Crassus pleaded for Orata, Antonius
for Gratidianus. Crassus stood upon the letter of ^he l^we: ^ause the The
^etter of the law.
seller, knowing the discommoditie, had not told it: that it ought to be made
good: Antonius enforced the equity of the law: because The equity of the law.
that discommoditie was not unknown to Sergius, who had sold the same house,
that it was nothing needful to be declared: and that he was not deceived, who
understood, of what title it was, that he had bought. To what purpose tendes
all this? That ye may perceive, that couine liked not our auncetours. Couine.
But one way the laws condemn couine, an other way the philosophers: Laws.
the laws, as far as by Philo^ophie.
open deed they can gather upon matters: the philosophers, as far as by
reason, and understanding they can comprehend. Reason therefore re^uireth this:
y^ nothing suttelly, nothing fainedly, nothing deceitfully be done. Is it then
any deceit, to pitche the toil, although you go not about to rous^, nor
chase the game? For the very game lights upon it oftentimes, when nobody
folowes them. So when you offer your house to sale: you set up your bill, as a
net: you sell the house, because of the faults: so^me body happs upon it,
unware of the^: though I see, this through corruption of use neitherby custom
is couted dishonest, neitherby ordinance, or civil law decreed: yet by the law
of nature it is forbidden. For there The felouship of men.
is a fellowship of me^ amongst men (which thing although it has been
oftentimes spoken of, yet oftener it must be spoken) which in deed very
largely extends: and a nerer there is of those, who be of one nation: and a
nier, of them, who be of one city. Therefore our aunceters The law of nations.
would needs have the law of nations to be one thing, and the civil The civil
law
law an other. For what so is the civil law, the same is not consequently
the law of nations: but whatso is the law of nations, the same must needs be
the civil law, But we keep no sound, and express form of very law, and
Justice.
mere justice: we use the shadow, and images thereof: yea and even thosesame I
would, we did follow. For they be taken out of y^ best principles of nature, and
patterns of troth. For how precious be those words?

That not by you, or your promise, I be snared, or Forms o^ law drawn out of
divine, and natural reason.
deceived. How golden words be those? That among good men good dealing ought
to be, and without de^uing.

But who be good men, and what is good dealing, it is a great question. O.
Seuola.
Quintus Sceuola, the chief bishop, said, there was great substance of
matter in all those arbitrementes, in which there should be treating according to
good conscience: and the name of good conscience he judged to reach very
far: and that it had adoo in gardeinshippes, commepanies, matters of trust,
co^mau^deme^ts, things bought, sold, hired, and let out: by which, the
fellowship of man's life is vpholde^: in these things, he said, it was y^ office
of a great judge to determine, what echema^ should do to an other: specially
seeing the judgments in most me^ be contrary one to another. Wherefore couine
must be utterly avoided: and y^ wiliness, which will wylin^e.
needs have itself seem to be prudence: but it is tarr from it, and differs
very much. For prudence is placed in yt choice of good, and evil: wyliness, if
al things be evil, which be dishonest, p^ferreth evil before good. And not
only in matters of land: the civil law, yt has his original of nature, does
ponnishe wiliness, and couine: but also in the sale of slaves and niefs, all
couine of the sellers is forbidden. For he, yt should have known of their
helthfulness, of their fugitiueness, of their theuishness, does make
satisfaction by the Ediles decree. Otherwise is y^ case of inheritours. Whereof
is done to understand: because Nature.
nature is yt fou^tain of law, yt Law.
this is according to nature: yt no^ go about by an others ignorance, to make
his own gain. Nor any greater destruction of ma^ns life can be found, tha^
of a wiliness, falsely False sainig.
to dissemble ones understanding. Whereof those innumerable inconveniences do
grow, that profitable things seem to fight with honest. For how many will be
found: who being sure to be free from ponnishme^t, and knowledge of all men,
can refrain from doing wrong? Let us make a proof (if it please ye) in those
exaumples, wherein the common sort of me^ perhaps do not think, they do amiss.
For it falls not in this place to speak of murderers, poysoners,
willforgers, thieves, and robbers of the common treasury: who not with
words, and reasonings of philosophers, but with chains, and priso^me^t ar to
be ponnished. But these things let us consider: which they do, who be counted
good. Certain me^ A counte^ will.
brought out of Greece to Rome a counterfeit will of Lucius Minutius Basilius,
a very rich man: and to the intent they might the easilier prove it: they did
put in as heirs with them, Marcus Crassus, and Crassus, and Hortensius.
Nuintus Hortensius, men of most power in the same city. Who when they
suspected it to be forged, and were not guilty of any fault in their own
conscience: they refused not the pretty reward of an others falshod. What say
we then? Is this enough, that they seem not to have done any fault? To me
truly it seems not so: although the one I He loved Hortensius, in his life:
he forgiues Cras ^us, after his death.
loved being alive, the other I hate not being dedde. But when ^asilius would
have had Marcus Satirius, his sisters son, to bear his name: and had made
him his heir: I mean Foul gapers for others inheritaunces.
him, who was protector of y^ country of Picene, and Sabine (O shameful
stain, in those days) it was not reason, that the rulers of the city had the
goods, and nothing but the name descended to Satirius. To fense of injury.
For if he, that does not fense of injury, and keep it away from his, when
he may, does unjustly: as in my first book I have disputed: what manner a man
is he to be counted: who not only does not fense of, but also Inheritance.
furdereth an injury? And true i^heritau^ce also semes to me not honest if it
be purchased by wily flateri^g duties: and not by truth, but by false
faini^g. But in such cases, one thing is wont so^metime to seem profitable, an
other, honest. Yet untruly it so seems: for alike is y^ rule of profit, as
Profit.
of honesty. Who foreseeth not this: Honesty.
no guile, no mischief shall fail in hi^. For thus imagini^g, This in deed is
honest, but this is profitable: he will take upon him by error to sonder things
coupled together by nature: which is y^ welspring of all deceits, wicke^
deeds, and mischiefs. Therefore A good man.
if a good man have such power: y^ if he do but beck with his finger, his name
may creep into the testament of the rich: let him not use this power: no not
though he know for certeintie, that no man at all will once mistrust it. But
if ye should give this power to Marcus Crassus: M. Crassus.
that with a beck of his finger, he might be put in as heir, being no
heir indeed: he would (believe me) leap for joy in the open street. But a
just man, and he, whom we count a good man, will catch nothing from anieman,
to cast it upon hiself. Whosoever has wonder at this: he confesses himself not to
know, who is a good man. But if a man will unfold the secret knowledge of his
mind: by and by he may ^nfourm himself: that he is a good man, who A good man.
does good to whom he may: and hurts nobodie, but provoked by injury. How
then? does not he hurt another, who works (as it were) with a certain poyso^:
that the true heirs he may displace, and make himself succeed in their room?
May he not then do that, will sum say, which is profitable, and which is
auailable? Nay let him know: that nothing Nothing profitable which is unjust.
neither avails, nor is profitable, which is unjust. This whosoever has not
learned, can not be a good Fimbria, Co^sul.
man. I herd of my father, when I was a boy: that Fimbria, sommetime (...).
Luctatius Pythias.
Consul, was judge to Marcus Luctatius Pythias, one of y^ Equestriall order of
Rome, in deed honest: when he had put in sureties to answer the actio^, if he
were not found a good man: that therefore Fimbria said unto him, he would never
give judgment of y^ case: lest he should either rob a tried man of his good
name, if he had judged against him: orels should seem to have determined, that
there is sum good man: whereas that thing consisted in duties, and
co^mendations innumerable. To this good man then, whom also Socrates.
Fimbria, and not only Socrates had conceived: ca^ no way ought appear to be
profitable, that is not honest. Therefore such a man will not be so bold to
do, no nor purpose an^ Dread.
thing, which he dare not auerre. Is ^ent.
it not a shame for Philosophers to dout in these things, whereof the closones
of the cou^ri^ do make no doubt at all? From whom is sprung y^ proverb, which
now is well worn by co^tinuau^ce. For when they praise any ma^s conscience,
and goodness: they say, he is such a man, as ye may play with him
blyndfolde.

What other meaning has y^, but Nothing expedi^. which is not co^mely.
this? y^ nothing is expedient, which is not co^melie: although you may obtein
it, without any ma^s r^au^ce. Do ye not see tha^ by this proverb: y^ neither y^
same Gyges, can be borne with, nor this other, who^ (...) I fained with the
wagging of his finger to be able to turn to himself all men's inheritance? For
as y^ thing, which is dishonest, although it ^e closely kept, can no wai^ yet
be made honest: so the thing, which is not honest, can not be brought to
pass to be profitable, even nature being against it, and withstanding it. But
yet where very great (...), there is occasion of evil doing. When Marius, to
attein to the Consulship, did against his dut^.
Caius Marius was far of from hope of y^ Consulship: and seven years after
his Pretorship, lay still: nor seemed as one, that ever would labor for the
Consulship: to the people of Rome he accused Quintus Metellus, a noble man, and
citizen, whose ambassador he was: when he was sent to Rome fro^him, being his
captein: how that he prolonged the wars: and said, if they had made him
Consul: he would in a short space have brought Jugurtha, either quick, or
dedde, into the subjection of the people of Rome. And so in deed he was made
Consul: but he swarued from all trust, and justice: who by faisse accusation
brought in an envy a very good, and gr^ue citiezen: whose ambassador he was,
and from whom he was sent. No nor our ^atidianus truly did ^tidian reproved,
who ^red to himself alone the (...), that was nolesse due to the officers his
fellows.
then the duty of a good man, when he was Praetor: and the Tribunes of y^
people had ^alled unto them the company of the Pretors: yt there might be set^
a standerd of the coin by a common consent. For in those duies the money was
made so to fall, and rise: that noman could know, what he had. They penned a
decree by a common agreement upon a pain, and condemnation: and appointed, yt
they all together, at after noone, would go down into Rostra. And then all the
rest went echeman his way: Marius from the Senators benche got him straight
to Rostra: and alone proclaimed that, which by a common consent was made: and yt
thing, if ye desire to know, was to him a great honor: in all the streets,
images were made him: and to thefame offered was incense, and lights of war.
What need mame words? Noman was there ever more beloved of the multitude.

These be the things, which trouble men oftentimes, in taking of aduisement:
when the thing, wherein equity is broken, is not counted so great: but that,
which is gotten by such dealing, seems ^aruailous great. As to Marius it
seem^ not so dishonest, to get away the ^oples favor from his ^lowes, (...)
Tribunes, but to be made Consul for that doing, which then he had set before
his yie, it seemed very profitable. A rule.
But one rule there is of all, which I would feign have you thorowlie to know:
either the thing, Look, the sho^e of profit be not dishonest. and that no
di^honest thing seem profitable.
which seems profitable, let it not be dishonest: or if it be dishonest, let
it not seem profitable. What shall we then save? May we either take this
Marius, or that other, for a good man? ^end, and strain your understanding, to
see what shape, form, and image of a good man is in it. Does it then commonly
befall in a good man to lie for his profit, to^ accuse, to prevent, or deceive?
Of a surety nothing less. Is there To deceive.
then any thing so precious, or any gain so much to be desired: that ye
should therefore leese the glory, and name of a good man? What is there so much,
that this profit (as they call it) is able to bring us, as it may pull from us:
in case it take away the name of a good man, and spoil us of troth: and
justice? For what difference is there? whether one shapeturn himfelf from a man
to a beast, or under the Man.
^ourme of man, bears in him y^ brutish cruelness of beast? What of the^,
Beast.
who set at naught all good and honest things, so they may attain to power? do
they not, even as he did: who Pompeius ^oyned in aliaunce with (...).
would needs have him to his father in law: by whose bold enterprises he
might bear a swe^? For to him it seemed profitable to be of much power, by an
others enuic: but he saw not how unjust, how unprofitable, how dishonest it was
for his country. But as for his father in law, he had C. ^ulius (...) dei^ed
much to reher^e these verses of Euripides.
always in his mouth Euripides greek verses of the Phenissians: which I will
express, as well as I can: perchance with out their grace, but yet so as y^
meanig may be co^cei^ed. If breach of laws, a man shall undertake: He must
them boldly break, for kingdoms sake: In each thing else, look you regard
the right. Heinous was y^ ^teocles, or rather Euri^ides: who excepted only
this, which was most detestable. Why do we then gather these (...) cases, as
concerning inheritance, merchaundise, and deceitful sale? Nay behold him,
that sought to be King over the people of Rome, and all nations: and brought
it to pass. This kind of ^esire whosoever cou^teth honest, he is not well in his
wit: for he allows the overthrow of law, and liberty: and the cruel, and
detestable oppression of them he reckens a glorious matter.

With what kind of chydi^g then, or rating rather may I attempt to turn him
from so great an error: who confesses, it is not honest to reign as king in
that city, which both has been, and ought to be free: and yet accou^tes it
profitable for him, that can bring it to pass?

For, O ye gods immortal, can the most shameful, and cruel mnrder of a
man's own country be profitable? yea though he, that has embrued himself in
such blood, be cleaped of y^ oppressed subjects parent of the co^mo^weale?
Profit therefore Profit.
is to be directed by honesty: and Honesty.
y^ so, as these two words may seem to differ in themselves in terms, and yet
to sound all one in meaning.

Now to the opinion of the common people. What greater profit can there be, than
to reign, and to rule? C^trariwise I find nothing more unprofitable for him,
who (...) has atteined it: when I apply reason to the troth. For can
greeues, cares, daily, and nightly ^eares, and a life full of snares, and
dangers be profitable to any man?

About the seeking of the crown Empire.

many evil, and faithles be: Uerses of Accius.

But few good men, in such a case,
a man shall lightly see.
quoth Accius. But to which crown? Tantalus,
The Same, that from Tantalus, and Pelops.
Pelops desce^ding, was by just title possessed. For how many mo, think C.
Caesar.
ye, were untrue, and untrusty to that king: who with an army of Roman people
oppressed y^ people of Rome: and forced that city to be subject to him: which
was not only free of it self, but also a ruler of othernatio^s? What blotts of
conscience, suppose you, had he in his heart? what wou^des of remorse? But whose
life can be ought worth to himself: when y^ state of his life is such, that
whosoever takes it from him, shall be in most favor, and fame? In case these things
he not profitable, which specially seem so to be: because they be full o^
shame and reproach: we ought now to be fully Nothing profi^able, which is not
honest.
persuaded, y^ nothing is profitable, which is not honest. Notwithstanding the
same, both at diverse other times, and namely in the wars with Pyrrhus, was
so adjudged by Caius Fabritius in his second Consulship, ^ow Fabri^ius, and the
Se nate sent the traitor home again to Pyrrhus: who for a reward offered to
poyso^ his king.
and also by our Senate. For when king Pyrrhus unprovoked had meued war
against y^ people of Rome: and the fight was all about empire with y^ noble, and
puissau^t prince: a ru^away traitor went from him to Fabritius camp: and
promised, that, if Fabritius would offer him a good reward: as he ca^me
privily, so he would return (...) to Pyrrhus pauilion: and dispatch him with
poison. Fabritius caused him to be carried back again to Pyrrhus: and that
deed of his was well commended of the Senate. But if we seek the show, and
respect of profi^: true it is, this one runneawaye might have made an end^ of
y^ great war, and that grievous enemy of y^ e^pire: but it had been a great
shame, and foul deed, to have had him subdued not by prowess, but by
trecheri: with who^ y^ fight was all for glory. Whether then was it more
profitable (...) (...) Fabritius, who was such a one in our city, as (...) was
at Athen^s: or for our Senate: who Profit not to be severed f^o^ honor.
never (...) profit from honor: to war agai^^t their enemy with arms, or
wi^h poison? If empire be to be sought, for cause of glory: let treachery No
glory is in treachery. Riches coming with (...) can not be profitable, The
unprofitable adui^e of L. Philipp.
^e eschewed, wherein ca^ be no glory: again, if riches be sought any manner
way: they ca^ not be profitable, if they come with infan^ie. Therefore that
advise of Lucius Philippus, Quintus son, was not profitable: that those
cities, which Lucius Sylla, for a certain su^me of money, had discharged of
tributes, by decree of the Senate, should again be tributarie: and yet we
should not res^ore the^ y^ money, which for their beeig free they had
disbursed. The Senatehouse agreed all with him. A (...) it was to the government.
For of Pirates better is the promise, than of y^ Senate. ^ea but the tributes
(they will say) were (...) augme^ted: there fore it was profitable. How long will
they be bold to call any thing profitable, yt is not honest? Can hatred, and
infamy be profitable to any^ state: that should be vpholde^ with glory, and
good will of their (...)? I miself oftentimes have disagreed Cato ouerstiffe.
even with my Cato: for ouerstiffly, methought, he defended the treasury
gain, and tributes: and denied all manner alowaunces to the farmers of our
customs, and many, to our leagfrendes: whereas toward these we should be
beneficial: and so deal with those: as we were wont to do with our citizens,
sent to inhabit newetownes: and so much the more, because y^ knitting together
of those degrees of men did perteine to the safety of the commonwelth. Curio
Curioes calling on profit
also did evil, in that he said, the Tra^spadanes matter was just: but yet
evermore he cried, Let profit preuail. He should rather have said their matter
was not just, because it was not profitable for the commo^welth: tha^ when he
said, it was just, he should grant, it was unprofitable.

Hecatoes sixth book of duties is full Questions out of Hecato
of such questions: Whether it be fit In a great derth, to give over
houskeeping.
of corn, to give over housekeping? He disputes the matter on both ^ides: but
yet at last he thinks, ^uite is directed rather after profit, than after
humanity.

He putts y^ case, if one must needs To loze a good horse. or a (...).
rather bear y^ loss of a horse much worth, than of a slave little worth. In
this case, private profit leads a man one way, and humanity, an other. If a
fool in a shipwreck catch hold Shall a wise man drown a fool to save himself?
from him, if he can? He says, no, because it were injurious. What may the
owner of the shipp do? shall what the ow ner of the ship may do.
he may cast a passenger out of the ship into the sea, because it is his.
For until they arrive at the place, whether the ship was hired: y^ shipp is not
the owners, but theyrs, that sail in it. What if two in a shipwreck wisemen
shif ting for their lives.
they both be wiseme^: should either of the^ pull it to himself? or one give
over his hold to the other? Yea, he should give over: but to him, whom it were
more expedient to live, either Men alike in wisdome^
What if these be alike in both? Then there s^all be no stryuing b^twene the^:
but the one must yield to the other: as the i^ser does in lots, or at the
Italian p^ay with the fingers, called Tocco.

What if the father rob churches? whether the son may open his fathers
felome, or no?
or undermine the walls of the treasury? should the son open it to the
magistrates? That were surely a ^ur sed deed: yea rather he should (...) his
father, if he were accused thereof. Is not our country then above all duties?
Yes truly: but it is profitable for ones country, to have the inhabiters
reverence their parents.

What if ones father will go about whether the ^onne may co^ceale the fathers
treason, or no?
to usurp, as a tyrant, or to betray his country: shall the son conceal
it? Nay he shall desire his father, not to do it: if he nothing prevail, he
shall blame him, and threaten him also. And last of all, if the matter tend to
the destraction of his country: he shall prefer the safety of ^is country
before the safety of his father.

He puttes a question also: if a wiseman Counterfeit money.
unawares received counterfeit money instead of good: after he perceiues it,
whether he should pay it ^ute again for good money, if he were indetted to
any^ body? Diogenes says, he may: Antipater den^es it, to whom I rather agree.

He, that wittingly sells wine, y^ ^ine, that will not last.
declare it? or no^ Diogenes thinks, it is not need full: Antipater recke^s it
the duty of a good man.

These be (as ye would say) y^ cases, Mo cases in (...).
in controversy, in the Stoikes matters of law. Whether, in selling a Selling
of a bondsman.
bondsman, his faults ar to be told, or no? I mean not those, which unless
you declare, the bondsman may be turned home again by the civil law: but these,
that he is a liar, a dycer, a pyker, a dronkard: so^me think meet to be told,
so^me other, not so. If one selling gold, supposes he Selling pure gold, in
ste^e of copper.
of duty tell him, that it is gold? or may he bye for a penny, y^ is worth a
thousand? It is allreadie very plain, both what I think: and what the
controversy is among the philosophers, who^ I named. Whether Of couena^ts, and
(...).
ar couenaunts, and promises always to be kept: which be (as the Pretors
use to speak) made neither by co^pulsio^, nor by couine. If one minister to an
other a medicine A medicine ministered upon condi^ion, the pacient shall use it
no more.
by covenant, y^ he shall never after use the same medicine: in case he be made
holle by that medicine: and within a few years after, do fall into the same
disease: and can not obtein of him, with who^ he made the co^enau^t, y^ he may
(...) i^ likewise again: what is to ^e (...): seeing he is so (...), and w^ll
not grant him to use it: and yet he should take no harm thereby? (...) ^ ^ust
have regard to his (...) li^e an^ health. (...) (...) ^ (...) be required of ^
thing.
tw^ millions, and five hundred (...) crowns be left him by (...): that,
before he have y^ possession of it, he (...) openly, on y^ daytime, in the
mar^et: and he promises, so to do, because otherwise the man (...) not put him
i^, as his heir: should he (...) th^n, that he promi^ed? or (...) I would
(...) he had made no such (...): and that, I think, had bee^ a (...) of
gravity: but (...) he promised it, if he count it dishonest to dance in the
market: he shall with the more honesty go from his word, if he take nothing
of the inheritance: except (...)-^tur^ he will bestow y^ same money upon the
commo^welth, in so^me time of great necessity: that it may be no shame for him
cue^ to dau^ce, when he shall procure y^ wealth of his country. Certain
promi^es not to be kept.
which be not profitable (...) sor the^, to whom you made them. Titan (that we
may return to ^ables) said Of Sol, and Phaethon, his son.
to Phaethon, his son: he would do, whatsoever he would desire. He desired to
be taken up into his fathers charret: the mad fool was hoysted up: and on
the side, where he stood, with a flash of lyghtening he fell all on a fire. How
much better had it been, his fathers promise had not been in this performed?

What shall we say to the promise, Of Theseus, and Neptunus.
that Theseus required of Neptunus? to whom when Neptunus had granted three
boones: Theseus asked the death of Hippolytus, his son: when his father had
him in a selousie for his steppmother: which boon being obtained, Theseus fell
into very great lame^tatio^. What of Agamemnon? When he had vowed Of Agamemnon,
who offered up his daughter in sacri^ice.
to Diana the fairest creature, that should be borne that year in his
kingdom: he offered up in sacrifice his daughter, Iphigenia: who was the
fairest creature, borne y^ year. The promise rather should not have been kept,
than so heinous a deed should be committed. Wherefore promises also, many
times, are not to be performed.

Nor at all times, things laid to Things laid to keep.
keep ar to be restored. As if one, well in his wit, shall leave a sword with ye
to keep: and ask it again, when he is madd: it were a sin to restore it, and
duty, to keep it.

What if one, who has left money with you to keep, would make war against
your country? shall ye restore, that was laid ye to keep? No, as I suppose:
for ye shall do against the commonwelth, which ought to be most dear unto
you. So, many things, which by nature seem to be honest, by change of
times, becomme dishonest. To perform promises, to stand to couenauntes, to
restore that is laid ye to keep, when it otherwise behooves: it becomes
dishonest. And of these, which seem to be cases of profit, contrary to
justice, under pretense of wisdom: I think it sufficiently declared.

But for as much as, in our first book, we have drawn all duties, out of four
fountains of honesty: we shall continue still in the same: when we teach,
what enemies of virtue those things be: which seem to be profitable, and are not so in deed.

And thus of wisdom, whom wiliness would resemble: and likewise of justice,
which is always profitable, we have discoursed.

The other two parts of honesty remain: whereof the one is seen in the
greatness, and worthiness of an excellent courage: the other, Manliness.
in the framing, and measuring of stayednesse, and temperaunce. Temperau^ce.
It seemed profitable to Ulysses (as Comparing of profit with manliness
Ulysses.
sum tragical poets have set it out: for in Homer, the best author, there
is no such suspicion of Ulysses) but the tragedies do lay it as a reproach to
him: that, by cou^terfeting madness, he would have escaped going a warrefare.
It was no honest devise. Yet profitable it was (as sum perauenture will say)
to rule, and to live quietly at Ithaca, with his parents, with his wife, and
with his son. Think you any honor, got in daily dangers, and travails,
(...).
is to be compared with this Quietness.
quietness of life? I verilye judge it meet to be despised, and rejected:
because whatso is not honest, I count it in no wise to be profitable. For what,
think you, Ulysses should have herd, if he had continued still in his
cou^terfeting? who, having done great feats in war, yet herd these words
of Ajax.

For all the conscience of that oth^ Ajax.

be passed not a fly,
which he himself procured first:
^e (...), as well as I,
He could put on a fained face,
and fare, as he were mad:
And not to go with them, he wrought
with all the wyles he had.
His slye boldness but that Palamede
by deep policy did spy:
The sacred law of solemn oath
the freke would still deny.
For him nodoute it was better to fight not only with his enemies, but also
with the waves of the sea, as he did: than to shrink from them of Greece, who
had concluded together to make war upon the Tro^anes. But let us leave of
both fables, and foreign examples: and comme we to troth, and deeds.

When Marcus Attilius Regulus, Marcus Regulus.
being second time Consul, was taken by a train in Afrik: Xantippus the
Lacedemonia^ being the guide: and Amilcar, Annibals father, the general: he
was sent to the Senate upon his oath: that except certain gentlemen taken
prisoners were restored to the^ Penes, he should himself return to Carthage.
When he was comme to Rome, he saw well the show of profit: but, as the matter
proves, he judged it very vain: which was but on this sort: to tarry still in
his country: to be at home with his wife, and children: to keep his degree of
Consular estate: and to take the misery, which he had felt in war, to be
common to warrefaring fortune. Who can deny these things to be profitable?
What think you? Greatness of courage, and manliness says nay to it. Look ye
for more substantial authorities? For of these virtues it is the pr^pertie, to
be aferde of nothing, to despise all worldly vanities, to think nothing
insufferable that to man may befall. Therefore what did he? He ca^me into the
Senate: declared y^ he had in commandment: refused to give his sentence: and
said, he was no Senator, as long as he was bound by oath ministered by his
enemies. Yea and this moreover he said (O foolish manne, will sum say, and
against his own profit) that it was not expedient to have the captives
restored. For he alleged, they were young, and good capteins: whereas he was
worn, and spent with age. Whose authority when it had prevailed: the captives
were kept still: he himself returned to Carthage: and neither love of his
country, nor of his kinsfolk stayed him. Yet was it not unknown to him, that
he returned to a very cruel enemy, and to extreme torments: but he thought
his oath meet to be performed. Wherefore, even at that time, when he was
put to death with continual waking: he was in better state: than if he had
remained an aged captive, and a persured Senator at home.

But fondly, will sum say, Folse objected against (...).
he did: who not only judged it unmeet, that the captives should be
restored, but also dissuaded it. How, I pray ye, did he fondlye? (...)
defended.
Did he so, seeing he auayled the co^monwelth? May y^ be profitable for any
citieze^, which is unprofitable to y^ state? Me^ dowrest those fou^datio^s
which nature lays: when they s^uer profit from honesty. For we all covet
profit, and to it be carried, nor by any means otherwise ca^ we do. For who is
he, that fleeith profit? or who rather is there, that follows not the same most
diligently? But because nowhere we can find things profitable, but in
praise, seemlynesse, and honesty: therefore we esteem those, as chief, and
highest: and the commendation of profit we count not so honorable, as necessary.
Touching an oath ^ondrie (...).


What is there then in an oath? will sum say. (...) first.


Ar we aferd, Jupiter will be angry? Nay, this is common among all
philosophers: not only those, who hold, that God himself has nothing to do,
and nothing appointes to an other body: but the also, who will needs have God
always doing, and meddling with so^mewhat: that God is never angry, nor ever
hurts any creature.

What greater harm could Jupiter then no respect of religion, y^ might ouerturn
so great a profit.

What? should he have done dishonestlie?

Moreover this saying, that is in

Have thou thy faithed promise broke?
My faith I another gave, nor give
To any faithless, while I live.
though of a wi^ked king it be said, yet is it (...) said.

Hereunto they add: that as we

They lay also to this: that whatso likewise to be honest, although it seemed
not so at first.

These things commonly be alleged against Regulus. But let us consider the
first.

Jupiter was not to be feared, lest Answer to the first objection.
neither to be angry, nor to do harm he is accustomed. This reason surely
makes no more against Regulus, than against all kind of oaths. But in an
othemaking, not what the fear, but what the virtue of it is, ought to be
considered, An oath.
For an oath is a religious assuring of any thing. And whatso assuredly you
have promised, as taking god to witness: it ought to be observed. For y^ oath
now respects not the wrath of the godds, which is none at all: but justice,
and faithfulness. For notably said Ennius.

O heavenly Faith, tie to thy wings
the oath of Jove also.
Whosoever then stayneth his other he stayneth Lady Faith: whom, as it appears in
Catoes oration, our au^cetours would needs have to stand in our Capitole, next
unto yt great, and mighty Jove.

Yea but Jupiter, being displeased,

That is true: if there were nothing evil, but to feel pain. But the
philosophers, Pain.
that be of the greatest au thoritie, do affirm: that it not only is not the
uttermost evil, but also no evil at all. For who^, I pray ye, do not refuse
to take Regulus, as no mean witness, but (I believe) y^ grauest of al. For what
more substatial witness do we look for, tha^ a pere of the co^monweale: who,
for y^ continuing of his duty, did willingly enter into torments?

For whereas they say, of euyls the Dishonestie.
deformity of the body it breeds so^me osfe^ce: how much must needs that
corruption, and filth of a defiled mind appear? Therefore they Stoiks.
who more pythilie debate these matters, ar bold to call yt the only evil,
which is dishonest: and they, who dispute them not so ernestly, do not (...)
stick to call y^ same the vtterest evil. As for that saying,

My faith I neither gave, nor given
To any faithless, while I live.
it is therefore well brought in of the Poet: because when Atreus part should
go in hand, it was meet, the speech should serve for his person. But if
hereof they take themselves a rule, y^ it is no promise, which is made to a
promesbreaker: let them Promise.
take heed, there be not sought a starting hole for perjury. The law of A
gappe open for perjury.
arms, and the promise of an oath is many times to be kept with our enemy.
For whatso in such sort is Promise to be kept with ^ust enemies, not with
pirates, and thieves.
sworn, that the mind of the swearer conceiueth, it is necessary to be done:
y^ same is to be observed: whatso falls otherwise: the same if one do not, it
is no periuri^. As if you bring not the su^me of money, y^ ye promised rouers
for your life: there is no deceiving in it: no, though, being sworn thereto, ye
do it not. For a pirate is not counted in the nou^ber of enemies to ones
country, but a common enemy to all men. With luch a one neither promise,
neither oath ought alike, as with us to be kept. For, to swear an untruth, is
not to forswear: but not to perfourm (...).
that, which according to the meani^g of your heart ye have sworn, as by our
custom is expressed in a certain form of words: surely it is perjury. For
feately said Euripides:

In word I swear, but heart ^nsworne I bare.

But it was not fit for Regulus with perjury to disturb the conditions, and
couenaunts with his enemies, and of war. For with a just, and lawful enemy
the thing was done: toward whom both all the feciall law, and diverse other
laws be in common. Which if it were not so: the Senate would never have
delivered to their enemies, noble men being prisoners. But yet The Romans ho^
subdewed by the Sa^nttes, at (...).
Titus Ueturius, and Spurius Posthumous, the second time, they were Consuls:
because when they had not fought it well at Caudium: and our legions being
subdewed, they had made a peace with the Sa^nites: they were delivered unto them:
for without commission of the people, and the Senate, they had done it. And at
y^ same time, Titus Numitius, and Quintus Emilius, who were then yt Tribunes of
the people, because the peace was made by their authority: were delivered also:
that the peace with the Samnites might be refused. And Posthumous self, who was
delivered, was the perswader, and cauier of the same delivery. Which likewise
Caius Mancinus did, many years after: who, that he might be delivered to the
Numantines, with whom without authority of the Senate he had concluded a
leage: persuaded that particular law: which Lucius Furius, and Sertus Attilius
made by the decree of the Senate: and when it was received, he was delivered to
the enemies. This man dealt more honestly, then Quintus Po^peius: by whose
intercession, when he was in y^ same case it was brought to pass, yt the law
was not received. With him, y^ thig which seemed profit, prevailed more (...)
honesty. With the other aforesaid, y^ false show of profit was suppressed by
y^ authority of honesty. But that, which was done by violence, neded not to
have been confirmed. As who should say, violence could be done to a manly man.
Why then did he go to the Senate: namely sei^g he was purposed to dissuade them
from y^ delivery of y^ captives? That in him was most co^me^dable, y^ same ye
disalow. For he stood not to his own judgment: but took the matter in hand,
that it might be the judgment of the Senate: whereunto if he had not been a
cou^seler, the captives no dout had been restored to the Cartaginers. So had
Regu^us remained safe in his country. Which thing because he took it not to
be profitable for his country: therefore he thought it honesty for him, to be
of that mind, and so to suffer. For where they say, that it, which Honesty.
For there is nothing profitable, which same is not honest: and not because
Profit.
it is profitable, it is honest: but because it is honest, therefore it is
profitable. Wherefore of many maruailous exaumples, a man shall not lightly tell
either a more commendable, or a more goodly ex^mple, than this. But in ^ll
this praise of Regulus, this one thing is worthy of admiration: that he
thought it best, the prisoners should be kept still. For in y^ he returned, I
think it no wonder at all: because in those days, he could not do otherwise.
Therefore that commendation is not the man's, but the times. For our annceters
were of this mind: that there is no strayter bond to bind a man's promise,
than an oath. The virtue of an oath in ^ide time.
The laws in the twelve tables declare that: our holy orders declare the same:
and our leages declare nolesse, whereby bound is the promise made eue^ with the
enemy: the enteries, and ponnishmentes of the Censors declare as much: who
about no matter more heedfully gave judgment, than about keeping of oaths.
Marcus Pomponius, Tribune of the people, did summmon Lucius Manlius, Aulus
son, when he was Dictator, to appear Manlius (...) by Pompo^us.
at a day: because he had taken upon him the occupieng of his Dictatorship, a
few days longer, than he should: and accused him also, yt he had driven his
son Titus, who afterward was called Torquatus, How Titus (...)us Torquatus
did for his father being in trou ble.
from commepanie of m^n: and had commanded him to dwell in the country. Which
when the yongma^, his son, once herd of, that his father was brought in
trouble: it is said, he ran to Rome: and by break of day, ca^me to Pomponius
house. To whom when it was told: because h^ thought, that he being offended
would bring sum matter unto him against his father: he arose out of his bed:
and all hearers being voyded out of the place, he commanded, the yongma^
should comme to him. But he, as soon as he enterd, by and by drew his sword:
and swear, he would kill him out of hand: except he made an oath unto him,
that he would discharge his father. Pomponius, (...) with this terror, made an
oath so: he opened yt matter to the people^ he enfourmed the^, why it was
necessary for him to let fall the actio^. He discharged Manlius. So gracatiy
was an oath had in regard, at those days. And this Titus Manlius is what manner
man Titus (...) proved.
he, who got his surname, at the river of Anien, of a chayn, y^ he pulled from
a Frencheman: who^ he slew, beig begged by him: in whose third Consulship, the
Latins at Ueseris were discomefited, and put to flight. A very noble man
doutlesse: and one, who not long before being loving toward his father, beca^me
sour, and severe against his son. But as Kegulus is to be commended, in He
(...) we his son with the ax. for breaking law of arms.
keeping his oath: so those ten, who^ Annibal, after y^ Cannensia^ fight, sent
to the Senate, upon their oath, that they should return into that Ten
messe^gers from An nibal to the Senate.
camp, whereof the Carthaginers were then in possession: except they obtained
his request, for the raunsoming of certain prisoners: ar to be dispraised, if
they did not return. Touching whom, al men write not after one sort. For
Polybius, a special good author, writes: that of y^ ^enne chosen gentlemen,
who then were sent, nine returned: when y^ matter could not be obtained of the
Senate: and that one of the ten, who a little after, he was gone out of the
camp, returned back, as though he had forgotten so^mewhat: remained still at
Rome. For by his return to the camp, he took himself to b^e discharged of his
oath: but y^ was not true. For gyle confirms, and not discharges perjury,
It was then a foolish craftynesse, y^ did peeuishly cou^terfet wisdom. Therefore
y^ Senate made a decree: yt the same subtle and wyly fox should be carried
pynnio^d unto Annibal. But this is a meruaylous matter: Annibal had i hold eight
thousand of our men: who^ he took not in battle, nor as fleeing away for fear
of death: but they were left behind in the camp, by Paulus, and Uarro, y^
Co^suls. The Senate did not think it good to ransom them: whereas they might
have done it, for a little money: y^ it might sink into our soldiers herts,
either to win the victory, or manfully to dye. Which thing when it was
^knowne, the said Polybius writes, y^ Annibals heart was daunted therewith:
because the Senate, and people of Rome, eue^ in chances of adversity, were of
so lofty a courage. Thus the things, which seem profitable, be ouerweyed by
comparison of honesty. But thatsame Acilius, who wrote y^ story in greek,
says: there were mo, which returned to y^ camp, under the same gyle: y^ they
might be discharged of their oath: and that they were noted by the Censors with
all manner of infamy.

Here an end of this parcel. For it is evident, that such things, as be
Conc^usio^ of the comparison of profit with (...).
done with a fearful, servile, dastardly, and weak heart: as the doing of
Regulus had been: if either he had thought, concerning the prisoners, that he
saw expedient for himself, and not for the co^mo^weale, orels would have
tarried still at home: be not profitable: because they be reprocheful, ^ile, and
dishonest.

The fourt part is now behind: Comparing of profit with temperaunce.
which consists in seemelinesse, measurekeping, sobermode, stayednesse, and
temperaunce. May then any thing be profitable, that is contrary to such an
assemble of virtues? But the (...), and Anniceria^s, (...).
who had their name of philosophers (...).
from Aristippus, placed all (...) (...).
in pleasure: and therefore they judged virtue to be commendable, because it
was a causer of pleasure. And when Pleasure.
these were worn out of estimation: then flourished Epicurus, a furderer,
Epicurus.
and an author welnye of the same opie nion. Against them must we strive with
toothe, and nail (as they say) if Reasoning against Epicureans: who placed
feliciti^ in voluptuou^nesse, contrary to temperaunce.
we mean to defend, and preserve honesty. For if not only profit, but also
all happy life consists in the good complexion of the body: and in a sure
trust to the same complexio^: as by Metrodorus it is written: doutelesse this
manner profit, yea and the very chief (for so do they hold) will strive with
honesty. For first of al, where shall there be a place appointed for wisdom?
What? mean they, that on every side she should seek after delicacies? How
miserable a service were it for virtue, to be a wayter upon pleasure? But what
should be the office of wisdom? Skilfully wisdom.
to choose out pleasures? Admit, there be nothing pleasaunter, than so to do:
what can there be imagined more dishonest?

Now with him, who says, that pain is the vtterest evil, what place
Manliness.
shall manliness have: which cares not for any pains, or trauails, yt be
offered? For although Epicurus speaks in many places, touching pain (as he
does in this) stoutelye enough: nevertheless it is not to be regarded, what he
says: but what is meet for him to say: who has pointed out the limits of
good things to be in pleasure, and of evil things, in pain: as, if I should
hear T^peraunce.
him speak of stayednesse, and temperaunce. He talks in deed in many places
many things: but he is myered by the way, as they say. For how can he praise
te^peraunce, y^ setts the souerain good in pleasure? For temperaunce is enemy
to lust: and lust is a waiting servant to pleasure. And yet in these three
kinds, not without suttletie, they fall to their shifts. Theibring in wisdom,
The Epicures wisdom.
as a science ministering pleasures, and voydi^g pains. They set us out also
The Epicures (...).
manliness, after a certain sort: when they teach a way to despise death, and
endure pain. They also fetch The Epicures temperaunce.
in te^perau^ce, with much ado doutless, but yet as well as they may. For they
hold, y^ the greatness of pleasure aryseth by putting of all pain. Justice by
the Epicures is (...).
Justice staggereth with them, or rather lies under foot: and all those
virtues, y^ show themselves in the common knotte, and fellowship of men. For
there can be neither goodness, neither liberality, nor (...), no more tha^
friendship may: if they be not sought after, for themselves: but be referred to
pleasure, or to profit. Let us then drive our matter into few words. For as we
have taught, yt there is no profit, which is contrary to honesty: so we say,
all voluptuousness is contrary to (...). And so much the more I take
Callipho, and Dinomachus worthy to be reproved: who thought, they should end
the controversy: if they made a joining Uoluptuousnesse contrary to honesty
of voluptuousness with honesty, (...) of beast with manne. Honestieadmitts
not this knot, but does abhor, and reject it. Nor truly the end of good, and
evil, which ought to be after one sort, may be mingled, and tempered with
things disagreable. But hereof hitherto: for it is a weighty matter, and in an
other place discoursed more at large. Now to the purpose.

After what sort then the matter is to be resolved, if at any time profit in
apparaunce does strive with honesty: it is before sufficiently debated. But
if voluptuousness also be counted to have a show of profit: it can have no
fellowship with honesty. For be it so, we so^mewhat esteem pleasure: sum sauce
perhapps it shall have in it, but surely no profit at all.

You have from your father a present, The conclusion, and (...) of his work,
with an (...) to his son.
son Mark, in my opinion verily muchworth: but it shall be eue^ so, as ye
take it. Notwithstanding these three books ar, as strangers, to be enterteined
of you, among Cratippus notes. But as ye should once have herd me also, if I
had come to Athenes: which had been done in deed: but that my country called
me back with open mouth, in the mydst of my journey: so seeing in these
volumes my voice is conveyed unto you ye shall bestow as much time upon them,
as you may: and so much you may, as you will. But when I shall understand,
that you take pleasure in this (...) of knowledge: then I both present there
shortly, as I trust, and in your absence, absent will speak with you. Fare you
well therefore, my Cicero: and assure yourself, that you ar to me doutlesse
right dear: and yet far derer shall be: if in such books, and lessons, you
will set your delight.

^ The end of Tullies books of duties.
The Table.
A.
Academians schole. 116. b. Accius verses, 142. a. Accusation. 82 a. (...). 74.
b. Admiration for despising of money. 77. b. Admiration for (...). 81. b
Admiration for justice. 77. a. Admiration for (...). 77. a. Admiration for
stayednesse. 77. a. Advise. (...) a. (...) doing. 63. a. Affection toward
(...). 19. b. Affections, which rulers ought to resist. 33. b. Africanus. 30.
b. Africanus praised for a refraining hand. 104. a. Africanus saying. 35. b.
Against Caesar 71. a. (...), who offered up his daughter. 146. b. (...). 105. b.
Agreeableness. 56. b. Atax. 44. b. 14. 7 b. Alexander over irefull, his father
of more humanity 35. b. Alexander the (...). 72. a Ambition. 10. b. 34. a.
(...). 156, a Amity. 126. a. Anger. 34. b. 35. a. 54. a Angrinesse. 35. a.
(...), 108. b. Apolloes (...), that Spartaes fall should come by (...). 104.
b. Apparel. 51. b. Appetite. 52. a. Appetite and reason in the mind. 40. a.
Appetites how to be framed. 40. a Appetites outrageous. 40. a Applieng talk
to the matter. 53. a, Appointing upon the kind of life. 46. a. (...) definition
of couine. 132. a. Aratus the Sycionian, a right good co^monwelth man. 106. a.
Areopage. 30. a. (...) of Athenes (...) this surname, Just. 115. a Aristippus.
3. a 156. a. Aristotcles. 2. b. Aristotle's judgment of sumptuousness. 85. b.
(...). 35. b. Arts. 68. a. Arts, none can (...) judge of, but the
craftelmaster, etc. 115. a. Assayling of auc^tures. 32. b. Athenians. 30. a
Athenians assaulted of the Persians. 127. a. Athenians (...) (...) counsel.
etc. 127. b Attikes. 41. a. Augurs. 134. a.
B.
Baines. 51. a. Bargulus. 78. a. Beast. 5. b. 141. a. Bellieseruers. 59. a.
Benefits. 75. a. Benefits upon the common weal. 102. a. Blockishnesse. 50.
b. Bo^d of ma^s fellowship. 119. b Bragging. 79. a. Braules 54. a. Bribes. 103.
b. Brondes of pains. 77. a. Brutishness. 25. a. Brutus did well enough in
expulsing Collatinus 124. b. Building. 54. b. 59. b. Byeng. 128. a.
C.
Caius Canius. 131. a. Caius Claudius. 86. a. Caius Gracch a large (...). 102.
b. Caius Caesar. 11. a. 52. b. 82. a. 89. b. (...). a. 142. a. Caius Julius
Caesar (...) to rehearse certain verses of Euripides. 141. a. Caius Lelius. 78.
a. C. Marius. 30. a. Caius Pontius. 103. b. Callicratidas. 33. a. Calphurmus
drove Claudius to arbitre me^t for concealment. 134. a. Care. 55. b. Care of
other men's matters. 12. a. Carneades. 3. a. Cato. 134. a. Cato and Lelius
surnamed the wise. 115. a. Cato of Utica. 44. a. Cato ouerstiffe. 143. b.
Catoes judgment. 134. b. Catoes short and feate saienges. 41. a. Cato told,
what is the most profitable thing in nusbandrie. 19. a. Catuli, the father, and
the son. 52. b. Catulus uncle. 52. b. Cause of manliness. 31. a. Causes
moving men's good Wills. 70. b. Causes of good will, and fear. 71. a. Causes
of obedience. 71. a. Causes why sum break duty in not (...) (...). 11. a.
Caesar. 11. a. 52. b. 72. b. 89. b. 107. a. (...) crueler than Sylla. 73. a.
Celar noted for a tira^t 44. b Cesars monarchy. 64. b. (...) side. 80. a.
Change of life. 47. b. Chaungeable course in talk 53. a. Chivalry. 80. a.
(...). 53. b. Childern. 23. b. (...) in re quiting. 20. a. Crysippus feate
comparison. (...) a Cicero Consul. 107. b. Ciceroes accusation of Uer res 82.
a. Ciceroes Edileship. (...). a. Ciceroes Oration at. 27. years of age. etc.
83. a. Ciceroes son. 80. a. Ciceroes (...) compared with Scipioes. 110. a.
Cimon. 89. a. Circumstaunces. 56. b. Citiematers above (...) seats. 29. b.
Cities. 69. a. 103. a. Citizen. 49. a. 58. b. Citiezens. 22. a. Civil law had
in prlce with ancient rulers. 89. b. Civil manners. 58. a Claudius Centimalus
commanded to pull down certain houses. 134 a. Clenlinesse. 51. b.
Cleombrotus. 33 a. Cleomenes a (...). 13. b. Clerenesse 60. b. Cn. Octauius.
54. b. Cn. Pompeius. 30. b. Cn. Pompeius triumphed thrice. etc. 31. a. Color.
51. b. Commelie for (...). 49. a. Comely for old men. 48. b Comely
manliness. 37. b Comelienesse. 37. a. 55. b. Commelinesse according to age.
48. a. Comelienesse according to each man's nature. 43. b. Comelienesse a waiter
upon honesty. 37. a. Comelienesse coming by fortune 45. b. Comelienesse
defined. 38. a. Comeliness divided. (...). a. Comlienesse general. 38. a. 42,
a. Commelienesse in all honesty. 37. b. Comelien^sse in motions of the mind.
51. b. Comelieness in speech. 52. a. Comelienesse in 3. points 49. b.
Comeliness natural. 38. b Comeliness of justice. 37. b. Comeliness of
te^pera^ce. 37. b Comeliness of wisdom. 37 b Comeliness particular. 38. a.
Comeliness poetical. 38. b. Co^melienesse taken of set purpose. 45. b.
Commendation of his matter. 2. b. Common. 129. a. Common dangers. 32. b. Common
fellowship. 9. b. 62. a. 118. a. Common felows^ip to be preferred before
knoweledge. 60. a. Common judgment of me^. 61. a Common people. (...). a.
Common profit. 128. b. Common safety. 118. a. Common talk. 52. a. Common
things. 21. a. Common thing^s to b^astes and men. 5. a. Common weal. 125. b.
Commonweals government. 68. a. Comparion of honest things. 60. a.
Conceiving of matters. 62. a Concealment. 134. a. Concealment in Claudius
condemned for deceate. 134. b. Concord. 105. a. Conscience in keeping oth^ of
warfare. 15. a. Conspiracy. 126. a. Contemplations end. 61. a Contempt of
casual things. 26. b. Contempt of outward things. 26. b. (...). 104. b.
Cost, in wh^t things better (...) 87. a. Costlin^sse. 55. a. Cotta Curio. 87.
a. Couenauntes, and promise^. 145. a. Couetise. 84. b. Couetise of money. 27.
a. Covetousness. 10. a. 103. b Covetousness a very foul vice. 104. b.
Couine. 133. b. 135. a. Couine ponnishable. 1^2. a. Couine wherein it stands
132. b. Counsel. 48. b. 89. a. Counsel of fr^ndes. 36. a. Countenance. 57.
b. Counterfeit money. 144. b. Counterfeit will. 137. a. Countriemen. 22. a.
Countries. 103 a. Courage 31. b. Craftiness. 42. b. Crassns and Hor^ensius.
137. a Crassus and Sceuola Consuls. 1^7. a. Crassus in his youth got great
fame by accusing C. Carbo. 81. a. Crassus cration. 88. b Crassus the rich. 10.
b. 86. a Cre^it. 74. b. Credit how to be gotten. 75. b. Cruelnesse of men one
against an other. 6^. b. Cruelty of A^kemans to Eginetes. 126. b Curioes
calling on profit. 143. b Customs 6^. a. Cynikes. (...). a Cyrenaikes. 156. a
Cyrsilus. 127. a
D.
Damon and Pythias, a notable couple of fr^ndes. 126. a. Dangers. 32. b
Dangers common, and pri^ate. 32. b Dangers of life, glory, favor. 32. b to
Deceive. 140. b Decij. the father, and the son. 115. a Deed. 139. a. Deeds
must be like tunes 57. a. Defense. 83. a. 83. a Degrees compared. 23. b.
Degrees of duties longing to justice. 63. b Degrees in order altered with
persons and times. 23. b Deintie life. 44. b Deintinesse. 50. b Delectation.
53. b. Delectation shameful in a shameful matter. 122. b Demetrius. 72 b.
Demetrius Phalerens. 2. a Demetrius Phalereus disco^me^ded Pericles. 87. b.
Deny not. nor grant your friend every thing. 125. b. Desire of rule. 27. b.
Desire of soueraintie. 25. b. Despeire. 29. b. Despisement. 76. b. Dicearchus
book of the death of men. 68. b. Difference of Natures. 42. b Dyonisius the
tyrant among the Syracusia^s. 72. a Discern men by their virtue not be their
fortune. 10^. d. Discontinuaunce of Eloquence. 100. a Discord. 34. a.
Disconuenience. 57. a. Discretion. 56. a. Disdain. 35. b Dishonest^e. 122. a.
151. a. Disputation between Diogenes, and Antipater. 128. b Dissension. 34. b.
Dissimulation. 132. a Doing. 60. b Doing of great enterprises. 26. b Doing of
injury. 118. b. Doings. 40. b. Dry mockes. 42. b Duty defined. 4. a Durie
divided. 4. a. Duty divided an other way 4. a. Dutiefull demeanor. 7. a.
Dutiful doing. 46. a. Duty in study of knoweledges. 8. a Duties. 2. b Duties
in the end of wars. 14. b. Du^ies in wars holden for honor, or life. 16.
a Du^ies of i^stice. 9. a Duties of justice, and manlienesse. 7. b. Duties out
of comeliness. 39. b. Duties of ma^lienesse. 26. b Duty to be (...). 3. b
E.
Earnestness^. 42. b. Ediles office. 80. a. Egall law. 49. a. Egina an (...).
etc. 126. b. Eloquence. 62. a. ^1. a. Eloquence, a grace most commendable. 89.
b. Of Eloquence. 2. kinds. 1. a Empire. 142. a. Increasing of private goods.
1^3. a Endeavor. 48. b. Enemies gentlye named hos^es. 15. b. Ennias. 10. b 21.
a. 33. b. 88. and Ennius in Medea. 133. a. Ennius verses. 16. a. Epicureans.
115. b. Epicurus. 3. a. 156. a. Epicutus confuted. etc. 156. a Epicurus
manlineile. 157. a Epicurus tempera^ce. 157. a. Epicurus wisdom. 157. a.
Equity. 107. a. Equity of law to be leaned unto. 13. b. Equity of the law.
135. a Error of ra^h judgment. ^. a Estate. 100. b (...) of glory above
common weal. 33. a. (...) for honesty. 75. a (...) of life. 44. a.
Euerstirring loule. 64. a. Exacting of tribu^es to be avoided. 103. a. Example
of Greeks. 29. b. Example of himself. 1. a Example of Regulos. 16. b. Example
of the (...) Romans. 15. a Example of the Romans equi^ie. 17. a. Examples.
24. a. 55. a. Examples of Romans. 30. a Excellence of man's nature. 41. b.
Exceptions in duties perteinig to (...). 12. b Exceptions in fear or love. 74.
a. Exceptio^s in liberality. 18. a (...). ^1. b. (...) of mind. 48. b.
Exhortation to his son. 66. b. 111. b. (...) nothing is, which is not come^y.
139. a. (...). 18. b. 84. b.
F.
(...) a despiser of gold 115. a. Fabritius and the senate s^t back the
trairour to Pyr thus. 142. b. Faming. 79. a. Fairness. 51. a. Fair ^peeche.
44. b. Faith. 1^0. b. ^aithfulnesse. 9 b. 107. a. (...) accusation 34. a. (...)
(...). 136. b. False (...). 1, 2 a. False semblant 17. b. (...) in ^alke. 73.
a. (...). 23. b. Far (...) to compass matters. 43. a. (...) to be (...). 8.
a. (...) 1^ a. Favor. how it is (...) e by ^malier (...). 100 a. Fear. 10. a.
71. b. Fear (...) to (...). (...). b. (...) law of (...) battle. 15. a.
Feed to live, not live to feed. 42. a. Felows^ip. ^8 b. Fellowship of life.
20. b. Felo^ship of md. 126. a. 135. b (...) first degree. 20. b Felowships
(...) degrees. 21. b. Fensing of murie. 13^. b. Few take the best way. 47. a
Filthienesse. 50. a (...) Consul. 138. b Flaterers. 36. a Fleing of peril. 32.
b Folowers of aunceters. 45. b Following ye multitude. 46. b Following parents.
46. b. Foolehardinesse. 25. b. Foolelarge. 18. b. 84. b For a commonwealth how
farforth we must do. 126. b Force. 14. a. 17. b Forms of law drawn out of
divine, and natural reason. 136. a Fortunes stroke. 69. b Friends. 23. b
Friendship. 74. b Friendship among good men 22. b Frowardness. 35. a Furniture.
49. b. 54. a
G.
Gaininges. 59. a Gap open for perturie. 151. b General rule in liberality.
20. b General rule in promisekeping. 17. a Gentleness. 88. b Gentle speech.
81. a. b Gesture. 50. b. 51. a Getting goodwill. 75. a Giving over houskeeping
in derth. 143. b Gifts giving. 84. ^ Gifts of nature. 5. a Gile. 17. b
Glory. 26. a Glory there is none in (...). 143. a God. 66. b Going. 51. b
Going to death. 44. a Golden precept. 123. a Good. 114. a. 133. a. b Good heart.
75. a Good knowledge. 8. a Good man. 138. a Good out of evil. 111. a Good to
be set before rich. 101. b Good turns done of one to an other. 23. a Good
will. 74. b. 80. b Governments refusing in the co^monweale. 28. a Gracchi, lost
by landstrifes. 105. b Gratidian reproved. etc. 139. b Gravity 40. b. 42. b.
54. a. 81. ^ Great courage. 81. a. 118. a Great things. 76 b Greeks. 42. b
Grounds of justice. 5. b Gyges, 123. a Gyges tale expounded. 123. ^ Gytheu^, a
notable harbrow for ships. etc. 127. b.
H
Handicraftesmen. 59. a Havens. 67. b Health 67. a. 108. b Hecato, Panetius
scholar, wrote. 6. books of duties. 133. a Hercules, for his worthy deeds,
was taken for a God. 118. a Hercules had a divine gift above nature. 46. b to
Hide. 129. a Hirelinges. 59. a to Hold ones peace. 129. a Honest. 4. b. 114. a.
116 b. 133. b more Honest. 5. a Honesty. 6. b. 113. b. 122. a. 127 a. 137. b.
14. 1. b. 1^3. a Honesty, and profit compared. 4. b Honesty, and profit
repugnant in seeming, not in deed 121. b Honesty for it self, either one ly,
or chiefly to be desired. 121. a Honesty like health of body. 38. a Honesty
only good. 26. b Honest, or profitable in bargains. 128. a. Honor of the
city. 49. a Honor ^eking. 42. b Hortensius. 86. a Hortensius Cicero loved in
his life. etc. 137. b Hospitautic. 89. a Hostis now taken for an enemy. 15. b
Hou^e of a prince. 54. b Houses 67. a How he will teach. 3. a How necessary
it is to be taken for just. 77. b Hurt^. 17. b Husbandry. 59. b. 67. a Hyeway
to glory. ^9. a
I.
Ianus, a place in Rome. etc. 109. b Idle philosophers disalowed 11. b Jesting.
41. a kinds of Jesting. 41. a Imiratio^ of worthy me^. ^0. a Impedime^rs of
ma^liness 2^. b Inheritance. 48. a. 137. b Inheritance, with condition to do
an vnsemeiy thing. 145. b Injustice. 10. a. 33. b Intelligence. 52. a Intent.
139. a Isocrates. 2. b Judgment. 125. b Judgment of the skillful. 57. b
Judicial causes. ^1. b Just. 133. b Justice. 7. a. 39. b. 69. b. 88. b. 100.
b. 119. b. 135. b Justice, a worker of glory, and (...). 77. b Justice civil
14. a. Justice general. ^. b Justice general, above all. 63. a. Justice in
(...). 17. b Justice in war. 14. a Justice particular. ^. b Justice (...) by
Epicures 157. a. Justice toward the vanquished. 32. a
K.
Kindly love. 80. b. Kings. 78. b. (...). 22. a. Kin^folk. 23. b Knowledge.
60. b. Knowledge of troth. 8. ^ Know your self. 45. a.
L.
Labor. 48. b. Labor of body. 31. a. Lacedaemonians. 30. a. 72. b. 105. b.
Large gifts with measure and for honest causes. 86. b. La^gegiuers. 84. b.
Large room 55. a. Latin tongue. 1. b. (...). 83. b. 84. b. Law and right of
man's fellowship. 118. b. Law for layeng out of lands. 104. b Law for pillage.
103. b Law of nations. (...). b. Law of nature. 21. a. 117. b. 119. a. 128. b.
Laws. 68. a. 78. b. 117. b. 127. a. 136. b. Laws civil. 21. a. 128. b. 135. b
Learned m^n profitable (...) after their death. 61. b. Learning. 59. b. 68. a.
Leisure 110 b Lesson in all doings. 29. b Letter of the law. 135. a. Letters of
Philippus, Antipater and Antigonus. 81. b Liberal. 85. a. Liberal endeavor.
^9. a (...). 9. a. 83. a. 87. b (...) the second part of general justice. 17.
b Liberty. 28. a. Licurgus. 30. a Lieng in bargaining. 132. b. Lisander. 30. a
Lisander expulsed. 105. b Liuelesse things. 66. b. 67. a. Living agreeab^ye to
nature 114. a. Living things. 66. b. 67. b. Loss of a good horse or (...).
144. a. Loveliness. 51. a Love of co^monweale. 23. a. Love of glory. 27. b.
Love of (...). 101. b Lucius Crassus. 52. b. 81. a. L. Crassus the orator. 87.
a Lucius Fusius 82. a. L. (...). 55. b. 86. a Lucius Mu^mius Achaicus 104. a
Lucius Philippus unprofitable advise. 143. a Lucius Philippus, without large
gif^s, came to great dignity. 87. a L. (...) Tribune. etc. 104. a. (...). 82.
a (...) scoolemaster to Epaminondas. 61. b
M.
Magistrates. 36. b Magistrates life. 28. a Magistrates ought to avoid
passions. etc. 29. a. Malice. 35. a Maki^g of goods common. 103. a Mamercus.
86 a, Man. 5. b. 140. b. Manners. 19. a. 100 b. Manhood without justice, falls
into diverse extremes. 25 a Manly courage in citiema: ters 33. b. Manly man
not vanquished of his own affections. 27. a. Manly ma^s (...). 31. b Ma^ly must
be plain. 25. b Manitnesse. 7. a. 24. b. 62. a. 147. a. 156. b. (...) praised.
24. b Manitnesse, what it i^. 25. ^ (...) (...) his son, for breaking array.
154. b (...) summoned by Po^ponius. 154. a Man to man does most hurt or profit.
66. b. Marcus (...). 82. a Marcus Brutus a sore accuser. 82 b. M. Cato. 31. b.
Marcus Crassus. 138. a. M. Luctatius Pythias. 138. a Marcus Octauius in large
(...) measurable. 102. b Marcus Regulus. 148. a M. Scaurus. 30. a. 54. b. ^6. a
Marcus Seius libe^all to the people. ^6. b. Marius sold Sergius a hou^e 134. b
Marius, ^o atteine the (...), did against (...), 139. b Maisilia a goodlye
city o^ etc. 73 b Matter of talk 53. a Mean duties 105. b Mea. (...). 40. a
Measure in common liberality. 21. b Measure of talk. 53. b. Measure the gift,
by the giuers good heart. 20. a Medes 78. b Medicine ministered on condition.
145. b Me^ alike in wisdom. 14. 4. a Men newly come up. 46. a Men of deserts.
58. b Merchandise. 59. b. 67. a Merry conceits. 42. b 10. ^essagers from
Annibal to the Senate. 154. b (...) es. 67. a M^te men mus^ serve the
commonweaie. 29. a Mild manners. 44. b (...) suppressed (...) attemptes. 86. b
(...) of private yfit. 33. b M^rth. 42. b Misgoing. 47. b (...). 83. a Most
part likes not the best things. 26 a Motions of body and mind, 39. b Musing.
57. a. III. a Mutius. 81. a
N.
Nature. 43. b. 47. a. 50. b. 136. b Nature and fortune. 47. a Nature of
profit. 66. a Natures gifts. 5. a Navigations. 67. a (...). 32. a. 86. b. 116.
a Negligence. 40. a New comers up need great virtues. 80. a New tables for
releasing of det. 117. a. (...). 79. b Noble men must not stain their stock
with (...) life. 80. a Nothing against honesty for your friends sake. 126. b
Nothing against nature. 48. a
O.
Occasion. 56. a Occasions of wro^gdoing. 10. a Occupations and sciences. 59. a
Office bearing, or refusing. 27. b Officers 58. b Old age. 58. b Old manner of
requiring the judges favor. 126. a One thing to hide, an other to keep
silence. 130. b Opport unity. 56. a Order. 49. b. 56. a Offense. 100. b (...)
must either be anoyded, or assuaged. 100. b Ore (...) (...) the people. 86. b
Oath. 125. b. 150. b Oath of warrefare. 15. a of Oath, sondrie objections 149.
b Others faults. 57. b Others life, our glass. 57. b Outfinding of duties by
choice of things. 4. b Owner of a ship, what he may do. 144. a
P.
Patience. 48. b Pain. 151. a Panetius. 35. b. 83. a. 87. a. 104. a. 116. a
Panetus defended. 108. b. 121. b Panetius excused. 121. a Panetius how he wrote
of duties. 112. b Partiality. 18. a. 35. a Pastime. 41. b Paulus Emylius. 104.
a Pausanias. 30. a Payment of money. 101. a Peace always to be sought. 14. b
Peace the end of war. 14. b Pelops. 142. a Perfect duty. 105. b Pericles. 56. b
Peripatetikes. 3. b. 151. b Peripatetiks make an order of good things. 113. b
Perjury. 152. a Person. 38. b Person proper to each man. 42. a Persons. 45.
b (...). 72. b Philippus a peoplepleaser. 102. b Philippus to Alexander. 83. b
Philosophers. 58. a Philosophers life. 28. a Philosophers minds not tempted so
many ways as magistrates. 29. a Philosophy. 135. a. 151. b Philosophy
praised. 64. ^. Physic. 59. b Place. 56. a Placing. 56. a Plain dealing. 43.
a Plainness. 43. a Plato. 2. a Plato scholcmaister to (...). 61. b Plato to
Architas. 9. b Plautus. 41. a Players. 45. a. 50. b Plesantnesse. 40. b. 42. b.
53. a Pleasure. 156. a Pleasurefeders. 59. a Pleasure of the body. 41. b
Pleasures, flatteri^g dames, 77. a Pompeius. 86. a Pompeius side. 80. a Poor.
101. a. (...). 51. a Possidomus, Panetius scholar. 112. b Practice. 8. b
Precept of d^tie. 32. b Precept of justice. 117. a Precepts of purchasyng
glory. 79. b Presumption. 29. b. Pride 35. b Principles of wisdom. 6. a.
Private. 129. a Private dangers. 32. b. Private goods. 108. b Private
householders. 36. b Private man. 49. a Private promise to the enemy. 16. b
Private substance. 36. b P^iuate things 9. a Prodigaluie. 85. b Profit. 64. a.
86. b. 113. b. 127 a 137. b. 141. b. 153. a Profitable. 4. b. 116. b. 133. b
More profitable. 5. a Profitable and unprofitable things divided. 66. b.
Profitable is nothig, which is ^s. 138. b. 142. b. Profit compared with (...).
147. a. Profit (...) with (...). 156. Profit from honesty not to be severed.
122. a Profiting of other. 48. b Profit not to be set before friendship. 125.
b. Profit not to be severed from honor. 143. a. Profit seming to strive with
honesty, what to determine. 116. b Promise. 151. b Promise breakers ponnished
by the Censor. 16. b Promises not to be kept. 146. a. Promise to be kept with
just enemies. etc. 151. b Prosperity. 35 b Prudence. 56. b. 60. b 62. b.
Prudence with (...). 75. b Prudence without justice is suspected. 76. a Publius
Lentulus. 86. a P Nasica. 30. b Publius Rutilius Rufus, Panetius scholar. 113.
^ Publius (...). 82. a (...) of (...) 14. a Punnishme^t of shame. 122. b
Pyrthonians. 65. a Pyrrhus answer to the Romans. 16. a Pythius 131. a
Q.
Question of a cornemerchaunt. 128. a Question of selling a house. 129. b.
Questions out of Necato. 143. b Qu^stions resolved. 110. b. Quiet livers. 36.
b (...). 49. d. 147 b Quintus (...). 30. b Quintus Fabiu^ 33. a Quintus Fabius
Labeo. 13. b Quintus (...) Sceuola. ^6. a Quintus Sceuola. 136. a
R.
Rashn^sse. 32. a. 40. a Razing of cities. 32. a Reason. 5. b. 55. b Reason and
speech. 20. b Rebuking. 54. a Refraining hand. 104. b (...) charged with
folly. 149. a Regulus defended. 149. a Relief to the mi^erable. 87. b. Remedy
of rash judgment. 8. a (...) sommewhat of ones own right. 88. b Rendering of
thanks. 102. a Requitiug a good turn. 19. b Retailers. 59. a Reverence to
elders. 48. a Rich. 102. a Riches coming with infamy not profitable. 143. a
Right. 78. b Right of men's society, to be kept (...). 119. a Right trade.
46. b. Rigorousnesse. 35. a Riot. 48. b Robbe^ie. 78. a (...). 42. b Rom^nes
host subdued by ye (...) at Caudiu^. 152. a Romans ^late. 72. b Romans
sloutnesse in the second puni^ war. 127. a Romulus did not well in that he
slew Remus. 124, b Romulus (...). 125. a Rule. 45. a Rule for profit and
honesty. 140. b 3. Rules in men's doings. 55. b Rules of glory foryouth. 80.
a (...). 81. a
S.
Sadness. 43. b Sagenesse 53. a Salamis. 29. b. Sapience. 60. b Scaurus. 30.
a. 54. b. 86. a (...). ^. b Sce^olaes conscience in bying. 132. b Scipio
Emilianus, who was called Atricanus Minor. 104. a Scipioes, brethren. 115. a
Scipioes saying, touching leisure, and solitariness. 110. a Sclaundering. 53.
a Sects of philosophers^ 3 a. Seeds of lobermoode. 6. b. Self (...). 54. a
Selfliking. 120. b Selfloue. 36. a. 120. b Selling. 128. a Selling of a
bondinan. 145. a Selling of land. 133. b Selling pure gold in s^ede of copper.
145. a Sense. 5. b Seven wisemasters of Greece 115. b Shamefastness. 39. b. 48.
b Shamefas^ness, natures scholar. 50. a Shame to hide a thing, that is: more
shame to lie in a thing, that is not. 131. a Show of profit. 122. a Sillanus.
86. a Slaves. 17. b Sloth. 48. b Soberness. 80. b. 81. b Society of man, and
the parts of his body compared. 117. a Socrates. 79. a. 138. b Socrates, and
Lelius keep ever one cou^tenau^ce. 35. b. Socratians. 41. a Sol and Phaeto^ his
son. 146. a Solitariness. 111. a Solon. 30. a if the son may conceal the
fathers treason. 144. b if the ^onne may open his fathers felony. 144. b
Sophocles. ^6. b Sparks of manliness. 6. a. Speaking. 57. b Speech. 14. a.
52. a Speculation. 8. b Stayednesse. 48. b. 104. b Steadfastness. 40. a. 47. b.
48. b Stirs of the mind. 53. ^ Stoiks. ^. ^. 9. b. 147. b. Stoikes appoint
one thing only good. 113. b Stoiks why he chiefly ^olowes. 116. b Stones. 67.
a Store of necessary things. 103. b Stranger. 49. a. 58. b Strangers 126. b
Strength of mind. 31. a Students life profitable to the commonweal. 61. b
Study of both tou^ges. 1. a. Sturdinesse. 25. b Su^me of his. 3. books. 5. a
Suttlesufferance. 43 a Sweetness. 52. b Syllaes and Cesars salestaffe. 73. b.
Sylla the victors cruelty against the Marians. 73. a.
T.
Tale of a Greek that beguiled a Roman. 131. a. Talk 82. a Talk gentle, not
obstinate, pleasant. 53. a Tantalus. 142. a Temperaunce. 7. a 37. ^. 48. b 69.
b. 147. a Te^peraunce sometime above particular justice 61. b Te^perances
properties. 7. b. The be Alexa^ders wife. 72. a The (...). 29. b. 101. b The
ophrastus. 89. a The ophras^us praises (...). 85. a Theseus and Neptunus. 13.
a. 146. a Thieves laws among themselves. 78. a. Things. 50. a Things having
reason. 66. b Things laid to keep. 146. b Things perteining to glori^. 74. b
Things void of reason. 66. b Thing that seems profitable. 124. b Tiberius
and C. Gracchi both stain forsedition. 79. b Tiberius Gracchus. 79. b Time
borrowed for study. 66. a Timochares. 17. a. Titus Manlius Torquatus doing for
his father in trouble. 154. a Titus Manlius, what manner man he proved. 154. b
Tollfariners. 59. a Trauail. 83. a. b. 147. b Trauail for the poor, rather
tha^ for the rich. 100. b Trauail not to be spent in a shameful cause. 102. a
True virtue is only in perfect wisemen. 114. b Tullies Academical disputations.
65. b Tullies book called Hortesius now lost. 64. b Tullies book of friendship.
74. b. Tullies books of a common weal, now lost. 87. b Tullies books of
glory be lost. 76. b Tullies Consulship. 30. b Tullies eloquence. 1. b Tullies
orations. 64. b Tullies order in his holle work. 65. b Tullies philosophy. 1.
b Tullies sect, and liberty in writing. 65. a Tullies sons bringing up. 112.
a Tullies sons schoolmaster. III. b Tul^ies sons stock. III. b. Two
profitable things, whether more profitable, 109. a Tyranny. 18. b Tyrauntes.
120. b Tyrauntes ends. 71. b
V.
Uaine (...). 8. a Uainglorie. 19. a Uanquished men. 14. b Uehement speech 52.
a. 81. a. Uenus notable image. etc. 113. a by Uer^ue must me^ be ^o^ne to our
use. 69. a Virtue of an oath in old time. 153. b. Uertues. 76. b Uertues, not
vices of elders to be followed. 4. 7. b Virtue stands in. 3. points 69. a.
(...). 78. a U^sage. 51. b U^ysses. 147. b. (...) for a time suffered eve rye
thing. 44. b Uncomly hauiour of body, etc. 40. b. Undertaking of enterprises
29. b. Unhonest profit mother of all mischief. 122. b. Unhonest thing not
profitable. 1^7. b Unlaw^ull parting of lands 107. a Unmesurablenesse. 35. b.
Unshamefastnesse. 50. a Unthankfulness. 88. a Uoice. 52. a Uoidance of evil
affections 27. b Uoiding of affections. 27. a Uoluptuousnesse contrari^ to
honesty. 157. b. Use and exercise. 24. a Use of (...). 67. b. Use of riches,
10. a U^urers. 59. a Usurie 109. b.
VV.
War. 31. b. wastefulnesse. 84. a water. 67. b welfauordnesse. 49. b what
point of philosophy he will treat upon. 2. b why he gave himself to
philosophy. 64. a why he seuer^h virtues, coupled by nature. 76. a why he
spendes his vacant tune in philosophy 110. a. Wh^ he writ^s to his son of
philosophy in latin. 1. a wiliness. 136. a wine that will not last. 145. a
wisdom. 7. a. b. 48. b. 64. b. 69. a. 1. 6. b wisdoms properties. 7. a wise.
133. a if a wi^eman may drown a fool to save himself 144. a wiseme^ne
shifting for their lives. 144. a wit. 31. b wont. 116. a words. 50. a works
of the mind. 80. b worthiness. 87. b worthiness of honor. 76. b writing.
III. b wrong doing is against nature. 118. a ^. sorts of wro^gdoing, whether is
the worse. II. a
X.
Xenophons book of ordering a household. 108. b
Y.
Yielded men. 14. b Yongmens duties. 48. ^ Youth. 79. b
FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Fletestre^e within Temple bar, at the sign of the
hand and star, by Richard ^ottel.

^ Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


