THE Familiar EPISTLES of M. T. CICERO Englished and Conferred with the: French
Italian and other translations.

LONDON printed by Edward Griffin.

I. WEB, D. OF PHYS: TO HIS MVCH ESTEEMED Friend, FRA: L. Esquire.
YOur inbred love of knowledge, equaliz'd with able industry; and your
applause, and furtherance of a public benefit, brought us acquainted. In that
an office freely done to any peculiar person, is very laudable; but extending
it self to an universality; obliegeth, and unites all men. For, as the
mutual participation of particulars, and their use, and faculties in a body
natural: So breeds it, a loving harmony, and perpetuity, in that which is
political: harmony of minds, through uniting courtesies; perpetuity of being
so, by an affectionate acceptance, and grateful acknowledgement. Whereupon,
there is not only an exchange of favors, out of the endowments of fortune:
but from th'elaborated experience also, of such as are not envious, proceeds
a willing demonstration of all, either infused, or acquired sciences; ever
binding, by reiterated offices, the receiver to a new addition of
thankfulness, and the giver to parti^ipate through a former deserving
gratitude. And this was the main occasion that I, (true friend) breaking the
ice of my long concealed blessings, and inventions, laid open to your view
those crystal, and abounding fountains, which, who so tastes, so instantly
be-deweth his understanding, with so recreating a Balsamum, that it springs
in the coldest Winter, and is ever fruitful. This powerful and celestial
water, is (as you beheld) environed with a guard of ancient Authors, of the
most admired perfection in all professions; and such, as from the riches of
their wisdoms, have left rules, precepts, and authorities; as legacies,
regalities, and prerogatives; by which all after-ages, conditions of men, and
dominions; have been, and must be instituted, maintained, and governed. All
these, though they bewrayed a willingness, to embrace you, and grant you
access unto that fountain: yet through an ancient familiarity, begun in
childhood, between your self, and Cicero, which was one of them, you sought
this courtesy rather from him, and he gave rather way thereto, then any
other. And as he was ever of an affable disposition, and had been well read in
the conditions of all men, and, delighted to be frequented, by the most
illuminated understandings; he so tasted your inclination, that, calling me
from clensing, (as my custom is) and purifying that fountain, he requested
me, in token of his affection, to present you with one volume of his Epistles.
I ask't him which? He answered; the Familiar. In what Language? English.
Whereat I blush't, and smiled. He gathering, mine inward thoughts by mine
outward carriage, said; Blush not to be made a Translator of so ordinary
Books as mine Epistles; In that, things the more ordinary they are; argue the
more universal acceptance: and besides, men of greater show, have held their
translations of lesser moment, for their greatest ornaments: But blush to
think that Cicero, whose letters bewray his conversation, and whose
conversation was with Consuls, Kings, Imperator's, Praetors, Quaestors,
Tribunes, Generals, and friends of his own rank, Caesar, Pompeius, Lepidus,
Antonius, Brutus, Cassius, Cato, Plancus, Lentulus, Deiotarus, Octauianus, and
such great Potentates; and at that time when all the world was subject unto one
dominion, and himself in it a chief Commander; I say blush, to conceyte that
he, should reduce such Epistles into Volumes, only for little ones. And wrong
not thine own judgment so far, as to imagine, that every man of thy Nation,
and Country, which is desirous, and worthy to read mine Epistles, is able to
understand them in their original: go on then; for those that ruled all men
have been ruled by me; be thou then ruled; and go on. When I heard this, my
shameful blush was turned to a daring boldness; which made me reply,
Command: but, thou art the whole worlds greatest Orator; and I, when these are
ended, shall be but a young Translator; Let me bring thee a Sydney, a Great L:
Chancellor, or a Sandys; that can parallel thy Latin, with our English
Language. No, said mine Author; they have done; do thou. With that, I asked
him, how? Have thou forgotten, said he, that, Epistolas quotidianis verbis
^exere solemus? Here I grew silent: but not so silent, as presumptuous; For,
hence came these Epistles. Neither did I forget a French Doletus, and Italie's
Manutius, who had dared as much, and were applauded. But when I was almost at
an end, and met with, aliter scribimus, quod ^os solos quibus mittimus, aliter
quod multos lecturos putamus. I was absolutely determined to commend my former
labors, to the secretest of all friends, a fire. But you, at that very
instant, sent by destiny, repriued them: and requested my patience once more
to read them, and return you them. It Is done, and by these you shall receive
them. Send back your censure; and Farewell.

READER:
CICERO'S Epistles have in Italian, French, and other languages, endured sundry
translations; and of each, many impressions: their Author being grown to that
deserved repu^ation, that not only his native Country, but the whole world
has now, well near a thousand seven hundred years, admired him; as well, for
his powerful and perswas^ue eloquence, as for his understanding in all
learning, and especially in Politicis. In which he so far excelled, that he
was not only sought unto, by the greatest Generals, and Governors of mighty
Region^ and Provinces, for Councel^ and directions; but himself, from a
Gentleman of no great fortunes, was by his own deserts, so magnified, that
passing through all titles and degrees, of place and honor, usual amongst the
Romans; he, above the rest, was glorified with these testimonies; of Custos
Vrbis; Defe^sor Omnium; Pater Patriae.
Preserver of the City: Defender of all men: and, Father of his Country. And
came to be of that authority, that he was one of those, which commanded
Kings and Potentates. These things maturely considered; a grave and powerful
Magistrate, of weightiest employments, about a great Monarch in Europe, made
these letters his glass, his rule, his Oracle, and ordinary pocket-booke: an
hono^iustly due unto the Prince of Eloqu^nce; for, if I conceive him, he
affords letters of content unto all ag^s; from the swath-band to the crutches:
and to all conditions; from the meanest Ar^ificer, to the highest Emperou^: and
to all capacities, from the most pleasant and conceited'st W^iter, to the
serious Soldier, or grauest Councellor. I know he loses much, by being
translated; though by the most expert Linguist breathing; and into the purest
language spoken: Yet, because he hath^ like a pleasing Actor, been called for,
again and again, by other Nations; I doubt no^, but ^ith us, he may retain
some relish of his admired sweetness, and profound wisdom.

If in any place, our English translation, shall not precisely run along with
^he original. First, know that the various l^cti^ns may be one cause ^her^o:
Next, the different expositions, in the Italian or French translations, or
their corrections in after editions; for, in pl^ces that were difficult,
doubtful, ha^ting, or dismembered; after, conferring these (as sufficient, and
careful obseruers of our Author) amongst themselves; and all with the text; I
have followed the most seeming probable interpretation. Neither have I
neglected the precept, that in this case, Horace gave me: Nec verbum verbo
curabis reddere fidus
Interpres. --
Faithful Translator, thou shall not afford
Exchange of languages, made word for word.


Le^t I might err with that English Gentleman, who being demanded by an
Italian, what was become of his footboy? made answer: Ha preso i suoi
calcagni. Which sounded almost as well to the Italian, as this other to an
English man, from the mouth of a great Tr^ueller, who being asked, when he saw
his friend? replied: It makes a little that he was here. Both these answers,
as many o^ the like, though they have good words, yet for the sense, being
word for word translated, the first is but English-Italian^ and the last,
Italian-English. Which how far they are different from the purity of speech,
in either language, let their Boccace, and our Sr. Philip, teach us. Keeping
therefore sense, for sense; lest I might offend mine own language, or wrong
mine Author, I have endeavored, within the compass of my capacity, to give
thee some, though not all manner of satisfaction. For, not alone the profit of
younglings, is to be respected; but theirs also, that are desirous to read
matters of history, negotiations, war, and secret passages of policy, and
government: of which these little books are full: as being written by the
greatest wit, and most industrious, and frequented Orator, in the weightiest
businesses, and quickest times, of the Roman Common^wealth.

An Abstract of that part of the History of Ptol^maeus King of Egypt, which
is usually put before these Epistles for the better understanding of the first
book.
PTolemaeus, king of Egypt, father, to Ptolemaeus, that slew Pompeius: and to
that well-knowne Cleopatra: abusing his royal dignity by his leuitie; as,
playing the minstrell, while others danced; from whence he was surnamed
Auletes: and being otherwise in life lycentious; gave daily new occasions to
his subjects to withdraw their love, and loyalty. But, falling into
th'-acquaintance of Pompeius in the war against Mithridates; and ambitious of
Society and amity with the people of Rome; as was usual with other Kings and
his own predecess^rs: he gave to Caesar then Consul, and Pompeius his son
in law six thousand talents to effect it. Suetonius. Sterling. 1050000. l
He also sent an aid unto Pompeius in his employments in Iudaea of eight
thousand horse, without any charge unto the Commonwealth. He kept a sumptuous
table for a thousand personages, and bore the charges of as many seruitors to
attend them. These and the like profus'd expenses daily increasing: and
surmounting his annual revenue of twelve thousand and five hundred Talents:
Sterling 2187500. l
being enforced to borrow of Caius Rabirius Posthumous, and other friends, and
Usurers; and after to tax his subjects for the payment, they growing at length
to dislike his proceedings, not able further to tolerate so heavy burdens,
expelled him the kingdom. Whereupon, about the end of the Consulship of
Publius Lentulus and Q. Metellus, he repaires to Rome; complains to the
Senate^ urges the Society, and Amity; of himself, and Ancestors; with the
Senate, and people: gets Pompeius to back him, and plead his deserts; and so
effectually follows his business; that it was thought, not only just; but
for example-sake useful, and pro^itable to reu^nge the injuries of that King,
whom the Senate and people of Rome had not long before graced with those
attributes of Friend, and Companion. A decree of the Senate was forthwith
enacted, That the Consulls should cast lots which of them should restore him to
his Country. The first lot fell to Lentulus, together with the government of
Cilicia and Cyprus. For Spain; that fell to his Colleague Metellus, was too
remote from Egypt, and not to be annexed to the reducement of the King of
Alexandria. Against this decree, and ballottation C. Cato Tribune of the people
opposed; obiecting religion; and alleging an Oracle out of the Sibyline
verses. That, if the King were reduced by a multitude, it would prove
dangerous to the Commonwealth. Then, they deliberated, who should reduce him
without an army. Some stuck to Lentulus, whom they had formerly as well by
decree, as lot received: some thought it fit to send Pompeius; some, otherwise.
The variety of opinions prolonged the business: but Cato's audacitie
overthrew it. For, from the beginning of his Tribuneship, he by daily
detractions, provoked envy both against the King, and Lentulus. At length a
law being diuulged, to abrogate the government of Lentulus in Cilicia; his
friends withdrew their thoughts, from a lesser care, to a greater fear. And
Pompeius, wa^ by the same Cato so bitterly accused to the Senate, that he gave
over al pretense in that reduceme^t. The King dispayring of the Senates aid,
fled to Gabinius Pro-Consull in Syria; By whom, through the promise of Starling
175000. l.
ten thousand talents; and the assistance of Pompeius then Consul, he was
restored about twenty five years before the beginning of our Christian
Computation. He found his kingdom under the Dominion of Archelaus friend to
Gabinius, in the right of his wife Berenice, eldest of the three daughters of
the said Ptolemaeus: but he slew them both in his restoring.

Gabinius being after called in question for violating the prerogative of the
Commonwealth, in that he had passed the bounds of his Province against the Law
Cornelia de Maiestate: was by corruption of Judges absolved. The detestation
whoreof, was cause that he was shortly after, accused of extortion, condemned,
and with con^iscation of goods banished. Our Cicero was in the first
accusation, Playntife: in the last, at the request of Pompeius defendant.

Read Cicero's Oration in defense of Caius Rabirius Posthumous.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE FAMILIar Epistles of M. T. Cicero.
Cicero to Publius Lentulus Vice-consul. Epist. 1.
IN all my endeavors on your behalf, and especially in my devoted affection
toward you; I satisfy all other men, yet never satisfy my self: For, you
have so well deserved of me; because you never left my business ^ill 'twas
effected: that I, not having the like success in yours, find my life
di^tastfull to me. The reasons are these Ammonius the Kings Ambassador
manifestly withstands us by money; And the business is carried by those
Creditors who had the managing thereof while you were present. There are but
few, if any, that are inclining to the Kings suite, and they all will have the
business referred to Pompeius. The Senate gives way to the brute raised of the
Religion, not for the Religion, but for just disdain, and hatred, taken
against the Kings briberie or corruption. We cease not to exhort and entreat
Pompeius, and in conclusion, freely to reprehend him, and to admonish him that
he draw not on him so great an infamy. But my entreaties and aduertisements
are needless: for, as well in his private discourses, as openly in the Senate,
he has so carried your cause, that no man could with greater eloquence,
gravity, endeavor, or earnestness have pleaded it; acknowledging your favor
to him; and his love to you in the best fashion he was able. You know you have
displeased Marcellinus. Yet, this cause of the Kings excepted, h^ makes plain
demonstration, that in any other occasion he will favor you to the utmost of
his ability. And we are contented with his pleasure. Ther^ has been no
means to make him al^ter his course about the religion. Thi^ is the state of
the business^, till the thir^teenth of January, in the morning of which day, I
wrote these. Hortentiu^ and I, and Lucullus, touching the Army, let the
religion carry it: (for otherwise we should do nothing,) yet remitting our
selves to the order made when you propounded the matter; we stand for you: that
the Senate may commit unto you the charge of restoring the King without the
Army, as the Religion requires: so that you may do it without indangering
the Common wealth. Crassus chooses three Ambassadors, not excluding Pompeius:
for my meaning is of such as have public authority: Bibulus also three
Ambassadors, private Citizens, and with him agree the other Consulars, except
Seruilius; (who holds that in no case he should be restored;) And Volcatius,
(who consenting with Lupus chooses Pompeius:) and Afranius, (who assenteth to
V^lcatius:) which thing augmenteth the suspicion of the intention of Pompeius.
For it is found, that Pompeius friends agree unto the opinion of Volcatius. The
difficulties are many; and the business begins to grow doubtful: The
manifest, and earnest practices of Libon and Hipsaeus, and the great desire of
all Pompeius friends, bewray the hidden fire of his ambition, to have the
managing of this business. And they that contradict him, are not friends to
you, who have so much extolled him. My authority herein is the less, by
reason of my obligation to you. And the impression which men have made touching
Pompeius intention drowneth my favors, they surmising, that they shall
gratify him by this occasion. Things are now in the same estate with us, as
they were long before your departure; being as w^ll by the King himself, as by
the intimate, and domesticke acquaintance of Pompeius privily corrupted:
afterward by the Consulars openly sifted, and mad^ exceeding heinous, and
reproa^hfull Every man shall in your absence perceive my integrity; but your
friends shall know the love I bear you. Had there been trust, where there
should have been most, these troubles had not fallen upon us. Farewell.

Cicero to Pu^lius Lentulus Vice-consull, Ep. 2.
THE xiij. of January the Senate determined nothing: because the greatest part
of that day was spent in Controversies, between the Consul Lentulus, and
Caninius Tribune of the people. At which time I also spak much on your behalf,
and by manifest tokens I perceived, that the Senate took wondrous w^ll, the
remembrance of your respect unto that order. Whereupon the day following, they
were pleased, that I should make a brief recapitulatio^ of every man's opinion:
For, they seemed to be reconciled unto us: which I perceived as well by the
pleading of your cause; as by their calling every man, and requesting their
favor for us. When therefore the first sentence was pronounced, which was of
Bibulu^, that the King should be by three Ambassadors restored; The second,
that you should restore him without the Army, as Hortentius desired; or as
Volcatius, who gave the third; that Pomp^ius should restore him: It was
demanded, that the particulars of that opinion of Bibulus might be considered.
No man opposed that part wherein he touched the Religion; as being a thing not
to be contradicted. Touching the three Ambassadors, ^he great^st part flue from
him. Then followed the opinion of Horten^ius, upon which Lupu^ Tribune of the
people (because he had made the motion for Pompeius) began to contend, that it
belonged unto him rather than to the Co^suls to command that every one should
go to that side to which they were most addicted. But his speech was
interrupted by the outcries of all men: because it was a thing new found out,
and without sense or reason. The Consuls neither assented unto him, nor were
they greatly repugnant. They were contented the day should be thus driven over,
and so it was. For they well perceived that the greatest part would follow
Hortentius: though they outwardly seemed to allow of the opinion of Volcatius.
Many were requested to give their opinion, and that with great vexation of the
Consuls, whose desire was that the opinion of Bibulu^ might be preferred. This
controversy endured till night, and then the Senate rose; and I, as it fell
out, supt that night with Pompeius, lighting thereby upon this occasion more
fit than heretofore has been offered, as being the first Senate day, that
has since your departure proved fortunate unto us. I so reasoned the matter
with him, that he seemed to give credit wholly to my discourse, and to
deliberate how he might favor you. Hearing his own tale, I must needs free him
from the least touch of Ambition: but when I consider the carriage or passages
of his familiar acquaintance, of what degree soever, I find that assuredly
true, that at length is manifested to all the world: that all this cause has
been before this time by some corrupted, and not without the knowledge or
priuitie of the King himself, and of his Counselors. These I wrote the 14. of
January before day, in which the Senate was to sit. We shall as I hope
maintain our reputation in the Senate so far, as is possible in this so
persidious an age, and full of injustice. As for the popular respects, I think
we have so carried things, that nothing can be done with the people, without
the violating of divine authority, or breach of laws, no nor without
compulsion. Yesterday the Senate ratified the things aforesaid, by interposing
of their grave authority: to which though Cato, and Caninius opposed
themselves, yet it was registered, and I think it shall be sent unto you. I
will not fail to give you good account hereafter of every thing that passes:
and I will engage all my thoughts, endeavors, diligence, and friends, in the
effecting this business, to our own contentment. Farewell.

Cicero to Lentulus. Ep. 3.
AVlus Trebonius my ancient and ^amiliar friend, who has affairs of great
impo^tance in diverse places of your Province, and such as may be soon
dispatched; has been heretofore very well-come thither, as well for his own
worth, as for being by my self, and other friends recommended: and, at this
present, in respect of your love toward me, and for our near alliance, he is
very confident, that he shall be able by means of these my letters, to
purchase your gracious favor. I beseech you therefore let not his hope deceive
him; and I recommend unto you all his affairs, his Freemen, his agents, his
family; and especially, that what Titus Ampius shall decree about his
business, you would be pleased to ratify: and so use him in all other
occasions, that he may thereby gather, that I have effectually recommended
him. Farewell.

Cicero to Lentulus. Ep. 4.
Upon the fifteenth of January, when we had the better hand in the Senate, for
that the day before, we had broken the neck of that opinion of Bibulus,
concerning the three Ambassadors; and that there was now only resting the
opinion of Volcatius, to contend withal; the business was with diverse
cauills p^olonged by our adversaries: who could not endure, that we amongst so
many, and so great variety of opinions, should carry away the glory of the
day^ Curio was at that time a bitter enemy unto us, Bibulus much more mild,
and rather a friend than otherwise; Caniniu^, and Cat^, had resolved ^o propose
no law before the next creation of Magistrates. The Senate, as you know, by the
inte^dict of the law Pupia, cannot be reduced before the Calends of February,
nor for all that month, unless the Ambassages be either dispatched, or put
off. But the people of Rome are possessed, that those that envy and hate you,
have brought up this brute of an invented Religion, not so much to hinder you;
as to keep every man else from seeking for credits sake to go that journey
with the army into Alexandria. And no man can report other than that the
Senate, has had good respect of you: for it is well known, that your
adversaries have hindered the dispatch of your cause, but if they shall attempt
now any thing by wicked and treacherous proceedings (as they have done) under
pretense or name of the people of Rome, it is sufficiently provided, ^^at they
can pass nothing, unless they will withstand authority, and the laws, or
else bring their intent about by violence. I will omit to speak, either o^
mine own faithfulness, or other men's ingratitude. For it were but a folly to
make any ost^nta^ion of my self, considering that if I should spend my life
for you, I cannot counteruaile your courtesies: And to complain of other men's
injuries, were but to renew my old troubles. If in this time of weak
Magistrates, any thing shall be attempted by force, I can make no resistance:
but if no violence shall be offered, I can assure you, that the Senate and
people of Rome will do what in them lies to support your reputation. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Lentulus Vice-consul. Ep. 5.
THough I desire nothing more, than to be known first of your self, and then
to all the world, for a most thankful man, and one that cannot forget the good
turns you have done me; ye^ it grieves me to the heart, that the times since
your departure are such, as enforce you to make trial as well of mine, as
other men's trust, and affection toward you. For I understand by your letters,
that you have had the same proof o^ your friends, in your authority: that I
have had of mine, in my health, and prosperity. I endeavored with all my
understanding, care, and po^er, to bring about the cause of the king; when on
the sudden Cato, beyond all imagination, proposed a wicked law, which did not
only hinder the cause, but has made that business, which was before light,
and easy; to be very difficult, and desperate. But, though in so cross an
accident, we are to expect all mischief; yet we fear nothing more than
treachery. Come what will come, let Cato be well assured, we will resist him.
About the restoring of the king, I promise you thus much, that I will so bestur
me, that you shall rest fully satisfied. Yet I doubt, that either the business
may be taken out of our hands; or that there will be no further proceeding in
it: and I cannot well determine, which of these two courses will leaft content
me. But if it come to this pass; there is a third way which neither Selicius,
nor I dislike. That we neither suffer the King to be abandoned; nor let him be
put over unto that man for his restoring, who is already thought, to have
obtained him. We will do the best we can, that things may go, as we would
have them: if not; we will so leave off, that we may suffer no disgrace
thereby. It is for a man of your wisdom, understanding and valor; to be well
assured, that all your greatness, and honor proceeds from your own virtue,
your noble actions, and grave proce^dings, (which will never fail you) and to
set light by that, that the perfidiousnesse of any man can detract from you, in
any thing wherein fortune has enriched you. Knowing for certain, that
whatsoever is done in that kind, will turn to them more hurtful, than to you
hereafter. There is not an hour passes, but I am either doing something in
your business, or contriuing how to do it. And in every thing I use the help
of Quintus Selicius: whom I esteem as discreet, faithful, and loving unto
you, as any of your other friends. I make account that you have understood both
by frequent letters, and messengers, as well what we have now in hand, as that
that has been hitherto effected. Of that, that is expected, I hold none
fitter then my self, to send you mine opinion. I have seen Pompeius upon two
occasions terribly troubled. First, for that on the ^^xt of February, speaking
to the people in the favor of Milo, they gave not only a negligent ear unto
him: but often interrupted him with exclamations, and villainies: secondly
because Cato speaking ill of him, in the Senate, and sharply accusing him, had
a most quiet audience: so tha^, it seems he altogether shrinketh from this
cause of restoring the king, in which we have always held our own: the Senate
not having taken any thing from you herein, but that, which by the Religion it
cannot give unto another man. Our hope therefore at this present is, that the
King finding himself decei^ed in his opinion of thinking to be ^estored by
Pompeius: and being deprived of all other hopes herein, will necessarily
apply himself unto you. In the effecting hereof we will use all diligence:
and he will doubtless be most willing; so that P^mpeius make but the least
show to be content therewith. But you know how slow he is, and ^l^o how silent
in all his actions, yet there is nothing, that may be done herein, by us
omitted The other injuries that Cato threa^neth to do us, shall need (I hope)
but easy resistance Of the Con^ulars I find none to favor you, but
Hortentius, and Lucullus. The rest are partly ^ec^et, partly open enemies. But
be of good courage: And without al doub^, the rash attempt of this
fantastical ^ellow will come to nothing, and you shall recover your former
honor, and reputation. Fare you well.

Cicero to Lentulus. Ep. 6.
HOw matte^s have been carried, you may ^nforme your self of P^llio; who was
not only present at them, but employed in them. In the depth of the trouble I
suffer about your business, my comfort is, that I hope assuredly, that the
good Council of your friends, and time it self, which discovers the
designs of enemies, and treacherous persons shall shelter you from their wicked
pretenses. One better comfort I have more, calling to remembrance, my troubles
past; whose very image I perceive in your affairs, for although the blemish of
your honor, is not to be compared with the loss of my welfare: there is
notwithstanding such a resemblance, that I cannot imagine, but you will hold me
excused, if those things affright me not, which you your self never feared.
But, be you that man, that I have known you from your infancy; and credit me,
the injuries of men, shall make your greatness more illustrious. And expect
from me the chiefest favors, and offices that can be showed you, for I will
not fail your expectation. Fare you well.

Cicero to Publius Lentulus Vice-consull. Ep. 7.
I have read your letters, in which you are thankful unto me, because I often
acquaint you with all passages, and because I make open demonstration to you of
the affection I bear you. It was needless to thank me, because I was
obliged to love you, (if I would not appear unworthy of your good opinion:)
and besides, I took delight in this frequent epistolar correspondence with
you, seeing we could not in absence otherwise enjoy one another. And when it
falls out that I write not so often unto you, it shall proceed from a distrust I
shall have to put my letters in every man's hands. But always, when I shall have
a faithful messe^ger, I will not omit the opportunity. Touching the
particulars, which you desire to know, concerning your friends, they would be
tedious to relate, but as for that, of which I have often heretofore written
unto you, I can bid you now rely upon it for a certainty. That some, which
both greatly could, and should have favored you, have envied your greatness,
and the course of your Fortunes. Although the case be not alike, yet it has
some equality with mine. For they that were offended with you, upon an
occasion that concerned the Commonwealth, have openly withstood you; and those
that were defended by you, have not been so mindful of your valor, as
hateful of your commendation. At which time, as I have heretofore at large
written unto you, I have known Hortentius, and Lucullus to be very
affectionate toward you; and amongst those that are Magistrates, Lu^ius
Racilius, a most faithful and loving friend of yours. With that diligence, I
bestow in favoring you, I profit not so much as I should, if I favored
another, men presuming, that I help you more out of obligation, than
discretion. Amongst the Consulars I have not known a man besides H^r^entius
and Lucullus, that has made so much as a show, of any good, much l^sse done
any good thing for you. I write nothing unto you of P^mp^ius, because you know,
he has been very seldom in the Senate. But this I tell you, that he h^th
often re^soned with me, about your matters, and that not only when he was
invited thereunto by me, but of his own proper inclination also. And the
letters which you lately sent him, were wondrous acceptable unto him, as I have
understood by signs of grea^est certainty, I must needs con^esse, that you
have not only filled me with joy, but with admiration, when I consider, how
ingenuously, and with what great discretion, you have kept so rare a man your
friend, and so much obliged him unto your courtesy. Wiping out of his
memory, the fal^e suspicion, which he had, that you should be offended with
him, believing as others did, that he strove with you about the restoring of
the king. To tell truth, though you have always found him ready to pleasure
you, and especially then, when peradventure the con^ra^ie was doubted, as when
Caninius, sought that the people should give him the managing of this
business, yet I can assure you, that I never saw him, more earnest, or forward
than at this present. Therefore know, that whatsoever I write, shall be written
by his Council, and opinion. I say then, till now the Senate has not denied
you the restoring of the King. Because that decree, that no man might restore
him, was rather made out of fury then by reason; and the Tribunes as you know
were thereunto opposed. You therefore having the government of Silicia and
Cyprus, may easily inform your self, whether your fo^ces be sufficient to
bridle Alexandria, and Egypt, and finding it a ma^ter feyseable, you may, go
into A^exandria with the army, leaving the King at Ptolem^is, or there bouts,
and when you have set all things quiet, and appointed, and placed your
gu^risons, you may restore Ptolem^us to his former state and Dominion. And
after this manner, he shall be restored by you, as the Senate had in the
beginning ord^ined; and restored without the army, as these religious persons
said, was according to the pleasure, or liking of the Sibylla. And you shall
thus do a thing agreeable to the honor of your self, and of our
Commonwealth. It is true, that the attempt seems unto us, doubtful, because
we know men will judge according to the success. And, if the matter should
fall out as we would have it, every man will proclaim you wise, and valorous:
If any misfortune should come between you and home, all men will say you were
vain, and ambitious. Wherefore, you shall better gather than we, whether the
enterprise be secure, as having the estate of all Egypt within your view. Our
opinion is, that if you have any certainty, to possess your self of that
kingdom, that you defer no time in effecting it; but if the case be doubtful,
put not your self upon it. This I assure you, that if you prosper in it, you
shall be in your absence praised of many, and at your re^ur^e, of all men; if
it happen otherwise, I forsee that nothing but ^ll can come thereof. The Senate
having declared their pleasure, and besides there being the respect of the
religion. But as I exhort you, to put your self upon the task, if you find
things without danger; so if you doubt they will give you battle: I dissuade
you from it. And again I tell you what from the beginning I have signified
unto you, that men will censure your actions, not so much according to the
counsel you have embraced, as according to the end that shall ensue thereof.
But if this way should appear dangerous unto you, we should like it well, that
the king, (giving assurance to those friends of yours, which in diverse places
of your Province, have furnished him with moneys;) should use your aid to
return into his kingdom. You being easily able to help him; as well for the
quality, as situation of your Province; he being destitute of a more sure
means to return withal. This is my opinion; now do what you think best.
Whereas you rejoice at my condition, at the familiarity of Milo, at the
vanity and weakness of Clodius, ^ wonder not at your joy; being the custom
of an excell^nt artificer, to take pleasure in his own workmanship. Though you
cannot imagine how great peruersitie (not to give it a worse term) reigns in
some kind of men, who if they had favored me, I had never changed mine
intention, in the managing of the Commonwealth, but their ill carriages
toward me have constrained me, to run a course for mine own safety, of
which I have been hitherto something careless, esteeming honor more than
mine own life. Both might hau^ been done very well, if these Consula^s were
to be trusted, or had any constancy: but they are for the most part so
malicious, and so deprived of judgment, that whereas they should long affect
me, as one that am a most affectionate citizen to mine own Country, they
envy me for defending it. Which I have written thus freely unto you, because I
acknowledge, not only my present ^state from you, but the beginning of my
honor also. And moreover, because I begin now to believe, that my obscure
paren^age, was not the cause I was so ill beloved: considering that you, that
are bo^ne of a most noble house, could not avoid the rage of these malicious
people. Who though they have su^fered you to arise to one of ^he chiefest
places, they have afterward always said wait, to clip your wings for fear
you should fly higher. I rejoice, that your Fortune has not been like mine,
for there is great difference, between being a little crossed, and being
utterly ruined. Notwithstand^ng out of your worth, you have labored so, that I
am not greatly to complain of mine; you having provided, that I h^u^ made a
greater gain in honor, than I have recei^ed damage in my estate. Therefore at
this present I entre^t you; urged here^nto not only by the favors you have
done me, bu^ by the affection that I ever bare you, that you striue-with all
your power to arise unto the height of glory; to which ever since you were a
boy, you have had a strong inclination: and let no^ every occu^rent injury,
deiect the lof^ines o^ your spirit, which I have always loved, and admired.
The hope that is of you is great, and great is the comm^ndation of your
liberal^tie, as also the memory of your Con^ulship is great; to which you know
well, how great an ornament, and honor will be added, if some noble argument
or token of your valor can in the government, which you now have of that
Province, be produced. Though I am unwilling you should enterprise any thing,
without diligent consideration, examination, and preparation. And because I
know that all your thoughts have eu^r been inclined to ascend to the highest
step of honor, when you are arrived, I assure you it is an easy matter to
maintain you there. And to the end that this my exhortation appear not
friuol^us, and from the purpose: know that I have to this effect been desirous
to put you in mind of the acciden^s which have occurred to both of us, that
hereafter you may know whom you may trust, and of whom you should be wary.
Whereas you write that you would know, what the state of the Commonwealth is:
there is great discord, but ^he strife is unequal; ^or they that are st^ongest
in riches, arms, and power, seem to have gone so far through the folly, and
in^onstancie of their adversaries, that they are also at length before them in
authority. So that, having few or none against them, they have fully obtained
that of the Senate, which was never thought should have been granted by the
people, without great commotion. And thus a stipend, with ten Ambassadors has
been assigned and granted unto Caesar, and the time of his government in
France prolonged, contrary to the Law Sempronia, which I write briefly unto
you, because the present state of the Commonwealth displeases me: yet I write
it to advertise you, that you may in time resolve your self to believe that,
of which I by the study of so many years, and much more by experience, am
resolved; that, a man ought not to love prosperity without authority, nor it
without prosperity. Whereas you congratulate with me about my daughter, and
Crassipes, I acknowledge your courtesy, and hope, that of such a marriage we
shall have that content, which is desired. It rests only that I remember
you, that you bring up our Lentulus in all those sciences, to which you have
ever been inclined: but above all things, that you put him upon that course,
which you have holden: by which if he go, there is no doubt, bu^ he shall
become most virtuous, and very valorous; having in these his green years,
made himself of so great an expectation. We do most entirely love him, as well
because he is your son, and worthy to be so; as because I know he loves me,
and has ever done so. Fare you well.

Cicero to Publius Le^tulus Vice-consull. Ep. 8.
OF all things which concern you, what is done, determined, and promised by
Pompeius; Emplat^rius shall to the full inform you: who has not only seen,
but solicited them; and that with so much love, judgment, and care, that
greater of any friend could no ways be expected. Of the same man you may
understand the state of the weal public, whose shape by pen can hardly be
portraied. But let it su^fice you, that the government is in the managing of
our acquaintance, and the common opinion is, that in our time it will not be
changed. Wherefore I, as well for the obligation that I have to Pompeius, as to
obey your comfortable, and safe Councels; and to maintain my regained honor,
together with my prosperity; I favor his pretenses, as he upon your request
has favored me in my occasions. You know how full of trouble it is unto a
citizen to change the habit of his mi^de, especially when it is good, and
such as has been by him long time continued. Notwithstanding I apply my
self to this man's pleasure, not being able with honesty to gainesay him,
neither do I this as is peradventure by some informed, with dissimulation;
because a natural inclination, and love, which I bear him, can do so much
with me, that I hold all things to be honest and ^rue, which are to his profit,
and good liki^g. And in my judgment his adversaries also should do well, if
(not being able to withstand him) they should cease to contend longer with him.
Verily this also gives me comfort, that every man freely grants unto me, as
it were by a special privilege, either to favor the disignes of Pompeius; or
to be silent; or to retire me to our common studies, in which I take the
greatest pleasure. And if his friendship forbid me not, I will by all means
do so; not being able to council the commonwealth with that freedom I
desire; nor with that authority, which I, after so many troubles sustained in
managing the gr^atest pl^ces of dignity have expected. Although this is not my
loss alone, but universal. For, of necessity, either place must be given
(though with loss o^ reputation,) to the wills of some few: or difference of
opinion, and opposition must be vain and frivolous. And whatsoever I have
hitherto written, has been almost wholly upon this occasion. That you may at
length look to your self. The courses of the Senate, of all Courts of
justice, and the whole state are altered; nothing remains for us to do, but
to wish for quietness: and those that govern, make show that they will content
us, so that men will be quie^, and not so much ^rouoke their grea^nesse to
displeasure: ^ut we must not think to live with that repu^ation which
be^itteth noble Senators: thanks be to them that have allienated Pompeius,
from the Senate, and broken the peace which was betvveene him and the
Nobility. But to turn to our purpose, about your matt^rs; I have found that
Pompeiu^ is a good friend unto you; and when he becomes Consul, you shall
^^nde (if I be not dec^iued) whatsoever true, parti^^lar, and important
favors, your heart ca^ im^gine, or be desired. And I having an especial care
of all your business, will spur him alvvaies forward. And I am not only
sure, that I shall never seem unto him importunate, but I rather hope, that he
perceiving me so gra^efull, will herein assuredly find great contentment.
Le^tulus live secure, for every little occasion of yours sticks nearer me, then
all mine own. And I being of that mind, can satisfy my self for matter of my
diligence; but for the effects, it is impossible; as not being able with my
v^ry thoughts, to search out the way, to show you my thankfulness, much less
in act to equalize the least part of your favors. It is here reported that you
have gotten a great victory. And we expect the nevves thereof from you. And
we have already spoken to Pompeius; and so soon as your let^ers shall arrive,
we will speak with the Magistrates, and Senators. And in all your
business, although it should so fall out that we should work more then we
think our selves able: yet it seems much less unto us then is befitting.
Fare you well.

Cicero to Publius Lentulus Vice-consull. Ep. 9.
YOur letters were very acceptable unto me, because I understood [by them]
that you apparently perceive how much I respect you; which had not been so
well expressed, if I said I had loved you, because in my conceit, that name of
respect, although it be exceeding grave and holy; is notwithstanding of less
weight, and of much less price, then are the courtesies you have done me. As
for the thanks you render me, nothing has thereunto more moved you, then a
certain abundance of affection; which gives occasion, that you esteem those
things which without my utter shame, and soul imputation cannot be
pretermitted. But if all this time we have been separated, we had lived
together, and in Rome, I had made more manifest demonstration of my mind unto
you. For with equal commendation, in defense of the Commonwealth, we should
have proceeded in every action to one, and the self same end, and purpose. And
I hope it may yet come to pass; asvvell for that, which you give notice of;
as because you can easily perform the same. Of the which I will here after
give satisfaction according to your desire, and will declare unto you how I
am affected, and the state in which I now find my self. But to turn unto my
purpose, if you had been at Rome, I would have been governed by your
pleasure, and have remitted my self wholly unto your love and infinite
wisdom, and you should have used me as a Counceller, peradventure not
altogether ignorant, but I am sure, faithful, and affectionate. Although I am
very glad, (as I ought to be,) to hea^e you are full of glory in your
Province, for your late obtained victory: Yet here you would have reaped, a
better crop of your seed, and more abou^dant. Because I would wonderously have
helped you, to have bin revenged on them, of whom you know there are some, that
greatly malign you, for having restored me into my Country; other some, that
enu^e you for the reputation and renovvn, which is fallen unto you by so noble
a fact, and honorable enterprise. Although that wretched villain, natural
enemy of his friends, who without favor, and deprived of any man to uphold
him, in recompense of your especial favors done him; bestirred him with that
feeble force he had, to do you injury: Yet he himself in our revenge has
given condign punishment to his own offenses. For such plots of his have
been discovered, that have not only utterly dishonored him, but during life
deprived him of liberty. And although I should hau^ liked it better, that you
had learned by my example, then by your own experience; yet I rejoice in my
sorrow, that you have known that faith in men with small cost, which I to my
great loss have been acquainted with, and I am disposed to discourse a while
upon this point, to give ansvv^re to that you have demanded. You write that you
understand that I am reconciled with C^sar, and with Appius, and further you
add, that for being so, you do not reprehend me; but that you would know what
reason has moved me to defend and praise Vatinius: which, that it may the
better be explained, i^ is necessary, that I declare my mind unto you; taking
my discourse from far-fetched passages. When I returned, good L^ntulus, into my
Country, it was my meaning to help, not only my friends, but also the
Commonwealth; and because I found my self infinitely obliged unto you, as
being by your means returned; I thought I was likewise obliged unto it, as
having favored you in my restoration. And whereas formerly I had wearied my
self in the service thereof, because I would not b^ wanting unto it in the
office of a good Citizen; I now think that it behooves me much more to do
the same, that I might not be ungrateful. And this disposition of mine I made
known unto the Senate, when you were Consul; and reasoned with your self
often about it. Though from the beginning, when you sought that the Senate
should restore my former losses, many things offended me; finding my self of
the one part secretly hated, and of the other slowly favored. For, neither
when there was reasoning about my house, or of that wicked violence, by which
I, and my brother were cast out of doors; did they join with you, which
should have assisted: nor yet made they demonstration of that mind toward me,
which I expected; not only in matters that were of moment, no nor yet in such,
as although they were for the great los^e of all my moueables neces^arie:
howsoever they were of me, but as base things, little esteemed. And though I
perceived t^ings pass in this manner, (for they were not very secret,) yet did
I not esteem the present ^^iurie, equal unto their merit past. Wherefore,
although I knew my self much obliged to Pompeius; especially because you more
then any man told me, that you saw him very earnest in my cause; And although
I loved him, not so much for having received courtesies from him, as because I
have been always inclined to affect him; thinking that he for his virtue had
deserved it: yet without having any regard to what he desired, I followed my
old custom, having in every action, the good of the Commonwealth my sole
object. And in token of the truth, Pompeius being of the Senate, when he went
into Rome, to commend Publius Sextius; and Vatinius one of the testimonies, had
told, that I was become one of Caesar's friends, moved thereunto by his happy
fortune; I gave him this answer. That the fortune of Bibulus, which he
esteemed full of misery, was greater in my estimation, then all the triumphs,
and victories. And in another place, I said (even in the presence of Pompeius,)
that none but they thrust me out of Rome, which where occasion that Bibulus
feared to s^ur out of doors. And that examination of mine was only to
reprehend the Tribuneship of Vatinius. Where I spoke with great liberty and
courage, about violence, authority, and the donation of Kingdoms. Nei^ther did
I in this (...), but a^ many other times speak in S^na^e with the same
constancy. And further, Marcelinus, and Philippus being Consuls, the Senate
upon the fifth of April, was contented upon my request, that on the fifteenth
of May in open Senate, the case should be proposed of the Campan Territory.
Think you that I could at this time courageously handle this cause rather,
then ^orget my own calamities, and call to remembrance my own actions? When I
had spoken my opinion, there grew great alteration, in some particular persons,
which had occasion; and in others also, which I could never have imagined. For
the decree being made, after that manner that I had councelled; Pompeius,
without making any demonstration unto me, that he was displeased; took his
journey for Sardinia, and Africa: and went by Luca to meet with Caesar; who
complained much of this deed of mine: as being incensed a little before in
Rauenna, by Crassus, who had spoken much ill unto him concerning me: And,
though I had understood by many, that Pompeius was offended with me; Yet my
brother gave me the greatest notice, who meeting him in Sardinia, a little
while after he came from Luca, was thus saluted by him. In very deed, Sir, I
desired to see no man rather then you: neither could fortune have brought me
any man, with whom I could be so much contented. If you take not such order,
that your brother Marcus keep the promise that you on his behalf made us,
this debt will fall upon you. What needs more words? He complained grievously;
he made repetition of his deserts; he called to memory the agreement made
about the acts of Caesar; and follovved on yet further, that he knevv well,
that Caesar loved my happiness; p^aying him at last, to recommend unto me the
cause, and ^he honor of the aforesaid [ Caesar.] And that at the least, I
should not oppugn him, if I would not, or could not help him. When I had from
my brother understood these things, and Vibullius, by commission of Pompeius,
having been a little before to speak with me, that I should in courtesy
leave, till his return, the Campan cause, in the state it was in: driven to
bethink me of my self, I turned me wholy to consider mine own affairs,
becoming after a sort petitioner to the Commonwealth: That in consideration
of so much pains, as I had taken for it, it would be pleased to grant me,
that I might show my self grateful toward my benefactours, and continue
the trust of my brother; and that it would suffer that man to be good, whom
in all occasions it had found to be a good Citizen. Now in all my actions and
sentences, which seem to offend Pompeius, I perceived, that there were
certain persons whom you may imagine, which, notvvithstanding they were of
my opinion, and had alvvaies been so, yet they rejoiced, that I follovved not
the will of Pompeius; hoping assuredly, that he, for that cause should grow a
cold friend unto me, and Caesar a capital enemy. I had just occasion to be
grieved hereat; but much more, that in my pr^sence, they did most familiarly
embrace, vvelcome, and kiss mine enemy. But why do I say, mine enemy?
rather enemy of the Law, of the Courts of Justice, of the quiet of his
Country, and in conclusion, of all men of honesty. with that demonstration,
they had an opinion they should mo^e me to anger, but it was not so; because
in me all anger was ext^nguished. These passages therefore considered, and
making a calculation, with that understanding that God had given me, I
reduced into form all my discourses: which if I be able, I vvil briefly
recount unto you. If I should see the Commonwealth to be governed by wicked
and loose Citizens, as we know falls out in our times; and have understood,
to have at other times also occurred; no force, either of rewards, which I
slightly esteem, nor yet of dangers, which were wont to fear the stou^est
men, could have such interest in me, that I should consent to the liking of men
of such condition, although my heart should tell me, they had obliged me. But
the Commonwealth resting it self under the shadow of C^cius Pompeius, who,
with his great deserts toward it, and with his worthy actions, has gotten
this power, and estimation; and I having from my youth favored, nay, I say
more, having furthered him, both when I was Praetor, and when I was
Consul, and he in like manner helping me, as well by council, as by favor;
and unwilling to have other enemy in the City, then that man that was to me
an enemy; I thought not, that I should be held for inconstant, if I had a
little altered some of my opinions; inclining my will to that, which
appertained to the dignity, both of a man of his sort, and of such an one, as
was my Benefactour. And being of this mind, it was necessary for me, as you
see, that I should also favor Caesar, he being inward with Pompeius; to
which, partly ancient friendship much moved me, that I and my brother Quintus
have alvvaies, as you know, held with Caesar; partly, the humanity and
courtesy, which he has many vvayes in short time shevved us. And to this,
the respect of the Commonwealth, made great addition: seeming unto me, that
it did not only dislike, but strangely refused, that there should be any
contention with men of that quality. Especially Caesar having performed many
valorous actions thereunto behoofefull. And I being heretofore entered into such
deliberation, was upon the former occasions, altogether settled, by reason of
the testimony, that Pompeius had given of me to Caesar, and my brother to
Pompeius. Moreover, I should have considered, that which is by our Plato
written so divinely; that, Citizens were wont to be such, as their Governors.
I remember the first day of my Consulship, and often afterward, that I might
keep the Commonwealth in a direct course, and at one stay, I laid so strong
foundations, and in such a manner encouraged the Senate, that it was no
marvel, though it carried it self so stoutly in December following. And in
conclusion, I remembered: that from the time of our Consulship, until that of
Caesar and Bibulus, men lived in exceeding peace, and unity; And upon any
occasion we had to speak in Senate, our opinions had that esteem that was
befitting: afterward; at that time when you were Governor of the hither
Spain, the Commonwealth having no Consuls, but Merchants of Provinces, and
servants, and ministers of seditions; fortune would, to give occasion of war,
throw me into the midst of the Camp of discord, and civil contention. In
which danger, the Senate having readily raised it self, and whole Italy, with
the strength of the best men, in my defense and assistance: I will not relate
what happened; because I should complain of many; I will only in brief say,
that I needed no army, but I wanted Commanders; And the fault was in general
of all those, which did not defend me; but particularly of those, which were
tied to defend me. And if they should be reprehended, which were truly
fearful, they which counterfetted fear, are so much more blameworthy.
Certainly, that disposition of my mind was worthy of commendation; when
seeing my Citizens most ready to succor me, and desirous, to show me their
thankfulness; yet because they were without Leaders, I would not put them to
encounter with armed servants. But it sufficed me, only to sh^^, how much
strength should have been by consent of good men gathered, if they had had
occasion of a battle for me, when I was strong, and lusty; seeing they could
afterward, when I was at the weakest, give me succor. Whose minds you did
not only know, when you took pains about me, but also you confirmed and
maintained [them.] And I will never deny; rather, while I breath, I will be
mindful, and report it willingly; that you used the means of some most noble
personages, which were more strong in restoring me, then they were after in
retaining me. In which intention, if they had perseuered; together with my
prosperity, they had regained their own au^horiti^. Because, the good
Citizens, recovering themselves in your Consulship; and being by your example
rouzed from that drowzinesse, that had long oppressed them; especially, having
the protection of Cneius P^mpeius, and of Caesar, who, by his own strength,
was raised by the Senate, to singular and unusual honors, no wicked Citizen
could have ever offended the Commonwealth. But mark, I pray you, how things
have proceeded. That infamous fellow Clodius, which polluted the women's
sacrifices; who gave no more honor to the Goddess B^n^, then to his own
three sisters, was absolved of that fault, for which he ought deservedly to
have suffered. And afterward, Milo, Tribune of the people, and with him many
just men, entreating, that this seditious Citizen might, according to his fact,
be punished; the Judges, against all rights of Justice, did acquit him,
depriving the Commonwealth of so memorable an example, of revenge upon
seditions. And afterward, the very same Judges permitted, that the name of
Enemy, was with bloody letters engraven, in the house, that was not mine,
(because it was no booty of mine, I having only a hand in the building
thereof) but did belong unto the Senate, who paid the charges of it. It is
true, that I ought them that thankfulness, which was due for so great a
ben^fit, as bringing me out of banishm^nt, and giving me my health again. But
I would, that they had not only, as Physicians, had regard unto my health, but
also of my strength, and color; according to the custom of those good
masters, which take care to anoint such as are to make proof of their
actiuity. But as Apelles^ by his curious Art, finished the head of Venus, with
the upper part of her breast, leaving the other part of her body, with a mere
beginning: so may I say that some men about my head, have only labored, and
have left the rest of the body rude, and unperfected. And because those that
envy me, and especially mine enemies, thought, that the blow given me by
banishment, had partly taken away my courage, you could not imagine how much I
have deceived their expectation. Heretofore, of Quintus Metellus, son of
Lucius, who was a stout man, and of a strong heart, and in my judgment, for
greatness, and constancy of mind surpassing all men; they reported, that
they understood, (though I hold it rather to be a thing of their own
forging,) that he being returned from banishment, made alwai^s show of a weak
and dejected mind. How is it credible, that he should be changed by
banishment, having both by especial election accepted it, and with great
courage of mind sustained it, being careless of his return? and how comes
it, that they take not notice, how Metellus in constancy and gravity exceeded
all men; even that Ma^cus S^aurus, who was so famous ^o the world? But their
malice made them believe that of me, which they ^magined, or understood of
him; that is, that I should grow base, or be dejected: though the
Commonwealth gave me greater encouragement, th^n I ever had before, in m^king
k^owne, that it could not be without me. Besides, Metellus, by intercession
of one only Tribune of the people was restored; whereas I^ was by the
Senate, by the Consuls, by all Rome recalled, accompanied with whole I^aly,
at the Convocation assembled for the choosing of Consuls, and by the whole
Country with great concourse of people received. Neither have I afterward
ever done, nor do I any thing at this present, which may offend any man,
though he were the most malicious man in the world, only I do what I can,
that I may not be vvanting to my friends, or strangers; either in doing,
counselling^, or taking any p^ines I am able for them. This custom of mine,
perhaps offends him, that looks after the glory and appearance of this
life; and does not consider, the cares, and heavy troubles with which it is
incombred. But because I was wont, to commend Caesar, they do herein openly
reprehend me, as if I were become a rebel to my own person, and unto the
affection which I have formerly carried to my country. And they consider not,
that I am moved hereunto, not only by the reasons spoken of in the beginning,
but also these last, which I began to manifest. O Lentulu^, you shall not
find that union of good men, which you left us, the which confirmed in our
Consulship, and sometime afterward interrupted, and destroyed, before you
were Consul; was afterward by you entirely restored: and is at this
present abandoned of such, as should have favored it. Which, those chief men
of ours, do not only demonstrate with signs external, from the which they
might with ease have absteined, but have many times in diu^rse fashions
revealed it. So that upon good reason ^u^ry wise Citizen, (of which ^u^ber I
desire to be one, and so to be esteemed) ought wholy ^o change as well his
will, as opinion. Because, the same Plato, (whose authority it pleases me to
follow) would, that a man should take pains in the ^ommon-wealth, till he can
p^rswade his Citizens, to their own benefit. And he adds; that i^ is not
convenient to force ^ither Father, or Country: and he says, that the occasion
of his not meddling in the Commonwealth was, that having found the people of
Athens now at length grown old in madness, or folly, he had no hope to be
able either with reason or force to correct, or reclaim them, the one being
impossible, the other seeming unto him a thing that was not honest. I had not
the like liberty; because I could neither say, that the people of Rome, were
so mad, as Plato once found that of Athens; and because, I having been now
long time conversant in the Commonwealth, it seemed troublesome unto me to
take my self from it. And I thought it a matter of no small consequence, to be
able without blame, to hold mine own estate. Beyond all that has been^
hitherto spoken, I considered the ra^e, or ra^her^d ^^ne courtesy, that Caesar
has used to me, and my bro^her: for which, though C^sar were less fortunate
in the successes of war, yet were I obliged to favor him; so much the rather
therefore should I do it, perceiving him to be in so expedite a course of a
prosperous fortune. And ^e you well assured, that after your self, from whom I
acknowledge my welfare; there is no man, to whom, I should not only confess;
but be glad ^o be so much beholding. Having made this preamble, it is easy ^or
me to make answer to your demand, concerning Vatinius, and Crassus. And I take
great delight, that you are pleased, that I should keep good quarter with
Caesar, and with Appius. Now to come to Vatinius. First of all Pompeius
reconciled me unto himself, as soon as he was made Praetor, I having with
all my power withstood his petition in the Senate, not so much to offend him,
as to defend and prefer Cato. After that, Caesar sought me, with entreaties
of greatest e^ficacie, that I would be his defender. But let me entreat you,
not to be further inquisitiue, why I have commended a man of his condition,
then I shall think fitting: least I requite you with the like, at your
return; though I can also requite you at this present; that you may well
remember what you have written in commendation of any man, even to the outmost
bounds of our dominion. Neither be you therefore grieved, because I also do
now, and will hereafter do the like. Yet I confess, that the spur which put
me on to de^end Vatinius, was that of which I said, while at the bar I defended
him: it appeared unto me, that I did act the Council, which the Parasite gives
to the soldier in the Eun^ch.

If it fall out, that she name Thaedria,
Produce thou straight the name of Pamphila.
If she say, let us send for Phaedria,
To sup with us; say thou, bid Pamphila,
That with her pleasing note may solace you.
If you shall hear her praise the comeliness,
Of him: praise her; and to conclude, do^ thou
Reply, pinch, bite her, with like craftine^^e.
So I, because some noble men, and my benefactors, did love mine enemy more
then be^eemed them, and in my presence oftentimes drew him apart, sometime as
if it had been about earnest busine^se, and did at other times familiarly, and
pleasantly embrace him: and because they had their Publius, I besought the
Judges by special favor, that they would also grant unto me an other Publius:
that I might a little sting them, as they had somewhat pinched me. Neither does
it suffice me to have said it, but often also, with the applause of Gods, and
men, I make the eff^cts appa^ant. You have hitherto understood of Vatinius: now
hearken [to what I shall say] about Crassus. We were then become friends, I
having, (because I would not disturb the Commonwealth,) forgiven all
injuries; when it fortuned, that he undertook the defense of Gabinius, with no
small wonder to every man, having but a while since strongly oppugned him. I
should have cared but little, so that he had defended him with modesty, and
without venom: but having galled me without cause, and with little respect; I
was enforced to ^urne me; and I beginning again to be inflamed with the
disdain of former injuries, (whose sparks were not yet extinguished, as I
believed, but [vvere] only covered,) suffered my self to be transported into
extreme ^^oller. This gave me great reputation amongst the people; and it much
plea^ed some kind of men; I mean such, as I often name, without naming them:
w^o greatly prais^d me, that I was so free in speaking; saying, that they
began then only to bel^eue, that I was returned into my Country that Cicero,
which I was wont to be. But of the other side, they said it pleased them, that
Crassus was mine enemy, and that his fri^nds should never become friends to
me. Wher^upon I, hau^ng understood by men of authority, and credit, of their
malice; and Pom^ius praying me more then ever to be reconciled to Crassus; and
further, Caesar vvriting unto me, that he was ve^^e sorry for this
disagreement: I regarded not only my troubles, but also mine own nature: and
Crassus, to as^ure ^s it were, the people of Rome of our reconciliation, that
very day, that he parted to go unto the government of Syria, desired to sup
with me in the garden o^ Crassipes my son in law. Whereupon I undertook to
defend him, as did befit our acquaintance; and with his great reputati^n ^
de^ended him in the Senate. You have understood upon what grounds I went, and
what business I have defended; and my estate in the government of the
Commonwealth, so far, as concerns me. But believe faithfull^, that I had
done neither more nor less, though I had been at liberty, and free from all
r^spects. Because I should not hold it a wise enterprise to contend against so
great power; nor to thrust at the principalities of such like personages,
though it were not impossible; nor to persevere in one opinion; the course of
things being altered, and good men having changed their minds, excepting only
in religious obedience. Neither shall you ever find, that wise men, and such
as are expert in the affairs of the Commonwealth, praise him, that does
always p^oceed, after one and the self same order. But, as it is wisdom,
to obey the time, or winds in navigations; although you cannot arrive unto the
port; yet being able, by changing of your course, to arrive thither; it were
folly to go forvvard ^he way begun with danger, rather then by changing it,
to land at the place desired: even so, it behoouing us, as I have often said,
to have for object, our own good, together with that of the Common-wealth^ we
should not always hold, one and the self same way; but always walk to one
and the self some end. Wherefore I again reply, that, if I had mine own
liberty, I would not, for it govern me o^herwise then I do at this present.
But being bound by good turns, and by injuries urged, I rather lay my
foundation in this opinion, so to help the commonwealth, that I thereby be
not endangered Neither do I greatly care to manifest my self for such in
every occasion: first, because my brother Quintus, is Caesar's Ambassador:
next, because I have never done any office for Caesar^ no, not of the least
condition, for which he has not manifestly made demonstration, to be
exceedingly bound unto me. And I obtain of him, all those great favors, that
may be desired from a man of his quality. Whence it proceeds, that the malice
of others cannot hurt me: by the which I should have been shrewdly foiled, if
I had not made me a buckler of those which are the most honored, and potent
Citizens: because my wonted guard was not sufficient to defend me. Me think I
am certain, that if you had been present, you would not have counseled me
otherwise. I know debates, or conten^ions, please you not; I know the
temperance, and mildness of your nature; I know, tha^ you entirely love me,
and that you hide within your breast no hur^^ul^ or evil thoughts to any man;
I know you have a great, and a generous spirit; not hid under any veil of
dissimulation, but plain, and full of sincerity. I have ^^ene in your friends
the same deceit, that you might see in mine. It is therefore credible, that the
same reasons should move you also by which ^ was moved. But always when I
shall enjoy you, you shall be the man that shall advise me in mine affairs;
and take charge of mine honor, as you took charge of my safety: and I in
your actions, opinions, and pleasure, and finally in every thing do promise to
help^ you, and be your associate; Neither will I while I live think of any
other thing, then that you may find every day greater content then other, in
having favored me. Whereas you pray me, if I have written any thing since your
departure, that I would send it you: I have written certain Orations, which I
will give to Menocritus: but be not afra^d; for they are so few, that they
will no^ prove tedious unto you. And because I do not alwai^s attend unto
Orations, but some times turn me to more pleasing studies, which, as they did
in the days of my youth; so they do now much delight me: I have written, or
I have endeau^ured to write, a disputation after the manner of Aristotle, or a
Dialogue of the Orator; which matter I have divided into three Books; and I am
half of opinion, that they may be helpful unto your Lentulus: because they
are different from the common precepts, and embrace the whole art of Oratorie,
which was written in times past by Aristotle, and Isocrates. Moreover, I have
written in verse three books of my own troubles, and calamities; and if I had
thought good to have devulged them, I had not deferred so long to send you
them; because they are, and shall be perpetual testimonies of your favors
toward me, and of my thankfulness and affection toward you. But I have not
sent them, for fear: not of those, which would hold themselves offended,
(because of them I have written both little, and slightly,) but of my
benefactors, who being in number infinite, it was impossible I should of every
one make mention. Yet I will send you them howsoever; if I find conu^niencie
of a messenger. And, because you have always exceedingly loved learning; I now
give you all the fruits, which shall grow of those studies, in which I have
been ever most delightfully exercised; and to you I dedicate and consecrate
the future births of mine understanding. It was not needful to remember me,
nor to recommend unto me your affairs: because they are so ne^re unto me, that
I would not be put in mind of them: and I cannot be prayed [to do any thing]
about them without extreme grief unto me. Touching that you write me, that
you could not this summer furnish the want of my brother Quintus, because,
being hindered by sickness you went not into Cilicia: be^ sure, that having made
him to have thi^ possession, he will think, and have an especial occasion to
think, that yo^ have entirely accomplished his business. I beseech you write
often unto me, giving me familiar aduertisemen^ of your affairs; and
signifying always unto me, how our Lentulu^ proceeds in his studies; and how
he does exercis^ himself therein. And be well assured^ that no man ever loved
another man so well, as I love you, and I will strive to make such signs
appear, tha^ not only you, but all men living shall perceive it; yea, and our
posterity. Appius has first reported in many places, and lastly has spoken
it openl^ in the Senate, that, if the law Curias^ ^e produced, he will take
that province; that fortune shall allot him: the law being not produced; he
will deal so with his Colleague, that he shall be contented to let him come
in your place; and that, though it be a custom, that the Consul should go
with the authority given him by the people; it follows not therefore, that he
may not do otherwise: and, that it is sufficient, for him to go with that,
which the Senate has given him by way of the law Cornelia; and would serve
himself of it, till his return to Rome I know not what your friends write
unto you concerning this; I know well, that there are diverse opinions; one,
that having no successor from the people, you may choose whether you will
depart or not: another, that if y^u depart, you may leave one in your place. I
know not so well the law in this point; (though it be a matter of no great
difficulty to know it) as I know that it is expedient for you without any
delay to resign your province to your successor; If it were for nothing else,
but to show an act of magnanimity, and befitting that courtesy, which I know
delights you: Especially considering that you can without suspect of your own
ambition, oppose his. I hold it my part, to tell you what I think; and to
defend what you do^ After I had written these, I received yours, about the
customers of your province. Who cannot in reason complain of you, touching
Justice: but considering that you have always been their furtherance, I would
you had now also been as wary as you could neither to endamage, nor offend
them. For if you had but used them in a little more gentle manner, they would
have been contented. I will not now be slack in defending what you have
decreed: but you know what manner of men these customers are: and you know,
with what fury they were enraged against Quintus Scaeuola. Howsoever, I would
counsel you, that aft^^ the best manner you may, you will seek to appease,
and reconcile them And though it be a thing full of difficulty, yet by your
wisdom it man with facility be effected. Farewell.

Cicero to Lucius Valerius Doctor of Law. Ep. 10.
FOR I have no reason but to giu^ you this ^^^le, especially, seeing
ar^^dacitie may be now a days used i^ place of wisdom; I have written t^ our
Len^ulus, thanking him very dil^gently on your behalf; but now would no longer
have you use our Letters; but that your self should come at length to visit
us: with an intention to live in such places, where other Doctors, and your
equals are; rather then to abide there, where you only may seem wise amongst
the ignorant. Though such as come now from thence tell us, that you are
sometimes so proud, that you disdain to answer; sometimes so outrag^ous, that
you answer injuriously. But now at last I desire your self to be merry with.
Come speedily therefore and go not into your Apulia, that we may rejoice at
your coming home in health: for, if you go thither, I am in great doubt,
that, like Ulysses, you will not be able to call to mind any of your [poore]
alliance. Fa^ewell.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Cicero to Caius Curio. Epist. 1.
THough I am sorry you should sup^ose, me to be negligent in writing: yet it
grieves me not so much to be accused of negligence, as it is pleasing unto
me, that you inuit me to put pen to paper: for in the one I am altogether
blameless, and in the other you show me that affection, which though I have
formerly perceived, yet in the acknowledgement thereof I receive much
contentment. I have ever written, when I had opportunity of sending: and who,
in this kind is more officious then my self? But from you I can swear, that
I have not received above two, or three letters at the most; and very short
ones. Wherefore, if you, as a strict Judge, look too narrowly to the matter, I
will be even with you in the same error: if you be unwilling, that I should
use you thus; you were best to judge discreetly. But let this much suffice
about letters: for I shall find out means enough to give you satisfaction
herein, If I shall know how to please you concerning them. Your absence
troubles, and contents me. It troubles me; because it h^th deprived me of the
fruits of your most pleasing conversation: It contents me; because all things
are fallen out to your glory, and comme^dation: And seeing your ^ortune in all
things comforts me: I cannot choose, but give you, out o^ mine affection
toward you, one brie^e remembrance. There is so great an expectation of your
valor, and understanding; that I have the boldness to entreat you, as much
as may be, to return so disposed, that you may be able to govern, and
maintain it. And because it is impossible, that I should ever ^orget your
deserts: I would that you also should call to mind, that, if, when you were
little, you had not obeyed my most ^aithfull and loving aduertisements, it had
been impossible ^or you to have obt^ined those profits, and honors, which our
country will bestow upon you. In reward whereof, you ought to be content, that
I now at length weary with age; by resting my self upon your love, and youth;
may give some repose unto my latter days. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Curio. Ep. 2.
THE death of your renowned Father, has deprived me of a testimony of great
authority; informed sufficiently of my great love unto yo^^ And, had the
heavens so ^auoured him, that before he dyed, he might have seen^ you, he
had been the happiest man in the world; as well for the memory of his own
virtue, which will live for ever; as because he has left behind him, a son
of such condition. But I will not believe, that our friendship shall have need
of testimonies. God keep you, and increase your patrimony. And be assured I
will hold you as dear, and bear you the same affection, that was borne you by
your own Father. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Curio. Ep. 3.
IT is not Rupa's fault, that the sports are not published, which you would
celebrate in honor of your father: but we have councelled him, that it is
better to expect your return; to the end, that the b^si^esse may rest in your
arbitriment. And about this matter, either I will write hereafter at large,
what my opinion is; or else, least you should think thereon, I will take you at
unawares, and face to face against that reason which moves you I will dispute:
that I may either draw you to that which I think fitting; or at least, I may
leave a memory of mine opinion to your consideration: that, if at any time
(which I would not) you shall repent you of your own counsel, you may call
mine to your remembrance. But I can tell you, that your return mee^es with
such times, as, by those benefits, which nature, industry, and Fortune have
given you; you may more ^asilie obtain the highest dignities of the
Commonwealth; then by pleasing the people with the vanity of such like
spectacles, which are not esteemed; because they are signs of riches: and not
valor; and there is no man, that nowadayes is not therewith glutted, till his
eyes are weary again. But I do otherwise then I did at first make show of. I
said I would not write you mine opinion; yet I am entered upon the particulars
thereof. Wherefore I Will put off all this discourse till your return. I give
you to understand, that great matters are expected from you; and such as should
proceed from one that is exceeding rare for valor, and understanding: For
which you being, as you ought to be, and as I hope, prepared: We, that are your
friends, and all the Citizens, and the Commonwealth, shall be more bound unto
you for this, then for all the sports or shows you can give us. Assure your
self, that to me no man is more dear then you, or more acceptable. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Curio. Ep. 4.
YOu know, there are diverse sorts of letters in vse^ but the chiefest is that
by which the co^ueniencie was brought us of writing, to give notice unto our
friends, far off, about n^edfull matters, to us, or them appertaining. Letters
of this kind I assure me, that you expect not from me. For, of your private
occasions, you have them that gi^es you notice, and those that brings you news
thereof: and in my [affaires] there is no new thing happened. There are yet
found two other kinds of letters, which much please me: one familiar, and
conceited: the other s^uere, and weighty. Of ^hese, I k^ow not, which is least
to my purpose. Should I be m^r^y with you? truly I do not think, there is a
Citizen, that has in these times any ^ill to laugh. And in grave matters,
Cicero cannon write to Curi^; except he d^scourse of the Commonwealth, of
which it is not safe at this time to speak what he thinks. Wherefore not
having other occasion to write, I will end after my wonted manner, and I will
on^ou^age you to pretend ^he height of glory. Because it is necessary you
should encounter that expectation, which has so much obliged you to people;
and against this potent enemy, to fight manfully. W^^ch you shall easily
ouer^ome, b^ing of opinion, that, if you will arrive unto that height, which
you desire, it is necessary you should employ your self about those virtues,
by which men get immortal honor. I would to this purpose write more at large
if I did not faithfully believe, that without my words you were sufficien^ly
inflamed: neither touched I this point to inflame you, but to manifest the
affection, that I bear unto you. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Curio. Ep. 5.
COnsider how the case stands with us, when I dare not so much as write unto
you thereof. And although you are, wheresoever, (as I have heretofore written,)
in the self same danger: yet I am glad, that you are not at Rome: Be it either
because you perceive not that, which we see; or because your commendation is in
a most eminent, and noble situation, in the view of many of our friends, and
Citizens: brought hither not by any obscure, or various relation, but notable,
and immutable. Now know I not, whither I ought to ^eioyce, or fe^re, tha^ there
is an admirable expectation raised of your r^tu^ne: not because I doubt, that
your virtue is not answerable unto men's opinions; but indeed, because I fear
you will find no employment for it, when you are returned; all laudable
customs of our Country are now at length so impaired, and almost
extinguished. But because I know not, whether this also, which I write, be
written with security, I will leave the remainder to be signified unto you by
others. Yet, you eith^r having, or not having any hope of the Commonwealth,
do for your part whatsoever befitteth a valorous Ci^tizen, and such an one as
may hereafter restore the ancient liberty, and accustomed dignity, to your
country afflicted, and oppressed with the miseries of the times, and wicked
behavior. Farewell.

Cicero to Curio. Ep. 6.
THere is yet no news; of your approaching Italy. Nevertheless, because it is
thought it will not be long ere you come. And being known for certain, that
you are already parted from Asia, and are on your way to Rome; the great
importance of the business has forced me, without any delay, to send this
present messenger; which is Sex^us Villius, a familiar friend of my Mil^; I
being exceeding de^irous, that this my letter may come unto your hands with all
expedition. If it were true, Curio, that you had such obligations to me, as you
publicly speak of, which I hold nothing; I would with more respect seek
after you, when I should have occasion to ask any thing of you. Because a
modest man shunneth, as much as is possible, to entreat a favor from him, to
whom he thinks he has done any kindness; lest that, in place of a request,
he should seem to receive as a duty, that which he demands; and to take
it rather for payment, then a benefit. But being more manifest then the light,
that I am exceedingly obliged unto you, through the nouelty of my miseries, and
calamities: and conside^ing that it becomes a gentle spirit, to accept
willingly of a good turn from one, of whom other benefits have been formerly
received; I have been bold to request that of you by this letter, which above
all other things does most import me. Because I never doubted that I should not
be able to sway the weight of your good ^urnes, though they were infinite;
especially, considering that I am not of so weak, or poor a spirit, that I
cannot assure my self ability, to be capable of every favor, how great
soever, and to remunerate the same, and ^o exceed it. I have deliberated with
my self, to recollect what favors I am able, to unite all my forces, and all
my thoughts, to draw Mil^ unto the dignity of Consul: not so much to be
esteemed courteous and loving, in the occasion of such a friend, as to show my
self grat^full, and ready to make acknowledgement, to one that has been so
much my Benefactour. For I believe not, that ever any man living, had so great
care of his own health and substance, as I have of his honor, which I esteem
equal with my life. And I am most assured, that if you will favor him,
^urther means will not be requisite. For we have already all these things; the
stay of those that are honest, which are affectionated to him, by reason that
he being Tribune, labored on my behalf; the favor of the people, ^or the
magnificence of the shows, and because they know him of a f^ee disposition;
the attendance of the young men, and those ^h^t are beloved of the people,
because they see him al^o beloved, and know how diligent he is in the like
occasions. And there is l^st of all the favor, which I afford him: which,
though of it self it be not of that quality, that it can do much, yet,
because it is known to be just, and due, and full of grateful affection,
peradventure for this cause, if not ^or any thing else, it will produce some
fruit. We want st^ll a head, and one that may as it were, moderate these
winds, and gou^rne them: whom if we should choose out of many, we should not
find a b^^t^r ^h^n your self. Wherefore, if you have an opinion, that I am a
thankful, and honest man; as you may believe, seeing me take that pains that
I do, ^or Milo; and to be s^ort, if you hold me worhty of your favors; let
me entreat you to grant this my desire, of your bestowing your favor upon this
my commendation, or, (to speak better) upon my welfare. And of the aforesaid
Milo I promise you, that if it shall please you to embrace him, you shall not
find a friend more courageous, grave, constant, and beneuolous toward you;
besides, my obligation, for the honor, which will redound unto me by this
action, shall be no whit inferior to that, which I have already unto you, ^or
having assisted me in my return from banishment. I know you are not ignorant,
how much I am obliged to Milo, and consequently, how much I ought to help him
in this his demand; I mean, not only when it were need^ull to contend
ciuilly, but to ^ight with weapons. Therefore I will say no more. I recommend
to you this cause, and remit my self unto your love. And assure you, that for
such a courtesy, I shall hold my self in a manner more bound unto you, then I
am to Milo himself, for having restored me into my Country. Because the
content was not so great, that I ^ound of my freedom, which he principally
procured; as the sweetness shall be, which I shall taste in showing him that
thank^ulnesse, which his received good turns merited: and so much I esteem of
your favor, that I doubt not, but by it alone, our suits may fully be
accomplished. Farewell.

Cicero, Vice-Consull; to Caius Curio, Tribune of the people. Ep. 7.
FRi^^ds were not wont to be reprehended, though they slowly rejoice at other
men's good fortunes, so their sl^cknesse proceeded not from negligence. For I
live far off, and news comes hither but slowly. I rejoice then, that you have
obtained the Tribuneship, and I desire, even from my heart, that you may
purchase therein eternal praise. Further, I ex^ort you, that in all things you
cleave to your own wisdom, and be not led by the nose, through other men's
persuasions. No man can better advise you, then your self. You shall never
err, if you stick to your own counsels. I write not this without just cause.
I know to whom I write it. I can judge of your understanding and wisdom.
Questionless, being directed by your own judgment, you will never enter into
any ignoble, or unworthy actions: neither will you ever ^ather any other, then
discreet proceedings. And, being in these hard times of the Commonwealth
possessed of your place (not by chance; but by your discretion: not by
accident, b^t election; and at this time, when the state of public affairs
is in danger) I am certain, you perceive, how far the nature of times, bear
sway in the government thereof, what great variety of affairs there is, how
doubt^ull their ends are, and how easily the humors of men bend, sometimes
this, sometimes that way. Nor make I any question, but you understand, that all
negotiations in this world, are carried with color, and deceit. Open therefore
your eyes, [I say] open them and do as I have directed you: follow your own
course, and only rely on your own counsels. A man should hardly find one,
that can better advise another, then you: who then should better direct your
self? Good God, why am I not at Rome? that I might be an eyewitness of your
honors, and as it were, enjoy a part in them; and be at hand to advise and
counsel you^ Though you have no such need: yet the sincerity and greatness of
my love toward you, would so work, that my faithful instructions might stand
you in some stead. But at another time, I Will write more at large, for within a
few days, I mean to dispatch private messengers, to inform suddenly the
Senate, briefly of the victories, we obtained over our enemies, all the last
summer. By your freeman Thraso, I wrote unto you, how diligent I was about
your Priesthood, and the difficulties I met withal. Dear Curio, by the
unfeigned love we bear one another, I entreat you, that you will suffer me to
spend no longer time, in the government of this Province, of which I now grow
exceeding weary. I spoke unto you hereof, at Rome, no ways supposing, you
should this year have been Tribune. And the same suit I often renewed by
letters: but, then I sought your favor, as a noble Senator, and a young
Gentleman generally beloved. Now I importune it, as from a Tribune of the
people, nay, as from Curio the Tribune. I pray therefore be pleased, to use all
means, not of coming to new consultation, which ordinarily is the more
^edious course, but rather to prevent the same: by requesting, that I may be
tied to those conditions enjoined me, when I took upon me this government;
which are extant in the Senates decree, and by the Laws prescribed. Let me by
all means crave thus much of you. Farewell.

Cicero Vice-consull, to M^rcus Coelius. Ep. 8.
THis is not that which I expected from you: It may be you thought, I requi^ed
you to write unto me of fensing encount^rs, the issues of suites, or of the
thefts of Chr^stus: but I meant no such matter: for these are things, that when
I was in Rome, no man would presume to acquaint me with. What looked I for
then? observe, in what nature I esteem you, (and not without cause, for in all
my days, certainly I have not known a more understanding man then your self
in Commonwealth causes) not that I care so much to have such triuiall matters
imparted to me, nay, nor will I that you should certify me of matters, of
far higher consequence, daily discussed of in the Commonwealth, except they
concerned my self: for, other ma^ters come diue^se ways to mine ^ares, and
fame it self will relate them to me. I expect not therefore from you, either
things past, or present, but r^ther those future, and to come, as from a man
that is clear, and far sighted, that beholding a draught of the Common
wealths model in your letters, I may conceive what the whole structure will
be. But I excuse you for not having sent me it ^itherto, because nothing has
fallen out, that any of us might not forsee as well as you; you might rather
have foreseen, then any of us, and especially my self, who was sundry days
in Pompeies company, and ever in discourses of the Commonwealth, which
neither can nor ought to be expressed in writing. Let me only tell you, that
Pompeius is a famous, and faithful Citizen, and he wants neither courage,
nor prudence, to constitute those ordinances for the preservation of the
Commonwealth, which are fit and expedient: And therefore I would wish you, to
offer him your love: do but observe how cheerfully he accepts of it. For now
at length he holds that those are good, and those bad Citizens, that we were
wont to hold so. I stayed in Athens ten whole days, where our good friend
Gallus Caninius kept me always company. Upon this present, being the sixth of
Iulie, I am to depart. I commend all my businesses, to your special care, but
above all my desire is, that things may so be wrought, that this office of mine
may not be proroged. How you should carry your self herein, I know you need
not my direction; I will remit my self unto your wisdom. Farewell.

Cicero Vice consul to Marcus Coelius Rufus, chosen AEDILE Curule. Epist. 9.
I Am very glad, both for mine own, and for your sake; of the dignity lately
conferred on you, and for that which you attend hereafter. And, though I do
this office slackly, it is not out of negligence, but because I hear not how
matters pass at Rome, the journey being long, and the ways encombred with
thieves, which cuts off the expedition of news. I am glad then, not only for
your present honor, but for those also, that are expected to succeed the same.
And besides my contentment, I find my self deeply bound unto you: neither
can I devise words to express my thanks, because you are come to it by such a
means, that you have given us a subject of that condition, that will ever
minister unto us matter of laughter. So soon as I heard of it, I set before my
imagination the person of that man; (you know whom I mean) and I represented
unto my thoughts, those his youths, of whom he so vainly gloried. I am scarce
able to speak for laughing But, contemplating, ^ou absent, me thought I spoke
thus unto you. I regard not how great a matter you have compassed; nor what
offense you have committed. And in that the business had better issue then I
expected. That saying came to my mind. I am told that, that is impossible. But
presently I became full of all joy. For which being rebuked, as if I had been
half ou^ of my wits, I excused my self thus: Accuse me not good friends,
great pleasure landing:
Obscures my reason and mine understanding.
What should I say more? while I scoff at him, I seem as very a ^oole as
himself. Here I Will make a stop. Another time, when I have more leisure, I
will write more copiously unto you, both of this and many other things that
concern you. Rufus, I must needs love you, because Fortune has made you a
friend, to augment my honor; and curb, not only mine enemies; but even such
also as envy me: that those may be sorry for their bad and dishonest parts;
and these for their apparent follies. Farewell.

Cicero Imp^rator, to Marcus Coelius Rufus Elected Aedile Curule. Ep. 10.
I Cannot be persuaded, that you wrote not to me since your being made,
Aedile, especially being elected with such disgrace to the honest man you wo^
of, and so much joy of your ^riends. But howsoever, since this happy Crea^ion,
that so rejoiced my heart, I never heard one word from you: which makes me
^eare least my letters should miscarry as well as yours, and be intercepted by
the way. I assure you, I never wrote to mine own house but you had a letter:
neither could I do otherwi^e, the wo^ld not affording me a dearer, or greater
friend ^hen your self. Be care^ull t^erefore by whom you send me letters.
Behold Coelius how it fall^ out according to ^our own desire: I shall gain a
Tri^mphant crown without ^oyning ^attaile with the Parthians; of whom ^ou
doubted, knowing that my power was but weak, to encounter so strong ^n enemy.
Conceive therefore; that when I heard of the Part^ians approach and remembered
how w^ake I was in ^ouldiers; I re^ired to places of ad^antage; and so came to
Amanus trusting to the strength of that situation. I had in mine Army, a
company of very good outlandish men. The mountanous people, who never knew me
oth^rwise then by Fam^, came flocking in to see me. For in this country I
many times ouer-heare these words; Is this that Cicero which delivered Rome
from the Treason, of those cons^irators: to whom the Senate, etc. When I
ar^iued at Amanus, which is a mountain that seperates mine, from B^bulu^ his
province, by a ^orrent; C^^sius, to my singular contentme^t, had fought so
victoriously, that he had driven the enemy from the siege of Anti^chia^
Bibulus had taken upon him the Government of his Province; and I, with all my
forces pursued certain rebels of Amanus, who had ^uer been^ enemies unto us.
Many of them were slain, many were by us taken: the r^^i^fled some into one,
some into another quarter. A few strong places there were, which we suddenly
surprising, to^ke, and set one fire. And this victory was of that import, as I
deserved to be ^n^tituled, by the Army, IMPERATOR, according to the mann^r^
And this honor I received before Issus, where Clitarchus told you, that Dariu^
was vanquished by Alexander. Th^^ p^rformed, I marched along with mi^^ Army,
to certain fortifications, which dai^ie ^orraged all Cilicia: and now I am
before an exceeding strong town, called P^ndenissus, which I have bel^aguerd
th^se five and twenty days, with argi^es, vine^, or shelters, and turrets:
and were it [a towne] of note, I might hope thereby to win much honour^ ^or
b^leeue me it is as difficult, and dangerous an enterprise, as could be
vnder^ak^n: If I take it in, (as I make no doubt) the Senate shall forthwith be
aduer^ised thereof. These precedent circumstances I thought good to let you
know, for your further hopes of that ^uccesse, which you desire. But to return
to the Parthians, we have past over this Somm^r, with reasonable event, to our
satisfaction; but it is very doubtful what may hereafter ensue. And therefore
noble Rufus, use your best endeauours to procure me a successor in ^his
charge; or, if this (as you write, and I suppose) be hard to com^passe, let not
my Com^and in any wise be prolonged: for this will readily be granted
Furthermore, I instantly request you, to write unto me of the state, not only
of present, but future affairs: and vouchsafe herein to be very vigilant,
and care^ull. Farewell.

Cicero Imperator, to Coelius Aedile Curule. Ep. 11.
WOuld you ever think I could want words, and not you^s only so elegant, but
even those vulgar [termes] that ordinarily pass betwixt us? yet this want do
I find: for, in that I am much troubled with the fear of what will be
resolved on, about the Provinces; I am exceeding desiro^s ^o return to Rome: I
can forbear the sight of my friends no longer: I am incomparably weary of my
Province: either because I have already purchased such fame, that I need not
so much labor to augment it, as fear, least Fortune diminish it; or in that
thi^ employment, is not propo^tion^ble to my forces, which can, and have
sustained far waightier burdens o^ the Common-weal^h; or else in very deed,
because an hot war is looked ^or, which may be avoided, as I suppose, if I be
suff^red to depart at the time appointed. As for your Panthers, I have spoken
to diverse who t^ke them, that they should by all means get me some: but they
light on so few now, as it is wonderful; and they too, as men commonly say,
complain exceedingly, that all things are secure in my prou^nce besides
themselves, and therefore they resolved to pass over into Cariae.
Notwithstanding, they daily look for some there, and especially from
Patiscus; those that are found shall be all yours; but yet I tell you not how
many. Out of doubt your Aedil^ship gave me hearty contentment, and this
present time renewed the memorial thereof: for I wrote this letter on the
Festival day of the great Mother of the Gods. I pray send me a particular
information, of the whole state of the commonwealth, because I may boldly
build upon the truth of your aduertisements. Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Coelius Aedile Curule. Ep. 12.
THE great rumors, which, (as I heard) fell out in Rome, on the festival days
of the goddess Minerua, by reason of speeches made unto the people; keep my
mind I assure you, in continual trouble, because I could never hear further
of it: and yet that which most grieves me is, that among these sturres, if
there be any thing worthy of laughter, I cannot make my self merry with you:
for I well know, there are many [th^ngs] but I dare not write them. One thing I
dislike, that you would never vouchsafe to certify me, what happened in Rome.
Wherefore upon the receipt of this letter, though the prescribed time of my
Government will be out, yet would I be glad to meet with yours, to be truly
acquainted with the present state of the Commonwealth: to the end, when I
ar^^ue, I may not be a mere stranger. Your friend Diogenes, a very discreet,
and well gou^rn'd man, went from me, with Philo in his company, from Pessinus,
to go seek King Deiotarus, though they know well enough, that he is neither
rich, nor bountiful. Live in Rome, o Rufus, that is, in the eye of the world,
Men in other places become base, and obscure; who in Rome through industry,
might quickly grow famous. Having eu^r known thus much, and from my tend^r
youth believed so, I would I had been constant in this opinion. To tell you
true, I esteem more of a ^riendly walk, and familiar discourse between our
selves, then of whatsoever honor, or profit may accrue from my Province. It Is
questionless, that this government will confer upon me, the respect, and
commendation of in^egritie: and my gains therein had been as much, had I
remained at Rome. Oh, but you will tell me of a Triumph: What more glorious
Triumph is there, then to enjoy the presence of those things that are most
dear unto me, from which I have so long been absent. But I verily hope to see
you ^hortly. On my way let me meet with letters, worthy your self. Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Coelius Aedile Curule. Ep. 13.
THough your letters be rare, (and those peradventure sometimes not faithfully
delivered me) yet do they yield me great contentment. What wisdom might I
perceive in your last? how lovingly and prudently you advise me? and though I
was resolved to take the same course, that you prescribe me, yet when the
opinions of wise men and faithful friends concur with our own, we like our
former determination the better. I love Appius dearly, as I have many times
told you: and he seemed no less to love me, presen^ly after we were
reconciled. For both being Consul, he gave me great respect and honor: and
he conuersed with me most lovingly; and appeared also to ^ffect those studies,
to which I was addicted. And I for my part, have omitted no occasion, wh^rein I
might do him any pleasure: of which I desire no other witness, then your
self; for, Phania's testimony, I think, is of no great authority. And I
love him the better, because he professes so much love toward you^ Besides
this, you know how dear Pompeius is unto me, and that I love B^utus with all
my heart. Why should I not ^^raine my self to favor him? Is he not of a
flourishing age, rich, and powerful? Is h^e not gotten to a high degree of
honor? Has he not a rare wit? Does he not abound in progeny, kindred and
friends? And which is more, is he not my Colleague? Has he not dedicated his
inuention^ unto me? I am transported thus far, to remove from you that
suspicion, which our letters imply of my affection toward him. You must needs
have heard something. But be assured, they are deceived. And though in my
Provincial managings, I take some different courses from his; whereupon some
may suppose, that I do this rather out of a secret hatred, then through
diversity of opinion, yet did I never either say, or do any thing, with a
prejudicial intention to his honor. And this case excepted, which Dolobella's
temerity has exposed me unto, I am ready to become an humble Suitor for him in
any d^nger One part of your letter, where you write that the Ci^y sleeps,
rejoiced me much, conceiving thereby, that, that same friend of ours, was
grown cold. But the last words of your handwriting, peirced my very heart.
What? does Curio defend Caesar? Who, but my self, would believe it? for, as I
live, I thought so. Oh how I desire to laugh with you. Because I had visited
all parts of my Province, and made you a relation thereof, and that I had
enriched: he Cities, and p^rswaded the people to pay the customers, not only
the impositions of these present five years, but the remainder also of those
five that are past: and had ^ound no condition of men, but did think well
thereof; I determined the seu^nth of May, to pass into Cilicia: and after I had
been at the Camp, and h^d taken speedy order, for whatsoever concerned the
Army; to take my journey toward Rome, according as the Senate decreed. I would
feign see you in your Aedile-ship. And I think every day a year, till I be
in Rome, and amongst my friends; but especially with your self. Fa^ewell.

Cicero, Imperator; to Marcus Coelius, Aedile Cur^le. Epist. 14.
THere is great familiarity, between me, and Marcus Fabius, a very honest and a
learned man: And I love him heart^ly, not so much for his wit and learning,
which is great, as for rare modesty I ^ee in him. I recommend unto you his
cause, with the same care and love, as if it were mine own. I know the custom
of you great Lawyers; you receive no Client under an Homicide. But in this man's
case, no excuse can se^ue you. If you wish me well, lay all other business
apart, when Fabius shall need your help I am very desirous to understand, how
matters go at Rome: and above the rest, I would know how you dispose of your
self, it being long since I heard any news at all: but this hard winter is
the cause thereof. Farewell.

Cicero, Imperator; to Marcus Coelius, Aedile Curule. Epist. 15.
I Could have wished no greater prudence, or expedition, then you and Curio
used, in obtaining my suites^ which gives me special satisfaction; both for
their speedy prosecution, and also in that our Competitor, who was angry with
us, has approved in the Senate of those high praises, wherewith C^to honored
me, in relating my actions. Now provide your self to procure me the Tri^mph
also: for I hope to obtain it. I am glad ^ou have a good opinion of Dolobella,
and withal, that you love him. Whereas you say, my Tullia's discretion must
be the best means, to correct some of his defects, I know you speak this,
for that which you once wro^e unto me about him: what ^ould you say now, if
you saw, what I then wrote to Appius: But what should we do? Thus goes the
world. God send me good of this affinity, and that Dolob^lla may prove as good
a ^o^ in law, as we desire, and as I hope he will prove, the rather for the
good instructions you may give him, out of your accustomed good conditions, and
nature. N^w, I am wonderfully perplexed about the Commonwealth. I am a friend
to Curio; I affect Caesar's honor: I could spend my life for Pompeius: yet I
love the Commonwealth above all other^ Labor not you much in this behalf,
for me thinks I perceive you are taking care: in that you would be both a good
Citizen, and a good friend. I have resigned over the government of my Province
to Coelius, my Quaestor. To a child, youl'le say? And I answer, To a Quaestor,
and a brave noble youth: And all have almost don the like; and there was no
man, that for his honor and worth, was more worthy of it. Pontinius departed
long before. My brother Quintus had refused the charge: And say I had also left
it him; evil minds might have reported, that this was no leaving of a charge,
when he but surrenders it to a Brother. And they peradventure would have
added: that the Senates meaning was, the government of Provinces should be
given only to them, that never before had the like office: and that my brother
held the government of Asia, ^or three whole years. In a word, I am rid of all
care: If I had left my brother there: I should have feared every blast of
wind. Neither did I this out of mine own brain, but led by the example of
such men; who being v^ry mighty, yet sought the general amity of the Cassij,
and Antenij. Though for my part, I strove not so much, to win this young man;
as not to o^fend, and make him an enemy; As I should have done in giving this
dignity to any other. You ought to app^oue of this my course, if for naught
else, at least because there is no retiring backward You write very darkly to
me, touching Occila, neither find I any thing in the Records. Your actions are
so spread abroad, that your very marriage is known beyond mount Taurus. If the
E^sterly winds stay me not, I hope out of hand to see you. Farewell.

Cicero Imperator, to Marcus Coelius Aedile. Ep. 16.
YOur l^tters would have brough^ me much grief, but that as w^ll mine own
reason freed me of all cares; as also, my mind being long time plu^ged in
despair, is now become so obdurate, that it entertaineth no new sorrow, yet I
know not what the contents of my former letters might be, through which you
should so censure of things as you write. I complained of the present troubles,
whereat you also grieved: For I never found you so blind in understanding, but
that you could see the same, which I discern. One thing I wonder at, that you
who should know me so well, should ever be induc^d to think, that I am either
so inconsiderate, that when I may sa^le securely, I will bear out into the
m^ine: or so inconstant, that in an instant I should shake off the favor of so
mighty a man, which I have with so long t^auaile obtained: and be an enemy to
my self, by my personal assistance in a civil war, which from the
beginning, and alwai^s I have shunned^ what is then this my pensive resolu^ion?
peradventure to retire me into some solitary place, for you may be sure^ that
not only my mind, to which yours once was answerable, but also mine eyes
cannot endu^e to behold the i^solencies of some vnwo^thy persons. Whereunto is
to be added this troublesome pomp of my Lictors, and this imperial title,
which has b^ene imposed on me. For if this were not, my burden would be fair
more tolerable. I could be content, to withdraw my self, into any obscure, or
s^litary place within Italy; but this my dignity, lai^s me open, no^ to the
eyes only, but to the tongues also of such as are maleuolent: and yet I never
determine to leave Italy without your pr^uit^e. But least I should be
t^oublesome to my friends, I am cons^rained to live at these little Farms I
have upon the Sea coast. And upon this, diverse suspect, that I mind to pass
the Seas, which peradventure would stand with my liking, if I thought to arrive
in some peaceable part. For it besitteth not me to go to war, principally
against one, to whom I have always showed my self a friend: and in his
assistance, to whom I can never be thankful enough. And you cannot but carry
in mind, what I once so freely told you, when you met me at Cumanum. Remember
you not then, how far I was from abandoning Rome? And when some speech grew of
leaving it, did I not protest unto you, that I would rather stand to all
chances, then fo^sake Italy, to enter into a civil war? Has any thing since
fallen out to make me alter my mind? rather all accidents have concurred, to
maintain my former resolution. I swear unto you, and I suppose you do
bele^u^ me; that amidst these miseries I seek nothing else, but that men may
perceive, that as I have always affected peace; so b^ing out of hope to effect
it, I have s^unned civil war with all my power I hope, I shall never repent
my self of this my constancy. For if Qui^tus H^rtensius was wont to boast,
that he never ^ssisted in a civil w^r^^; ^uch more should I be commended for
the same. For in him it was repu^ed but a kind of cowardice; And my former
proceedings remove this imputation. Neither am I dismayed at those dangers,
which your viscerall love, propounds unto me; because there is no kind of
disaster, which seems not to oppress every one in these troublesome times:
from which questionless with mine own particular prejudice, and ^uen with
those which you exhort me to shun, I would most willingly have freed the
Commonwealth. To my son, whom I am glad you so dearly esteem, if the
Commonwealth stand firm, I shall leave a rich patrimony, in leaving him the
memor^all of my name. But if the Common wealth dissolve, no worse can come to
his share, then falls ^o other Cittize^s. Whereas you pray me, to be careful
of my son in law, a worthy young man, and dear unto me, you may well
conjecture, that I am nearly touched on his behalf, considering the ^ntire
love I bear to him, and my daughter Tullia. And I tell you thus much, that
amongst the common miseri^s, the small hope I had, was, that he would ^uoid all
those molestations, which his ou^r-free disposition made him run into.
Enquire I pray you; while he remained in Rome, what days were they, how bitter
to himself, and to me his Father in law how dishonorable? Therefore, I
neither attend the end of the war in Spain; which I am certain will be
such, as you write unto me; nor have I any other stratagem in my head. If the
City ever recover her former state, undoubtedly, there shall be also some
place for us: if it shall no^ recover, I believe that you also will retire to
the same so^itary places, where you hear we are settled. But I dream perhaps;
and all these things may have a better issue, then we expect. For I call to
mind the fears of those, which were old when I was a young man. Who knows,
whithe^ I am not come to be of the same disposition, following the common
defect of my years? God grant, it prove so: but yet I am sure you have heard,
that there is an imbrodered gown a weauing for Oppius. And our friend Cur^ius
will have one twice dyed: but the Dyer makes him d^u^ce attendance. I would
needs put in this clause, that you might perceive, that I can still be merry,
though I be a little moved. I desire, you may see that come to pass of
Dol^bella, which I have told yo^. And make reckoning, that it is your own
case. To conclude, be assured, that I will do nothing without my friends
counsel: but I beseech you, that whereso^uer I shall be, you will defend both
me, and my children in such sort, as best stands with our amity, and you^ own
loyalty. Farewell.

Cicero Imperator, to Caninius Salustius Vice-quaestor. Epist. 17.
YOur officer on the xvii. of Iulie, delivered me your letters at Tarsis:
whereunto I will particularly answer, as you seem to desire. I hear not a
word of any Successor in my place, neither do I think, that any man shall
succeed. There is nothing to the contrary, why I may not depart, at the ^ime
appointed; especially all fear of the Parthian war being taken away. And I
think not to stay in any place, I have an opinion, that I shall go as fa^re
as Rhodes, to see my son; and nephew, But I dare not assure you ^hereof. I
would feign be with all spend in R^me, yet I Will proceed in my voy^ge according
to the intelligence, that I shall receive from thence. And according as I shall
think, that it may turn to the benefit of the Commonwealth Your Successor
cannot come so soon, that you may meet me in Asia. Where you tell me, that
Bibulus grau^ts you an ample ^reedome, from rendering an account of that you
have received; I gr^unt you it were good for you that it were so, bu^ I am not
of opin^on, that the law Iulia will tolerate it: which Bibulu^ observes not
for some peculiar reasons of his owne^ but if you approve of my counc^ll: I
would advise you to observe it. In that you write, I should not di^furnish
Apamea of men; I see that some are of the same opinion, and I am very sorry,
that I have g^u^n occas^on to malignant spirits to pra^tle thereof so
untowardly. Whether the Parthians are returned or no, besides your self, I
know no man makes doubt: and because this news was generally divulged for
certain, I casheered so great a number of choice soldiers; whom, I had placed
in the guarisons of the Cities. It was not ^rue, that I sent you, my Qu^sto^s
accounts; nor, were they yet finished^ I mean to leave a cop^ie of them in
Apamea. Concerning the booty, that came to my hand^ in th^s war, no man laid
hand vpo^'t, nor shall touch one farthing thereon, ^xcept the Quaestors of
Rome, that is, the people of Rome: I am minded to return all the common
treasure, by the Bankers of Laodicea. From whom I will take securi^ie, that it
may be paid in without my danger: Whereas you move me in a matter of ^e^
thousand crowns, I can in no sort furnish you: because one part of the
treasure, amoun^ing of the spo^le, is already in the conueyers hands: and mine
own portion the Quaestor has received. For your d^mand, concerning my opinion
of the Legions, which by the Senates order, are to come into Syria: at first I
doubted, whether they should come or no: but now I assure my self, that they
shall not come, when they shall understand, that there is no danger of war
in Syria. I see well enough, that Marius, successor to Bibulus will ar^iue very
late, because order was set down, that he should bring men along with him. I
have answered one o^ your letters, now I come to another. You entreat me, that
I would write to Bibulus in your behalf, with all importunity possible. To
which I answer, tha^ I am ready herei^ to give you all con^en^ment: but yet I
have some cause to complain of you, that alone, amongst all those which are
about Bibulus, you did not aduer^ise me of the evil opinion, that he conceiu^s
of me without cause. For many have told me, that Antiochia being in great
fear, and much hope being repo^ed in me and my army, he should say, that he
would rather suffer any extremity, then seem to have need of my aid. And,
that you have concealed this from me displeases me not, understanding what
respect a Quaestor should bear ^o a Praetor. And I heard before, what terms
he stood upon wi^h you. Moreover, when he wrote to Thermus touching the
Parthian war, I had not so ^uch as the least word from him concerning it; to
whom he knew well, that the d^ung^r of that war did appertain. Neither did
he ever w^ite unto m^, more ^hen once, to recommend his son unto me when he
s^ood for the Augureship. Wh^reupon I, mo^ed by compassion, and because I ^uer
affected his son, I would not but answer him very courteously: but if he be
of that humor, that he bears an evil mind to every man, which I could never
bel^eue, I ought to care ^he l^sse, t^ough he loves not me neither. But if he
have any particular hatred to my self, my l^tters will stand you in small
st^ad That he ha^es me, I manifestly discern by this, that he has written to
the Senate, how he has used all endeuou^s, that the money might be made ou^r
by exchange, to the peoples advantage; at^^ibu^ing only to himself that
glory, which was no l^sse mine then his own: saying fu^ther, that he was the
man, who sent back the troops of h^rse of Lombardie, to ease the people of
such a charge: which was my action, and none of hi^. He has afterward made me
partaker of a business, which concerns himsel^e only; affirming that the
provision of prouender for the oullandish horse, was demanded by us both. But
what more manifest testimony o^ his malignant, and ^a^e nature can be
required, ^hen^ w^it^ng to A^io^arz^n^s, to whom, the Senate at m^ ^^q^^st, had
given the title o^ King, he styled him not King, but soon ^o King A^i^barzanes
It is not good to commend any one, to men of that condition; because in such a
ca^e they do worse. But, to do you ^ pleasure, I have written to him. About
the d^liuering, or not delivering i^, use your own discretion. Far^well.

Cicero Imperator, to Quintus Thermus Vice praetor. Epist. 18.
I Am very glad, that my endeauours for Rhodon, and other favors that I have
showed to your most grateful self, and yours, have been acceptable. And
persuade your self, that daily, more and more, I affect your honor: the which
by your justice, and clemency, you have indeed, already so amplified, that it
seems not, that any thing more can be added thereunto. But ruminating every
day upon your occasions, I cannot but like well of my coun^ell, that I gave to
Aristo, from the beginning, when he came to find me: it seeming unto me, that
you would draw upon your self too powerful an enm^^ie, i^ this young man, who
is po^ent and migh^i^, should receive such an ini^rie from you. And doubtl^ss^
it might ^e well t^rmed an iniu^ie: beca^s^ ^h^re is no^ any man, whom the
(...) o^ ho^or exceeds hi^. And h^, (le^ us (...) aside his nobility,) in
thi^ r^sp^ct, is sup^riour to your L^gates, (m^n certainly of hon^st
condition, and h^rmlesse persons,) in that he is not only Quaestor, but your
own Quaes^or. I understand sufficiently, that no man's il^ will can prejudice
y^u: but yet I would not therefore, that thre^ Bre^hren of a most noble
family, cou^agious, and eloquent, should be angry with you, especially, upon
some ground. For I see, that they are all three, like to be Tribunes of the
people, one after an other; and who knows the cond^^ion of times, which shall
succeed in the Commonwealth, I for my part, am of opinion, that there will be
troubles. Why therefore, would you expose your self, to ^he displeasure of the
Tribunes? especially, when, witho^t any check, you may prefer the Quaestor
before the Legates: who, if he follow the steps of his predecessors, ^s I hope
and desire; your self shall par^icipa^^ of his commendation: if otherwis^, the
whole infamy will redowne to himself only. Going into Cilicia, I thought
good to write my opinion unto you. I pray God, that whatsoever you do, may
turn to your own contentment. But if you will follow my advise, you shall avoid
these oppositions, and be careful of the quietness of your posterity.
Farewell.

Cicero Imperator, to Caius Coelius, son to Lucius, elected Quaestor. Epist.
19.
WHEN I heard the wished news, of your being elected my Quaestor, I was in
hope, that from thence, so much the greater contentment should redound unto me,
by how much the longer you were like to continue with me in the Province: and
it was very necessary, that to the near tie of amity, by which fortune has
linked us, familiar conversation should also be annexed. Afterward, because
neither your self, nor any other wrote unto me of your coming, I doubted (as
still I do) least I should depart from the Province, before you arrived there:
I since received your letters, written with singular humanity, which were
delivered me, the xxii. of June in Cilicia, where I was with the Army. And in
those, I discovered your courteous, and inge^uous nature: bu^ they do not
express, neither from whence, nor when they were dated, or at what time I
should expect you; neit^er could I know it from the bearer, because you told
him not. Which circumstances being uncertain, I determined notwithstanding, to
send my S^ators, and Lictors, with these pr^sent letters: the which if you
receive timely enough, I should be very glad, that you would out of hand come
unto me into Cilicia: your cos^n Curio (and as you know) my dear friend, and
Caiu^ Virginius your kinsman, and our familiar acquaintance, have written
effectually to me in your recommendation, and questionles, they have wrought
the same effect they worthily did merit, but yet your letters were of greater
^ffect, especially being written, of your new dignity, which unto both of us
will give occasion of a more inward amity. Fortune could not allot me a
Quaestor, more pleasing unto me then your self: and therefore I will do any
thing to advance your honor: that all men may clearly discern, that I have
had a du^ respect both to you^ own, and the dignity o^ your Ancesto^s. But
this I may the better effect, if you come unto me in Cilicia, the which, in my
opinion, greatly imports both me, the Commonwealth, and your self
especially. Farewell.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Cicero to Appius Pulcher Imperator. Epist. 1.
I Know your Freeman Phania, to be so discreet, and have noted him so vigilant,
in observing what is done in the Commonwealth, that if her self could
possibly inform you of her own state, I cannot think she could give you
the^in, better satisfaction then he can give you. wherefo^e he can sufficiently
inform you of all things. And it is a good excuse for my brevity: besides,
for some other respects, it is also more secure. But for my love to you, though
the said Phania can say enough, yet I think it not altogether impertinent,
that my self likewise, assure you thereof. Be therefore most secure, that you
are very dear unto me, both for the estimable parts of your wit, nobility,
and courtesy; as further, because you write, and because I have heard it from
others, that all the good offices I have employed in your behalf, are
acceptable to you. And seeing Fortune, by loosing the knot of our near
familiarity, has d^priu'd us for so long a time, of familiar conversation; I
will labor to restore that which I did loose, by now favoring and assisting
you, as far as I am any ways able^ wherein I shall esteem my self happy,
if I may perceive, that this my affectionate desire, be as acceptable to your
kindred, as I know it is to your self. I never knew your Freeman Cilix before
he brough^ me your letters, which were full of love and courtesy. And he also
ha^h done me herein a wonderful kinden^sse, by relating daily to me, with
singular contentment^ the great love that you bea^^ me, and which in all your
discourses, you demonstrate unto me. that need I say more? In two days he is
grown domestical with me, but for all that, it cannot be that I should not be
very desirous of Phania's return, whom when you send back to Rome, which I
suppose will be shortly: I pray: enioy^e him to use me in any thing wherein I
am able to do you service. I friendly recommend unto you Lucius Valerius, a
Doctor of the Laws, and I recommend him, though he were not in effect a
Doctor: For I will be more wary in writing to you of him, then he uses to
be in adui^ing others. I wish him marvelous well, he is one of the most
inward, and trusty friends that I have. He acknowledges himself greatly
bound unto you, but yet he writes that I shall do him a wonderfu^l favor, by
recommending him unto you; wherein I beseech you, that you will not frustrate
his expectation. Farewell.

C^cero Vice-Consull, to Appius Pul^her Imperator. Epist. 2.
SEeing it has so fortuned, both against my will, and beyond expectation, that
I must nece^sarily repair to the government of this Province. Amongst the
multitude of my molestations, and in my sundry cares and cogitations, I have
found this only comfort, that none could have succeeded you, which stands
be^ter af^ected to you then my self: neither could I wish to have received my
Province from any man, more desirous to resign it me disincombred, and free
from all disturbance. And, if you hope also, that I bea^e the same affection
toward you; undoubtedly you shall never herein be deceived. Out of our inward
love, and by your great humanity, I earnestly entreat you, that, wherein soever
you may (as in many things, it will be in your power) you would be^ very
care^ull of my affairs. The Senate, as ^ou perceive, commits this Prou^nce to
my charge. If you leave it me, as little encombred as you can^ I shall proceed
in the course of my office. You know how far in this yo^ may assist me. I
earnestly entreat you that you will bethink your self of every thing wherein
you may pleasur^ me. I wo^ld use more words about this matter, but that I fear
I should wrong your courtesy; and offend o^ an^ient friendship, which between
us, suffers no superfluous ceremonies: be^ides, there needs not many words in a
matter that speaks sufficiently for i^ self. I promise you assuredly, that If
I understand you have a regard to m^ proceedings, you shall find therein,
ample satisfaction, and contentment. Farewell.

Cicero Vice-consull, to Appius Pulcher Imperator. Ep. 3.
WHen I came to Brundusium, the xxii. of May, Quintus Fabius your Lega^e, came
to seek me: and by your order told me that which not only I, whom it
concerned, but the whole Senate also called to mind; that t^is Prouinc^
required a stronger gu^tiso^. For almost all were of opinion, that my Legions,
and those of Bibulu^ should be made up with Italian soldiers. Whereunto
Sulpicius the Consul, saying, he would not consent, I much complained thereof;
but the Senate so greatly hastened my departure, that I was forced to obey him,
as I did Now I desire, you would carry in mind, what I demanded of you in the
letters, which I delivered at Rome to your posts: which was, that whatsoever
one could effect, for the ease of a domestical and loving friend, in visiting
the Province, you would procure with all affection and diligence, for the
inviolable love I bear you: that every one might plainly discern, that
neither I could ever have succeeded any man, more devoted to me then you, nor
you resign the Province to any, who loved you more dearly then I. By those,
which you wrote unto the Senate, whereof you sent me a copy, I understood,
that you had casheer'd a great number of soldiers: but the above mentioned
Fabius certified me, that you had indeed such a determination, but at his
departure, it was not yet effected. If it be so, you shall do me a singular
kindness, not to weak^n so small an army. And as I suppose, you have received
the decrees enacted by the Senate to this purpose. Such is ^he love I bear
you, that any thing you do, shall give me satisfaction: but yet I am
confident, you will be ready also ^o per^orme that, which accreweth to my
benefit, and commodity. I expec^ed Caius P^ntinius my Legate, at Br^nd^sium,
and I think he will be there, before the first of June, as soon as he comes,
we will take shipping, with the first opportunity. Farewell.

Cicero Vice-consull, to Appius Pulcher Imperator. Ep. 4.
THe fourth of June, being at Brun^usium, I received your letters, wherein you
write, that Lucius Clodius shall impart something to me in your name. I
earnestly looked for him, to hear what he would have delivered, touching your
commission. I hope by many testimonies, you are now sufficiently satisfied, of
the affection I bear toward you, and the special desire I have to serve you:
and yet you shall be^ter understand, when greater occasion shall be given to
show it, how deeply your honor, and dignity is imprinted in my heart. Quintus
Fabius Virgilianus, and Caius Flaccus, son to Lucius, and Marcus Octauius,
son to Cneius, have all three made known unto me, how dearly you value my
amity: which I formerly collected, by many presumptions, especially in that
delectable book of Augurations, written so lovingly, and dedicated to me.
Whatsoever one friend can do for another, I will not leave undone for your
sake; not only because I ever honored you, from the first day you began to
love me: but further, in that I infinitely esteem two persons, of two several
ages, Cnei^s Pompeius your daughters father in law, and Marcus Brutus your
son in law. Moreover, my self having been received into the College of the
Augures, me thought this degree of honor, especially approved by you, with my
great reputation, was as it were a band, to linck us together, in an
indissoluble society. But if Clodius speak with me, I shall have ampler
matter wher^of to write, and I Will do what possible I can, to see you out of
hand. Whereas you write, that you lingered so long in your Province of purpose
to meet me, I must needs confess it gave me great contentment. Farewell.

Cicero Vice-consull, to Appius Pulcher Imperator. Ep. 5.
I Came to Trallis on the xxvii. of July. There Lucius Lucilius presented me
your letters, and related what by word of mouth you did commit unto him. You
could not have sent me a man that was more my friend, neither as I think more
wise and discreet, to inform me of such matters, as I desired to understand.
I have read your letters with great satisfaction, and gave a diligent ear to
Lucilius: Now, you being of opinion also, that ceremonies should not pass
betwixt us, (for, you write: though you have read, with much contentment what
so ^uer by me was mentioned about mutual kind offices, discharged one to
another; yet because I ^etch't my r^lation of them somewhat too far about;
you thought them not altogether so requisite) and because indeed they are
merely supe^fluous, when the amity is such, as has been long tried, and
that there is no further doubt of faithfulness; I will lay them aside:
thanking you only, as I have reason, for the loving diligence, you use, in
reforming the state of the Province, to facilitate my government of the same.
First therefore, I thank you for so courteous an office, then I engage my
faithful promise unto you, that with all endeavor and zeal, I will ever
labor, that first your self, and all your friends, and others a^terwards may
also perceive, wh^t a friend I am unto you. And of thus much, whosoever he be,
that is ignorant, he rather seems, to be discontented at our friendship, then
not to be privy to it. But certainly, it shall apparently be known. For it
shall be made manifest by no obscure, nor ignoble persons; neither in occasions
lightly importing: but let the effects ^ather prove this, then my words. And in
that you write, that going the same way I entend, you fear, you shall not see
me in the Province, I will reveal the whole matter to you. Talking with Phania
your Fr^e-man in Erundusi^^n, I remember I said, I would willingly have entered
into the Province, on that part that stood best with your liking: to which he
^^plied, that you meant to come by Sea, and therefore you would be glad, that I
were arrived at Sida, a maritime part of the Province: I told him I would: and
so had done, but that Lucius Clodius advised me in Corcyra no^ to enter into
this encombrance, because at my arrival, you would be in Laodicea. This was a
far shorter cut, and more commodious; principally in that it gave you better
satisfaction: but afterward you altered your resolution. Now, you shall
understand my disseigne, to the end that you may gather, a^ you may easily, if
there be any way for our meeting. I think to be at Laodicea, on the last of
Iulie: and there will I continue for certain days, for the receipt of some
moneys, which I made over by way of exchange from Rome. Then will I take my
course toward the army; so that in the midst of September, I make account
to be at Iconium. But if I mistake my self in writing, (for I know not what
may happen) whenever I set forwards you shall be advertised of my iournies
from day to day, with all possible expedition, and diligence. I neither dare,
nor willingly will impose upon you any burden, but if it may be with your
conueniencie, it greatly imports us both, that we should meet, before you
leave the Province. If any evil hap, prevent this our interuiew, yet
notwithstanding in the government of this Province, I will have no less care
of your honor, and reputation, then if I had seen you. I will not write unto
you, that you should perform any thing on my behalf, till I be out of hope,
of meeting you. Whereas you write, that you requested Scaeuola, during your
absence, to govern the Province till my arrival; I saw him in Ephesus, and he
kept me company for those three days, that I stayed there, but he spoke not a
word, of your moving him to any such matter. I would he could, for I cannot be
persuaded, that he would not have served you. Farewell.

Cicero Vice-Consull, to Appius Pulcher Imperator. Epist. 6.
WHen I compare that which I have done, with that which has been by you
per^o^med, I am far better satisfied in mine own, then in your proceedings.
Although I desire, that in true love, we may disch^rge our selves recip^ocally.
Phania's fidelity in all your affairs, b^ing well known unto me, and in what
esteem he is with you, in Brundusium I was bold ^o ask of him, by what part
he thought you would have me make entrance into the Province: He answering me,
that I could not please you better, then to go by shipping to Sida. I promised
to do so; though I did it with great discommoditie, and little credit. But
afterward meeting in Corcyra, Lucius Clodius, a man so possessed of your heart,
that talking with him, me thought I spoke with your self, I said to him, that
I meant to take the same course, Phania prescribed me: then he giving me
thanks, for the entire af^ection I showed herein, importun^d me, to go
directly to Laodicea; affirming, that you would reside in the edge, or skirt of
the Province, for your more ready departure: and, but that I was Successor,
whom you so much desired to s^e, you would have been gone before your
Successors coming. Which fitly confronted with the letters, that I rec^iued in
Rome: by which I perceived what have you made to depart. I answered Clodius,
that I was ready to do as he counseled me, and far more willingly, then to
perform my promise unto Phania. So that hereupon changing my determination, I
presen^ly wrote a letter unto you, with mine own hand, which was delivered
timely enough, as your an^were thereunto implies. In doing this, I have, as I
suppose, discharged my part, neither could I show any greater kindness. Now
with this, compare what you have done. You did not only not come thither,
where you might with the soonest have had sight of me. but you removed into
those parts, where I could not possibly arrive, within the term of those
thirty days, which were assigned you, for your departure, as I suppose, by the
law Cornelia. So that it seemed unto them, who were not acquainted with our
mutual affections, that you seek to avoid our meeting; and consequently (to
say no worse) that you were but a cold friend unto me: but on the other side,
they judge, me most loving to you. And in deed, before I came into the Province
I received your letters, in which, though you certified me, of your going to
Tarsus, nevertheless you gave me assured hope of our meeting. Yet some persons
afterward, and as I believe, malicious (for many at this day are possessed with
that vice) having fit matter to talk of, and being no ways acquainted with
the stabilitie of my mind, labored to alienate me from your friendship,
alleging unto me, that you had some interest in Tarsus, that you established,
and performed many things; whereas, you might have considered, that when I was
entered into the Province, it belonged not to you, further to govern it. Which
neither they were ever wont to do, that within a short time expected the
arrival of their Successor. But these men's words never troubled me; rather,
being true, I was beholding to you, for you eased me herein, of a part of my
burden; and I rejoiced, that whereas the employment of my government was to
continue for a whole year, which I thought ouer-long, I was by your means
eased, of a months labor and travail. One thing, (to speak truth)
displeases me, that, of those few soldiers, which remained in the Province,
there wanted no less then three Cohorts, which were more entire then the rest;
and, that I cannot learn how they are disposed of. But above all it grieves
me, that I cannot certainly understand, where to see you: and I def^rd writing,
for no other cause, but by reason, I hourly expected your presence. But
because you wrote nothing to me, I have sent unto you, Antonius, Conductor of
the new Supplies, a valiant man, and one in whom, I pu^ great confidence; that,
if you think good, you may assign to him the charge of the Infan^ery: that I
may attempt some enterprise, while the season of the year serves. Wherein,
both our amity, and your letters, put me in hope that I should not want, your
best directions, neither do I yet despair of those hopes. But questionless,
when, or where I may see you, except you certify me by writing, I cannot so
much as imagine. For that which belongs to me; both good, and bad shall
apparently see, that my mind is as friendly addicted to love you, as possibly
it can be. For yours, you have given ill disposed men some occasion to surmise
the contrary; do but reclaim this error, and I will hold you most dear unto
me. And because you might consider, or cast where we may meet, without the
breach of the Cornelian law; I arrived in my Province on the last of July: I
go into Ci^icia, by way of Cappad^^ia. I removed the Camp from Iconium, the
last of August. Now, for the time when you may most fitly meet with me, you
may take order at your pleasure, casting up the days iournies, and the way;
where it may be effected, and on what day, without any inconvenience to either
of us. Farewell.

Cicero Vice-consull, to Appius Pulcher. Ep. 7.
When I have more time, I^le write more at large; I wrote these in great have,
Brutus servants being to depart for Rome without any stay; so as, I had no time
to write to any body else but to you, and Brutus. The Appian Legates, brought
me, I cannot say a letter, but rather an entire volume, full of unjust
complaints, because by my letters, I hindered their building. In the same
epistle you entreated me, forthwith to give them license to build, before the
winter came upon them: and withal, checking me covertly, you complained that I
prohibited them, to collect the tribute: before my self, made acquainted with
the matter, had given license; you affirming that this was but a kind of
crossing their courses; in that I could not inform me of this matter before
the winter, after my return out of Cilicia^ Now, conceive rightly, whether you
have any cause to complain of me. Diverse parties came crying out, and saying,
They were grievously exacted upon, through the paying of intolerable tributes.
I wrote, that nothing should be done therein, before I had well examined the
matter: can any man say this was injustice? Oh, but you will tell me I could not
be informed thereof before the winter: I grant it: but should I go seek my
informations from them, or they come to me? What you will say, so far off? When
you wrote unto me that I should permit them to build before Winter: supposed you
not that they were to come where I was? though in deed, they committed an
absurdity, worthy of derision. For, they sent me the letters when winter was
almost ^nded, importing a suit, that they might finish their work in the
Summer that was past: but know, howsoever, I am ready to observe your
pleasure; although, they are far more in number, that refuse to pay such
tributes, then those, that are therewith contented. Concerning the Appians this
may suffice. Pausania, Lentulus freeman, and an officer of mine, tells me, that
to him you seemed offended, that I met you not. Did I this, think you, out of
any disesteeme of you, and because I am the proudest man in the world? A man of
yo^rs, came after midnight, and informed me, that you would be at Iconium
before day. When, being two several ways, and not knowing by which you might
have come, I sent Varro, a familiar acquaintance of yours, one way, and Quintus
Lepta, chief of the ingeniers of mine army another: enioyning both of them,
to come post before, that I might go out to mere you: Lepta came running and
told me, how you were gone beyond the army: I came presently to Iconium. How
the matter went afterward you know: why should not I come and meet you? First
being Appius Claudius, then being Appius Imperator. Moreover, it being the
custom of our predecessors? and, which is of greater importance, you being my
friend? especially, I having ever been, more obseruant in such offices, then
ever stood with mine honor and condition. But no more of this. The same
Pausanius told me further; how you complained of me in these words: did Appius
meet Lentulus, did Lentulus the like to Appius, and would not Cicero
vouchsafe, to come and meet Appius? How comes it to pass? that you being a
man, in my judgment, of singular learning, and wisdom, greatly experienced
in worldly affairs; and further, endewed with a pleasing affability; which is
a virtue, as the Stoics deservedly hold opinion; I say, how can it be then,
that you should be carried away with these fopperies, supposing that either
Appius, or Lentulus for their nobility, should be highlier esteemed of me,
then the ornaments of virtue? Though I had not past those honors, which in
vulgar esteem, are glorious, yet could not I admire these your names: I rather
valued those men highly, which left them unto you. But after I was with much
honor, elected to many offices of governments of great quality, wherein I
bare my self so approuedly, that I could not wish greater reputation, or glory
[then was given me]; I never reputed my self your superior; but always your
equal. Nor could I see, that ever Cneius Pompeius, whom I prefer before all
others, or Publius Lentulus, to whom I give place, retained any other opinion.
If you think otherwise, it would not be much amiss, (the better to understand
what Gentilitie or Nobility is) to consider a little, what Athenadorus son to
Sandon, writes thereon. But to return to our first purpose, believe most
assuredly, that I am not only your friend, but your most entire affectionate,
and in all manner of proof, I will contend, to possess you of so much. But if
you seek occasions, that you may seem not to be, so much obliged to labor
as well for me, as I have labored for you, from this time forward I free you of
this trouble. I shall questionless find out other Counselors, or at least
Jove shall be my guide. If also your inclination be such, that you affect to
conte^^; yet shall you not m^ke me, do other then love you after my usual
mann^r: But you shall do well^ if you believe it not, for I little care
whether you do or no. I have written freely to you, of these matters, because
my conscience tells me, that I always discharged the office of a friend; and
relying on the love I bear toward you, the which as it was entertained wi^h a
^^rme deliberation, so will I maintaintaine and hold it till you are weary.
Farewell.

Cicero Vice-consull, to Appius Pulcher. Epist. 8.
THough I perceive so much as your own ^etters did seem to intimate, that you
are like to be at Rome before you shall receive these; and that ^re now the
twatling of these malignant people of the province, is somewhat cooled; yet you
having written so copiously to me touching their sinister relations, I thought
it fit, briefly to answer you. But I will not rip up a new, the two first
heads of your letter, because they comprehend no absolute, nor determinate
points; except this, that in the place where matters are scand, and at some
feasts, it was observed by many external signs, that I am not your friend.
This, is as much as nothing; and being nothing, neither can I conceive what
these words of yours import; sure I am, that this might truly be spoken unto
you; that both on the seat of Justice, and in private places, I have many
times uttered honorable and worthy reports of you, giving manifest testimony,
of our familiar, and domestical Amity. And as for the Legates, could I have
wrought more justly or equally, then to ease poor Cities of a burdensome
charge, without diminishing a whit of your reputation, especially being with
great instance solicited thereunto by the Cities themselves? For I heard
nothing, that these ^mbassies went to Rome in your Honor. When I was in
Apamea, the principalls of diverse Cities came and told me, that the ordina^ie
charge of Embassies were so great, that the cities were not able to defray
them. Then, I cast many things in my mind: First, I could not be persuaded
that you, who are not only wise, but as the report now goes, a noble minded
man, should be delighted in these Embassies: and as I remember once in
Synnadis, upon the public Tribunal I spoke much thereof; alleging in the
first place, how Appius Clodius, without further testimony from the
Myndensians (for that City was then mentioned) was known by the Senate, and by
the people of Ro^e: and moreover, that I had observed at other times, that the
Legates that came to praise any man, never obtained audience of the Senate. And
finally I concluded, that their good enclination liked me well, because they
showed themselves thankful to you, who had been fitt^d them; but that I
thought this course no ways necessary: and if needs they would demonstrate
their good affection, I should have thought well of it, if some one had done it
of his own charge: And have granted it; so that the expense had been
reasonable; but not, if exorbitant. You cannot therefore in any reason, take
this ill at my hands: except, (as you add) that mine edict had been past,
upon purpose, to cross these legations; as some were of opinion. Now, in my
judgment, they bear not themselves so ill, who do such bad offices, as they,
that l^nd an ear unto them. While I was yet in Rome I drew the edict;
afterward, I annexed thereunto but one clause, which I took out of yours: and
this at the importunity of the Tole-masters, who came to Samos to me, for this
purpose; and touching the disburthening of the Cities of their charge, I wrote
that article with special care^ and I annexed thereunto some new conditions,
which gave me good satisfaction; being so beneficial to the Cities, as if I
had herein restored to them their lives. But this point, which occasioned all
the suspicion, that I went about to wrong you; is an ordinary thing, put in
practice by others before my self. And I could not be so foolish to imagine,
that the Ambassadors came to Rome for any private occasion; as being sent, not
to give thanks to a private man, but unto you; not for particular interests,
but public; and in an assembly not private, but general to the world, that
is, in the open Senate. Neither when I interposed this ^y command; that no man
should depart without my license, did I exclude them, which could not come to
me beyond Mount Tauru^, where I was with the Army. And that clause in your
letters well deserves laughter. For, see^ing they might have spoken to me, as I
went betwixt La^dicea, and I^onium; as the Magistrates and Ambassadors of all
those Precincts, and Cities did, Which dwell on this side Taurus; to what
purpose was it, that they should come and speak with me in the camp; or that
they should pass the Mount Ta^rus: except they had not resolved of their
Embassies to Rome, before my being beyond Taurus. Which questionless is not
so. For while I was in Laodicea, Apamea, Synn^dis, Philomel^m, and Ieonium, in
which Cities I stayed, all these Embassies were constituted. And yet you must
conceive thus much, that about the diminu^ion, or absolute taking away of the
charge, for these Legations, I referred my self wholly to their pleasure, that
were of highest authority in the Ci^ies. In that it might justly be feared,
that by reason of unnecessary disbursements, things might have been brought
to that pass, that it had been needful to sell the tributes, and to have
laid an imposition, of so much by the powle, or by the house; which, as you
know, would have been a very hard matter. And I being ca^efull (not only
justice, but compassion moving me thereto) to ease the burdened state of those
affl^cted Cities, and especially oppressed by their own Magistrates, I could
not well be negligent, in the case of so impertinent an expense. When such
tales therefore were told you^ you should not have believed them. But if you
take pleasure to lay your own iealousies upon others, you bring up in
friendship, a certain discourse little beseeming a Gentleman. And if I meant
in any thing, to have blemished your reputation, I would never have been
inquisitiue of ^our son in law Lentulus, of your freeman in Br^ndusi^m, nor of
the chief Engine^ in Coreyra, whither you would have me to come. And, i^ y^u
followed the prescriptions o^ the learnedest men, tha^ have wri^ten exceeding
well of amity, you should not have used these, or the like ^pee^hes. They
argued, I o^^os^d: They ^ff^rmed, I denied. Th^^k^ ^ou that I never heard any
thing t^u^hing yo^? As for example, that when I was to come to L^o^i^ea, you
passed over Mount Taurus. that you gave entertainment in Tarsus, at the very
same time, I gave mine in Ap^mea, Synnadis, and Philomelum. I will add nothing
more, lest I should be thought culpable of the same defect, whereof I accuse
you. Thus much I will freely utter; if these things, which you say, were
related to you by others; be your own dreams, or fictions; you commit a
grievous error: but being true, that they were the reports of others, yet, you
are greatly too blame, to give ear unto them. I will never fail in the office
of a good friend. And if any man think, I have some subtle reach in my
proceedings; whosoever he be, I would he would tell me, what a wonderful
subtilty I should show in this; that I, when I was in Rome, and your self in
your Province, ever defended your reputation, when I could not so much as
dream, I should need your aid in these occurrents; should now, when you are in
Rome, and I in my Province, give you cause, to neglect my credit? But it may
be, you suppose that I have done you injury, in my giving ^are to certain
persons, that dep^au'd, or spoke ill of your Legates, or Cape-Ingeniers, or
Tribunes of the soldiers: wherein, notwithstanding, I never heard, that they
touched your reputation; or that they should speak unworthily of any other,
but the forementioned, of which men, Clodius discoursing with me in Corcyra,
complained greatly, and said, that other men's malignitie, had blemished the
integrity of your name. I never drew any man to speech of such like matters:
but by reason, they a^e many that talk thereof, no ways in my judgment,
wronging therein your honor, I would not be too forward, to put them to
silence. If any one hold opinion, that no man can be really reconciled: he
accuses not us herein, as men perfidious, but rather manifests his own
treachery, discovering that to be in himself, which he imputes to others: and
such an one, has no better conceit of you, then of me: But if the form of
my government distastes any man, thinking it strange, that in the government of
this Proui^ce, I take some courses different from yours: each of us observing
Justice and equity, though you one way, and I another; I do not greatly value
such a man's good opinion. You, as a most noble and bountiful Gentleman, gave
profusely in the Province, if I have proceeded with a more restrained hand, and
that the year following has cut off a part of your former bounties; by reason
of the hardness of the times, no man need wonder hereat: ^or, besides that of
mine own nature, I was ever sparing of another purse, I was much moved (as I
told you) out of the conditions of the time: and therefore little care, to
seem niggardly to those, that complain upon their peculiar interests, so I
be herein good unto my self. Touching the aduertisements you send me,
concerning Roman affairs, I heartily thank you, and the rather, because you
intimate, that you will be careful of those businesses, that I commended to
you; in which, of one above the rest, I request you to be mindful, that the
time of my government be not prolonged; And entreat Hortens^us, our Colleague
and famili^r friend, that if ever he did, or intended to do me a pleasure, he
will not now persevere in his opinion of the government for two years: for
nothing can more molest, or discontent me. Whereas you would know, in what state
I stand: I departed from Tarsus the seventh of October, and the day following I
wrote these, in the County of Mopsuhes^ia, where I was with the Army. If I
atch^ue any thing, you shall be aduertis'd thereof, and I Will never write home,
but you shall be written to. Concerning the Parthians, I take it for a fable.
Those Araebians that came into my Province, in Parthian habit, are gone away,
as it is reported: and there is no fear of any war in Syria. I would
willingly have you write often of your affairs, of mine, and of the whole
state of the Commonwealth, at which I am much troubled; so much the rather, in
that you write our friend Pompeius is to go into Spain. Farewell.

Ci^ero, Imperator; to Appius Pulcher. Epist. 9.
WIth much a do, I have at last read a letter, well beseeming Appius Clodius,
full of humanity, courtesy, and friendly care. Out of question, the very sight
of R^me, has returned you your former sweet proceeding. For when you wrote
unto me on the way, while you were yet in Asia, about the matter of the
Legates, whose coming to Rome I prohibited: and when you complained, that I
hindered the Appian edifications, it gave me no small distaste; and mine own
conscience witnessing, that I had been ever constant in loving you, I returned
an answer half in choler: yet after I read the letters delivered to
Philotimus my Freeman, I perceived, there were many in the Province, which
affected our falling out. But after you came to Rome, or at least, as soon as
you had seen your friends, you understood of them my perpetual love and
affection toward you, manifesting it self, upon all occurrents, while you
stayed in your Province: wherefore imagine, how near my heart those words
went, you wrote unto me^ If any thing fall out for my advancement and dignity,
though it be impossible, yet render me equal kindness. This, you may easily
do; for, what is there in this world, which endeavor will not compass?
Neither can any attempt be so difficult, but a true affection may overcome it.
I ever thought, and so my friends write, that you should obtain a Triumph, but
yet I am exceedingly satisfied in the certainty you give me thereof; and not
because I hope my self as easily to get it; (for this were but an Epicurean
part) but in that your honor and dignity is of it self most dear unto me.
Seeing therefore, you have greater conueniencie of messengers, then any other;
for none would come hither, without giving you notice; when my suit has gotten
that success, which you expect, and I desire, I should be very glad, to be
thereof advertised. If through those long Sessions of the Senate, as our friend
Pompeius was wont to term them, you are delayed a day or two, (for there is no
likelihood it shall be longer,) your dignity will no ways be impeach't by
this deferring. But for the love you bear me, and for that, that you expect
from me. Vouchsafe to cheer me up, with this acceptable information, and
^emember to keep promise with me about the present, which you promised to make
me. For besides, that I am desirous of the Science of Auguration; any gifts of
yours infinitely please me, they being an apparent testimony of the love you
bear me. And because you demand some equal remuneration, I must ruminate well
upon it, that I may make you the like requital: For, if I should not take the
pains in this, that usually I do in my other compositions, which you are wont
to think worthy of admiration. You might have just cause, to repute me not
only negligent, but unthankful. And of these matters enough. Further now, my
desire is, that you bring to effect the offer which you made me; my meaning is,
that you labor by all means possible, to compass me my suites; using therein
your wonted diligence, that the Senate may pleasure me, and out of hand, with
the honourablest demonstrations that may be. You promised it me; see you do
not fail: and do it likewise, for the sake of our ancient am^tie. I doubt, I
have ouer-long deferred my writing thereof to the Senate, and that my letters^
through difficult passage by sea, came in time of the vacations. But herein I
followed your example; and I think I did well, in not writing so suddenly
after my being called Imperator, but after the end of many enterprises, brought
to pass in all this summer. Be therefore careful of this, according to your
promise; and so in all other occasions, vouchsafe to take my affairs, my
self, and all mine, into your friendly protection. Farewell.

Cicero, Imperator; to Appius Pulch^r. Epist. 10.
When I heard of their presumptuous boldness, that molested you, though at
the first hearing I was astonished; because nothing could have happened further
beyond my expectation; yet when I more advisedly considered thereof, I took
heart at grass, putting great hope in your self, but greatest in your
friends. And many reasons persuaded me to think, that this trouble would rather
augment, then extenuate your honor. It vexed me much, that envious men had found
out a means, to deprive you of the glory of your Triumph, which questionless
you should have obtained, conformable to your deserts. Of which loss, if you
make the same reckoning, that I ever esteemed should be made; you shall do
wisely, and triumph at last in the sorrow of your enemies. For I know you to be
so strong in friends, and so prudent, that undoubtedly it will greatly grieve
them, that ever they run into such a leuity. For mine own part, I assure and
promise you, calling all the gods to witness of my heart, that for your
dignity, (for so I will rather term i^, then safety) in this Province, which
you governed, I will have more then ordinary care; entreating for you
affectionately; endeavoring my self no otherwise then if you were my kinsman;
using what authority, and power one may have, that is dear, as I hope to be
unto the Cities, and has the title of Imperator. Command me, and expect at my
hand all [good] offices, for my endeavors shall surmount your imagination.
Quintus Seruilius deluer'd me a brief letter of yours, which notstanding I
thought too long; for your int^eating me, made me take it for an injury. I am
sorry the time is come, wherein you shall have cause to know, what esteem I
make both of you, and of Pompeius, whom I must regard above all others; and
what love I bear to Brutus: Although you should have discerned it by some
other way, as no doubt but you shall. But seeing such an occasion is offered,
if ever I fail in any thing, let me be reputed a dishonorable, and very bad
man. Pontinius whom I know to be much bo^nd unto you, returns you those
offices that he owes you. He was gone to Ephesus, upon business of his own,
of no small importance, but when he heard of this accident of yours, he
presently returned to Laodicea. I knowing that you shall have a number of such
men to favor you; I make no doubt but this present cross will redound to your
greatness. But if you obtain to be Censor, and discharge the Censorship, as
you ought, and can: I plainly discern, that you will not be a perpetual and
firm defense to your self only, but to all your well willers also. Well,
labor what you can, that there may be no prorogation of my office; that when
we have procured you all satisfaction from hence; we may also stand you in some
steed there, if any thing happen wherein I may pleasure, or ^urther you.
Whereas you write of some favors showed you, which my friends also have
wri^ten from thence unto me; it was no news; but yet it infinitely contented
me: not only for your own respect, whose friendship yields me much
satisfaction, and benefit; but also because by this I see, there is some
esteem made in our City of valor and worth: which reward I always
received, in payment of my travel and pains. But me thought it very strange,
this young man should be so rash and headstrong, to incur your enmity,
without all regard of me; whom with singular endeavor, I defended twice in
capital causes: especially you being backed with many qualities, and
assistances, that to himself are wanting, for I Will speak no worse of him: and
these words that slipped from him like a child, and a fool as he was; were
first certified me in writing by my friend Marcus Coelius, and of the same, you
have also written to me at large. Certain^l^e if I had took him for your
enemy, I would rather have sh^ken off mine old, then entered into any new
ami^ie with him. For you shall have no cause to doubt of my affection, which I
have made manifest to eu^rie one, both now here in my Province, and before in
Rome: Nevertheless because in your letters I observe some little jealousy of
me, I am enforced to justify my self with you. For now, it is no time for me
to complain. But tell me now? when prohibited I any embassy from coming to
Rome, in your praise? see you not how I could have done nothing of less
prejudice to you then this, if I had professed open hatred to you? And again, in
case I meant closely to malice you, I could have undertaken no action, would
more have laid me open then this. Were I as persidious, as they that report
this of me, I had not been so palpably foolish, to break out suddenly with
you into so great enmity; especially in a matter, wherein I might well
discover my desire, but that in effect I could no ways offend you. I remember
diverse came and told me, that the rated charge of Embassies, far exceeded the
usual proportion; whom I did not enjoin to any thing, but only said, I
thought it fit, that the charge thereof, should mount no higher then was
determined by the law Cornelia: And in this likewise, I referred my self to
their pleasure; as the accounts of the City can testify: by which it
appears, that the charge was such, as themselves thought good to be at; but,
bad men have striuen to pervert truth with a thousand lies; giving you to
understand, that provisions were not only taken from those Ambassadors, who
were going to Rome, but were redemanded, and caused to be restored by their
Agents, who were already departed, and that this was the cause that many
forbear coming to Rome. I could find in my heart to be very plain with
you, were it not, (as before I told you) that my meaning is, as reason
requires; only to justify my self, and not accuse you; no ways to aggrauate
your mind, which is already sufficiently disturbed. So that I condemn you
not for believing these men's words: but 'Ile not spare to set down some
reasons, why you should not have believed them. And certainly, if you repute me
an honest man, and for a man worthy of opinion or fame in those Sciences,
whereunto from my childhood I have been addicted; if you suppose in me any
generosity of mind: or if you value me of any judgment in matters of weighty
consequence; I cannot perceive, how it should enter into your mind, that I
would practice, (I will not say) any treachery, any decei^, or dissimulation in
our friendship; bu^ so much as the least base, or dishonorable part. But if
you please to delineate me for an hollow, and double-hearted fellow: what is
there more unlikely to be thought of, in a man of such a nature, then to cast
off the love of a person placed in high dignity: or to take away his good
name, in the Province, whose honor blemished by others, I have at R^me
defended: or to show an ill mind, where I have no power to hurt; or to intend
treachery in that place, where it would be discovered to no end nor purpose?
And why should I be so implacable toward you: having understood by my
brother, that you were not my enemy, when without blame you might have been
so? And seeing with reciprocal desire, we incline to concord: what favor
required you of me, during my Consu^lship, that I denied you? when I
accompanied you, on your way, to the Province; what charge left you with me a^
Puteoli, wherein, my care, surmoun^ed not your expectations? and if it be true,
that fallacious, and double hearted men, howsoever, have a regard to their
p^culiar profits: what in conclusion could be more beneficial, and profitable
to me, then joining in love with a noble and honorable person, whose power,
accompanied with such wisdom, and valor; whose progeny, and kindred, might
be unto me, a wonderful ornament, and preualent protection? Neither sought I
your friendship, with any particular end, or aim; but because these your
parts, and endowments, I esteemed them, and loved them, for their own sake.
Moreover, how value I those bands, think you, by which I rejoice, to see we
are linked or joined together? The likeness, or identitie of studies; the
swee^nes of mutual conversation, li^e, and discours^; and that litterature
that is not of many possessed? These things I pass over, as being better
known to our selves, then others. What shall I say of those things, which are
well known to the people? The peace, and agreement we made; in which, being
so generally noted, the leaft halting in the world, would have raised suspicion
of treachery: The college of Angures, in which amongst our predecessors, it
was not only unlawful, to violate amity, but further, no man could be
advanced to that dignity, who professed hatred to any one of the College. But
to leave matters so weighty and important: where find you, that any man held,
could hold, or ought to hold another in that reverence, as I hold Cneius
Pompeius, your daug^ters Father in law. For if deserts be of any worth, I make
account that he has restored to me my Country, my Children, my safety, my
Dignity, and briefel^e, even mine own self: If sweetness of conversation:
who can rem^mber in our City, any friendship more inward then ours? and if
signs of love and courtesy deserve any thing; what project, would he not
commit ^o me? what secret would he no^ communicate? when he was remote from
Rome, whom did he use but my self? what t^arms of honor hat^ h^ not graced
me with? and in conclusion with what patience, with what humanity, did he
once endure me to touch him to the quick, in the defense which I made for
Milo? with what a singular care provided he, that I might not run into any
popular disgrace, protecting me with his Council, Authority, and in a word,
with arms? at which time he showed, that magnanimity, and gravity, as he
would never believe the words, I will not say of a Phrygian, or a Lycaonian, as
you did in the matter of Embassies; but of many great men, who spoke ill unto
him of me. Now his son, being your son in law; and besides the respect of
affinity, I understanding how dear, and acceptable you are to Pompeius: how
ought I think you to be affected toward you? especially he having written
unto me such letters, that if I were as great an enemy to you, as I am a
friend, yet would I be pacified, and suffer my self wholly to be directed,
not only by the will, but by the leaft wink, or beck of so great a
benefactor. But of these matters let this suffice: and I fear I have been
longer then peradventure was requisite. You shall see, what I have partly
performed, and partly set on foot in your behalf; the which I do, and will
undertake, rather for your honor, then for any great danger, or doubt therein.
For I hope ere long to hear, that you are created Censor: which being an
office for a man of great valor and high vnd^rstanding, (let me tell you) it
requ^res other consideration and care then this present imploym^nt. Farewell.

Cicero, Imperator; to Appius Pulcher (as I hope) Censor. Ep. 11.
LYing with the Camp near to the river Pyramus, I ^eceiued at one time two of
your letters, which Quin^us Seruilius sent me from Ta^sus: one was written the
v. of April: the other, which seemed the latt^r, bare no date. I will first
therefore answer to the former. Whereas you write unto me, that you are cle^red
of the imputed crime of Majesty: of which success, though I understood by
le^ters, by messengers, and finally by fame it self, (for nothing could be
more divulged: not that any man thought otherwise, but because all the
occasions of renowned men, are ever spread with a common voice) yet your own
letters multiplied my joy; not only in that they revealed what was past, more
abundantly then others did: but also, by reason, that vnd^rstanding of it by
your self, I had the greater cause (as I thought) to rejoice with you. I have
therefore enter^ain'd you a far off, in thought, and kissed your letters, and,
with my self, I reioyc't, as if the business had been mine own. For, when
the people, the Senate, and the Judges; do favor wit, endeavor, or virtue; me
think^s they favor me also. Which peraduen^ure proceed^ from that sweet
deceit, by which I am nuzzel'd in a belief, that my self also am possessed of
those parts to which al favor, or grace belongs. Neither did I wonder, that
your cause should have so glorious an issue, but that your enemies could carry
^o wicked a mind. And though you are yet to purge your self, de ambitu: this
need not much to trouble you. For, as you ever increased Maiestatem, of the
people of Rome, So you ever shunned ambitum. And what is Maiestas? Nothing
else, undoubtedly (according to Sylla's meaning) but, That no man should be
defamed by any other, without rigorus chastisement: and Ambitus was wont for
the most part to be so apparent, that as well ^e that seeks ^o defend himself
being culpable, offends: as he that accus^th one that is innocent. For
whether one gives, or not, contrary to the laws, how can it possibly be
concealed? and of all the honors you ever emoyed, who ever had the least
suspicion [thereof]? O, what hard fortune had I, that I could not then be
present? I know well enough, what sport I should have made. But touching the
trial de Mai^state, you write two things, which give me singular contentment;
one is, that you were defended by the Commonwealth her self, who, though she
were better stored with good and valiant citizens, should support men of your
quality: but now more especially, because there is such a penury, in every
age and degree, that she being left as a poor forsaken, and desolate widow,
has great reason to embrace such tutors. the other is: because you so highly
extol the fidelity and love, of Pompeius, and Brutus, both my very dear
friends. I am glad, you have two kinsmen so loving and noble: the one neither
has, or ever had in all the world his like; and the other has now a long time
enjoyed the chiefest place among the young men of this City; and shortly also,
as I hope, shall carry it from them, that in years far exceed, and go
before him. Concerning the corrupted witnesses, if Flaccus cause not their
infamy to be publickely proclaimed in their several Cities; when I pass
through Asia, it shall be done. Now, I come to your other Epistles: I have
perus^de the form and draft you sent me, of the present times, and the whole
state of the Commonwealth, and I am much comforted in the prudent discour^e
you make there of. Because I see the daung^r is not so great, as I feared, and
there is better defense, then I in any wise hoped; If it be true you write unto
me, that all the city referres it self to Pompeies direction and government.
And also I conc^iue, how prone your mind is, and enfl^med to the defense of
common liberty. And I was singularly well pleased in your loving care and
vigilancie, that in the depth of your waightiest occasions, you fail not to
mak^ known unto me, the state of the Commonwealth. If I had thought, you had
been in these distractions, I would not have written so earnestly to you,
about the books of the Auguries. Now, I solicit you not to the performance
of your promise herein, reserve them till another time, when both the one, and
the other of us, may be at better leisure. And in their stead send me at this
present, all your Orations complete, as you promised. Tullius who should have
spoken with me in your name, is not yet come to me. And here are now no more of
your friends; but that all mine, are likewise yours. I know not what those
letters be, which, you say, I wrote unto you, in so great choler, I have
written twice unto you, in iustific^tion of my self, about the false reports,
that were d^liuer'd you of me: and in justifying my self, I complain of you,
for giving them credit: and me thought one friend might lawfully vs^ such
expostula^ions with another. Bu^ if you relish them no^, I Will use them no more.
And if the letters I wrote to you, upon such a subject were (as you write)
destitute of eloquence: I tell you they were not mine. For as Arist^rchus
accounted no verse to be Homers, which he approved not of: so, (give me leave a
little to be pleasant,) suppose you nothing to be mine, which is not smooth and
elegant. F^rewell. And if you be Censor, be mindful to look back into the
Censorship of your great Grand-^ather.

Cicero Imperator to Appius Pulcher. Epist. 12.
I Will first congratulate with you, (for so the order of things requires)
afterward I Will return to my self. I am glad therefore of your being cleared
of the action de Ambitu, not so much for your acquitall, whereof no man
doubted; as, in that the better citizen you are, the more valiant man, the
more constant friend, and the greater abundance there is in you of those
parts, that derive from virtue, and endeavor: so much the more was it to be
admired, that in the Articles o^ so m^n^e judges, who are of power to accuse,
without producing the accuser, there was no secret m^lice found ou^, which
durst oppose you^ This was not a proce^ding answerable to these times, to men
of these dai^s, nor to present customs. For my part I have not ob^erued any
thing this many years, that struck me in^o a greater wonder. Now, to come to
that part, which concerns me: Imagine your self ^or a while in my pl^ce, and
accoun^ you are my self If you can easi^y deu^se what to obi^ct unto me, show
me no fa^our, if I kn^w not how to reply. I ^ray God this a^finitie, which my
^riends hau^ made without my priu^tie, procure to me and my daughter Tulli^
that contentment, which, out of your love, I know you wish her. Which, thou^h I
hope it will come to pas^^: yet should I grieve much, that ^his should ^all
out, in time of your molestations, but that your prudence and humanity affords
me comfort Wherefore I know not how to get clear of this bu^inesse: For of the
one side I ought not to disapproue a thing, which you desire to be succesfull;
and ^^t on the other, I cannot tell what still vexes my mind; although I am
persuaded I may be secure, that you understand very well, that all this matter
was brought about by my friends means: to whom, a^ my departu^e I gave
commission, that I having to live so far of, they should not attend my will and
pleasure, but of themselves should do what they thought ^i^, and convenient:
And what if you had bin personally here, you may say? surely I should have
entertained the match, but concerning the time [of consummation] I would have
done nothing without your advise, and counsel. You see, how I sweat with the
pains I daily take, while I strive to defend a matter, which I am bound to
defend, and no^ to offend you. Ease me therefore of this so weighty a burden.
For to my remembrance, I never handled so intricate a matter. And be assured,
that, when I heard the news of this affinity, though, heretofore I had been
slack, in performing any thing that appertained to your honor, I should
suddenly have be^aken my self to the defense thereof, by making you discern;
not any b^tter affection then before, (^or better I could not) yet a more
fervent zeal and ready will to prosequute your occasions. In departing out of
the Province, the whole year of my government being expired, on the third of
August, when we drew near to Sida by Sea, I heard of this thing by my friends
letters. I said presently to Quintus Seruilius, who was with me, and s^em^d not
very glad of these new^s, that I would affect you, more then ever I did. What
should I ^ay more? I will not prot^st that my love is grown greater, but I Will
boldly affirm, that my desire to manifest it unto you, is much augmented. For,
as the regard of our precedent enmity, before urged me, to be ver^e wary how
I gave the least mistrust, of my fained reconciliation unto you; so this new
affinity, excites me to use all my best endeavors, that it may not be thought,
that upon th^s conside^ation, the tender affection I ever bare you, should in
any part be d^m^nis^ed. Farewell.

Cicero Imperator, to Appius Pulcher. Ep. 13.
PResaging, as it were to my self, that in such alike office, I should one d^y
have need of your f^uour; when your goue^nment and proceedings in the Province,
were d^b^^ed in ^he Senate, I maintain^d your honor, with my whole power. Ye^
I must needs say, and that truly, that you have rendered me more, then ever you
received, How many have written to me, tha^ not only with the authority o^
you^ words, and opinion; for which things of themselves, from so great a man, I
ought to have been contented; but ^urther, with your endeavor, and coun^sell,
and with your repairing home to my house, and soliciting al my friends, you
omitted no office of kindness to any particular [in my behalfe]? I esteem
more of these things, then o^ those, for which these endeavors are undertaken.
For the ornaments of virtue, have been obtained by many, without virtue; but
such high fauo^rs, from men o^ that rari^i^, none cert^inely but a virtuous
man, could at any time obtain. So that I propound unto my self no other
reward of our amity, but mere friendship; which in her self comprehends
abundant felicity; especially in those studies, wherein we mu^ually take
l^king. Because I offer my self unto yo^ as an associate in the cause of the
Common-weal^h, of which, our o^inions are not different: and I will daily
converse with you, in the exercise of those virtues, that both the one, and
other of us loves. I would to God fortune had so dispos^d, that your kindness
might have bin as great to my friends, as mine to yours: and yet I despair^ not
ther^of, for a secret for^ knowledge that my mind gives me: but you need not
care for this: the burden is to lie on my shoulders. And I entreat you to
believe, that by this new affinity, my affection toward you is not only not
diminished, but it is increased: though before, it seemed to be perfect. When I
wrote this present letter, I hoped you were Censor, and for this cause, I
contrived the letter, brief, and modest, as letters ought to be, that are
directed to a master of behavior. Farewell.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Cicero to Seruius Sulpitius. Epist. 1.
CAin^ Treba^ius my fam^liar f^iend writes unto me, that you demanded of him
where I was; and that you were sorry that sickness was ^he c^u^e, you could not
come ^o see m^ after my return out of my Province; and that now, if I came
near Rome, you would be glad to confer with me about both our offices. Oh
Seruius, I would to God we could but have spoken together, before the ruins of
the Commonwealth: (for we may now truly say, she is ruined,) out of question
we might have devised some way to ^phold her. For I know that both in, and
after your Consulship, you affected nothing but peace. Foreseeing the evil
that was to ensue. And though I commended your judgment, and was of the same
opinion my self; yet could I never procure the atonement of civil dis^ord^^
For I came late; I was alone; and, as it seemed, but weakly informed of the
cause. And finally, I found my forces unable to alter their stubborn min^es,
that desired war. Now, seeing we are out of hope to assist the Commonwealth,
if we may take some course for the safety of our own lives, not to maintain
any form of our ancient state, but to mourn for the Commonwealth, so far as
any ways may stand with our reputation, I would rather consult with you then
any other person in the world whatsoever. For I know you rich in the treasure
of all learning, and deeply read in all ancient, and modern histories. And
know, that I had formerly written to you, that your going into the Senate, or
rather, into the assembly of Senators, would be to small purpos^, but that I
was afraid to offend him, who (as you may conceive) would have taken it very
ill, that I should di^swade your residence in Rome; when he so instantly
requested me to do as your self did. To whom, when he entreated me, that I
would return into the Senate, I answered: that I would say as you said, about
the peace, or our going into Spain. You see on what terms we stand: our
Empire is divided: war is kindled in every quarter: Rome is abandoned, and
exposed to combustion: the laws, judgment, and finally all good customs are
suppressed. Whereupon, so far I am from hoping after better, that I know not
what I may presume to desire. But if it seem good to your wisdom, that we
consult together, though I resolved to remove further off from Rome, then now I
am, whose very name I cannot hear spoken without extreme grief: yet I will
come nearer hand. I have bidden Trebatius, that, if at any time, you would send
him to speak to me, he refuse not this endeavor: the which I pray do: or
else, you may if you please send some one of your own people, whom you most
t^ust: that it may neither be necessary for you, to come out of Rome, nor for
me to approach it. I am so confident in your understanding, and foolishly
peradventure, rely so much on mine own, tha^ I assure my self, that
whatsoever wit^ (...) opinion, we shall both conclud^ (...), will by all men be
approved. Far^^^^l.

Cicero to Seruius Sulpitius. Epist. 2.
ON the nineteenth of (...): being at Cumanum, I (...) your le^^ters, and after
I had (...) that you wrote, I might perceive (...) discretion Philo^imus
showed: w^o being ^o speak to me in your nam^, about what occurred; he came
not himself but sent the letters: the which you said were but brief,
supposing him to be bearer. Notwithstandin^ when I had read them, your
Pos^^^^mia, and son Seruius (...) me; and determined, that you (...) come to
Cumanum; en^reating (...) write unto you, to that effect. Wh^rea^ you require
me to advise you: (...) more need of council my self, (...) advise another.
And why should (...) sum to council a man of your ^^^^oritie, and wisdom?
If we seek (...) our peculiar offices and duties, we ^ay easily find them
out: but if benefi^ (...) shall hardly find it. But if we (...) men, we ought
to be: that is, if (...) steeme that only profitable, which is just, and
^^^est; we must needs know what (...) ^ould do. In that you write how yo^^
state and condition is like mine o^^; it is most certain in us, both that when
we held the best opinion, we erred alike: for our councels aimed (...)
concord, which being most behoue^ull to Caesar, we likewise thought in
maintaining peace to have favored him; but how we were deceived in our
iudgeme^^^ (...) what it is come unto, you (...) and you do not only know
(...) ^resent, and past, but you forese^ (...) ^^ose to come. It Is an hard case
(...) now put unto, to do one of these two things: either to approve what is
done; or to be present thereat, though you a^proue it not. One of which
courses, in my opinion, is base; (...) other full of danger. To conclude, ^ am
resolved, that we must depa^t; but (...) to be thought of^ after what man(...)
shall order our departure, and whither we shall go. Never was there (...)
condition more miserable, nor (...) more difficul^: because we (...) dispose of
any thing, but that w^ (...) light upon some great contra(...) If you so think
^ood, I would (...) you do thus: that if you have de^ermin'd of any course,
wherein your (...), and mine own do not (...), in any ^i^e take not the
pains to come; but if you desire first, to consult with me, I Will willingly
stay for you^ And I shall be glad, if you can conveniently, that you would come
out of hand, as is likewise the desire of Seruius, and Posthumia. Farewell.

Cicero to Seruius Sulpitius. Epist. 3.
I Daily hear, that you are pensive; and that, for the public s^ipwracke, you
mourn extremely. Whereat though I cannot wonder, but confess, that I
likewise, undergo the same affliction: nevertheless, I both grieve beyond
measure, that you being a man endowed with such singular wise^ome, will not
rather rejoice at your own good, then vex at another man's hurt. And I, though
I grant not, that any man is mo^e grieved at heart, then I am, for the
lamentable overthrow of our Commonwealth: yet now for many reasons I take
comfort, especially in calling to mind, that I never failed to pay unto my
country, whatsoever was due from a good Citizen. For long since, as from an
eminent and high tower, I discer^'d a far off, the ruin that was coming. And
I saw it the better, because you pointed it out unto me. For though I was in my
Province a great part of your Consulship, yet so remote as I was, I knew your
opinion about the preventing this pestiferous war. Besides I was in Rome, at
the beginning of your Consulship, when a discourse falling out, upon all the
civil wars, you admonished the Senate, to take heed, by the calamities that
were past: and to think how much more intolerable those would be, which
oppressed the Country in these time^, seeing they had be^ne so cruel, who
oppressed it heretofore, having thereof no former president or example: In that
men, do vsu^lly think, that they may in all reason do, what they have
example for; nay, and to do wor^e, then their presid^nt allows. Remember
therefore, they are in extreme mise^y, who might have been in happ^e^ ^state,
if they had followed your aut^oritie, and counsel. You will say: What fruit
reap I by this, amidst such darkness, and so great ^uines of the
Commonwealth? Such is my grief, I conf^sse, that it is scarcely capable of
consolat^on: so gr^a^ is the l^s^e of all things, and the desp^ire of their
recovery: yet, you should m^tigate your so^row, ^i^h this comfort; that Caesar
himself and with him al other Citizens are possessed, that there remains no
other light of sanctity, prudence, and repu^ation, but your person. These
reasons, may afford you, wonderful relaxa^ion. Concerning your being far off
from your friends, you ought the easelier to support these troubles; being at
one instant likewise, far removed from many, and grievous molestations: of
which I would write somewhat to you, but that I will not in writing certify
you of things, which, in that you see them not, I judge you less unhappy,
then our selves, that daily behold them. Hitherto me thinks, I have used all
the arguments of cons^lation, that the love I bear you could put into my
mind, to ease the burden of your aggreeuances: other comforts remain within
your own breast, the which I know to be great; yea, greater then any that can
be ^ound: and I have every day, a feeling ther^of in my self, with so great
benefit of mind, that methinkes, I enjoy a safety th^reby. But I well
remember, that you from your infancy, were studioushe addictted to all
lea^ning, and especially, to Philosophy; which in prosperity yeeldes us
profit, and contentment; and now being in adversity, we have no other comf^rt
but it. I will not be arrogant, nor prescribe unto you, who are endued with so
great learning, and so noble a soul, the study of these Arts, which you ever
affect^d from your youngest years. Thus much only I will say unto you, (and I
hope you will commend me for it) that I, seeing how the estimation of my Art is
declined, I mean of eloquence, I have appl^ed all my endeauours to the study
of Philosophy. And because you see, that your Art also, though it be
excellent and singular, is notwithstanding almost as lightly valued, as ours: I
need not labor to put you in mind; that in so boisterouse a storm you retire
your self also in^o the same Port; being persuaded, that alread^e, you are
thither withdrawn: for it is such refuge, that though ^t cannot restore our
public los^e, yet will it be ve^ie available, in razing out the memorial
thereof. Your ^onne S^ruius is a wonderful proficient in all the l^b^r^ll
Arts, and principally in thi^, wherein, as I write, my repose consis^eth. I
wish him so well, that besides your own, no man's love can exceed m^ne toward
him. Wherein he returns me just exchange. For he lou^s, and honors me, with an
opinion, (as may easily be discerned) tha^ herein he performe^h, what your
own heart desires. ^arewell.

Cicero to Seruius Sulpitius. Epist. 4.
I Accept of your excuse, in having written unto me sundry le^^ers of the
same tenor, and in the selfsame words: but I accept it only, in that you
write you did so, by reason through negligence, and vntrustines of messengers,
letters oftentimes miscarried. Touching that part where you excuse your self,
by saying, that through penury of words (for so you term it) yo^ use to write
many letters, in one and the sel^esame form; I cannot in any wise admit of it.
And whereas you say by way of a jest, (for so I take it) that I possess the
treasures of the tongue, certainly I am not ignorant, that of words I am not
very barren, (for why should I d^ssemble) but notwithstanding all this, (and in
this I halt as little) I easily, or readily give place, to the pregnancie,
and el^gancie of your writings. Touching the government of Achaia; I ever liked
of your course, in not refusing such a charge; but after the reading of your
l^st letters, I far more highly approved it. For all the reasons which you
allege are most just, and beseem^ng both your authority, and prudence. (...)
as you are grieved, because ther^ ensued not that contentment of mind, you
looked for, you supposing, that we live not so ill here at Rome: Undoubtedly
you are deceived. But because the commotion, and con^usion of things is such,
and the ruin so great, which this most wicked war has wrought: that every
man deemes himself unhappy wheresoever: therefore you repent you of your own
opinion, and we at home, seem happy men unto you. But clean contrary, we
here judge you, not altogether to be free from molestations; but in respect
of our selves, fortunate, or blessed. And were it but in this, your condition
is far better then ours; for you may securely write the occasions of your
grief, which we cannot do, without danger: not through any vice of the
Conqueror, who cannot possibly be more clement, but in respect of the victory
it self, which in civil wars, is always insolent. In one thing we have
exceeded you, because a little before your self, we saw the grace, which
Caesar did to Marcellus your Colleague, and withal, in that I beheld, how the
matter was carried. For I may truly affirm unto you, that since these
miseries, that is, since that time that men began to strive for the Empire of
Rome by arms, there has passed nothing in the Senate, with the dignity of
the commonwealth. For Eucius Piso making mention of Marcus Marcellus; and
Caius Marc^^^us prostrating him^s^lfe at Caesar's fe^te, humbly entreating him
that he would be pleased, that his Brother might return to Rome; the Sena^ors
rising ^p altogether at the same instant, submissely requested the like of him:
Then Caesar accusing th^^uster^tie of Marcus Marcellus, (^or so he called i^)
and in honorable terms exal^^ng your worth, and wi^edome, on a su^daine
b^yo^d all expectation, he said, that for all this he would not forbear to
comfort the Senate. Be no further inquisi^iue. This seemed unto me ^o glorious
a day, that me thought I saw a form and Image of the Commonwealth raised up
again from death; whereupon all they, who were demanded before my self,
having given thanks to Caesar, besides Vol^^tiu^; who said, if he were in
Marcellus case, he would never return to Rome; when I was sought unto, I
changed my mi^de: For I resolved, not o^t o^ slothfulness, but for me^re
grief, of lost digni^ie, never to speak more in the Senate But this generous
part in Caesar, and so ^riendly an o^fice of the Senate, broke off my
resolution; and in many words I gave thanks ^o Cae^ar, which peradventure may
be a c^use, that I shall no more enjoy that honest repose, that was the only
mitigation of our evils. But yet, I having begun to speak, that I might not
off^nd Caesar; who if I had been altogether silent, might peradventure have
thought, that I held, this Commonwealth no Commonwealth; I will he^eaf^er speak
so seldom, as it shall rather be too little, then too much: and this I Will
do, to satisfy in one, both his will, and mine own studies. For although
from my tender years I was well affected to all liberal Sciences, and
especially to Philosophy: yet this study delights me more ^uery day then
other, ou^ of the maturitie of my years, as I suppose, which inclines to
wisdom; and through the malignitie of these times, which is so violent, that
no other remedy is aua^leable enough, to defend our mind from those
molestations that enuiron it: to which study, you write you could not attend,
by reason of the mult^tude of negotiations: which you may w^ll do, allowing
your self some time in the nigh^'s, now growing somewhat longer. Our Seruius
honors me with great respect: and he breeds my infinite contentment; for
besides his learning, I discern in him singular goodn^sse, conioyn'd with
valor. He often discourses with me, of your affair^s, asking me the question,
whether you must remain still in your Province, or depart. Hitherto my opinion
is, that we dispose of our selves to Caesar's will. If you were at Rome, besides
your friends, you could find nothing wherewith to be delighted; Caesar
himself is the best of all other considerations. But the estate of the
Commonwealth, is such, that you would rather desire to hear of it, then see
it. This I speak against mine own mind; because I desire to see you in R^me
for my consolation: but I speak it, because I prefer your benefit before
mine own contentment. Farewell.

Seruius Sulpitius to Cicero. Epist. 5.
FOr the death of your daughter Tu^lia, I wa^ as truly sorrowful, as behooved
me: but this I reputed a common misfortune; and had I been there, I would have
assisted you with all possible kindness, and with your own eyes, you should
have read my grief. Now, though their estate be pitiful, and lamentable, that
undertake to comfort others; who either being kinsfolks, or near f^iends,
have more need of consolation themselves, being no ways able ^o discharge this
office, without abundant tears, in that they are afflicted with the same care
and grief: yet will I not forbear to set before your eyes those things, which
at ^his present come into my mind: not because I imagine, that you did not
discover them, but in that by the veil of your grief, they are peradventure
concealed from you. What Is the reason, that the death of your daughter should
so afflict you? Remember how Fortune has hitherto to^sed us. She has
deprived us of those goods, which men ought to esteem no less dear, then
their children; our country, our dignities, all honors, and commendable
customs. What greater sorrow could pierce your heart, through the access of
this disaster? or what mind is there, that is not so inured to these things,
that it is ere this time hardened; and that in feeling them, is sorrowful? have
you compassion of her, because she is dead? In deed I suppose, this greeues
you: Though nece^sarily you must, as we al^o oftentimes consider, that they
have been very fortunate, to whom the heavens were so favorable, as depriving
them of life, they brought upon them a death without vexation. And why should
she desire longer life? To what end? Upon what hopes? To marry with some
Gentle^man, with whom she might have lived h^ppily? I believe, that amongst our
young Nobility, you might have made choice of a son in law, co^respondent to
your own dignity: to whose trust, you might ^ecurely have committed your
children. Or, because she might have occasion to rejoice, when she saw her
children in flourishing estate? And such, who, of themselves, might be able to
govern their fathers inheritance? might attain successively to all honors?
might show courtesy in their ^riends occasions? Which of these things was not
taken away, before it was given? Oh, but you will say, The loss of children go^s
near the ^eart. It Is true, it is an ^uill, but to suffer what we suffer, is
far worse. I Will rel^te a thing unto you, which gave me no small consola^ion; to
try, if it can a^ford you as much. Returning out of Asia, and sailing from
Aegina, toward Megara, I cast mine eye round about. B^hinde me lay Aegina,
before M^gar^, on the ^ight h^nd Pirae^us, and on the left Corinthus: which
were somet^mes renowned Cities, but now appear to every man's view, demolished,
and even wi^h the g^ound: And thus I began to con^ider with my self: Do we
then, poor wretched men, so dismay our selves, when any one of us is slain,
or dead; When in one only place, so many bod^es of razed Cit^es are seen
lying on the ground? Wilt not thou, o Seruiu^, ackno^ledge and remember thy
self, to be borne mor^a^l? I^ you think good, propound to your self this
other example: Not long since, at one instant, many honorable men were slain:
The Empire was much impayr'd: All the Pr^uinces were tormented: And do you,
for one si^ly woman's breath expired, pour out so infinite lamentation? Who, if
she were not now dead, within a few years, of nec^ssitie she must dye; being
mortal borne. Alas! banish this passion from your heart, and rather recall
those things to your mind, that are worthy of your person: that she lived as
long time as was requisite; that she lived in the flourishing estate of the
Commonwealth; that she saw her father P^aetor, Consul, and Augure; that she
was married to one of the noblest young men in Rome; that she tas^ed all
contentments, that possibly may be ^nioyed in this world; and at last,
departed this life at the same instant, when the Commonwealth her self
failed. And therefore neither you, nor she, could complain of Fortune.
Besides you must remember, how you are the same Cic^ro, that was wont ^o
persuade, and comfort others. Do not therefore imitate ignorant Physi^ians,
who in other men's maladies, profess they have the Art of Physic, but by no
means can cure themselves: rather have recourse to those remedies, with which
you were wont to cure others misfortunes. There is no grief so great, which
length of ^ime does not make less, and extenuate. It becomes you not to expect
this time, and not to withstand it by your wisdom. And if it be true, that
the soul is immortal: then she questionless, out of the love she bears to
you, and the affection to the r^st of her friends, would no^ have you commit
this error. Deny not this favor therefore to your daughters soul. D^ny it
not your good friends, who sorrow ^or your greefe^ Nor deny it to your Country,
because, if she stood in need of you, she may use your aid and council. And
seeing we are reduced to such a point, that we must also have a respect to
this; take heed, lest others censure, that you lament not so much for your
daughter, as for another man's victory, and the calamities of the
Commonwealth. I am ashamed to write unto you of this more at large, because I
would not seem to be diffident of your wisdom: with this brief record
therefore, I will make an end. We heretofore saw, that you governed prudently
in your happy ^ort^nes; and reaped thereby high commendation. Now, let it
appear upon this accident, that you know how to demean your self also in
disasters, without taking greater grief then is convenient: to the end, that
of all other virtues, this may not only seem wanting in you. As for the
occurrents of these par^s, when I hear of the pacification of your mind, I
will presently give you advertisement. Farewell.

Cicero, to Seruius Sulpitius. Epist. 6.
I Wish, my dear Seruius, as you write, that you had been at Rome, when this
grievous accident befell me. For if your letters have somewhat ^asde my mind,
so much the more do I suppose, that with your presence you might have assisted
me, both in comforting me, and mutually mourning for the cause of my grief.
For first you set me down reasons, that are of force to stay my tears; and
then your self also, as it were for a kind of comfort, have associated your
grief with mine. But yet your S^ruiu^, in all the loving offices, that at such
time could be showed, did manifest both in what esteem himself held me, and
how he thought that you al^o ^ooke well at his hand, this his affection toward
me. Whose love did so comfort me, that I know not what greater contentment I
could have desired; for joy I cannot term it. Neither do your words only
cheer me up, and your fellow feeling, as it were, of my heart grief; but your
authority also turns to my especial consolation. For me thinks I am ashamed,
I should not tolerate my misfortunes, with that fortitude of mind, as you,
being a man of singular wisdom think fit I should do. And yet sometimes I
am so overwhelmed with sorrow, that I can scarcely support it; wanting those
comforts, which others in the like Fortunes failed not of, whose example I
propound unto my self. For both Quintus Maximus, who lost a son, that had
been Consul, and after the same dignity, performed many famous enterpris^s:
and Lucius Paulus, who in seven days, was deprived of two: with our Gallus,
and Marcus Cato, who had ^ne died, that was replenished with prudence and
valor: these lived in those times, that the honors which the Commonwealth
afforded them, were to them a comfort. But no other comfort was left me, then
that which death bereaved me of. I had lost those ornam^^^s, ^hi^h you recount,
and which I with painful endeauours had purchased: my mind was not busied,
neither with my friends occasions, nor the managings of the Commonwealth: I
could not plead any cause, nor could I counsel the Senate: it appeared unto
me, even as in effect it was, that I had lost all the fruits of my labors,
and fortunes. But on the other side, considering that this misfortune happened
not to me alone, but extended it self further to you, and some others also: I
armed my mind with patience, and so much the more readily, because I knew
whither to fly, where to repose me, and where, with sweet and pleasant
discourse, to expel out of my mind, all clouds of duskie and hea^uie
meditations. But now, this grievous wound makes me feel those old scars,
which I took to be healed. Heretofore, though I were deprived of the
Commonwealth, yet I found them at home, which ye^lded me comfort. But now, of
that society, which I so deerly loved, finding my self left alone, me
^hinkes I have lost all those delights, that should have eased my afflictions
about the Common-weal^h. And thus I have lost all, both public and private
comfort: which makes me the rather desire, that you would speedily return: all
the consolations of letters, are nothing, in respect of those, which our
conversation and conference will afford me: and her^of I shortly look to
receive comfort. For I hear, your return is expected. I desire for many
causes, to see you out of hand, and amongst the rest, that we may, before it be
too late, consult, how to pass over this time, wherein, the form of our life
must be framed, according to the will and pleasure of one man: who, though he
be replenished with wisdom and courtesy; and, so far as I can perceive, bears
toward me, rather a good mind, then otherwise; and a singular affection to
you: yet herein we must be circumspect, how we resolve, and that we stir in
nothing, but quietly repose our selves, under the shadow of his gracious
favor. Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Marcellus. Epist. 7.
THough I will not presume to reprehend the courses, which hitherto you have
taken; not because I am likewise of the same opinion: but in that I repute you
so wise, that I will not take upon me to prefer mine own judgment before yours:
yet for our ancient loves sake, and for the infinite good will, you have borne
me, from your childhood, I could not but impart that unto you, which I judge
most profitable for your life, without any prejudice to your honor, or
reputation. I remember full well, you are the man, which in your Consulship
performed wonderful matters: I likewise call to mind, that you never
approved, that a civil war should be made in such form and manner, as it
has been. Neither did you ever like of Pompeyes Army. And you always feared
the perils, which since have happened, as also you cannot forget, that my self
was even of the same opinion. And therefore, as you would be present in the
war, but a small time: so I used all the means I could, to keep from thence,
because there was no fighting with counsel, authority, or cause, which were
things wherein we excelled: but the buckling was by force and hand-blowes,
wherein we were not equal: and therefore we were vanquished; and if not
vanquished, (for it seems, that a just and honest cause can never be overcome)
at least, we were disturbed, and discomfited. Wherein, not only your counsel is
by every man to be commended, in that together with the hope of victory, you
gave over your desire of fighting: giving in this to understand, that every
wise and good Citizen, as he enters into a civil war against his will, so does
he as unwillingly persevere in the same, till it be ended. I see that those,
who followed not your advise, are divided into two sorts: For some of them, did
what they could, to renew the war in Africa: And othersome have cast thems^lues
at the feet of the Conqueror; as also I my self have done. You have kept a
^iddle way; r^puting peradventure of the other two ways, the ^ormer very
imprudent, and the second to be scarce honour^ble. Questionless, most men, yea
all in general, both censure, that you did wisely: and many likewise, extol
therein your magnanimity and fortitude. But it may suffice you, that you have
made your self known for such a man: especially, ^eeing you want nothing else,
for the ^ecouery of your former estate; but a will in your self. For I
understand, there is nothing troubles his mind, that is Lord of all, but only
the doubt he is in, that you will not accept of your restitution at his hands.
In which it boots not, for me to deliver my opinion, considering, what I have
done my self. Notwithstanding, if you were formerly resolved, to live in
perpetual exile, rather then to behold your Countries servitude: yet you
should consider, that wher^soeuer you are, you shall be ever under his power,
whom you fly, who although he were con^ent, that you should live abroad in
any place in liberty, and quie^ly: yet you should do well, to bethink your
self, whether were better, either to live at Rome, and in your own house, or
at Rh^des, or Mitylene But his dominion, whom we so much fear, being extended
so far, that there is no p^rt of the world, which it reaches not unto; had you
not rather continue in your own house, without danger, then abroad, wi^h
peril, in another man's. For my part, were I to lose my life, I had rather lose
it in my Country, then in strange and foreign parts. What I write unto you,
all that love you think the same: who, ^or your famous and noble virtues, a^e
very many. We also stand in doubt of your habitations, which we would not have
sacked in any wise. For, though peradventure, they can take no hurt of long
continuance: (because neither Caesar, who has in his hands the Commonwealth,
nor yet the Commonwealth her self, would permit it.) Nevertheless, I knowing
that in Rome there be Huck^ters, I would not have them outragiously entered, and
pil^^red. And who these are, I durst set down in writing: but that I am
assured, you know them well enough. Your brother, Caius Marcellus, who is vexed
with continual afflictions, with many tears in his eyes, sues for your
re^urne. And I feel no less grief then he: though the offices he undergoes
to help you, are not permitted me to do. I having stood i^ need my self of
another man's help with Caesar, with whom I can do no more, then what the
vanquished, usually obtain from the Conqueror: Nevertheless, I forsake not
Marcellus, either in my councels, or endeauours: your other friends make no use
of me. In all occurrents command me. Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Marcellus. Epist. 8.
I dare not advise you, nor offer you any comfort, knowing, you of your self
to be exceeding wise, and of great valor. For if it be tru^, that you support
those ^errible accidents, which have happened, with such constancy as I hear;
I should rather rejoice in your fortitude, then mitigate your sorrow. If also
the sinister events of the Commonwealth excruciate you: I dare not presume to
have so copious a wit, as to think I can comfort you; not being able in that
kind to help my self. In other offices be assured, that I will never fail,
whenever your friends request me; to whom I will in all occasions, give to
understand, that I am bound to do for you, not only whatso^uer I can do, but
what I cannot do also. This I would request you to accept from me, either as a
remembrance, or an opinion; or else, that you would believe, that my affection
toward you urged me to speak it: which is, to enter into this cogitation,
that my self has done; that if there be any form of a Commonwealth, you
must live therein; and though you be, both in every man's judgment, and in
effect an honorable Citizen; yet the quality of the times must bear greater
sway: then your peculi^r will: nay, though no form of a Commonwealth should
remain, yet you may think Rome, a place fit enough for your exile. For if we
affect liberty, what part is no^ subject to this dominion? if like wise you
care no more to live in one place, then another; what sweeter residence is
there then a man's own country? But I assure you, that Caesar cherishes all
good wits; and embraces noble, and estimable men, so far as may stand with
the state, and dignity which he holds: but I go ^ur^her, then I thought to
have done. Again I say, I will join my whole endeavor, with that of your best
friends, if they be your friends: if not, I for mine own part, in all
opportunities, will satisfy whatsoever is due, to the ancient amity has
been between us. Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Marcellus. Epist. 9.
THough I wrote unto you at large before, by Quintus Mutius, and explained my
opinion to you; yet Theophilus your Freeman going thither, whose fidelity and
true love ^owards you, is well known unto me, I would not let him pass,
without my letters: Once again therefore I persuade you, to return into your
country, in what state so ever it stand. You may well see many things which
you would not; but not more, then what every day comes to your ears: and
think not, but there may come as much offense unto you, by the ear, as by the
eye: rather, that which we hear, seems oftentimes far greater then it is in
effect. Oh, but you^l tell me that sometimes you must needs say, and do that,
which willingly you would not. First; to yield unto the times, that is, to obey
necessity, has ever been reputed singula^ wisdom: Then; so far as I can
see, this your argument is not true^ For, remaining in Rome, peradventure it is
not lawful for you, to speak what you think: but you may lawfully conceal
it. There is only one at this present, which gouern^s; who is not advised by
his friends, but follows his own counsels: and the like would Pompeius have
done, if Fortune had permitted him to seruiue Conqueror. Shall we believe,
that after victory, he would have made any reckoning of us; when, during the
uncertainties of the war, when he saw, all men, run one and the self same
fortune, he only made use of the directions of some shallow fellows? And ^f
when, you were Consul, he would not follow, your prudent instructions, neither
would be directed after our prescriptions, in the year of your brothers
Consulship: suppose you, if he had be^ne once possessed of the whole common
wealth, that he would ever have lent so much as an ear, to our admonitions?
Civil wars are full of all miseries; which our predecessors never saw; and
[yet] this present age, by reiterated experience ha^h felt them. But there is
nothing more lamentable, then victory itself: the which, though it for^une to
the best qual^fied men, yet it makes them more ^ierce, and vnbrid^ed: so as,
though they be not such by nature, yet necessity constraines them so to be. In
that the victor must grant many things, contrary to his own mind, to those
by whose means, he vanqui^hed. Did you not perceive as well as I, how cruel
likewise Po^peius victory must needs have been? If therefor he had subdued,
would you in this case have forsaken your country, because you would not
behold some things displeasing to your mind? If you say, you meant to live at
Rome, because you would have enjoyed your substance, and retained your
dignity: I will answer, that out of your virtue, you ought to have contemned
your own respects, and to have no other object, but the Commonwealth.
Withal, what will the effect of your opinion be? For hitherto, your resolution
is not only commended; but considering the matter, your good Fortune also:
your resolution; because necessity drove you to a civil war, and your
wisdom retired you from the issue of it: your Fortune; by reason that in an
honorable vacancie, you prese^u'd the quality, and fame of your place, and
dignity. But now, no place ought to be dearer to you, then your country;
neither should you love her the worse, for her d^formitie, nor deprive her of
your comfortable presence, seeing she is become the widow of so many, so
great personages. Finally, if you ^aue made known the greatness of your
mind, in not humbling your self to the Conqueror; take heed you be not
censured proud, in refusing his courtesy. And if we repute him wise, that
flies far off, from his countries oppression; sometimes it is likewise
esteemed but wilfulness, not to affect it: and if we are denied to enjoy
public fortunes, yet let us make much of that, we are permitted to enjoy
privately. To conclude, I say, that if you think that you live there more
commodiously: yet ought you to consider, that you rest not peradventure in any
great security. The liberty of Arms is vnlimitable: but in other countries,
there is also le^se respect of doing injury. I so desire your safety, that
your brother Marce^^us, little, or nothing at all surmounts me. Have a respect,
as is convenient, to the quality of the times, to your wisdom, to your life,
and to your substance. Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Marcellus. Epist. 10.
THough I had no news whereof to write, and every day expected your letters,
or rather indeed your self: yet was I not willing Theophilus should come to
you, (...) l^tters. Determine therefore to come so soon, as you can; and make
account, you shall come long looked for; not only by us, that is, by your
friends, but of all men in general. Sometimes I muse with my self, that you
delight as much as you can, to prolong your coming: questio^les I should have
held you excused, i^ you had no other sense, but that o^ your eyes. But things
heard, making as deep an impression, as those that are seene^ and being my
opinion, that yo^ ought without all delay to repair to Rome; I thought good by
this, to instigate you thereunto. And s^eing I have made known my mind unto
you, it remains for you to resolve in such a sort, as best stands with your
wisdom. Yet I would desire you to write unto me, at what time we are to expect
you. Farewell.

Marcus Marcellus to Cicero. Epist. 11.
HOW far your commands pre^aile with me, you might ever understand, but in
this present occurrent more then at any other time. For though Caius Marcellus
my most kind brother, not only exhorted me, but humbly entreated me, that I
would be pleased to return to Rome: yet could he never pe^swade me, nor
work that effect, which, since that, your letters have done; by which I
perceive how the matter went. Your office of congratulation with me, springing
from a most sincere affection, is to me very acceptable: and it yields me the
greater contentment, because amongst so few friends and kinsmen, which
seriously employed themselves for my safety, I particularly discover your
desire, and the singular affection you bear me. At the first I little regarded
my returning into that country, where men ruled more then laws: but now I am
persuaded, that from such men, or such friends, as you are, no man can live
far distant, either^ in adverse, or favorable fortunes; wherefore this makes
me rejoice in my self, and I remain so much oblieg'd unto you, that I will
devise by all means to make you know, that you have been beneficial to one,
who in his love unto you, is no whit inferior to the best of your
acquaintance. Farewell.

Ser^ius Sulpitius to Ci^ero. Epist. 12.
THough I know well, that I shall inform you of lamentable, and fearful
news, nevertheless because fortune and nature exceedes all men's discourse:
whatsoever it is, I think good not to conceal it: On the xxviij. of May,
coming by ship from Epidaurus, to Pirae^um, I there found Marcus Marcellus our
Colleague, and I spent all that day with him. The day following, when I
departed from him, with intention to go into Boeotia, and to visit the rest
of my Province; he, as he told me, was to sail toward Italy, by the way of
the Malleae. The day after I being to leave Athens, about ten a clock at
night, Pos^umius his ^amiliar friend, came, and told me, that after supper
Publiu^ Magius C^ilo, one of Marcellus his domestical friends, had stabbed him
with a poinyard, and given him two wounds, one in the stomach, another in the
head, close under one of his ^ares; but that yet there was hope, that he might
escape it: and that Magius after so wicked a fact, slew himself: and Marcel^us
sent him to relate unto me the accident, and ^ntreat me, that I would assemble
some Physicians: the which I presently did; and about break of day went without
all delaie, toward his lodging: when, not far from Pir^^um I met a boy that
belonged to Acidinus, who delivered me a letter, which inferred, that a little
before day Marce^^us left this life. Thus, a noble gentleman, renowned for
great valor, by a base fellow, and of meanest condition, was lamentably
murdered: and, having for his honor, and dignity been pardoned by his enemies,
he met with a [pretended] Friend, that butchered him. I would not stay till I
came to his lodging, where I found none but two ^ree-men, and some few
servants; for the rest, they said, were fled distracted, because their Master
was slain, before his own lodging. I was enforced to carry him, into the
City in my litter, and there I prepared for him as solemn a funeral, as in
Athens I could. The Athenians would not grant me a place within the City where
to bury him: For they excused themselves that they were prohibited by their
religion, neither had they granted the like to any before; but they were
content he should be buried, in any public School we best liked. And we of
many made choice of the most noble; which was the school of the Acad^mie:
where burying his body, we ordained, that the Athenians, should erect in his
memorial, a marble sepu^cher. You see then, how both before and after his
death, I did him those offices, whereunto I was tied, both in respect of inward
amity, and by reason I had been his Colleague in the Consulship. Farewell.
From Athens, this last of May.

Cicero to Publius Nigidius Figulus. Epist. 13.
THE reason why I have not written to you of long time, is first because I had
no certain subject whereof to write; and secondly, because I could not use
those kind of letters, which are ordinary. For Fortune has so taken from us
all kind of cheerful argument; that we cannot only not write, but not so
much as think of any joyful matters. There remains a kind of writing,
that is miserable and lamentable, and com^ormable to these times: this I want
also. For when I should offer you assistance, and comfort, I am able to offer
you none For my self overwhelmed by the same storms, am driven to rely on
others. And I lament more often, that I live in this manner, then I joy tha^ I
live: for though I have not particularly received any notorious injury by
Fortune: and Caesar, without attending my supplication, has conferred upon
me, many real favors: yet have I inwardly such coffeehouse, that me
thinks I si^ne gri^uously in remaining alive. For many of my familiar friends
are by death taken away, and diverse for fear of the victor, are fled into
sundry countries. And, of all those friends, which joined with me, and you, in
defense of the Commonwealth, I have not one that suruiueth: and I am enforst
to behold the ruin and rapine of their goods: neither do I only hear, but to
my extreme heart grief I see, their substance ill disposed of, by whose aid
we heretofore extinguished the flames of the Commonwealth. And where we had
before, favors, authority, and great glory; now we ^inde no such matter:
true it is, that we enjoy the grace and favor of Caesar himself: but that
can not prevail, above the violent mutation of all things, and of the times.
Being therefore de^titute of whatsoever I was accustomed unto by nature,
enclination, and use; I am distasteful not only to others, as I understand,
but to my self also. For being borne, to have always somewhat a foot,
beseeming a man; now, I want not only the means of employment, but even to
ruminate, how I might help any one: And whereas before, I was able to pleasure
persons ignoble, yea, and the guilty; now, to Publius Nigidius my dear
friend, who heretofore was so highly honored, and who excells all men, both for
learning, and piety; I cannot so much as offer my assistance. It therefore
re^aines, that I labor to comfort you, and remo^e from you with lively
reasons, that grief which oppresses your mind. But if any man be of true
force to comfort, either you or any other, it is your self: whereupon, I will
not touch that point, which contains in it learned, and exquisite reasons; But
I will leave it absolutely to your self. Observe you, that, which is requisite
for a valiant, and wise man, exacted at your hands by your gravity, height of
spirit, life past, the studies, and Sciences, which you ever prosecuted with
singular commendation. I Will deliver unto you, what I can know, remaining in
Rome, and thereunto bending my mind, as I do. I therefore affirm unto you,
that you shall not long dwell in these molestations, wherein at this present
you are inuolued; but in those which also oppress us, I fear, you will ever
continue. First of all I conceive, that he which bears all the sway, has a
very good opinion of you. This I write not without good ground. The less
familiar I am with him, the more diligently I diue into his disposition. And
therefore be secure, that he delays your restitution for no other reason, but
because he would have so much the iuster occasion, to deny their suits with
whom he is displeased. Besides, all his friends, I mean those in greatest
opinion with him, stand greatly affected to your virtues, whereunto may be
added the peoples favor unto you, yea, and of all Rome besides. And moreover
the Commonwealth, which, to tell truth; at this instant, is but weak, (but of
necessity it must recover it former ability) with the same strength it shall
have, will constrain her governors, to restore you to your country. I said
in the beginning, that I could not offer you my endeavor, and yet now I Will
presume to offer you it: for I will seek by all ceremonial observance, to
gain, and bind unto me Caesar's friends, who love me well, and spend much time
with me; and by all artificial means, I will study to insinuate my self
into Caesar's amity; which hitherto has been denied me, through my over
respective nature. In conclusion, take my faithful promise, that I will leave
no ways unattempted, by which I may think to compass our ends: And in this
I Will do much more, then I dare to write. In all other occurrents command me,
for you shall see me exceed the love of all your other friends and kindred. I
have nothing in the world, which you may not esteem as well yours as mine
own; But of this I Will dilate no further, being desirous that you should hope
rather to help your self with your own; as I hope you shall. Nothing
remains, but to exhort, and entreat you, that you would arm your mind
against Fortune: and remember not only those things which you have learned of
other great men, but also those which have proceeded from your own study, and
understanding. Which doing, you shall rely on good hopes: and with fortitude
overcome any adverse accident. But who is better acquainted with these reasons,
then your self? I will enterprise any thing, whereby I may yield you
assistance: and I will pr^serue in memory the good: which you wrought for me
in the unfortunate time of my banishment. Farewell.

Cicero, to Cneius Plancius. Epist. 14.
I Received from you two letters, delivered in Corcyra: in one of which you did
c^ngratulate with me, for having understood, that I still retained my ^ormer
dignity. In the other you wished me happy success of the new marriage. And
I affirm unto you, that I hold my dignity; if it may be called dignity for a
man ^o c^rrie that mind toward the Commonwealth, which all honest men ought:
but if dignity consist, in effecting your upright counsels and ends; or at
least in defending ^reely your opinions; there is not so much as the least
appearance of dignity; and it is no sm^ll matter, if we may govern our selves
^o, that with patience we may wade through the torrent of evils, which partly
threaten, and partly lie upon us; which is very difficult in so miserable a
war, whose ends threaten slaughter on the one side, and servitude on the other.
A midst which d^ungers I am much comforted, when I call to mind, that I
fores^we these dread^ull calamities, ever since the time, that I feared not
only the victory of our enemies, but our own also. For I saw, but too
pl^inely, how dangerous that contestation would be, which propounded to it
self, the Roman Empire for a reward. And admit they had vanquished, to whom
through hope of peace, and no desire of war I was lin^ed; yet I well
understood, how bloody the victory of enraged, ambit^ous, and insolent men
would be: but if they had lost the day: how many great men, and e^cellent
Citizens would have lost their lives. Who, when I lab^ured for peace, and laid
open to them the miseries, which civil ^warres produce, they supposed, that my
exhortations proceeded rather from ^ea^e then prudence. Whereas you rejoice for
my new marriage, I know assuredly, that you affect my repose and quiet: but I
had never taken any new course, in these so lamentable times, but that, at my
return I found mine own estate, in as bad terms as the Commonwealth: For I
was not secure under mine own roof: my whole house was full of entrappings
and snares; I found gins laid every where for me, even by those, who for my
singular benefits, should rather have had a tender care, of my goods, and
safety. Whereupon I thought, by the trust of a new affinity, to secure my
self, from the perfidious practices of the old: But enough has been said,
concerning our affairs, and more peradventure, then was requisite. As for
yours, take a good heart, and fear no particular contrariety: For overcome
who will, I see not how you run into any great danger: Caesar, having
already as far I can conceive, assuaged his anger toward you; and the
Pompeians having never hated you. Caesar I know, h^th received you into grace,
and Pomp^ius never wished you ^ll. For mine own part, I promise you, that
wherein soever I may do you good, although ^t this present, I see, I can
pleasure you but little; yet will I strive, with endeavors and ^ounsell, or at
least, wi^h hearty affection and love, to procure your profit, honor, and
safet^^^ I beseech you, advertise me, of what soever you do, or intend to do,
with expedition. Farewell.

Cicero to Cneius Plancius. Epist. 15.
I Received from you a very brief letter, wherein I was not certified of that,
that I desired to know: and have understood that, which before I knew very
well. For I was not informed, how constantly you support, the common miseries;
I plainly discerned, how much you loved me: but this I knew before; if the
other had been known unto me, I had been furnished with matter to write of:
But though heretofore by letter I expressed my mind unto you; yet at this present
likewise, I thought good to admonish you, that you would not think your self,
to be at any worse poi^t ^hen others. We are all in great danger, but the
peril is common. Thi^ disaster is universal: you must not therefore shake it
off, ^or request, that, that be done for your self alone, which is denied all
others. Let us therefore still between us retain that mind, which we eu^r
m^intain'd among our selves: whereof, I hope well on your behalf; and for mine
own, I Will war^ant you Farewell.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Quintus Met^llus Celer, son of Quintus, Vice-consull, to Cicero. Epist. 1.
IF you be in health, I am very ^lad^ I should n^uer h^u^ ^hought, that you ^ad
so little est^^med our mutua^l love, and the amit^ ^e^weene us renewed, that for
a word only, you would s^eke the ruin of my brothe^ M^^ellu^; to whom some
respect was du^, if not for his own sake, yet at least ^or ^he nobility of
our family, and ^or the singular love I bear, both to you, and the Common
wealth. But now I both see him to be b^set with enemies; and small account to
be made of my self, by him that had good reason to esteem me. So that I, who
have charge of the Province, and Army; I that am armed for your d^fence, am
extremely distrac^ed. And because you have neither borne you as ^quitie, nor
as the clemency of our predecessors required you; no marvel thou^h hereafter
you r^pent you. I did not believe, you could have car^ied so mutable a mind,
toward me, and mine: And yet your injuries cannot be of so great efficacy, as
to separate me from the Commonwealth. Farewell.

Cicero, to Quintus Metellus Celer; son to Quintus, Vice-Consull. Ep. 2.
IF you and the Army be safe, and in health: I am glad. You write unto me,
that for the mutual love, and late amity renewed between us, you could never
have believed, that I should have held you in so base an esteem: by which
words I know not, wha^ you would infer: But I imagine, that it might be
reported unto you, how I argu^ng in the Senate, used this speech; That many
were grieved, because I had pres^rued the Commonwealth: and that your neere^t
kinsmen, whom you could not well deny, wrought you ^o far, that you should
not urge my commenda^ion in the Senate, as before you were resolved. In saying
of which, I further added, that the office of preserving the Commonwealth, was
equ^lly divided betwixt us. For, I had defended Rome from domestical
practices, and from the treason of corrupt Citizens, and you, Italy, from the
armed enemy, and privy conspiracies: and that this our society, in so great
and honorable an enterprise, was broken off, by your kindred: who took i^
ill, that I, who had wonder^ully approved of you, in matters of so great
importance, should be i^ any par^^ by you recompensed. And declaring in ^his
dis^course, with what joy I ^tt^nd^d your praise, and approb^t^on; and how
f^ustrate I rema^n'd o^ that hop^; the Senators took con^entm^nt her^in, and
began to smile; not ^or that I ^pak^ of you, but because my expectat^on proved
v^ine and ^ru^tl^s^e: and because openly, and sincerely, I revealed the desire
I had, ^o be commended by you. I^ cannot therefore in this be said, that I
have not honored you, manifesting what contentment I should take, to hear
your testimony, add greater grace to my renowned actions. Whereas you speak
of mutual love, I know not how you understand love (...) but I suppose, that
then it is tru^ly mutual, when the one, and the other p^rty loves, with equal
and ans^erable affection. If I should have said, th^^ to do you a favor, I
reno^n^^^ my Province; you would rather h^u^ thought me vain herein, then
otherwi^e. For the renunciation was made, to give my self satisfact^on, and
every day I am b^tt^r pleas^d therewith, then other. It is true, that in giving
it up, I sought to have it committed to you. I will no^ men^ion the offices I
did you, before you were drawn by lot: only, be as^ured of thus much, that my
Colleague did nothing in it, without my priuitie. Remember you the rest: with
what expedition, so soon as your lot was drawn, I as^embled the Sena^e on the
self same day; how abundantly I spoke in your comm^ndation. Did ^ot you once
tell me your self, that I did not only commend you, but exalted your praise,
with the scorn and contempt of your Competitors? Besides, the decree, which
past vp^n such an election that day from the S^na^e, will testify my true love
toward you, so long as it is extant. And after you wen^ into the P^ouince, I
desire you would call to mind the favors, that I did you, both in the Senate,
and with the people; as also the letters I wrote unto you. And when you have
collected all these things, consider I pray you, whether at your last return
to Rome, you requited so many good offices. Whereas you mention our renewed
amity, I know not herein your meaning, because you term that renewed, which
never was altr^d. Whereas you write, that I have done ill, having by one only
word, procured your brothers ruin; First, be assured, that I like wondrous
well, this your zeal, and good will, accompanied with such vis^^rall love and
affection to your brother: And then, if in any thing, for the respect of the
Commonwealth, I have been opposite to your brother; I request you to p^rdon
me; For, no man can love the Commonwealth, better then my self: but if I
defended my reputation, from his violent passion toward me; i^ may suffice
you, that I never complained to you, of the injury he did m^e: who, because I
knew, that he prepared, and disposed the whole power of his Tribuneship to my
destruction: I besought Claudia your wife, and Mucia your sister, whose good
opinion toward me, I discovered in many things, for the amities sake betwixt
me and Pompeius, that they would divert him from so wicked a determination. But
he, notwithstanding I had been Consul, and had preserved the Commonwealth, did
me such an injury, as was never offered to any Magistrate, of what mean rank
soever; nor to the worst Citizen. For, at the last of December, as peradventure
you have heard, he prohibited me, in the resignation of my Consulship, to give
account unto the people of my proceedings: which injury notwithstanding, at
last redounded to my great honor. For, he permitting me no further
intimation, then mine oath; I swore aloud, and the people with a loud voice,
and to my great glory, swore likewise, that mine oath was most true. Having
received this gross disgrace; yet the same day, I sent to Metellus, those that
were friends to us both; requesting him to remove that resolution, he had
undertaken against me; To whom he made answer, That it was not in his power:
because, speaking to the people, he had formerly employed, that there was no
reason, that he should have authority given him to speak, who would not grant
the same to others, but had punished them, without permitting them lawful
plea. Oh, what a grave Gentleman, and brave Citizen was this! who, though I
had delivered the Senate from death, Rome from combustion, and Italy from war,
thought me worthy of that punishment, which the Senate, out of the consent of
all good men, had inflicted upon them, who meant to set Rome on fire; hew the
Magistrates and Senators in pieces; and to have raised up, a most bloody or
cruel war. Upon this, I opposed my self to your brother, who was present.
For, the first of January, I so buckeld with him in the occasions of the
Commonwealth, as he might perceive, I wanted neither courage, nor constancy.
And afterward on the third of the same month, he having conuocated the
people, in the beginning of his Oration, he went about to deprave me, naming,
and threatening me every third word, with full resolution, utterly to sink me;
not by way of Justice, or equity, but by bitter violence, and passionate
outrage. Whose temeritie, if I had not stou^ly withstood; who would not have
thought, that in my Consulship, I showed resolution, rather out of the benefit
of my Fortunes, then either for virtue, or fortitude of mind: If you neu^r
perceived how ill Metellus stood affected to me; this may be an evident
sign, that he little esteems you; never writing unto you, of a matter of so
great importance. But if he did impart his mind unto you, you should think me
very mild, and tractable, in that I never complained thereof to you, though I
had all the reasons [in the world] to do it. For, not only in words, as yo^
write, but with all manner of injuries, he labored to persecute me. Now,
observe my humanity, if it may be termed humanity, when a man does not only
suppress the choler of his mind^ but further humbles himself, to his enemy.
I, though your brother had shamefully iniuried me, yet never showed my self to
him, otherwise then favorable. And, whenever his name came in question in the
Senate; I always joined with them in opinion, that proceeded mildly with him.
Neither content with this; although he were mine enemy: yet in that he was
your brother. it did not only displease me, but further, I wrought by all my
means, and power, that the decree enacted against him, might be cancelled. So,
as I opposed not your brother; but I have resisted your brother, neither was I
toward you, mutable, as you write; but so constant, that I have perseuer'd in
loving you, though you gave me occasion to the contrary. As also at this
present, though you write to me after a threatening manner, yet will I not
complain. Because I do not only pardon, but highly commend your passion
(...) natural affection intimating in this, of what force brotherly love is.
But yet I entreat you, that you will also truly weigh my passion; allowing,
that if your friends did bitterly, and with cruelty, persecute me without
cause; I ought in this case, nor only, not to give them place, but make my
repai^e to you for aid; and make use of the power, as well of your self, as of
the whole Army, under you. I ever desired to have you my friend, as likewise,
I have omitted no endeavor, whereby it might appear, that I was not your
friend only, but your most loving friend. My heart is now, that which it ever
was, and so shall continue, so long as you please: and if the hatred that I
deferuedly bear to your bro^her, can any whit extenuate the love be^wixt us; I
will hereafter forb^are to hate him, l^ast it be an occasion, that I be no^
beloved. Farewell.

Quintus Met^llus Nepos, to Cicero. Epist. 3.
YOur mani^old courtesies work so with me, that I give no credit to those
di^honest repo^ts, which this impor^^^a^e (...) sends unto me. Neither (...) I
(...) account of such like (...), by (...) their leuity: and freely taking
your self in his stead, I accept you for my brother: imagining that he is no
more living amongst men: Though twice I have saved him, whether he would or
no. Touching my self, and the things I have effected, I will write thereof at
large to Lollius, not to be burdensome unto you, with so many letters. You
shall know my mind by him, about the state of this Province: Let me entreat
you, if it be possible to continue the same love, toward me, that you always
bare me. Farewell.

Cicero to Quintus Metellus Nepos Consul. Epist. 4.
THE letters of Quintus my brother, and of Titus P^mponius, my inward friend,
so raised my hopes, as I expected aid, no less from you, then from your
Colleague: Whereupon I wrote unto you, conformable to the state wherein I
stood, giving you thanks for what you had he^etofore done, and requesting you,
hereafter never to fail me. After this, my friends not only wrote unto me,
but many that came hither, reported it by word of mouth, that your affection
toward me was altered which was the cause, I would presume no mo^e to write,
because I would not be irksome, nor troublesome unto you. Now, my brother
Quintus aduertising me, how exceeding kindly you spoke of me in the Senate,
I thought it but my duty, and most requisite, to thank you again for the
love, which still you manifest unto me. But if I shall not wrong your courtesy,
I would entreat you, that you would preserve your friends, and me also, rather
then by their arrogancy, and cruelty, to oppose me: you have overcome your
self, in pardoning the Commonwealth your private enmities, and will you foster
other men's [rancors] against her? I give you my faithful promise, that if out
of your clemency you lend me your aid, in all occasions I will rest at your
command: but if you permit the Senate, people, and Magistra^es to be cross, in
reuoking me out of this unworthy banishment, wherein I was driven, by wicked
violence, not only to my own, but to the ruin of the Commonwealth:
remember, that you may hereafter desire to suc^our us both at such a time,
when no means is left, either for her escape, or my safety. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Antonius, son to Marcus Imperator. Ep. 5.
THough I resolved not to write any thing unto you, but by way of recommending
some Friend; not because I knew my commendations would take any great place
with you, but that they who entreated me, might perceive, that our ^riendship
was no whit impaired; yet when Titus Pomponius was coming toward you, who
better knows then any other, what I have desired, and effected in your
behalf; and does besides long to gratify you; and bear^s me singular
affection: I thought good to write unto you; especially not being able to
satisfy Pomponius in any other wise. If I should say, that you were much bound
unto me, I should not lie; having ever procured your benefit, honor, and
reputation; whereas your self can t^uely testify, that you never did me any
favor: rather you have sometimes sought to hurt me, for as much as I have
understood from many: For I^le not affi^me, that my self ever found it: not to
use the very same word accidentally, with which they say, you were wont to
pick qu^rrels wi^h me. But I mean not to w^ite that unto you, which has
be^ne reported to me: I Will leave it ^or Pomponius to deliver unto you; who
apprehended the same coffeehouse which I did. The Senate and people of Rome,
are witnesses of the notable offices which I have per^ormed for your honor:
whither you ever recompenst me in any part, none knows better then your
self. How far you may command me, let others give their censure: whatsoever
I did for your sake, I did it first out of mine own disposi^ion, and then to
be reputed constant. But now I give you to understand, that such an occasion
prepares it self, that I must needs with greater zeal do my endeavor. And
I will bend my self thoroughly thereunto, so I find not my pains, and travel
lost; for in this case, you your self would hold me for a fool. Pom^ponius
will inform you wherein my help is so importing, the which Pomponius, though
I am confident, you will do any thing for his sake, nevertheless I comm^nd
him to you: And if any of the love remain with you, that heretofore you bare
me, I pray you demonstrate it to me wholly in his person; You cannot do me a
more acceptable office then this. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Sextius, son to Lucius Quaestor. Epist. 6.
DEcius the Notarie, came and entreated me, that at this present I would
prevent that any man should be allotted to succeed you. I, ^lthough I had the
best opinion of him, that could be had of one of his condition: and took him
^or your ^riend; ye^, calling to mind what you wrote unto me, not many days
before, I thought it hard to believe, that you should have changed resolution:
neither would I ^tand to his mere word, although I took him for a discre^te
and modest person. But after Cornelia your wife spoke with Terentia, and
Quintus Corne^ius certified me thereof: I was careful to be present in the
Senate, as often as it sat. And concerning your desire, to remain still in the
Province, I had much a do to make Quintus Fusius, Tribune of ^he people, and
the rest to believe it, to whom a little before, as also to me, you had
written the contrary. The affairs of the Provinces were d^f^rred till
January, but notwithstanding, at that time, we hoped ^o obtain our purpose.
^he kind office you did me, in wri^ing, that you desire, my buying of Crassus
house, might prove fortunate unto me: was an occasion, that not long after, I
bought it for an hundred, and five thousand crowns: so that I feel such a
burden of debt upon my shoulders, that I could wish, to enter into some
conspiracy, so they would accept of me. But the hatred they bear me is so
great, as they offer me repulse, and malice me openly, as the cause of their
ruin: besides they are not confident, and are afraid, that I lay some snares
for them; not believing, that I can want money, who freed the usurers, from
their violence. In truth, I am reputed for that cause, a sufficient man: and
there are some, that lend freely for six in the hu^d^ed. I went to see your
house, and bu^lding, which I thought in every part very fair. I have defended
Antonius in the Senate house, with the greatest seruencie, and care I could;
and by my speech and authority I have much drawn the Senate to favor him: I
would not fail him: though for some offices past, it is well known, how ill
he has requited me. I pray you, write often to me. Farewell.

Cicero to Cneius Pompeius magnus, son to Cneius. Ep. 7.
I And all men else, took great d^light in the letters, which you w^ote to the
Senate; For you give so much hope of a secure state, as putting my trust wholly
in you, I have always promised to every one. But on the contrary, those your
old enemies, who were become your new friends, hearing the news of your
victory, remained amazed, and astonished; seeing thems^lues frustrated of ^he
hope, they had, ^o come to the glory of so noble an ent^rprize. The letters
you wrote unto me, though they contain but little demonstration, of your love
toward me, were nevertheless very dear unto me. For I never rejoice more at
any thing, then I do when I understand, that I ^aue discharged my dutie^: and,
if aft^rwards any man in ^ffects be not answerable, I am glad, that I rest
superior in courtesy. I make no doubt, but the Commonwealth will reconcile
join, and bind us together; though my affection toward you, which in many
resp^cts you may have deserved, were not sufficient to make me enjoy your love
and favor. And bec^u^e you may know, what I wou^d have h^d y^u written to me,
I will tell i^ you plainly, both as my nature and our Amity requires. I have
compassed matters of such quality, as I firmly bel^eued that you would
rejoice with me; being bound thereunto, first, in r^spect of your country, and
then in consideration of our friendship. But I imagine you forbear the doing of
such an office, for fear of offending some man. Though I assure you, there is
none but commends that, which I affected for the sa^etie of my country. And
when you come, you shall understand, that I bare my self therein with so much
judgment, and greatness of mind, that you will not esteem my amity
contemptible; perceiving by the effects, that as you are far greater, then ever
was Scipio Africanus, so I am not inferior much to Lelius. Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Licinius Crassus, son to Marcus. Ep. 8.
I Know that all your friends have written to you, with what endeavor, and
affection, I have defended, and augmented your dignity. For I have trauail'd
in such sort, that they may very well perceive, the desire I h^u^ to pleasure
you. I have so bandied with the Consuls, and many Consular personages, as I
never was so fervent in pleading any thing: and I have undertaken to defend
your honor, in all occasions, that hence-forward shall present themselves: to
pay what I owe to our ancient amity; as now I do, and would have done
before, if a certain quality of the times, being opposite to my desire, had
not hindered me. And truly I was ever ready in heart, to honor and pleasure
you: but it f^ls out, that some men, ^nemies, and envious of others praise,
like a pestilence, infecting and corrupting our friendship, have procured, that
for a time, there passed not betwixt us, any great effects of love: and to
recover in part, that time, I might well desire, but n^uer hope, ^or so fit an
occasion, as at this present is: Fortune affording me a means, not only to
show unto you, my true and constant love, but to show it you, in the gr^atest
height of your felicity. Wherein my h^p has been so favorable, that not
only your family, but all Rome discernes, me to be your very friend. And
now, your wife, amongst other matrones the chiefest; and your obedient, and
valorous sons, are governed according to my precepts, and instructions;
making use of me in their op^ortunities: And the Senate, and people of Rome,
see manifestly, that in this your absence, you have not a friend, that more
zealouslie procures your honor then my self. I care not to give you
adue^tisement, of such things as have ensued, and daily fall out, for you^
friends will write to you thereof. For my self, be ass^red, that when I
undertook to honor and observe you, I was moved thereto out of no sudden
desire, nor accidentally: but so soon as I entered into businesses, I always
had this end, to anneere my self as much as I could to your friendship. Since
which time, I cannot remember, that I have not daily more and more, observed,
and esteemed you; and that you neither loved, nor accepted of me. And if at
some times, no bad effects, but some dislike has grown between us, this
occurring through ^alse suggestions, and of no moment, I would have the
memorial of that time, so to be rooted out of our memory, tha^ it may neue^
grow again. For you are, and I desire to be such a man, as I hope our inward
friendship, shall be praise-worthie in either of us, both of us lighting on the
self same times of the Commonwealth. You may make that ac^ompt of me, which
best pleases you; but yet I think you will value me no less, then belongs to
my place. Howsoever, I promise, and make offer of my self, in so much as I
shall be able to effect any thing for your benefit. And though in this, I
should have many competitors, nevertheless I Will give that trial of my self,
as they shall all remain vanquished; offering to stand to any man's judgment,
especially of Marcus, and Publius your sons: the which, though they be both,
dear to me, yet I am somewhat more affected to Publius; because not only at
this present, but ^uen from his childhood, he has always loved and reverenced
me as a Father. Suppose these l^tters to be in stead of a league, not of an
Epistle: and be secure, that I will most religiously observe, and perform,
whatsoever now I promise you: And I will ever discharge the same office that I
performed in your absence, in defense of your digniti^; first because I am your
friend, and then, because I would not appear variable or inconstant. I will
not therefore be longer. Only I affirm unto you, that whenever of my self
I find I have ability to do any thing, which may procure you satisfaction,
ben^fit, or reputation, I will of mine own accord do it. And in what I cannot
find^ out, if I but vnde^stand it from you, or yours, I will so work, that ^ou
s^all rest contented, in having mo^ed me. I beseech you therefore employ me in
any occasion of yours, how little or great, or indifferent so^uer it (...)
write to your fri^nds, that they (...) my e^deuour, advise, authori^ie, and
^^uour, i^ public or p^^uate occ^s^on^, eith^r judicial, or domestical: ^f
your own, or of your fri^nds; to the end that my care^ may diminish as fair
as is pos^ible, their desire of your own presence. Farew^ll.

Publius Vati^ius Imperator, to his friend Cicero. Ep. 9.
IF you be in health, I am pleas^d, my self am in health. If you t^^e upon you
m^ns defense, as your custom was: Pub^ius V^^inius, having n^ed o^ defense,
ha^h recourse to your protection. I hope that you will not refuse me in
matters, wherein my honor is touched, having accepted of me in those which less
imported. And whom should I rather choose or call unto in my de^^nce, then him
under whose protection, I have been accustomed to ^uercome? should I
peradventure fe^re, that you, who for my saf^ty exposed your self against ^he
violence of mighty persons, are not now able to ressi^t, the bad and wicked
practices of some, who are as vo^d^ of force, as fraught wi^^ (...)? wherefore,
if you love me, as y^u were wont; embra^e me, and prepare your self, to defend
my reputation against such as these. You know that my fortune, ^ cannot tell
^ell (...) manner, easily finds adue^saries, not upon my dem^rit: but what
auailes that, if i^ happen by my unlucky fortune? I pray you, if any man would
wrong my reputation, forget not your old custom, and make manifest unto me
your court^ous disposition, as ever you have done, since first I came into this
government. I send unto you a coppie of the letter, which I sent unto the
Senate, by way of advertisement, of things by me achieved. It Is told me, that
a servant of yours, is run from you, and that now, he is amongst the Vardaei,
whereof you wrote nothing to me; notwithstanding I have commanded him to be
searched for, by sea and land; and I Will find him you out howsoever, except he
be fled into Dalmatia: from whence I Will fetch him too, at last. Love me and
Farewell. In the Camp at Narona, this xiij. of Iulie.

Publius Vatinius Imp^rator, to his friend Cicero. Ep. 10.
FOr ^our Dionisius, though I have sought much, yet hithe^to can I not find
the trace of him; and the less, because the cold has here also in such sort
increased, that it has driven me out of Dalmati^: nevertheless, I will so use
the matter, that I will get him at length. I peruse^, what you wrote unto me
about C^t^lius, Out alas! what is that you d^mand of me? how happens it, that
you alway^s seek impossibilities at my h^nd? I would I could do every thing
^or you; and our f^^end, ^extus Ser^ilius; but I ^ust tell you ^^eely, that I
wonder much, that you defend such men, and accept of such like causes. This
Catilius is the bloudiest fellow that lives: how many Gentlemen, how many
honest matrones, how many Citizens of Rome, has he slain, and made slaves?
how many Countries has he destroyed? This b^utish creature, a man of no
esteem, was so presumptuous, as to contend wi^h me, and I took him in war:
I could wish, to pardon him for your sake, but how shall I answer them, that
cry out, and complain, that he has taken away their goods, rifled their
ships, and murdered their brothers, child^en, and progenitors. Were I as brazen
faced as Appius, in whose place I was subst^^uted, I could do no less then
punish him: yet I Will do what I can, to content you. Quintus V^lusius your
disciple, de^ends him: if he can peradventure, satisfy his adversaries; I
would, perhaps, release him. I pray, afford me all your help, wherein you see
me to stand in ne^d (...) does me great wrong, in not moving the Senate, that
I may be graun^ed my suit, for the ha^pie success the gods gave me in this
war of Dalmatia: as if I had not performed matters worthy of triumph, much
more of obtaining a suit: If he stay while I have ended the whole war, I
shall be worse entreated then others, who have served in the wars for ^he
Commonwealth. There remains yet, twenty old towns of Dalmatia, which have
united themselves, with above threescore.

AFter my suits were commenced, I went into Dalmatia. Six towns I have taken
by force: and there is this alone remaining, which is very great, taken
heretofore by me four times: For I have taken, four towers, four walls, and
all the Castle. From which, the snow, rain, and cold have driven me: and
through my evil hap, I was enforced to leave the foresaid town, the war
b^ing finished. Whereupon I pray you, if need be, to fauou^ me with Caesar, and
to defend me in what shall be requisite; with constant opinion, that you have
not a be^ter friend then my ^^lfe. Farewell. The f^r of September, from Narona.

Cicero to Publius Vatinius. Epist. 11.
I Wonder not, though you accept so well of mine offices, having ever known
you amongst others, for a most thankful man: and I never forbear to publish
it. For I have not only received thanks from you; but have been also
plentifully requited. Whereupon in all your other occasions, you shall find me
ready to pleasure you. Whereas you commend unto me, Pompeia, your wife, a most
noble Gentlewoman: having perused your letters, I presently spoke with our
friend, Sura, to tell her in my behalf, that she should make me acquainted,
what she stood in need of; for I would willingly pleasure her. And I promise
you to do it, and if it be needful, I Will go in person to visit her.
Nevertheless, I would that you should write unto her, that she will esteem
nothing so great, or so trifling, that I shall think either too difficult, or
unbeseeming me. Whatsoever I can do for you, will seem easy, and conformable
to my dignity. If you wish me well, procure that Dionysius may return.
Whatsoever you promise him, I Will perform: but if he will needs be a knave, you
shall lead him prisoner in triumph. I beshrew these Dalmatians, that put you to
so much trouble. But, as you write, in short time you will bring them in, and
they will illustrate your victories. For they were ever reputed warlike.
Farewell.

Cicero to Lucius Lucceius, son to Quintus. Epist. 12.
I Determine freely, to open my mind unto you by letters, which do not blush;
seeing in presence I never durst do it, through a certain modes^y, I cannot
say, but rather a rudeness. I have a wonderful desire, and except I be
deceived, very commendable; tha^ you would be pleased to celebrate my name,
with the publication of your compositions: the which, though many times you
told me, you would do; yet I would have you pardon me, though I solicit you
thereunto: For the ^orme of your writing, which I ever thought would be
excellent, goes beyond my expectation, and has so won me, that I am surprised
with an exceeding desire, that my acts atchieud, may be written with your pen.
Because I do no^ only hope, that death it self shall not ^xtinguish the
memorial of my name; but further, in life I desire to enjoy that reputation,
which may accrue unto me by your testimony; and to taste that sweetness, which
I shall find, seeing my self to be praised, and beloved, by one of your
quality. And though I know how much you are employed: nevertheless, in that I
see, you have now finished the history of the Italian, and civil war: and
you told me you pro^ected the rest; I would not omit for mine own sake, to
admonish you, that you would bethink your self, whether you would connex our
proceedings with others; or else to do, as many Graecians have done,
Calistines the Trojan war; Timaeus that of Pyrrhus; and Polybius the war of
Numantia: all which, divided the foresaid wars; so you also might separate the
civil conspiracy, from the wars external. I see not certainly, that it
greatly imports my commendation; yet respecting my great desire, surely it
imports, that you do not observe the order of times, but that you rather
anticipate, and first make mention of my actions. And withal, if you employ
your wit upon one subject only, and about one person; me thinks I foresee,
how much more copious and more adorned, the discourse will prove in every part.
Neither am I so barren of understanding, but that I perceive, how impudent I
am; First, in imposing upon you such a burden (which, in respect of your
employments, you might well refuse:) and then, to importune you, that you would
commend me; in that you may think peradventure I deserve it not. But having
once begun to exceed the bounds of modesty, we must absolutely lay aside all
bashfulnesse. And therefore I request you earnestly, to set forth mine actions,
and that with greater luster, then peradventure, you judge to stand with their
merit: and that you will not tie your self to the laws of History, but to
the desert of our friendship: which, I desire, should prevail further with you
in this; then truth. And because heretofore, you wrote, in a certain Proeme,
and indeed ingeniously, that even as that Hercules in Xenophon, would not be
moved a whit at the allurement of pleasures: so no respect of amity should
stir you. Now, ^or my contentment, I would have you alter your mind, and in
regard of our love, that you would apply your self, to satisfy me in this
request. And if (as I desire) you resolve to collect a memorial of my
proceedings, and to comprehend them distinc^ly in one volume: it would be a
subject, in my opinion, very worthy of your eloquence. For, beginning from
that time, that the conspiracy gr^w, and prosequuting even to that [instant]
when I returned from banishment; you shall meet with so many accidents worthy
of history, as compiling them all together, you will make up a reasonable
volume. And in this, you may make use of the knowledge you have, of the civil
alterations, relating partly, the original of discords, partly showing the
remedies against future mischeefes: discommending withal, things blameworthy,
and praising the commendable, with such reasons, as you judge fittest. And if
you would follow your wonted custom of speaking freely; you may note, many men's
perfidious proceedings, plots, and trecheries against me. Withal, my disasters
will minister unto you great variety in writing, carrying such a kind of
contentment, as will inuit me^ to read forward. For, nothing is more apt to
delight the Readers, then the variety of times, and several mutations of
Fortune. The which, though in their trial, we found them troublesome, yet are
we not sorry, to see them written. For, the secure remembrance of troubles
past, brings contentment and others, that never sustained any grief of their
own, reading the molestations of other men, without agreeuance, they feel a
kind of compassion, which replenisheth the mind, with acceptable delight.
Which of us feels not, both contentment, and compassion, when he reads the
death of that Epaminondas, who was slain before Mantinea? where he commanded,
that the weapon which wounded him to death, should then be taken out of his
body, when he heard, that his shield was in safe keeping: and having heard
thus much, contemning the extreme pain of his wound, in full contentment, he
finished his days, with a noble death. Which of us reads not, with admirable
a^tention, the flight, and return o^ Themistocles? It Is true, that a continued
history seems much to delight; because it orderly represents the success
of things past^ but a distinct Narration, wherein men may observe, the variable
and doubtful accidents, of some excellent man, carries with it, both wonder,
and expectation; joy, and sorrow; hope, and fear: and, if the end be
remarkable, in reading it, we attain to the height of contentment. Wherefore,
it will please me the better, if you resolve to distinguish this tale (as I may
term it) of our affairs, and successes, from the continued course o^ your
writings: which contains in it, diverse enterprises, and many effects, both of
counsels, and of the times. Neither will I believe, that it should breed any
suspicion in you, that I go about to creep into you, by way of flattery;
though I show so ardent a desire, to be by you celebrated. For, you are not a
man, that is ignorant of your self. And who reputes them not rather envious,
which admire you not, then those flatterers, that do praise you? Neither am I
so foolish, to be celebrated and eternized by one, who by celebrating me, may
not also himself purchase a particular renown for his wit, and learning. That
so famous a Captain, Alexander, would only be drawn by Apelles, and graven
by Lysippus: and he did it not, because he would win their love, by the Art of
assentation; but because he saw, that Apelles picture, and the sculpture of
Lysippus, would make their names renowned, and bring to himself also, no small
reputat^on. Although th^se Artificers, by th^^r mystery, repr^sent nothing,
but the form of the body, showing us their corporeal image, whom we never
saw: but whosoever is celebrated for laudable actions, without help of images,
he lives of himself, and shall live for ever in the memory of men. And we se^
that Spartan Agesilaus has no less fame, who never would be either drawn,
or graven; then they, that were very careful herein: For, one little Pamphlet
only of Xenophons, written in commendation of that King, has far surmounted
all the pictures, and statues, that ever were. And the contentment of my mind,
and the reputation of my name will be the greater, if I be mentioned in your
writings, rather then of any other. Because I shall not only he^ein have your
wit favorable to me, as Tim^leon had that of Timaeus, and Themistocles, that
of Herodotus; but further, the authority of so honorable a person, and so
well known in the important services of the Commonwealth. So, as it will see
me, that I have not only found that shrill trumpet, which Alexander, when he
came to Sigaeum, said that Homer resounded in honor of Achilles; but withal,
the serious testimony of a great, and reputed m^n I like that Hector well,
whom N^uim b^ings in, who rejoiced not so much, for that he was praised, but
he adds, by a praise worthy man. And, if I obtain not this favor from you;
that is, if by reason of any business of your own, you shall not have time
herein to content me, (for, in matters possible, I suppose, you would grant my
request) I shall peradventure be urged to do that, which many are wont to
reprehend: for I will write of my self, after the example, notwithstanding, of
many famous men. But you know, that in this part, many respects must be
considered. They must write sparingly of themsel^es, if they have done any
thing worthy of praise, and omit those things, which de^erue blame. Whereunto
we may add, that the writings purchase neither credit, nor authority; and
finally diverse discommend this manner of writing, saying, that in Greece, the
proclaimers of the Gyminician games, used greater modesty: who though they
have set the crowns on the heads, of the other Conquerors, and with a loud
voice, publis^ed their names; yet when themselves before the games be ended,
are crowned, they cause another to come to diuulge them: because they will not
publish their own victories. I desire to avoid this taxation, and will shun
it, if you grant me my request; and I entreat you herein to satisfy me. And
to the end, you may not wonder, why I use such earnest and long suite, or
entreatie to you for it, y^u having often informed me, that with all diligence,
you would compound a work of my actions: I tell you, as I did in the
beginning, that I herein solicit you, for no other respect, but because, I
would by all means, that other men should know me by your books before I
die; and that w^ile I live, I may enjoy the fruit of my glory. If
conveniently you can, I should be glad, you would return me an answer. And if
you determine, to take in hand this task^, I will make an abstract, of mine
own proceedings. But if you put me off till another time, I will not do it,
but reserve my self, while I speak with you thereof. Prosequute in the mean
while, the history you have begun, and persevere in loving me. Farewell.

Cicero to Lucius Lucceius, son to Quintus. Epist. 13.
THough the comfort, which your letters bring me, is most acceptable, because
it demonstrates, sincere love, joined with singular prudence: nevertheless I
reaped thereby, a far greater benefit, having discerned with what fortitude
you contemn humane things; how well you are armed; and furnished, against the
cruel assaults of Fortune. And questionless, he may be reputed wiser then
all others, who is not governed; but gouernes Fortune; trusting only in
himself, and of himself only depending. This opinion I was ever of; and
though it were well settled, and engraven in my mind: notwithstanding the
violence of unhappy times, and the perpetual shakings of adversity, have
somewhat displa'ct it, and made it almost to be forgotten. But now by your last
letters, I see you have replanted it; and likewise, more by those, which to
such a purpose you did write unto me, not long before. And therefore it is
needful that I speak not once alone, but often, and much^ and that I assure
you, that there is no jewel so precious, which I hold not base, in respect of
your letters. And though those reasons, which with an artificial form, and in
great abundance you have collected, are of a wonderful power to comfort; yet
nothing has more comforted me, then the constancy, and gravity of your
mind; the which in these your letters, I have perceived as in a looking
glass: and so much I prize it, as I am ashamed, I do not imitate the same. I
tell you more, that I hold my self more resolute then you, who talks so much
to me of forti^ude. For you seem to have some hope of better fortune, in that
by diverse reasons you seek to intimate unto me, that we should not esteem
the Commonwealth so weakened, but that she may rise again; as we see, that
one Fencer overthrown by another, oftentimes recouers; ther^ore no marvel,
though you be resolute, relying upon some hopes: but yet I wonder, how you
should have any hope remaining. Tell me? What do you see, which is not
altogether wasted, and consumed? Consider all the members of the Commonwealth,
which are well known unto you. Surely you cannot find one which is not
battered and broken: which things I would rehearse yet further, if I knew them
better then you; or if I could relate them without grief: although according
to the precepts you set down, we should wholly drive away, and banish all
grief. Whereupon I will support private discommodities, as you judge them; and
common, with greater ^ortitude then your self, who exhorts me to suffer them.
For, you are eased by some hope, as you write; bu^ mine is the greater
constancy, being supported by no hope at all And as you friendly advise and
put me in mind, I will comfort my self, with thinking how much I ever loved
the Commonwealth, and by reducing those times to memory, In which I together
with your self, so greatly assisted her; I having done for my countri^, no
less questionles, then what I ought to do: certainly more, then was
expected from any man's counsel, or courage whatsoever. Pardon me, if a little
I commend my self. For, speaking of those things, on which for the ease of my
mind you wish me to meditate, my grief is made much lesser. And to observe
you, so fa^re as I am able, I will wind my self from cares and passions, and
I will return to the study of the Sciences; which in flourishing Fortune are
an ornament, and in misery a comfort; and I will remain with you, so long as
either of our ages, or health shall permit me: and if we cannot be together
as we would, yet the similitude of our studies, will make us such a connection
of mind, that we shall never seem to be wholly separated. Farewell.

Lucius Lucceius, son of Quintus, to Cicero. Epist. 14.
IF you be in health, I am glad. I remain as I was wont, and also somewhat
worse then usually. I have many times enquired of you, desirous to see you; and
I wondered as still I do, how you can be so long out of Rome. I know not
undoubtedly the cause, that detaines you so far from us. If you love
solitariness, for the better commodity of writing, as you were wont to do; I
am glad, and reprehend not your course; knowing that there can be no greater
delight; not only in these miserable, and unhappy; but also in peaceable, and
quiet times; and especially to your mind: which being now weary, affects
repose, after so many agitations: and being replenished with Science, sends
abroad daily, some goodly fruit, which pleases others, and augments your
own glory. But if you have given over your self in pray, as when you were
here, to sorrow and tears: I am sorry for your grief, and for your
affliction. And if you will give me leave to tell you my opinion, I cannot but
reprehend you. Alas! what means this? will you alone, not discern, manifest,
and apparent things, who with the pregnancie of your wit, can discover the most
hidden? will not you understand, that continual lamenta^ion helps nothing?
will not you remember, that calamities are rather redoubled, which your wisdom
would have you to expel out of your mind? But if by way of exhortation I can
work nothing with you, I request you by the love you bear me, to free your
self from these molestations, and return to live with us, and to our common
studies, or else to your own, for you study more then others. I am distracted
with two contrary things: I would not be burdensome to you, wi^h these my
admonishments: and I would persuade you to give over, the resolution you have
undertaken. I beseech you, either in the one to follow my directions, or in the
other not to trouble your self. Farewell.

Cicero to Lucius Lucceius, son to Quintus. Epist. 15.
THE absolute love you bear me, appears in every part of the letters which
I last received from you. Of which love though I was most assured before now;
yet this demonstration was beyond measure acceptable to me; I would say
pleasing, but that I think I have lost this word for ever: and not for the
occasion you imagine, and in which, using most sweet and friendly words, in
effect, you grieuouslie reprehend me; but because for that deep wound I cannot
find that cure, which may heal it. Alas! I pray tell me? can I run unto
my Friends? Where are they? you know of whom I speak; for we have found them
common to us both. Others, you know are dead; and others obdurate in their will,
never to come to Rome, live in a remote country. I could willingly live with
you, and exceedingly desire it: and, it is long since we knew, and loved one
another. Our familiarity is great: our studies alike: what band, or obligation
is wanting to unite us? may we then live together? for my part, I know no
impediment; but hitherto, we have not so done, though we be neighbors about
Tusculanum, and Puteoli: what should I say in Rome? Where the Forum being
common, neighborhood little imports. But our age, I know not through what
wicked accident, is light upon times of such disposition, that when we should
taste of all contentment, we are ashamed even to live. For what refuge had I
left, being stripped of all public, and private good, together with all comfort?
only books: wherein, because I can do nothing else, I exercise my self
continually: but it is a great matter, that they also deny me their help, and
me thinks they exclude, me out of the Port of repose, and they reprehend me
bitterlie^ because I still remain in this life. Which is no other then these
present miseries, greater then ever were any. And do you wonder then, that I
live remote from that City, where I find no contentment from mine own
house? and where it is necess^rie to bear a great hatred to the times, to men,
to public places; of meeting, and to the Senate? Whereupon I entertain my
self with r^ading, and spend therein all my time; not to find any medicine,
that might absolutely cure me; but to beguile only that grief, which lies
heavy upon me. And if we had had this aduertisment, as we had it not^ thorough
the continual fears, that held us in suspense: We had been always together;
neither should your vnhealthfulnesse grieve me, nor should my heart sorrow
offend you. And therefore let us use all the means we can, to live together;
seeing we cannot devise any course, that will sort better with us. Within these
few days therefore, I will see you. Farewell.

Cicero to Ti^iu^. Epist. 16.
THough no man is less able to comfort you, then my self; hau^ng taken your
troubles so to heart, that I my self need consolation. Nevertheless my grief
being not altogether so implacable as yours: and seeing you in so terrible an
agony: I thought it an office correspondent to our amity, and to the love I
bear yo^, no longer to defer writing to you, but to administer you some
physic, which may at least diminish your grief, though not absolutely cu^e
it. And that consolation is ordinary, and well known to every one, of which
we ought continually to reason, and debate: that we bear in mind, that
we are men borne under this law, that our life must lie open to all the
blows of Fortune. To which Law, we must not seek to oppose our selves, in
refusing that condition of life, wherein we were borne; rather with patience
support those accidents, which humane wisdom cannot prevent: comforting our
selves in calling to mind, that nothing happens to us, that has not befallen
many others. And though this may yield thee comfort, yet I Will propound a thing
to thee, that shall be of greater force, then this or any other consolations,
which have bin ever practiced, or written by the wise^t m^n. I say therefore
that considering the miserable e^tate of our city, and the wickedness of
these times, you will perceive, that they are truly happy, who have had no
children: and they less unhappy, who have now lost them, then if they had
lost them, when the Commonwealth flourished. It Is true, that if thy great
loss grieueth thee, in respect of the damage received; I see no course to
divert absolutely your grief. But if natural affection move thee, to lament
their miseries, that are dead: not to allege now, what I have often read, and
heard upon this argument: that there is no evil in death, after which if the
soul lives, it may rather be termed an immortality then a death: and if it
die together with the body, we must not suppose that there is any misery,
because no sense: leaving I say, this part aside, I will only intimate unto
you one reason, which is very true: That such a danger is approaching to the
Commonwealth, that every man should be glad to avoid with death. For what
receptacle, shall honesty, bounty, virtue, laudable customs, good Arts, and
finally liberty it self, and safety, now find? Questionless there is never
a young man or child, of whose death I have heard, in this, of all others,
most cruel, and pestiferous year, which seems not to me by the gift of the
eternal Gods, to have been released from these miseries, and from this so bad
a condition of life? So that if I could beat into your mind this opinion;
that they whom you have lost met with no evil, it would in a great part
diminish your afflictions. For so you should come to retain only that grief,
which you feel not for their death, but for your own loss. And surely it
befits not the gravity, and wisdom, which since your childhood, you have
always manifested, to despair for the loss of them, that feel nothing.
Remember how you have lived hitherto, with so great moderation of mind, as it
is necessary for you to persevere in the same constancy. And by wisdom and
discourse, we must anticipate that in our selves, that at length time will
bring us: which by the remedy of years, heals every green wound. For if
there were never so base a woman, which in the loss of children, did not at
last cease lamenting: surely we are bound to draw that from our prudence, which
continuance of days will bring us; and not to expect the medicine of time,
which reason first propounds unto us. If these letters take effect, I shall
think that I have obtained my greatest desire: If they work nothing at all,
yet shall I judge, that I have done the office, of that friend, which I have
ever been, and promise during life to be unto you. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Sextius. Epist. 17.
I Wrote not heretofore unto you, not because I was forget^ull of our amity,
or to break off my usual custom: but because for a time I, together with the
Commonwealth, found my self oppressed with a grievous ruin; and besides,
your hard, and lamentable accident, so afflicted me, as it ministered occasion
to me, of not writing to you. But now, supposing, that I had too long neglected
this office; and the memory of worth, and greatness of mind, wherewith I know
you to be endowed, urging me thereunto: I thought good to break of silence,
with a firm opinion, that I shall commit no ^rror. You know, Publius S^xtius,
that when you were accused, being far off from Rom^, I def^nded you: and
afterward, the same peril hanging over your person, as did over Milo, I
neglected no endeavor for your safety: and last of all, so soon as I was
returned, notwithstanding your caus^, was carried o^herwise, then I would have
advised, if I had been present; yet I failed not in affording you any help,
that lay in my power. In which time, not only your enemy, but some others
which pretended to be your friends, taking opportunity of the dearth, sought
to disgrace you with the people: and so f^rre they wrought, that joining
thereunto, the partiality of Judges, and the iniquity of many others, they
were of power sufficient, to suppress the truth, and your just cause.
Afterward, upon any occur^ents whatsoever, I n^uer was wanting to your son
Publius, neither in endeavor, counsel, labor, or in favor, or testimony.
Where^ore having diligently, and religiously observed all the offices of
friendship, I would not likewise omit, to exhort, and entreat you, that you
will remember, that you are a man, and a man of valor: which is; that you will
prudently support, this common, and doubtful accident: common, because none of
us can avoid it; doubtful, because no man knows, whether it will be of
little, or long continuance. Defend your self bravely from grief, and oppose
Fortune; reuoluing in your mind, that both in our City, and in other
Commonwealths, many valiant, and innocent men, have been unjustly sent into
banishment. Let me also tell you this: and would to God, I might not speak
true; That you are deprived of such a Country, which can procure no
contentme^t to a wise man. Concerning your son, if I should write nothing, I
fear that I might seem ungrateful toward his virtue: but if I should tell
you, all that I judge of him, I fear I shall renew in you that desire, and
grief, which you were wont to feel for the privation of so worthy a son.
But nevertheless you shall do exceeding wisely, to think, that his love, his
valor, and his industry remain always with your self: those things being
no less our own, that we embrace with our mind, then the same, that we behold
with our eyes. His high valor therefore, and the inexplicable love he bears
you, ought to give you great consolation. And you ought to receive no small
comfort, considering that we and many others, so much esteem you, for the rare
qualities of your mind: and that this adverse Fortune abates no whit, of our
love to you; or of our judgment concerning you. Whereunto you may add another
reason; that as you have not deserved this exile; so you should not much grieve
therefore. For, wise men, when they are privy to their innocentie, are never
disturbed for any accident, that can happen to them. I, for the memory I
retain of our ancient friendship, and for the virtue which shines in your
son, and for the observance he shows me, will be most ready to yield you
help, and comfort. If it happen that you write to me of any thing, I will so
handle the matter, that you shall perceive, your writing was not frivolous.
Farewell.

Cicero to Titus Fabius. Ep. 18.
THough I my self, who desire to comfort you, want another man's comfort;
nothing for many years having so much pierced my heart, as now your trouble
does: notwithstanding I do not only exhort, but for our amity entreat you,
that you will strengthen your self against disasters^ carrying in mind, with
what conditions all men are borne, and in what times, we were brought forth.
Your own valor has given you more then Fortune took from you: having
obtained that, which seldom strange, or ignoble citizens are wont; and lost
that, which Fortune has taken away from many of greatest nobility. Besides I
see, that Tribunals of judgment, and commendable customs of our country will
be so altered; that happy is he, that with least grievous pain, is from such a
Commonwealth departed. But you having both goods, and children, and us,
together with others, conjoined unto you in the nearest of love, being to make
^lection, to live with us, and with all your friends; and of so many judgments
there being only one, which is reprehended, as that which by one only, and
doubtful sentence, may be thought to be yielded to the power of one: for all
these reasons alleged, this hard fortune should not seem grievous to you. My
affection toward you, and your children, even as you desire, and as it ought
to be, so shall it ever continue. Farewell.

Cicero to Ruffus. Ep. 19.
I Did ever believe, that you loved me from your heart. But I am every day more
confirmed in this belief: and I know that evidently, which sometimes you wrote
unto me; that your affection, would appear so much greater to me, then it did
in the Prouince^ by how much the better it may be discerned, that it proceeded
from judgment, and not from obligation. Although my opinion is, that you
cannot do more then that, which you did in the Province, to demonstrate your
love toward me. I received a few days since your letters, which were most
acceptable to me; for you writ, that although you expected my coming with
great desire, notwithstanding because matters went forward, otherwise, then you
supposed, you rejoiced at the course I took. Now, I have received these other,
which gave me exceeding contentment, because I understand, you are of the same
opinion, that all good and valiant men ought to be of; that nothing is
profitable, but that which is honest and just. And besides th^s; In that you
promise to follow me, whither so ever I go, which is the most acceptable thing
you can do for me, and (if I be not deceived) most honorable for your self.
Till now, I never acquainted you, with my intention by writing; not because I
would conceal my self from you, but in that communicating my advise unto you,
it was but a putting you in mind of the office of that good Citizen, whereof
you make profession; and an inuiting you, to run both my peril, and fortune.
But considering that I see, with how much love, and courtesy you offer your
self unto me: I willingly accept of your good mind; but without any binding
you, to keep promise with me. If you do what you make show of; I shall
remain greatly bound to you therefore: If you do not, I will excuse you. And
of these two elections, I suppose, that the first has pleased you for my sake,
and the other for fear. For now, we truly debate of a most important matter.
That which is honest, is plainly discerned. That, that is profitable is hidden
from us. Yet if we be the men we should be; that is, worthy of our studies,
and of our profession; we need not doubt, but it is better to choose, that which
is honest, then that, that is profitable. And if you be of this opinion, come
to me presently. But if you think, you cannot presently come thither, whither
honesty calls us: I will advertise you in what soever is requisite, and in
conclusion, I say unto you, that what course soever you take, I will be your
friend; but if you be the man I desire, your best ^riend. Fa^ewell.

Cicero to Rufus. Ep. 20.
Howsoever it had stood with me, I would have met you, if you had come whither
you appointed: Wherefore, though you remained behind, because you would not put
me to any inconvenience: notwithstanding I assure you, that, had you sent for
me, I would not have respected mine own commodity, to give you satisfaction.
To the other parts of your letters, I could more absolutely answer, if Mar^us
Tullius, my Notarie were here^ who I am sure about casting up the accounts,
(for the rest I know not what to say) has done nothing with any end, to do
you therein prejudice, or dishonor. And though the ancient order, and custom
were observed at this day: Yet be assured, that in respect of our friendship,
I would never have given up the accounts without first comparing them, with
your self. But it being requisite, by Caesar's Law, to leave a coppie of them
in the Province, and to carry afterward the o^iginall to Rome: I have done
the same in the Province, which I would have done at Rome also, if the former
custom had continued. Wherein I was so confident in you, that I would not be
the man, that would be with you, at the drawing of the accounts: but left the
charge thereof to my Notarie, appointing him expressly, that he should frame
every thing to your mind. I neither do nor ever will repent me, of having
that confidence in you, which I made show of: but me thinks it is strange, that
you entered into a iealou^ie of my Notarie; you having likewise left order, that
your brother Marcus Mi^dius should peruse the accounts, which were made in my
abs^nce; neither had I any other hand in them, but that after they were
finished, I read them; your brother having ^ormerly both ^eene, and approved
them. If this were honor: I could no^ more honor you: If it were confidence:
I was more confident in you, then almost in my self. If it were requisite in
such a business to have regard to your benefit, and praise, as it was fit to
have: I had no man more apt, nor discreet for such a business then my Notarie^
And though I have left in Apamea, and La^dicea, a coppie of the accounts; it
was for no other end, but to observe the Law, which commands, that they should
be left in two Cities within the Province. Whereupon to this part, I answer,
that though I had many just occasions, for which I could not use any delaie,
in giving up my accounts in Rom^: Nevertheless, I would have stayed for you,
had I not thought they could not have been reexamined after they were
registered in the Province. And as for Volusius, I am informed by understanding
men, and especially by Caius Camillus my very good friend, and most expert in
such affairs; that we could not change the course set down, nor transfer
Valerius debt, upon the person of Volusius; because they that stood bound for
Valerius, had been neither more nor le^^e obliged to payment. And the
principal debt, was no^ as you write, 900. crowns but 570. For, about the
sum which came short of 900, we had received no assignations, in the name of
Valerius. But certainly you seem to repute me, both discourteous, and
negligent; yea, (but I respect it not) and very indiscreet. Discourteous, in
that you imagine a Legate, and an officer of mine, were discharged, not for
mine own, but for my Notaries benefit; especially, when they were not to be
bound, to this inconvenience. Negligent; you supposing, that I never sought to
be acquainted with a matter, which did import my office so nearly, as it
might prove prejudicial to me: and that my Notarie, had set down that, which
he thought good, without speaking one word to me: alleging, that if I had
thought thereon, I would have proceeded more circumspectly. And I say unto you,
that I thought sufficiently of it, and I minded to have eased Volusius, of so
weighty a sum. And on the other side, I have ^ound out a way, that Titus
Marius, and others, which put in their security for Valerius, should not be in
any danger to pay it: taking such a course therein, that no man found himself
grieved, nay, all in general highly commended me for it. And I must tell you
more: My Notarie only, took it not well. But I thought it the part of an
honest man, having reserved to the people, what was belonging to them, to
prevent the particular loss of so many good friends, and Citizens. As for the
moneys raised out of the Province, you know, that by the advice of ^neius
Pompeius, they were laid up in the Lycaeum. And I as a thing done by mine own
Order consented thereunto. Pompeius afterward sent, and took them away, ^uen
as Sextus took yours, which you laid up: But this imports not you. I may well
grieve, that I had not the foresight to make a note; by which it might have
appeared, that you left those sommes there, with my approbation: but that there
are extant, the Senats decree, and both our letters. From hence it is manifest,
that those moneys were delivered to Publius Sextius: and I, seeing the matter
so clear, as no error could ensue^ I took no great care to make such a note:
but now I wish, for your satisfaction, that I had made it. I am of your
opinion, about giving in of the accounts, which you are to make: Neither in
this, shall your, and my accounts differ any thing: For you shall add, that
there you left those sommes by my Order; which I never put in. Neither have I
any reason to deny you this favor: and though I had, yet to pleasure you, I
would not deny it. As for the account of 2700 crowns, you cannot complain;
for it was set down as you pleased, or ^o speak more truly, as it pleased
your brother. I would willingly amend, if I could that which I left undone, in
giving up my accounts. But I must be circumspect, that herein I commit no
error, the term set down by the Senate being past. But surely, you have no
reason to be so angry, for I could not otherwise behave my self: although in
this, I refer me to their judgments, that understand it better then I do.
This I assure you, that I Will fail you in nothing, not only wherein I see you
deeply interested, but wherein soever I may do you a pleasure. As for those
that have done good service to the Commonwealth; know, that I have given no
testimony, except it be of the Tribunes, of the Soldiers, of the Prefects,
and my Domestickes; wherein I erred, supposing, that I might at my pleasure,
have presented their names: but afterward I was advertised, how 'twas
necessary, to present them within thirty days, after the giving in of the
accounts. Out of doubt, I am very sorry, that I left not this care to you,
seeing you are so ambitious of it. For of my part, there is no ambition at all.
But there remain the Centurions names, to be presented, and the Camerades of
^he military Tribunes: For, in these, the Law ties me not to a prefixed time.
Now it rests, that I return you answer, about the three thousand crowns,
whereof I remember you wrote unto me from Myrina, obiecting to me an error,
which grew by your fault, and not mine. For, i^ any deserve reprehension; It is
your brother M^ndiu^, and Tullie my Notary, that should be reprehended. But
that error being now past recalling; (For, the moneys being disposed of, I was
departed out of the Province;) I do certainly think, that according to the
inclination of my mind, and according to the hope of moneys, which I then had,
I wrote back unto you, as friendly as I could But me thinks, it is not
reasonable, that I should be bound to yield that unto you now, by way of
obligation, which then in courtesy I propounded. Neither, though you write
unto me, of the said three thousand Ducat^s, did I receive your letter wi^h
that coffeehouse, as Deb^ors in these times receive letters, from their
Creditors. You must withal consider, that in Eph^sus, I having le^t in the
hands of the Toll-Masters, three^score six thousand C^ownes, which I had
lawfully gotten in my Province, Pompey took it all. Whereof, whether I
complain, or not, questionless, your loss being only three thousand
Crowns, you may endure it with the greater patience; imagining with your
self, that the Senate allowed you not so great provisions, as indeed it gave
you; or, that my self gave you not so much, as I did. For, if you lent me
those three thousand Crowns, yet I am so confident in your good nature, and in
the love you bear me, that you would not now force me to sell something of mine
own, to have them again: for otherwise, I have no means to restore you them.
But all that I have written, esteem it to be written by way of merriment: And
the like do I, by that you have written to me. Although, when Tullius
returns out of the Country, I will not forget to send him to you, if you
think it be requisite. I desire in any wise, that you would rend this letter.
Farewell.

Cicero to Lucius Messinius. Epist. 21.
I Have read your letters with contentment, by which I understood, that you
greatly desire to see me: Which I imagined, though you had not written it.
Neither is my desire in this, inferior to your own. And so let my thoughts
obtain their wished ends, as I heartily desire to be with you. For, when our
Country did more abound, then now it does, with men of valor, and true
Citizens, and the number of my friends was greater; yet was there none, with
whom I was more willing to converse, then with your self, and but few, with
whom so willingly; but now, some being dead, other some in remote Countries,
and others not bearing that mind toward me, they were wont to do; I should
verily think one day better spent with you, then all the time I consume with
many of those, with whom I converse out of necessity. And I assure you, that
solitariness would be much more acceptable to me, (which, notwithstanding, is
not granted me) then their enter^ainements, that daily frequent my house;
except it be of one, or two, at the most. Therefore I retire my self, as I
would wish you also, to our pleasing studies: and withal, I comfort my self
with the memorial of my intentions, thinking to my self, that I never had
respect, (as I suppose you conceive) to private benefit, but to public
safety. And if he, whom you could never love, because you loved me, had not
borne me envy; he, and with him all other good men, had been happy. I would
never consent, that the violence of any particular man should be so powerful,
as to suppress common liberty. And after I saw those arms, which I ever
feared would be able to do more, then the consent of good Citizens, who,
according to my directions, and examples, undertook to defend the
Commonwealth: I was of opinion, that discords were rather to be compounded,
though upon unequal terms, so it we^e with security, then to fight against
those, who were stronger then our selves. But shortly we will confer, both of
this, and many other things. And I remain now in Rome, for no other end, but
before my departure, to know the success of the war, that is now on foot in
Africa. For, I am of constant belief, that we shall shortly see an end thereof.
And I am of opinion, it imports me, I know not what, to delay my departure:
that I may join with my friends, to take some course, according to the news,
we shall receive. Although I cannot tell you, what it is, that should so import
me; matters being grown to that pass, as overcome who will, the victory
will be the same, though equity, stand more with the one, then the other part.
And yet notwithstanding, now, that I am out of all hope, I bear a more
contented ^inde, then when we were betwixt hope, and fear. And your last
letters but one, encrea^ed my confidence: In that by them I understood, that to
support injuries, your singular humanity, much encouraged you, and much also
your learning. I Will not be sparing to tell you the truth: At first, I took
you to be rather of a so^t disposition, then otherwise; as for the most part,
all we are, to whom the chain of servitude seems too heavy; being inured to
live nobly, in a happy and free City. But as in good fortune, we bare our
selves moderately, so ought we to resist this constantly, which is the worst
that could have happened: That among so many evils, we may enjoy this little
benefit; that whereas in happy times; it was our duty to contemn death, in
which is felt no misery; now, being plunged in so many tribulations, we ought
not so much to contemn, as to desire it. I request you, for the loves sake,
that you bear me, to embrace this quiet: and firmly to believe, that besides
offense, and sin, from which you have been hitherto, and ever will be
exempted, there can nothing light upon a man, how terrible soever, which should
dismay him. I will presently come to you, if I see there be any occasion. And
if it be requisite, to change resolution, I will for^hwi^h adu^rtise you. But I
beseech you, being so crazie, hazard not to travel, out of a desire to see
me, before you have my advice therein. Let me request you, to love me still,
as you do; and to regard your health, alacrity, and contentment. Farewell.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Cicero to Aulus Torquatus. Epist. 1.
THough there be such a confusion of all things, that every one is discontented
with his fortunes, and that there is no man, that would not rather be any where,
then where he is: nevertheless, I make no doubt, but that in these times, it
greeues every honest man, rather to be in Rome, then any where else. For,
though there is great affliction felt in all places, for the great loss, both
public and particular, nevertheless, the eyes increase grief, when they are
constrained to behold that, which others hear; neither do they ever suffer us
to remove our thoughts from miseries. Whereupon, though of nec^ssitie, seeing
your self deprived of many things, you must needs be affected with great
grief: yet free your mind, from being gr^eu'd, because you are not at Rome;
the which, as I hear, vexes and troubles you. For, though it may touch you
nearly, that you are separated from your friends, and your own fortunes; yet
they st^nd in their usual state, nor would they be greatly bettered, by your
being present. Neither should you, when you remember your friends, desire a
particular fortune, or re^use that which is common. And, whenever it happens,
o Torquatus, that you truly consider with your self; you shall not need to
yield, either to desperation, or fear. For C^sar, who hi^herto, has been
more unjust to you, then your dignity required, has given evident testimony,
that he wishes you no more ill And think not, though he be greater then we,
that he is any whit more ^ecure; the end of all wars being doub^full. For
the one victory I cannot perceive, that you are in any such danger, that is
not as well every man's ruin as yours. And for the other, I know you no ways
stand in fear. It remains that the general peril of the Commonwealth, must
needs pierce your heart; the which I turn to a kind of consolation. And
though learned men, prescribe many medicines, for this so grown a disease; yet
I fear, there is no other true comfort to be found, then that, which is
applied from the fortitude of a man's mind. For if to live well, and happily,
it suffices that a man have a clear conscience, and do all things
conformable to Justice: I think we cannot properly term him unhappy, who is
privy to his own heart, that his secretest thoughts had never other object,
then honesty. For I cannot imagine, that we left our country, our children,
and our fortunes, for any hope of reward: but therein we thought that we
discharged a certain just, pious, and requisite office, for the Commonwealth,
and to our own honor; not being so foolish, that we should repute victory
certain. Whereupon if the same ensued, which formerly we supposed might
happen, when we did enter into the enterprise: we must not abandon our selves,
as if something had happened, we thought would never have come to pass. Let us
therefore believe (as in truth we may) that those things are never blamed in
us, which proceed from Fortune, and not from our selves: and being exempted
from this blame, we ought patiently to undergo those disasters, unto which,
the life of man, is subject. Out of which reasons I conclude, that there is no
man so sunk in misery, but that virtue is of power, to preserve him. But let
the lot fall to whom it will, of every side you have hopes, if any hope remain
to public affairs. And here I remember, how you were wont, to reprehend my
despair; and to encourage me to that war, whereunto you savv me going
against my will. At which time I never condemned our reasons, but our course.
For I saw, that we too late opposed those arms, which had been much
strengthened by our selves. Wherefore I gave counsel, that such a war was to
be avoided, wherein force prevailed above counsel; and violence, above reason.
And when I said, that, that would ensue which did; I presaged not what would
come to pass: but only feared lea^t those miseries should happen, which I saw
were likely to fall out: especially, that if I should have given my censure of
one, of two ends, I would surely have promised that, which was most certain.
For we were superior in those things, which are not used in fighting; but
inferior in the experience of arms, and resolution of soldiers. Now, assume
you, I pray ye, that courage, which then you thought I was to take. All the
forementioned I have written, because your Philargyrus discoursing before
with me, and moved as I think, out of loyal affection, he told me, how
sometimes you would be transported with grief, which you should by all means
bridle: being assured, that if the Common wealth return to her former estate,
you may certainly hope, that you shall live as honorably in the same, as any
way is convenient: and if she remain desolate and oppressed, you shall have no
worse conditions therein then the rest. And this time, wherein we all
continue doubtful, and daunted, ought hereupon to seem unto you less
grievous, because you are in that City, where virtue grew, and was borne;
which teaches us, how to dispose, and order our lives. Then have you
Seruilius Sulpitius, whom you always loved dearly, whose loving and sage
exhortations, you cannot want: and if we had followed his authority and
counsel, we should never have lost with arms in hand; but we should
willingly have yielded, without coming to them. I have spoken too much, where
peradventure 'tvvas not requisite; that which most of all imports, I will tell
you briefly. There is no man, to whom I am more bound then to you. The ruin of
this war has deprived me of those friends, to whom I was deeply obliged,
as you can testify. I know that at this instant, I bear no sway. But
because no man is so afflicted by misf^rtunes, but that he may, if he will be
only attentive to one thing, work some effect: I ^ssure you, I will employ
for you and your children, my council, endeavor, and affection of heart,
wherein I will neue^ be wanting unto you. Far^well.

Cicero to Aulus Torquatus. Epist. 2.
IF I write seldomer to you, then I was wont, it is not because I am
forgetful of you, but only in that for the most part, I feel my self
vnhealth^ull; though at this instant, I am reasonable well; and in that I am
not in Rom^, where I may understand, whither any go thither or not:
vvher^upon be assured, that I keep you in memory, and love you better then
^uer I did; and I have no less care of yours, then of mine own occasions. If
your matters hitherto, have not obtained that good issue, which men wished and
expected, undoubtedly, you have no reason, to grieve much thereat, considering
the wicked condi^ion of th^se present times. For one of these two things must
needs happen; either that the Commonwealth shall alway^s be troubled with
arms; and that having l^id down arms, s^e may once again recover breath^ or
else ^^^t s^e must absolutely perish. If arme^ ^r^uaile, you need not fear^,
either those that ^ake you to favor, or others whom you have assisted. If arms
be laid aside by accord, or given over by wea^in^s, or shall be violently by the
victors, taken out of the hand of the va^quish'^; in which of these kinds
soever the City do respire; you shall return to ^our place, and withal you
shall enjoy your Fortunes: But if every thing come to ruin, and such an end
happen, as Marcus Antonius, a very wise man feared ever since that time, that
he foresaw the future discords; mis^rable, and most unhappy doubtl^sse is the
consolation, which I mean to give you in this case^ especially to such a man,
and such a citizen, and nevertheless very nec^ssarie: that no man must grieve
for that which all others endure. What virtue may be in these few words (for I
will not, ^or some respect, speak any further) if you shall but consid^r, as
questionl^s you do: you may, without my lett^rs conceive, that these turbulent
seasons, may once clear up again: but, in what state soever the Commonwealth
stand, you need not be afraid: and if she be absolutely defaced, in that you
would not survive her, though you might, it is but reason, that with all
patience, we should comport such an accident; especially being innocent
therein. But no more at this present. I should be very glad, if you would write
unto me, what you do, and where you will be: to the end I may know whither to
write, and whither to come. Farewell.

Cicero to Aulus Torquatus. Epist. 3.
IN the last letters, I was somewhat long, not that there was any need, but to
testify the love, which I bear you. For your valor is so solid of it self,
that no exhortation is necessary to sustain it: neither am I in a state, to
comfort another, being deprived of all consolation. Wherefo^e at this present,
I must be brief: for if then it was not requisite to write at large; much
less is it now: And if it were then necessary; let that which I have written
suffice; the rather because nothing new has since occurred. For though we have
news every day, the which peradventure you hear also: yet all sort to that
end, which I discern as well by my understanding, as the things that we behold
with our eyes. And yet I see nothing, the which I know not vnd^ubtedly that you
likewise observe. For though no man can presage, the event of the battle: yet
me thinks I see it: and if I see it not, nevertheless, in that of necessity
one or other must vanquish, I conceive what victory will come to, as well in
the one, as the other. And let fortune bend to which side she will, I perceive
such a scourge thereon depending, that a man ought almost to seek death to
avoid it, with which some suppose to daunt us. For a life deprived of Honor is
no life: and death though it bring an end to a happy life, was never by
wisemen reputed a misery. But you are in that City, where the walls
themselves, can tell you these things, and that more abundantly, and with
greater eloquence^ I assure you, though other men's miseries are but of small
consolation, that you are in no greater danger, then any of those whosoever,
which either forsook the war, or of others tha^ renewed it: These fight, and
those stand doubtful, who shall remain victor: But this consolation is of no
great moment; behold an other far 'greater; the which I hope you will apply
to your self; even as I also do. Nothing while I l^ue can affflict me, being
innocent o^ all off^^ce: and if I live not, how can I feel any grief? But I
call to mind, that I return anew, (as they say) ^o bring owls to Athens. I
have, and ever will have, the greatest care I can, of you, of yours, and your
interests. Farewell.

Cicero to Aulus Torquatus. Epist. 4.
THere is no news at all; and if there were, I know your Friends certify you
thereof: but of the future though it be hard to speak: nevertheless a man may
by imagination sometimes come near it, when the matter is such, that a man may
forecast the issue. At this time it seems only probable, that the war will
not long continue: though some are of contrary opinion. I think that by this
time some effect has ensued: not that I know it certainly, but because we
may easily conceive as much. First, every man may expect the victory; and of
all battles, the end is ambiguous. Then, the Army both of one and other side
is so great, and so resolved to fight, as it is no great wonder though either
of them vanquish. That opinion is every day confirmed, that although the
occasions of the war be different, yet between their victories there will
be no great difference. One side we know, by experience: on the other part,
if Caesar vanquish, there is no man who does not forecast, how great fear
the^e is like to be; both because it is provoked, and in that it will have
arms in hand. And in relating this to you, if you think that I augment your
grief, whereas I should mittigate it with some consolation: I confess, that I
find no comfort in the common calamities, besides one; the which if you could
embrace, were very great, and such as I every day make use of: and this it is.
That a man, when he has wrought all the good he is able, ^ought not to be
disturbed for any contrariety, that may happen, not having deserved it.
Therefore, we having always advised ^or the benefit of the Commonwealth, and
being rather the blame of Fortune, then of our counsels, that things have
succeeded ill: and in a word; for so much as did belong unto us, we having
never been deficient; we ought to endure that patiently which has happened.
But yet I will not be persuaded, that I am able to comfort you, in these
common miseries, wherein a greater wit then mine is required to give it; and
singular virtue, to support it. Nevertheless, every one may easily show you,
how in particular, you have no occasion to complain. For although Caesar has
been more slack in releasing you from trouble, then we supposed: yet I know
he carries a good affection to you. For concerning others, I do ^ot believe
you expect my opinion. It remains, that you grieve, because for so long time,
you are f^r from your friends. This is certainly a great discontent: you being
separated from the sweetest, and most pleasing children in the world. But as
before I wrote unto you, it is now a time, when every man esteems his estate
very unhappy, and rather desires to be in any other place, then where he is. I
^or my part repute my self most unfortunate, for being in Rome; not only
because in all evils, it is more terrible to behold, then to hear: but in that
being here, I see my self exposed to all those accidents, which may happen on
a sudden. Although to my self, who devise always to comfort you, the
knowledge of letters, to which I have ever been addicted, has not afforded so
great consolation, as the length of time. You may remember how much I have
been grieved. Wherein the first comfort is, that I saw more then others; when
I desired peace, although the conditions were unequal. And though I presume
not to have presaged out of my understanding, but in that fortune was pleased
to make me p^ognosticate that which ensued: ye^ I am delighted with this vain
praise of wisdom. I find another consolation, which is common ^o us both:
that if I we^e now summoned to the last period of life, I would not go
unwilling: for I would think by death, to bring my afflictions to an end; and
I should depart from that Commonwealth, wherein it auailes me not to live.
Besides this: I am now old: and I think I have spent my years so well, that
in one respect, I should die with comfort; and in another, I should not take my
self to be injured, though I be forced to pass that period; whether nature
her self has almost conducted m^e. Finally, there has died in this war
such a personage, and so many valiant men have therein left their lives; that
if we were constrained to die, me thinks it were indiscretion to r^fuse it.
For my part, I propound unto my self, all accidents: and there is no evil so
great, which I take not to be near at hand. But yet I fear not; the vexation
being greater, which is caused by fear, then is the thing it self which we
fear, wherein there is not only, no grief, but we shall find, the last
period of sorro^. But I Will go no further: and peradventure I have said more
then was requisite. But, not any delight of many words, but mere good will,
draws my letters out too long. It displeased me that Seruius went from Athens;
who because he was your familiar friend, and one replenished with bounty, and
wisdom, should I know, have ever been near about you, and have given you
great comfort. My desire is, that as you ought, and your custom is, you would
rely on your firm resolution. I will with all diligence, and care procure
that, which I shall think to be beneficial for you, and what may profitablie
concern, either your self, or yours. In doing whereof, I shall imitate your
love toward me: but never arrive to [your] deserts. Farewell.

Cicero to Aulus Caecin^. Epist. 5.
Whenever I see your son (and I see him every day) I offer, and promise
him, my endeavor, and diligence; without exception, either of l^bour,
employment, or time: but my authority, and favor; with this exception: wherein
I am able, or in what I can. Your book I have, and do read, and keep most
diligently. your goods, and state, cannot sit nearer my heart then they do:
and every day I conceive more hope, seeing many to labor faithfully therein:
as I know certainly your son writes unto you: who has himself also the
same hope. But for these things, which may be foreseen by understanding, I
presume not to discern further, then I persuade my self, that yo^ see, and
conceive. Yet nevertheless, because it may be, that being dazeled with
grief, you may not so clearly discern, I thought good to write unto you my
opinion. The nature of things present, and the course of times is such, that
this fortune cannot long stand with you, or with others: neither in a cause so
just, and upon so good Citizens so cruel an injury continue. To that hope
therefore, which in particular I have of your self, not only for your valor,
and dignity; (for these ornaments are in many others) whereunto are added your
own proper q^alities, that is, an ^leuated wit, and singular virtue: Whereof
Caesar, makes an high esteem: And you could not have stayed long in this
fortune, if he had not thought himself offended, by those worthy parts, for
which you are to him most dear. But the provocation of his mind, is every
day mittigated, and grows more calm. And I understand from them, that
converse hourly with him, that the opinion of your wit, will commend you
greatly to his favor. First of all therefore, see, that you be of an high, and
resolute spirit; For you were borne of such a father, bred; and instructed
after such a sort, as it is requisite for you to do it. And then be of
constant hop^s, for the reasons above men^ioned. And live as^ured, that you
shall command me upon any of your own, or your childrens occasions: even as
our ancient friendship, and my usual custom toward friends, and the many
benefits that I have received from you require^h. Farewell:

Cicero to Aulus Caecina. Epist. 6.
I Know not how you remain satisfied at my hands; in that I have not written
unto you, as I stood bound; ^^well by our friendship, and many interchangeable
offices; as because we were both of one, and the same Faction. Questionless,
both long since, and many times, I would have written to you, but that
expecting daily better events, I desired rather to rejoice with you, then
comfort you. Even as shortly I hope to do; which will minister me occasion to
write again unto you. Now, though I am informed and hope, that you contest
with Fortune, out of a resolute mind: yet I Will see, whether with these
letters, I can add unto your forces. I know I am not fit to do it: but that
Authority which deriues from great love, ought to operate very much. Neither
will I attempt to comfort you, as one afflicted, and deprived of all hopes of
safety: but as a person, of whose safety, I promise my self neither more nor
less, then you heretofore were wont to promise your self of mine. I remember
when I was expelled by them, who thought they could not ^uine the
Commonwealth, except I; were first suppressed, that many of my friends, who
came out of Asia, where you were to see me, told me, how you affirmed, that I
should be presently, restored, and with infinite honor. If you, through a
certain knowledge of Tuscan discipline, which you had learned from your
Father, who was a noble, and honest Gentleman, took not your marks amiss: No
more should my prognostication be false, being grounded upon that, which many
wise men have written, and I have read, as your self knows, with exact
diligence. Besides the apprehension I may have therein, through my great
experience in public affairs, and for that which I have observed in my self;
to which kind of prognostication I give so much the greater credit, because in
present things, so obscure, and troublesome, it never deceived me. I would
speak of those things which I have presaged, but that I will not seem to have
now ^eyned that which is come to pass. Yet many can testify, how in the
beginning I advised Pompeius, not to join with Caesar: and afterward that he
should not separate himself from him. perceiving very clearly, that joining
with him, the authority of the Senate was much impaired; and being separated,
a civil war would grow. I was a great friend to Caesar, and I loved and
honored Pompeius: but a^ my counsel was loyal to Pompeius, so both to one,
and other it was profitable. Many other things passed, which I foresawe.
Because I would not that Caesar, to whom I was much bound, should know, that if
Pompeius had observed my directions, he should have been in high state, and
honored of all the Citizens; but yet he should not have had such a power, as
now he has. I persuaded Pompeius to go into Spain. If he had gone thither,
the civil war had not ensued. I sought not to obtain, that Caesar being out
of Rome, might stand for the Consulship: but when the people ( Pompeius the
Consul himself, urging it with great importunity) had granted it him: I said
'twas good to satisfy him therein. And discerning that this was the seed of
civil discords, with many reasons, I labored to extinguish it; reprehending
them which affected not peace: the which, though it were accompanied with
unequal conditions, yet I preferred it before war, which on our behalf was
most i^st. Pompeius knew I spoke truth: but there were some so blind, that to
enrich themselves, and effect their desires, holding victory secure in that
Pompeius was their Captain, they saw not the benefit of my Council. They came
to arms: I stirred not: they went out of Italy, I staid as long as I could. In
brief, the care of my honor, wrought more in me, then the fear of life. I
would not leave Pompeius, because he had not forsaken me in my necessities:
therefore to shun infamy, like that Amphiar^us in the Fables, I exposed my
self, to manifest ruin. In which war no adversity fell out, which I had
not formerly denounced. Seeing therefore you may perceive the truth of my
reasons, you are bound to believe me, as men use to believe Augures, and
Astrologers, when they have once spoken truth. Neither, do I now go after
dreams, as the Augures are wont to do, nor do I mark how the birds fly,
nor hearken I how they sing, nor mind how they eat: but I observe other
signs: which if they be not more certain then those, yet they are more easy
to comprehend, and consequently, not so fallible. And my Prognostication is
grounded upon two reasons. On the one side I consider Caesar's nature: on the
other, that of the civil wars. Caesar is benign and clement, just as he is
disciphered in that book, where you complain of him. Besides, he loves noble
spirits, such as yours is: and finally, ^e will be overcome, with many men's
entreaties: seeing, that they are not moved out of vain ambition, but out of
office, and charity. The which all Tuscanie doing, it is to be thought, she
will be heard. Now, what is the reason, that hitherto, these things have done
little good? For he thinks, that granting your return, with whom, it seems,
he has some cause to be angry; he could not afterward deny it many others.
Oh, you will say, what may I hope for then? if he be angry with me? he conceiues,
that he may extract his praises from the same fountain, by whose drops, he
was formerly made wet, or dashed. Finally, he is a man of great wit, and
prudent discourse. He see'th plainly, that he cannot long keep you out of
your Country, you being in Tuscanie, which is no base part of I^alie, but
amongst others, the most noble: and equal to any in Rome, of the more
honorable sort of citizens of your age, for wit, favor, and judgment. He
will not that hereafter you should acknowledge this benefit rather from the
time, then now from him. I have spoken of Caesar: Now I Will speak of the nature
of the civil wars. There is no man such an enemy to that enterprise, which
Pomp^ius, with great courage, but small preparations undertook, that can say,
that we have either been bad citizens, or bad men. Wherein I am wont to
admire the gravity, justice, and wisdom of Caesar: He never speaks but
honorably of Pompeius: Oh, but he has performed against him, many terribly
actions. The blame is not Caesar's, but of arms, and of the victory. Do but
mark us: how has he embraced us? He made Cassius his Legate; He has given
the government of Fraun^e to Brutus, and to Sulpicius that of Gracia: he
restored Marcellus, against whom, he was wonderfully incenst, with as great
honor, as could be wished. What can I therefore infer? Take the world what
form it will, the nature of things, and of civil wars, will never permit,
but that in one, and the self same cause, all may have the same condition: and
that good men, and good citizens, that are innocent, may return into that
City, whereinto so many guilty banished men are returned. This is my
prognostication: of which if I made any doubt, I would rather use that
consolation, with which you being a valiant man, as you are, I might easily
suppose to comfort you: That if you had taken up arms, for the Commonwealth,
(for so you then thought) with certain hope of victory, you should not have
been much to be commended; but had you imagined, it might so come to pass,
that we should be vanquished, the end of war being uncertain: it would have
been a thing most unbeseeming you, not to have been constant in adverse
fortune; as you would have been discreet, and moderate in prosperous. I would
discourse yet farther; how much it would refresh you, to call to mind, that
your deeds tended to a good end; And how delight^ull your studies would be unto
you in adversities. I could rip up unto you, the fearful accidents, not only
of ancient, but also of modern Captains, that have been in this war, with
you. For other men's examples, reducing that law to memory, whereunto all men,
are constrained to obey, extenuate our grief. Besides this, I would advertise
you, in how great an hauak and confussion of things we live: in that we should
less grieve to be deprived of our country, when it is in ill state, then when
it is well: but I would not have you think of this reason. For out of hand, as
I hope, nay, rather as I plainly discern, we shall see you, in honor, and
safety. In the mean while, although I have at many other times performed this
office: nevertheless, because Caesar, and his friends do show me every day
better countenance, I more confidently promise you, my pains, my endeavor, my
love, and my labor. And be assured, that what authority or favor soever I
do obtain, I Will employ it all for your benefit: as formerly I offered to your
son, the true image, no l^sse of your mind then of your body, a very well
demeaned young man, and exceeding constant in your adversity. Look to
maintain your self, not only with fortitude of mind, but also with hope,
which you may have abundantly. Farewell.

Aulus Caecina to Cicero. Ep. 7.
I Understand, that my son has not let my book be seen, doubting (and not
without cause) lest he might foolishly err to our prejudice: considering that,
the same which was written, with a sincere meaning, may be wrested to a
contrary sense. And therefore if you have not had it, ascribe the blame to
fear, and to the quality of our state, worthy doubtless of compassion. This
my misfortune which st^ll continues, grew by writing: and in this I know my
self, more unfortunate then others. For when a writing is uncorrected, by
cancelling the error, there is remedy: and when on is a fool, fame gives him
due chastisement. But my error is amended by banishment: the sum of which
offense is; that being armed I spoke ^ll of my adversary. According to my
opinion, there is none of us, which prayed not for victory: and which desired
not also, when he sacrificed upon any other cause, that Caesar might be
suddenly discomforted: If himself think no^ so; he is truly happy: if he
know and conceive as much; why is he angry with me, for having written
somewhat, that he would not have [to be written], he having pardoned others,
who sent up their prayers to the gods for his ruin. But to return to the
purpose, the reason you had not the book was this; because I have written of
you, but yet sparingly, and with respect; desire spurring me forward, but fear
keeping me back: whereas, it were requisite, that he that wrote of such an
argument should not only be free from all respects, but be of wit also, and of
a valiant, and resolu^e mind. It Is thought there is a freedom to reprehend
other men's vices: and yet it must be done with modesty. A man cannot commend
himself too much, least he seem arrogant. It is therefore only lawful to
commend anoth^r man. And ^f you praise not a man, as much as he deserves, of
necessity, you are to be reprehended, either of ignorance, or envy. But I
think I did you a pleasure in not commending you so much as you deserved; For
when one cannot do a thing sufficiently, it is good to g^ue it over, or at
least to touch it but sl^ghtly. Nevertheless I have used moderation: ^or many
things I have extenuated; many I have clean taken away, and many also I have
not set down. Even as, therefore, of a Ladder, if you take away some steps,
cut off other some, and leave others in ill case, you would make it that no man
could ascend thereon: So he that writes any thing with restraint, what
contentment can he give the reader? And when I but name Caesar, I feel my
self tremble; not for fear of punishment, but of his judgment, because I do
not entirely know his nature. How think you, that my mind may stand, when it
reuolues with it self, reasoning almost after this manner? This word will
please him: of this other, I am doubtful: and if I change it, who knows,
whether it may not be worse? Besides this, if I commend one; what know I,
whether I shall offend him? and if I offend him, will he not take it in anger?
I wrote against him during the war: and then he was angry with me^ What will
he do now, that I am vanquished, and banished? You also augment my fear, who,
in your book of the perfect Orator, minding to defend your self from
detractors, you make Brutus your shield, and you seek a companion, to excuse
your self the better. If you, do this, who were wont to assist every one with
your high eloquence: What opinion should I conceive of my self, who for so
many years, used to have recourse to you, for my defense; and now find my
self in case, to be defended of all men? If therefore it happen, that the
mind, in this imagination be peradventure transported with any vain fear; and
that this blind suspicion torments it; in that a man must not write to satisfy
his own judgment, but in such a sort, as he esteems may please others: how
difficult it is to do any good thing, if you have not found it by reason,
Nature having given you a singular wit, apt for every great enterprise; we now
find it. Nevertheless, I enioyn'd my son, that he should read the book to
you, without leaving it in your hands: except you would promise to correct it;
that is, wholly to change it. Touching the going into Asia, though great
necessity urged me, yet I have followed your advise. About my return, it is
superfluous to entreat you: you see the time is come, wherein it must be
dilated of. It is needles my Cicero, for you to have any regard to my son
[herein,] his age, too much affection, and fear, take from him those
aduertisements, which in that respect, are requisite. It Is fit that you take
upon you, all this enterprise. I have placed all my hope in you. You absolutely
know, out of your wisdom, what things will delight him, and with what, one may
reconcile his favor. It is requisite that from you, all things should have
their beginning, and all b^ finished by your hand. You are of great power about
him, and in great respect amongst all his followers. If you will dispose your
self to believe, that you must not only take upon you the charge imposed,
though this were indeed too much; but that the whole burden is yours: you may
easily obtain whatsoever is desired. And if this security which I intrude
upon you, make me seem either too ^oolish in my misery, or presumptuous in my
friendship: let your usual love, and kindness, excuse me both in the one, and
other, which ordinarily is so great, that now at length your friends in their
occasions, do not hope, but command you. I pray, let not the book my son
gives you, be seen, except you first so correct it, that it may not prejudice
me. Farewell.

Cicero to Aulus Caecina. Epist. 8.
Having understood by Largus, who is your kind Affectionate: how on the
Calends of January, your safe conduct was expired: I spoke with Balbus, and
Oppius, knowing that every thing was well done, which was acted by them in
Caesar's absence: and I earnestly entreated, both the one and the other, that
they would grant me, that you might remain in Sicilia at your pleasure: who
being wont, either to promise me willingly, whenever I demanded any thing of
them, that stood not against their minds; or else to deny me, and tell me
the reasons, why they did so: at that instant they gave me no absolute answer:
but yet the self same day, they returned to me, and granted me, that you
should continue in Sicilia, as long as you would: for they would so use the
matter, that Caesar should be content. Now you have understood what they
permit you: I think good to make known to you my opinion. This being done, I
received your letters: wherein you consult with me, whether you should stay in
Sicilia, or go into Asia, to set in order some busine^ses of yours. I took not
this your intention, to confront with Largus words. He spoke to me in such a
sort, as it seemed you might no longer abide in Sicilia: and you write, as if
you might continue there. But whether the one or the other be true, my opinion
is, that you should not stir from thence. You shall be near to Rome; and
having opportunity of often writing, and ^en^ing messengers, you may the
better solicit your return. The which, if it may be obtained, after the sam^
manner you desire and hope; or else upon any conditions wha^soeuer; you may
^orthwith come. Therefore I would not wish you, to depart from thence, in any
wise. I will commend you to my friends, Titus Furfanus, Posthumous, and his
Legates, when they come, for they were al at Mutina. They are men of great
bounty, and much affected to those of your quality, and my very inward
acquaintance. Wherein soever I see that I may do you good, I will do my
endeavor, without being required thereunto. And what I of my self understand
not: if it be told me, I Will exceed any man's labor, or diligence therein,
whatsoever. And though I mean to speak so effectually with Furfanus, that
letters shall not be very needful: yet some friends of yours thinking good,
that I should write a word unto him, for you to deliver: I desired herein to
content them. The copy you shall see, here under written. Farewell.

Cicero to Titus Furfanus Vice-Consull. Epist. 9.
BEtween me and A^lus Caecina, there has ever been so great familiarity and
friendship, that none can possibly be greater. For his father, a valorous
Gentleman, was my especial friend, and himself I always loved from his
infancy, because he gave wonderful hopes, of singular bounty and eloquence.
And not only through amity, but through a similitude of studies, we conuersed
so domestically together, that no man was more familiar with me, then he. It is
not requisite, that I write further: you see how many occasions lead me, to
assist him, in whatsoever my power extends unto. And, because I have seen it
manifestly, by diverse signs, that you grieve much, to see good men in these
hard fortunes, and the Commonwealth in so miserable an estate. Only I request
you, that the same desire you formerly had, to help Cae^ina, may so increase,
as that it may equal the love you bear ^^y self. You cannot do me a
greater pleasure. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Epist. 10.
AS there is no man better knows, then my self, how much you love me: so am I
a testimony to my self, of the love which I bear to you. For, I ever greatly
grecu'd, for the counsel you followed (if it were counsel, and not rather
destiny) to persevere in a civil war: and now not seeing you so readily,
restored into your fo^mer estate, as is convenient: I am therewith no less
troubled, then you with my disgraces, were heretofore tormented. Postumulenus,
and Sextius, know it: our Atticus knows it; with whom I have many times
discoursed thereof at large: and Theudas your Freeman; to whom, not long
since, I imparted the inward affection of my mind: and to eue^ie one of these,
I have said many times; that wherein soever I could, I should be glad to be
employed by you, and your children; to whom I would have you write, that they
make use of my endeauours, counsel, goods, or person: for all these things
being in my power, shall never be wanting to them. If in autho^ity and favor,
I could prevail so far, as I should prevail in that Commonwealth, of whom I
have so well deserved: you should also be the man, you were wont to be; that
is, worthy of the high^st place of honor whatsoever; and in your own order,
vndo^btedly reputed above all others. But because in ^he self same time, and
for the uery same occasion every one of us is fallen from high to low estate: I
promise you those things, which, before I told you, being as yet mine: and
moreover, those, which me thinks I do yet ^eserue, as relics of my former
dignity. Because Caesar himself, as in many things I discern, rather-loueth
me then otherwise: and almost all his familiar friends, whom I have heretofore
pleasured in matters of impor^a^ce, obse^ue, and honor me with all respect.
Therefore if I may in any wise, pleasure you in your substance, that is, for
your return, on which every thing depends: and every day, by reason of their
^ords, I am in more hope: I w^ll labor, and use therein all diligence, without
being requested. It boots not to descend unto particulars. What may be done
with singular affection, and great love, that I promise you. But it imports me
much, that al your friends should know thus much; to the end they may be
assured, that Cicero will never fail Trebatius, in whatsoever he is able; and
that they may think, there is nothing so difficult, but that in the effecting
it for you, I shall hold my self fortunate. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Epist. 11.
I Would many times have written to you, if I had had matter to write; For,
when friends are in such a state, as you now are; one should not write unto
them, but to comfort them, and ^o promise aid, and benefit. To offer you
comfort, seemed not necessary, understanding by many, how resolutely, and
wisely you support the iniutie of the times; and how much the sincerity of
your own operations, and counsels do comfort you. And if you do this, you
reap great fruit from virtuous ^tudies; wherewith I know, you were ever
delighted: and I earnestly exhort you, so to do. Besides this, though you are
abundant in examples, as having turned over all ancient, and modern
histories: yet, I having more experience in the affairs of the world, then I
would; as I have less in studies, then I desire; upon my credit, I promise
you, that the hard state wherein you now stand, and the wrongs done you, will
quickly have an end. For first he, who can do what he will, becomes in my
judgment every day more reasonable, and discends further into the nature of
all things: besides the cause is so just, that it necessarily, together with
the Commonwealth, which cannot always languish, will rise up again, and
resume vigor: and every day we find, more benignity, and favor then we
hoped for. Which things, because they many times depend, upon a very little
occasion of the times, we will observe all moments, and by as many means as
is offered, seek to help, and further you. Whereupon I hope, it will be more
easy every day, about the matter I formerly mentioned, to write unto you, and
promise you help. and I will do it more willingly with effects, then words.
Be secure, that you will find more-friends, then any banished man has, or
ever had, so far as I discern: and yet you will be beloved of none, more then
of my self. Carry an invincible, and resolved mind, which lies only in your
own power. Things that remain in the government of Fortune, shall be swayed
by the times, and ruled by our directions. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Epist. 12.
BEfore this time, I only loved Dolae^bella, but was no ways bound unto him;
because I never had any occasion to use him; and he stood obliged to me,
because in his dangers, I never failed him. Now, having procured you, the
restitution, even as I desired; first of your substance, and then also of your
country; he has so interrested himself in me, that there is no man, to whom
I hold my self more tied then to him. Wherein I rejoice with you after such a
manner, as I would not have you thank me, but rather to be joyful with me:
your thanking of me being superfluous, and your rejoicing most just. Now, that
your virtue and dignity, have opened unto you the way, to return among your
friends: like that wise, and magnanimious Gentleman, you are, you must forget
what you have lost, and remember what you have reco^ered. You shall live with
your allies: you shall live with your Friends. There is no comparison, betwixt
the loss of goods, and the purchase of honor you have made. Neither should
your goods be de^re unto yo^, the Commonwealth being in so miserable an
esta^e. Our friend Vestorius writes unto me, that you give me infinite
thanks. I take it exceeding well, that you diuulge my benefit, and tha^ among
the rest our Syro knows it. For those things which I do, I would have them
pleasing to all wise men. I desire to see you out of hand. Farewell.

Cicero to Ampius Balbus. Epist. 13.
I rejoice with you, my Balbus, and upon just occasion: neither am I so
foolish, to feed you with vain hope: least mocked thereby, you dare hope no
more, after better fortune. I pleaded your cause with greater freedom; then my
state required. For being enflamed, with honest charity, and moved by that
love, which was ever common betwixt us, though my favors were but weak, yet I
have compassed the end of our desire. Whatsoever concerns your return, and
safety, all has been promised, confirmed, ratified, and established: I have
seen the effect: I have procured it: I have personally interposed my self
therein. For all Caesar's ^riends converse much with me, and so well they like
of my amity, that next to him, they hold none more dear. Wherein I have been
careful according to the quality of the times pre^ent. Pa^sa, Hirtius,
Balbus, Oppius, Matius, and Posthumous, wish me all good. And if I had made
this trial for my self, I should have been well ^ontented, that I had
effected so much, ^n these times. Which came to pass ^ecau^e I proceeded not
with respect, as it seems these present times require: And retaining old
friendship with them, I have prevailed for your good. But your good friend
Pansa, desirous to do me all kindness; being of no less authority, then
favor about Caesar; was he that favored me most above others. Tillius Cimber
also bare himself as well, as I could have wished. But that which most
imports, is, That Caesar willingly gives ear to them, that petition him, not
through ambition, but for some just, and due respect. And because Cimbers
suites were of this nature, they have sped better for you then they would have
done for any body else. We have not yet obtained the Patent, because some men
are so malicious unto us, as they would swel^ with despite, that you, had
obtaine^ leave to return, whom they tearm^ the Trumpet of the civil war:
minding thereby, to make show, that the^ took no pleasure, that a war ensue^
Wherefore I thought good, to proce^^ secretly, and to keep the matter bu^^ed.
But by that time you shall re^^ these, I make no doubt but the (...) will be
dispatched. And Pans^, wh^ is not a man of vain words, has promised me,
giving me his faith, that with in few days he will give me the Pate^
N^^er^^elesse, I thought good to wri^^ thus much to you, that you might ha^^
some cause, to cheer up your self: the words of A^pul^ia your wife, and the
tears of Ampia your daughter, making me think, that you are not of so good
comfort, as your letters demonstrate. And they believe, that themselves, not
being with you, you will be much more assailed with pens^ue cogitations. And
therefore, to rid you of all grief, that might ceaze on your mind, I judge no
remedy could be better, then to give you full notice of your delivery: which
is most certain. You know, that before, when I wrote unto you, I only
comforted you, as an invincible, and wise man, but I gave you no certain hope
of returning into your country, till the heat of this war were quenched.
Remember your letters, wherein you showed a great mind, and fi^me, and
constant to endure all accidents. Which seemed no wonder to me, when I called
to mind, that from a youth, you did negotiate in the Commonwealth; and it fell
out that you had all your M^gistracies, in the greatest dangers of the same^
and you entered into this war, not only with an intention to be happy, if
you proved victor, but to be wise, though you were vanquished. Besides,
spending all your studies, in celebrating the worthy acts of valiant men: you
must consider, that you ought to do nothing, in which you should show your
self, unlike to them. But these instructions were rather to be used, if you
were in those miseries, from which you are now freed. But now, resolve only
to tolerate with us these [inconueniences] which at this instant oppress us:
to which if I found any medicine, I would also give it unto you. But there^ no
other refuge, then learning and studies, wherein we have always exercised our
selves: the which in prosperous Fortunes yielded us only contentment, but now,
with contentment, they give us life also. But to return to the beginning, be
assured, that your restitution is obtained. Farewell.

Cicero to Quintus Ligarius. Epist. 14.
THough in these your molestations, it was my part, to write unto you
sometimes, to comfort you, and to give you assistance: nevertheless, I did it
not hitherto, supposing that I could not either with words mitigate, or in any
other manner extenuate your grief. But seeing I conceive great hope, that
within a short time, you may compass your return into your country: I could
not, but signify unto you, my opinion and desire. First therefore I will
write, that which I discern, and see clearly; that Caesar will not be so
bitter to you, as he has been hitherto: because not only the matter it
self, the times, and the opinions of men; but, as I perceive, his own nature
also, does every day, more and more mollify him. This hope I conceive, for all
men, but for your person, I may have it far greater, being secured thereof,
by his nearest favorites: to whom since news first came out of Africa, I have
not ceased to sue, together with your brothers: who are so careful to procure
your return, as I constantly believe, that Caesar seeing their valor, and
singular affection toward you, will grant what they would: and if the matter
suffer some longer delay, then we could wish; it is, because we cannot have
audience from him, being exceedingly busied, in that he must give answer to
so many demands. And moreover, being provoked against them, that have renewed
the war in Africa, it seems he has a purpose to punish them longest, from
whom he has rec^iued longest trouble. And yet against these men also he grows
every day more pacified. Whereupon I promise you, (and keep in mind what I
say) that you shall not continue in these perplexities any long time. Thus much
touching my opinion. My love I had rather should be manifest unto you, by
effects, then by words. And were I able to do as much as by right I should, in
that commonwealth, of whom I have so well deseru^d as you suppose: you should
not remain in so miserable an esta^e. But the same occasions have deprived me
both of power and favor, which were unto you the cause of you^ afflictions.
Nevertheless, look what the shadow of my former dignities can compass; what
I am able to per^orme, with that little authority that remains unto me, with
my study, with my coun^ell, with my endeavor, with my favor, and with my
affection; I will not fail to apply it wholly to you^ benefit. Be of an
invincible spirit, as ^uer you have been: F^rst, for the reasons above
mentioned: and then, because you have always both counseled, and wrought so
well for the Commonwealth, that now, you may not only hope, for better
fortune: but if you did meet with it quite contrary, yet knowing that your
counsels and actions have always been laudable, you ought to support it, with
valor, and constancy. Farewell.

Cicero to Quintus Ligarius. Epist. 15.
ASSVRE your self, that I strive with all labor, industry, and affection, to
obtain your return into your country: For besides, that I ever bare you
singular affection, the great pity, and fervent love, which your brethren
show toward yo^; to whom I am grown as friendly as to your self; permits
not, that I should omit any kind of office, or diligence, or let sl^p any
occasion, to help you. But what I have wrough^ and compassed for you, I had
rather you should vnder^tand by their letters, then mine own. I will only
write unto you, what hopes I have of your safety, or rather, what I fi^mely
b^leeue, and am s^re of. If ever there were a man timorous, in great and
dangerous affairs, and that always rather fears contrary events, then hopes
for prosperous, I am the man: and if this be a defect, I must confess I have
it. Nevertheless you shall vnde^stand, that the last o^ February, betimes in
the morning, I going to speak with Caesar: and before I could be admitted in,
having suffered all indigniti^, and protraction, your brethren being prostrate
at Caesar's feet, and with them your kinsmen, I spoke whatsoever I thought
fitting for your purpose: and not only by Caesar's answer, which truly, was
favorable, and courteous, but by his eyes, his countenance, and many other
signs, which I could better discern, then set down in writing, I took such
a conceit, as I esteem your return most certain. Be of good cheer
therefore, and seeing you wisely supported, the more tempestuous times; bear
these also chearefully, that begin to be more temperate. Yet believe not, that
I w^ll abate a whit of my usual diligence: rather I Will follow your matters, as
if they stood upon the worst terms: and not only to Caesar, but to all his
friends also, whom I know very loving unto me, I will, as hitherto I have done,
prefer earnest supplications, for your safety. Farewell.

Cicero to Basilius. Ep. 16.
I Congratulate with you: I rejoice with my self: I love you; I protect your
affairs: I desire to be certified of your love to me; and of the news of your
self, and of those quarters. Farewell.

Bithynicus to Cicero. Ep. 17.
IF there were no^ between us in particular many just, and worthy occasions
of friendship, I would rip the beginn^ngs thereof, even from our Fathe^s: which
I will leave to them to do, who have no^ with good offices preserved paternall
amity. And therefore I Will content my self, with our friendship: which
animateth me to entreat you, that you would assist me, in my absence, wherein
soever need shall require: if you stand not in doubt, that I will forget your
cour^esie. Farewell.

Cicero to Bithynicus. Ep. 18.
FOR many respects, I desire once more to see the Commonwealth in b^tter
es^ate: but especially that I might be comforted, by that, which you promise
me: in that you write, if this should ^ome to pass, you will be ever with me.
It contents me, that you carry such a mind, and the same, our inward friendship
requires; and that opi^ion, which was sometimes held of me, by tha^ most rare
man your father. For I will not deny, but that they, to whom Fortune has given
much power, by the greatness of benefits, may intimate themselves with you,
more then I am able: but believe not, that any can love you above my self.
Therefore I shall be glad, that you preserve the memory of our friendship, and
affect also, to augment it. Farewell.

Cicero to Lepta. Ep. 19.
Having seen, what you wrote in one of yours, that I r^ceiued from your
Seleucus, I presently sent a note to Balbus, that he would let me know what
the Law was [^n that point.] He answered me, that it forbad, that any one,
which was at that present Praeco, should be made Decurio: bu^ not one that had
been so in former times. So tha^, let ^hese our friends be of good comfort.
For indeed, it were too hard a case; That whereas in R^m^, the Senatorian
dignity, was conferred even upon ^he Ha^uspices: one might not in a free
incorpora^ion, be a D^curio, that in former times had borne office of Praeco:
There is no news out of Spain, but take this for certain, that Pompeius has
a great army. For Caesar himself sent me a copy of a letter, of Pat^etu^,
which relates, that he has eleven Legions. Besides this, M^ssalla wrote to
Quintus Salassus, how Pompeius put to death, in the sight of the Army, Quintus
C^rtius, his brother, because he had accorded with some Spaniards, if Pomp^ius
went to a certain town, whither he resolved to go, about the provision of
corn; to carry him prisoner to Caesar^ Whereas, you write unto me, of the
security you put in for Pompeius: if Balbus, who promised in your company,
and is a man diligent enough, in matter of his own benefit, he re^urned out
of the Country, I will not cease to speak to him the^eof, to bring the matter
to an end: whereof he seemed to conc^iue great hope. I am exceeding glad, that
my book of The perfect Orat^r, so pleases you. Certainly, I persuade my
self, that I have employ^d therein, all the judgment I have, about the Art of
an Orator. And if it be such, as you write it seems unto you, there is some
matter in me also: if otherwise, I deny not, but so much may be taken from
the opinion of my judgment, as is in that book defective. I would have our
Lep^a begin to be delighted, with such like compositions. For, although he
has not yet that judgment, which yee^es will bring upon him; yet will it not
be without great benefit, if he inure His ears to such like accents. I am not
yet gone out of Rome, because my daughter lay in. Now, though she be, as I
hope, in good state, yet will I not depart, till I have received of Dolobella,
the first pension. And to confess unto you the truth, I delight no more to go
abroad, as I was wont; I took pleasure to visit my Farms, and to separate my
self from occupations: now, I have a house in Rome, which in beauty, is
inferior to none of my country buildings; and I am as free from employments,
as if I were in the most solitary place of this world: and I may study as
much as I will, for no man hinders me: therefore I think to see you sooner
here, then you me there. Procure that our [young] Lepta, may get Hesiodus
without book, and let him have ever in his mouth.

The hill where v^r^ue has her residence,
Is of a steep, laborious ascent,
The Gods would have it so; and it is but sense,
That we should sweat, to get so rare content.
Cicero to Lepta. Ep. 20.
IT likes me well, that Macula has done this duty; I ever approved of his
wine of ^ale^^^m, for entertainment, so there were house-roome enough, to lodge
my company. For other matters, the place contents me very well, but yet I
will not forbear to come to Petrinum, because both the village, and the seat,
is so pleasant, that both one, and other inuites men, not only to lodge, but
to remain there always. Whereas you write unto me, that I should procure you
to have the charge, of some of those festiuities, which are to be celebrated in
the countries: I have talked thereof, with Oppius: for I saw not Balbus, since
your departure, being so troubled with a pain in his feet, that he comes not
abroad. But you should do much more wisely, not to seek these employments;
for you cannot by this, color your designs: Caesar's friends being multiplied
in such abundance, that he rather leaves some, then lets any new ones take
place; especially if he bring nothing but endeavor. wherein he will think,
that he has done you a favor, yea, though he should know, that you did not
receive it. Nevertheless, we will see what hope there is: for if there be none,
I would advise you rather, to estrange your thoughts from it, then to have a
desire thereof. I think to stay some days in Astura, till Caesar comes
thither. Farewell.

Cicero to Toranius. Ep. 21.
Having written unto you, three days since, by the servants of C^eius
Plancius, I will now be short: and, whereas before I comforted; now I Will
advertise you. I think you cannot do better, then stay where you are, till
you be certain what you are to do. For besides, that you shall avoid the
danger, you might incur, by sailing in the winter, so many days, through a
tempestuous sea: and besides that, when you shall hear certain news, you may
depart at your own pleasure: you have no cause, to be so desirous to go meet
Caesar: and moreover, I am afraid of many things, whereof I rea^oned with our
friend Chilo: and to bring many words within a small compass: during these
evils, you could not be in a more convenient place, having opportunity to
turn your self, whither soever necessity calls you. And, if he coms hither,
you shall have time to meet him And, if any thing hinder him, or prolong his
coming (as many accidents may fall ou^) you shall be in a place, where you may
understand all news. Thus think I, and I advise you not to do otherwise. For
the r^st, be assured, as many times I have written for your comfort, that in
your case, you need to ^eare nothing, besides the common ruin of the whole
City; which though it be grievous to tolerate, yet we have lived in such
manner, and are of that age; as we ought valian^ly to bear all adversities,
which may happen, without our fault. All your friends are here in health, and
with hearty affection, they desire, love, and reverence you. Look unto the
preservation of your health, and stir not from thence, to no purpose.

Cicero to Toranius. Epist. 22.
ALthough it is thought, that the end of this pes^iferous war is now at hand,
or that some effect has ensued; yet I cannot, but daily think, how you alone,
in so great an army, should be of the same opinion I am: And that we only,
saw wha^ ill was in that war; wherein, all hope of peace excluded, the
victory it self must needs be terrible, which brought death, if you were
vanquished; if Victor, the yoke of servitude. Whereupon I, whom those valiant
and wise men, the Domitij, and Lentuli, then said was timorous (as indeed I
was; for I feared what came to pass) do now fear nothing, and am prepared
against every accident. when I supposed, that some part of the losses, which
afterward we sustained, might have been prevented; th^n I grieved, that they
provided not for the same. But now, e^erie thing being ruinated, no council
auailing us, there remains no other remedy, b^t with patience to support all
events: especially death; being the last period of humane miseries. And I
knowing, that I have labored to maintain the dignity of the Commonwealth,
so long as I could; and able to do no more; I have endeavored at least, the
preservation of her safety. This I have written, not to use speech of my self,
but to give you occasion to think thereon; you ever having wished, and advised
the same, that I did. For it is a singular comfort, when a man calls to mind,
that though the contrary happened, nevertheless, that he always persuaded that,
which reason and conscience did read unto him, And I would to God, that we
might once see the Commonwealth, in some state; and that enjoying each other,
we may compare our afflictions together, which we then suffered, when we were
reputed timor^us, because we foretold those things which have ensued. As for
your affairs, be assured, that you have no cause, to fear any other thing,
but the general ruin of the Commonwealth. Of me constantly believe, that
wherein I may be assisting to you, your safety, and to your children; I will
ever be ready, with the greatest care, and diligence possible. Farewell.

Cicero to Domitius. Ep. 23.
IF I have not written to you, since your coming into Italy; the reason only
was, because I could promise you nothing; being in so miserable an estate:
neither could I advise you, my self wanting council: and in so grievous
tribulations, I found no m^nner of comfort to give you. And though matters are
not now a whit bettered, but stand in worser terms then before: yet I took
occasion rather to write without matter, ^hen not to write at all. Though you
were one of those, that sought to labor more for the Commonwealth, then their
power would permit: nevertheless, in what I could, I would exhort you, to live
with those conditions, which may be granted you. Bu^, having imposed that end
to your resolute, and commendable council, which Fortune will have to be the
bounds of our contentions: I pr^y, and conjure you, by our entire, and ancient
amity, and by that great love we bear one another, that for my comfort, your
Fathers, your mo^he^s, your wives, and all your progenies, ^o whom you are, and
ever were most dear; to preserve your self; and to have a care of that which
may turn to the good of your estate, and of those that depend on you. Now is
the time to reduce to action, the documents which with long study you have
learned out of the writings of wise men. In doing of which, you shall support,
though not willingly, at le^st with patience, the desire of those f^iends you
have lost. I know not mine own worth: nay, I conceive my worth to be but
small; but nevertheless I promise you, that I will as effectually labou^ that,
which I think may stand with your safety, and dignity, as you with
singular industry and love, ever proseq^uted my occasions. And this my good
will, I have manifested to your most loving mother, a woman of great bounty,
and goodness. If you commit any thing to ^e; I will do whatsoever I may
imagine, stands to your liking. And also if you write not unto me; I will
notwithstanding with all care, and diligence do, what-soeu^r I see may redound
to your benefit. Farewell.

THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Cicero to Marcus Marius. Epist. 1.
IF any bodily grief, or your usual indisposition has detained you, from
coming to the public sports; I ascribe it rather to Fortune, then to your
wisdom. But if you reputed these things vain, which by others have been
admired; and being ^ble, yet would not come: the one, and other please me
well; both that you are healthful of body; and that you had so prudent a
mind, in contemning those things, which others admire without cause; so that,
you have reaped the fruit of your vacancie, which you might wonderfully enio^,
remaining as it were alone, in that Paradise. Neither do I therefore doubt,
but you spend all the morning, in reading, and studying in that room of yours,
from whence you may disce^^e, Stabi^num, and Sei^num. At which time, they that
left you there, being drovvs^e, beheld amongst the multitude, those, which
represented Comedies. The other hours of the day, you after spent in those
pleasures, that for your recreation you made choice of: vvheras we, were
vr'gd, to hear the Comedies, which Publius Maecius forsoo^h approved of. In
truth, if you desire, I should tell you; I must needs say, the sports were as
honourabl^e set forth as might be, but not to your liking^ whereof I judge
according to mine own inclination. First, for greater honor to the
Festiuitie; they returned to the Stage, who, I thought, for their reputations
sake, had left it. Then our Aesope, who so much delights you, bare him self so
ill, as he should have done every man a favor, not to have gone forward in his
part; for having begun to swear, his voice failed him in that [very] place,
If I commit any dec^it wittingly. I need not describe the rest unto you, you
knowing how the other plays are. Neither need I to tell you that they had not
the pleasing, or grateful spe^ches of ordinary plays. For the pomp took away
the pleasure; and I am most sure, you will be very glad you saw it not. For, to
see 600. Mules in [the Tragedy of] Clytemne^^ra; or three thousand standing
cups in a Troi^ne horse; or sundry armed shows of horse, and foot, in a
battle; what delight yields it? the vulgar admire these things, but they
would no ways have contented you. If in those d^ies you made your Protoge^es
read unto you, so he read not my Orations, undoubtedly you found ^a^re sweeter
recreation, then any of us. F^r as for the Grecian, or Oscian sports, I think
you never desired to see them, in that you may see the Oscian, in our Senate;
and the Grae^ian you so detest, that you accustom not to go to your country
Farm by the Greek way. And why should I imagine, that you desire to see the
Champions, when you would never see the Fencers? wherein Pompeius himself
confesses, that he has merely lost his time, and charge, in exercising them.
Besides this: For ^iue whole days, I deny not but there we^e every day two
magnificent baytings; but what pleasure can an understanding man take, when by
a forcible and strong beast a weak man is torn in pieces; or when a goodly
beast, is with a spear goared through, from one side to the other? These
things if they were worthy of sight, thou have seen them more then once: and
we that have be^ne there before, saw nothing new or strange. The last day, was
of the Elephants: who, stroke the people into great wonder, but gave no
delight; rather a compassion: and men in some sort thought, that, that kind
beast, did participate of humane nature. But because you may not imagine, but
that in those days, I was not only happy, but free: I will not forget to
advertise you, how at the same ^ime, when the Comedies were represented, I was
like to break with the pains, I took in de^ending the cause of Gallus
Caninius, your familiar friend. And if the people favored me, as highly as
they did Aesope; before God, I would leave the art willingly, and live with
you, and our equals. For if this kind of life, did not please me, then, when
both my years, and ambition, excited m^ to follow it; and when I was not bound
to defend any, but such as I thought well of; neither was I bound to defend
whom I would not, now I am so weary of it, that I can follow it no more. For I
expect no fruit of my labors; and sometimes I am enforced, to defend such an
one, as has done me an injury, at their entreati^s, that have benefitted me.
Wherefore, I daily cast about, how I may one day live, after mine own humor:
and I cannot express unto you, how praise vvorthie I hold your resolution; and
how I am satisfied to see you live so retired. And I grieve the less, for your
coming so seldom to see us, for if you were at Rome, neither could I enjoy
your sweet conversation, nor you make use of mine, be it what it will be, by
reason of my troublesome negotiations: from which if I can but ease my self,
(for I seek not to be altogether freed,) I have a mind not only to teach
others, but your self also; who for so many years, have studied nothing else,
what that life is, which may truly be called a life. Attend you as you do, to
maintain, and preserve your self, in this your weak constitution: to the end
that we may visit our country houses together, and at ease, range up and
down, here and there, in our Litters. I have been longer then I use to be;
not through the abundance of my time, but out of love: you having half
invited me in a certain Epistle, to write somewhat, which might make you not
repent, that you were not at the sports. Wherein if I have given you
satisfaction, I am glad: if not, I will be of good hope, that an other time you
will come to see them, and visit us; not expecting, that my letters should
herein give you full contentment. Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Marius. Epist. 2.
I Will diligently perform what you enjoin me: but certainly you were very
circumspect to commit the enterprise to one, who for his own inter^st,
desires, that the thing may be sold very dear: but you showed wit in limitting
me the price, for which, I was to buy it. For if you had referred your self to
me; as my love is towa^ds you, I would have enioyn'd my coheires to have given
you satisfaction therein. But now I know what you will spend, I will vnde^hand
send a person, that shall offer near your price: that th^re be no sale made
under the price you offer: But no more iest^ng. I will observe you with that
dilig^nce, which I ought. As for Bursa, I am sure, you receive great
contentment; but you rejoice ^oo coldly with me; supposing^ as you write, that
by ^eason of his ignobilitie I esteem the mirth the less, Be assured, that I
was more joyful at ^his sentence, then when Clodius was slain. First, because
I love rather to overcome with reason, then with arms: then, because it is
pleasing to me to overcome rather with the glory, then ^^^ne of my friend. And
above all, it liked me, that good Citizens have manifested so great affection
to me, though they perceiu^d in opposition, the preualent practices, and
infinite desire of Pompeius, a man so honorable, and potent. Last of all, which
could scarcely seem probable, I wished worse to this man, then to Clodius
himself: For ^o Clodius, in opposing him, I had done an inurie: and to ^his
defending him, a benefit: and Clodius aimed at an high enterprise, s^eing all
the Commonwealth was to run the same Fortune with me; neither did he mo^e of
himself, but through their ass^stance, who, I being safe, could not be s^fe
themselves. But this fooli^^ creature, for his recre^tion, went about to molest
me: and made some that envied m^e, beleeu^, that he would always be galling
of me. I pray therefore rejoice exceedingly. A great victory is obtained.
There were never more resolved Citizens then they, who durst attempt to
condemn him, against Pompeius power, who had chosen them for his i^dges; which
they would, never have done, if they had not been touched at the heart, with
my passion. We are so incombred here, with aboundanc^ of Judges, and new
laws; that every day we pray that some suspension follow not, to the end
that, as soons as may be, we may see you. Farewell.

Cic^ro to Marcus Marius. Epist. 3.
WHEN I consider, (as many times I do) on the common miseries, wherein for so
mani^ years w^e have lived; and for any thing I see, are like st^ll ^o live; I
call to mind that t^me, when w^ were last together. Nay, I remember the day it
self: For on the xiii. of May, in the year, when L^an^ulus and Marcellus were
Consuls; I coming in the evening into Pompeianum, you came presently unto me,
with a mind much troubled; And the grief did arise partly from thinking on my
office; and in part also for my danger. If I remained in Italy, you doubted
least I should fail in my office: and if I went to the civil war; you feared
I should run in^o some imminent peril. At which time you might perceive me
also, ^o disturbed, and deprived of all counsel, that I knew not how to elect
the best. Nevertheless, I chose rather to yield to the fear of infamy, then
to respect mine own safety. Which afterward I grieved at; not so much for
fear of d^nger, as for ^he many defects I found there, whither I was gone.
First, the Army was but little and weak: then, except the Captain, and some
few others, (I speak o^ the chiefest) the rest were in the war it self so
ravenous, and in wo^ds so cont^melious, that the victory it self astonish^t
me. I may further add, that the honourablest Citizens, of our parts, were
much charged with debt, What should I say more? The^e was nothing else good;
but the occasion of the enterprise. Which having obs^rued, I dispairing of
victory, first began to counsel ^ peace, as always my custom was. Then
Pompeius being very far from this opinion, I began to a^^^^e him, to draw the
war out at length. Whereunto sometimes he consent^d, and said he would do
it; and wo^ld peradventure have so done, if after a certain encounter, he had
not grown too confident in the force of his soldiers: neither afterward, did
that man, so highly ever esteemed, any thing beseeming a good Captain. With a
new Army, raised in diverse places, he joined battle, with tough and lusty
soldiers. Whereupon remaining vanquished, and having lost, even his lodging
Tents, alone reproachfully, he betook himself to flight. And this was my end
of the war: it appearing unlikely to me, that being so broken, we could
rest victors, in that we were not equal, when we were most entire. I departed
from that war, wherein it was necessary, either by fighting to die; or to
light upon some trecheries; or fall into the hands of the vanquisher; or have
recourse to King Iuba; or to be retired into voluntary banishment; or else
make choice to kill my self. Certainly nothing else could thereon ensue;
being neither willing, nor daring, to put thy self into the Conquerours hands.
But of all the foresaid discommodities, there was none more tolerable then
exile; especially to him that is innocent; when no further infamy concurred
therein: and when you are deprived of that City, where you can behold nothing
without grief. I made choice to live amongst my friends, (if one may say, that
any man has now right in any thing) and yet I was pleased, to be with my
friends. I prognosticated what did afterward ensue. I came home, not with hope
to remain there very contented; but so there were any form of a
Commonwealth, to be resident as it were in my country: if there were not; to
live as it were in banishment. Me thought I had no occasion, to offer my self
death; yet many, to desire it. For we commonl^ say, that a man should no longer
esteem his life, when he is no more the same man h^e was. But notwithstanding
to be guiltless, is a great ^x^^nuation of affliction: ^speci^lly having two
things for my sustentation, the knowledge of the most commend^d arts; and the
glory atchiued by my worth; the one of which cannot be taken away from me in
life; nor the other after death. I have been trouble^ome to you, with this so
tedious a discourse; b^t knowing you to be most loving to me, and the
Commonwealth, I meant absolutely to lay open my mind unto you: first, to show
you, how I never would condescend, that the power of one Citizen should be
greater^ then of the whole Commonweal^h. But after that through some man's fault
the forces of one particular man so increased, that there was no means to
resist him, I affected peace: and the Army being lost, and that Captain in
whom our hopes did live; my desire was, that all the rest, should have given
over the war; but not obtaining this my self alone le^t it: and now if this
be a City, I make account to be a citizen; if it be not, I suppose my self
to be an exile, in a place, where I remain in no worse condition, then if I
were in Rhodes, or Mitylene. I desired rather to have discoursed of these
things with you face to face; but because I saw, I should not so soon find
opportunity, I thought good now to write them: to the end that if you chance
to be in any place, where any speak sinisterly of me, you may know how to
defend me. For there are some, who, though my death would no ways advantage
the Commonwealth; yet they think it a great sin, that I do live. And these
men, I am certain, think the number of them that were slain in this war,
to be very small: who if they had followed my advise, though with unjust peace,
yet with honor, they might have lived. For they should have been inferior in
arms only, but not in equity. Here is a longer Epistle then peradventure
you d^sired; and I ^^all believe you take it so, except you write me another
longer. If I can dispatch some businesses of mine own, I hope shortly I shall
see you. Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Marius. Epist. 4.
THE xiiii. [of this present.] I came into Gumanum with our Libo: I think
presently ^o go to Pompeianum. But I Will first let you know of it. I desire,
that you should be always healthful; but more questionl^sse while we are
together. For you see we shall shortly meet. Wherefore if you determined to
apply any remedy to the gowte, defer it while another time. Be careful
therefor of your health, and expect me within two, or three days. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Caesar Imperator. Epist. 5.
BEhold, how secure I am, that your mind is no wa^es different from mine, not
only in my own occasions, but also in those of my friends. I thought to have
brought Caius Tr^batius in my company, whither soever I went, with an intent
to do him all the honor and favors, that possibly I could: But seeing
Pompeius journey grows much longer then I supposed: and in that I may easily,
for a ce^taine suspicion that you are privy to, either stay, or at least
prolong my depar^ure: see what security I repose in you: I have begun to
resolve that Treba^ius shall attend for that from you, which he hoped for from
me: and I have promised him no less, in your good affection, then I was wont
to assure him of mine own. But there has happened a wonderful accident, as
it were to assure me, that my conceit was not vain; and to secure me of your
favor. For our ^riend B^lbus, being in my house; and I speaking affectionately
to him, of the foresaid Trebatius, a letter of your^ was brought me, in the end
of which you wrote thus: I will make Marcus Furius, whom you commend unto me,
either king of Gall, or L^pta's Ambassabour. If you please, send me another,
that may for your sake, be honored. I and Balbus bliss ourselves, that this
should happen at such a time, as it seemed not fallen out by chance, ^ut even
sent from heaven. Behold therefore, I send unto you Trebatius; and so much the
more willingly, because besides mine own desire you inuit me to send him
also. I entreat you my Caesar, to embrace him with that humanity, which is so
incident to your own nature, and to confer those benefits upon him alone,
which for my sake, you would procure any friend of mine. And this I assure you
in his behalf, not with my old manner of speech, whereat writing to you, of
Milo, you worthily laughed: but after the Roman manner, as discreet man speak;
that there is no man, that in bounty, valor, or modesty, goes beyond him;
whereunto may be added, for the greater ornament of his other qualities, a
singular memory, and perfect knowledge of that, which appe^taines to the
government of Ci^ies. I do not require you, to make him a Prefect, or a
Tribune, or to give him any other dignity, only I desire, that you would love
him, and vouchsafe him your accustomed courtesy. And yet, I shall not take it
^ll, if you please to advance him, with such like titles of glory. And fin^lly,
ridding him, as they say, out of mine own hands, I put him into yours, so
famous for victory, and promise observed. But it may be, I use more ceremonies
in this, then your courteous disposition comporteth: But for those, I doubt
not, but we shall find a fitter opportunity hereafter. Be careful of your
health; and continue the love you bear me. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Epist. 6.
I Never write to Caesar, nor Balbus, but I recommend you; and that not with
cold, but with such fervent words, as they give great notice of the love, which
I profess unto you. But I pray you, shake off these fantasies, and that same
humor of returning to a City life: and with care, and resolution, strive to
obtain that you hoped for, upon your departure. And we your friends will as
readily pardon this, as those noble and rich Matrones pardoned Medea, that
inhabited in the high Castle of Corinthus: whom, with her white hand, she made
believe, that they ought not to reprehend her, because she lived remote from
her Country. For in the lands of strangers,
Have risen many rangers,
And have their Countries public good procured.
Many in their own cottage,
Possessed with drowzie dotage,
Have their whole life without ren^wne endured.
Among which, questionless, you had been one, if we by violence, had not
driven you from hence. But another time, I Will write more at large. Now, you
that have studied to open other men's eyes, open so your own, that you be not
deceived by the Charretiers of Britannia. And^ seeing I have begun to enter
into that passage of Medea, reser^e this always in your mind; That he is not
wise, that is not wise for his own profit. Look to your health.

Cicero to Trebatius. Epist. 7.
I Forget not to recommend you: but I would feign hear from you something,
about the effects thereof. I have great hope in Balbus; to whom I often write
effectually of you. I wonder much, that when I receive letters from my brother,
you write not to me. I understand, that in Britannia, there is neither gold,
nor ^iluer: if it be so, I would wish you out of hand, to take a chariot, and
retu^ne presently to us: but in case, that without Britannia, we may compass
our intention, seek to thrust in, amongst Caesar's Familiars. Wherein my
brother, and Balbus, will greatly assist you; but assuredly, more your own
modesty, and deserts. You serve one, who, besides many means that he has to
prefer you, is by nature most liberal. You are of an age very apt to serve
him. And by me, most assuredly, you are recommended with all efficacy: so
that you need to fear but one thing, [which is] that you neglect not your
self. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Epist. 8.
CAESAR has written very friendly unto me, how you have yet no great
familiari^ie with him, in regard of his great employments; but that without
fail, you shall have hereafter. And I returned answ^r unto him, how acceptable
every favor and courtesy that he did for you^ would be unto me. But in your
letters, I observe too great haste; and I cannot conc^iue, why you refused the
benefit of the Tribuneship, ^specially in that you should have been fre^ from
the trouble of executing it. I will expostulate thereof, with Vacerra, and
Ma^ilius, but not with Corneliu^^ because, confessing, that you were instructed
by him, you cannot commit an error without some imputation to himself. I
pray, make use of this opportunity and occasion, for you will never find a
better. Concerning what you write unto me, about that Doctor Pretianus, I
cease not to remember you to him. And he in like manner writes to me, that
you have occasion to be beholding to him. I would feign know wherein: and I
look that you should write often to me out of Britannia. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Epist. 9.
THese many days I know not what you do; for you write nothing to me, nor for
these two months have I written to you. Seeing you were not with my brother
Quintus, I knew not whether, nor by whom to write, I desire to know, where you
are, and where you mean to winter. I could be glad it were with Caesar: but I
durst not write to him thereof, knowing how discontented he is now: but I have
written of it to Balbus. See you be not forget^ull of your self, and return
a little the later, to return the richer: you need not make haste to come
hither, especially Vacerra being dead. But you want no counsel. I would feign
know, what resolution you have undertaken. Cneius Octauius, or whether it be
Cn^iu^ Cornelius, your familiar friend, borne of a noble family, of which no
man has notice; knowing that I am your friend, inuites me often to supper
with him. But hitherto he could never bring me thither; and yet I accept of
his good will. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Epist. 10.
I Have read your letters, by which I understood, how our Caesar is of opinion,
that in the knowledge of the Laws you are very profound. You have cause to
rejoice, that you are gotten into a Country, wh^re it is thought you know
somewhat. And if you had also gone into Britannia, undoubtedly, in that so
great an Island, you would not have met with your equal. But neuerth^lesse (I
may well laugh, seeing you inuit me to it) I bear you a kind of envy, that
you were called by him, to whose friendship^ not through any pride in himself,
but by reason of his many negotiations, others cannot attain. But in these
letters, you write nothing to me of your affairs, which certainly touch me,
as nearly as mine own. I am aff^aid, lest this winter, you be frozen, and
therefore I wish you, to keep always a good fire. Mucius, and Manilius concur
with me in this opinion, as they that know, that you are not very well
furnished with clothes: though I hear, that you in those parts, meet with them
that set you on heat. Through which advertisement, I feared much your
occasions. But you are much more circumspect in the Art of war, then in
pleading. For, though you can swim excellent well, yet you were not willing to
swim in the Ocean, nor to see the Charretiers of Britannia: although, when you
were at Rome, you never failed to go see them run, and manage horses. How
effectually I have written to Caesar in your behalf, your self knows: how
often, I know. It is true, that for this many days, I discharged not this
office; only because I would not seem, to distrust in his infinite courtesy,
and of the singular affection that he bears me; notwithstanding, in these last
that I wrote, I thought to renew your recommendation to him. And I would be
glad to know, what I have wrought, and withal of your estate, and all your
designs. And therefore I desire to know, what you do, what you expect, and
how long you think, to live from us: and be assured, that I cannot endure
your absenc^, if I perceive not, that it is ^o^ your good. For otherwi^e, we
are both the foolishest men in the world: I, because I seek not to draw you to
Rom^; you, because you come not away flying. One meeting that we have together,
whether it be about grave, or jesting matters; is certainly more worth; then,
not only our enemies, but the very Ed^i our brethren. And therefore let me
know all, as soon as you can: For, by comfort^ counsel, or effe^t, I Will
f^rther you. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Ep. 11.
IF you were not a^readie departed from Rome, you would now certainly have a
desire to leave it. For in so many Interr^gnum's, who has need of a Lawyer? I
would advise all Doctors, to demand two Aduocateships of every Interrex. Do
you not think that I am a great proficient in your Law terms? But tell me,
what do you? how go matters? for I see, that you begin to jest. These
signs are better, then the Statues of my Tusculanum, the which we also call
signs. But I desire to know, what this imports. You write, that Caesar takes
your Council: I would be gladder, that he took counsel of himself, to do
you some good. And if he do it, or that you hope he will do it, bear with
this war, and leave it not. For I, with the hope of your benefit, will
moderate my desire of seeing you. But if you see no way, to enrich your self
there, return to Rome: For here, either you shall at one time or other get
somewhat; or if not, one discourse betwixt us, will questionless be worth
more, then all the Samarobri^ae that are in the worl^. Besides, if you return
presently: you shall minister no great matter of rumor, or talk; but if you
continue long abroad, without any profit, I am much afraid, not only of
L^b^rius, but of Valerius also our companion; For, in a Comedy, the person of
a Doctor of Britannia may fitly be represented. Do you laugh? I laugh not;
but, of a most important matter, as my use is, I write iestingly unto you. But
now to lay aside all jests, I most lovingly entreat you, if by the means of my
letters, you be honored, as you deserve, that you will curb the desire of
being with us, and seek to ^ugment your reputation, and benefit. But if
matters go ill forward, return hither. But be c^rtaine, that with your own
wo^th, and with those offices I perform, in recommending you most
effectually, you shall obtain the end of all your desires. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Ep. 12.
I Could not imagine the cause, why you gave over writing to me. But my friend
Panfa tells me, that you are become an Epicurean. Oh! what (...) honorable
war? what would you have done, if I had sent you to Tarentum, and no^ to
Samarobrina? I never liked you since, you commended the li^e whereunto Titius
also my familiar acquaintance, meant to apply himself. But how will you
defend civil equity, doing every thing for your own i^t^rest, and nothing
for your citizens? what will that part of the law benefit you, which
commands, that amongst good men, promise be kept? how can he be a good man,
that does nothing for any man, but himself? how will you show, that, that
which is common ought to be divided: if they which only respect their own
delight, will have nothing common? How would you have men swear by Ioue^ if
you think that Jove cannot be angry, with any body? And how shall the people
of the Vlubrans do, if you be of opinion, that a man must take no care of
public things? I am therefore very sorry, if it be true, that you are
entered into the school Epicur^s: but if you counterfeit, to humor Pan^a, for
your profit; I excuse you: so you will sometimes write, what you do, and what
you would have me do, or procure for you. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Ep. 13.
HOw come you to conceive, that I should be so unreasonable, as to be angry
with you, because you seemed so instable, and desirous to return to Rome; and
that for this cause, I forbear long time to write unto you? It Is true, that the
g^iefe and coffeehouse of your mind, which I perc^iued in your first
letters, troubled me very much. But I omitted to write unto you, for no other
cause, but because I knew not where you were, and yet you complain, and accept
not of my excuse. Alas! I pray tell me my Tribatius, is it money that makes you
so presumptuous? or is it because Caesar, so great a Captain employes you? I
would I might die, if I do not think, (such is your vainglory) that you
had rather be employed by Caesar, then to be gilded over with gold. But be it
the one and the other; who will support your pride, besides my self, who am a
man apt to endure every thing? But to re^urne to my purpose, I am very glad,
that you remain there so willingly: and as your former coffeehouse was
grievous to me, so now I am delighted, to see you con^ented. Only I am in
doubt, that your Art, will help you but little. For I vnd^rstood, that there,
N^ man decides his cause by law:
But being crossed begins to draw.
And you are not a man, to maintain quarrels: nay, I know you to be so
modest, that your aduersari^s cannot put in this plea against you, that you
with armed power, were the first to assail them. But that I may give you so^e
item also, of those that are not in your books, I advise you to take heed of
the Treuiri. I hear that they are ^ruell. I had rather they were rich: But
another time peradventure, I shall have more leisure to jest. I pray write unto
me diligently, how al matters are carried there: the iiij. of March. Farewell..

Cicero to Trebatius. Epist. 14.
CHrysip^us Vettius, freeman to Cyrus the Architect, made me think that you
had not yet forgotten me. For he saluted me in your name, you are grown very
coy, that you vouchsafe no^ to write to me, who am so near a fri^nd vnt^ you.
And if you can write no more: there will be found but few h^erea^ter, whom you
are like to overthrow in their suites. But if you have forgotten me, I will
endeavor to come unto you, before I be clean razed out of your memory. If
also, the ^eare of the summer debilitate you; de^ise some excuse, as you did,
about Britannia. The foresaid Chrysippus told me, to my singular contentment,
that you are one of Caesar's intimates, but certainly it would like me better,
and more reason there is, that I should have daily i^formation of your
proceedings, by your own letters. To which desire questionless you had never
given cause, if with as great care, you had learned the laws of amity, as you
did those that belong to plead^ng. But all this I speak by way of ^est; as ^ou
are wont to do, and I too sometimes. I bear you unfeigned affection, and I
desire; yea, verily I believe, that you do the same. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Ep. 15.
HOw hard a matter it is to content them that love; this may teach you. First
you made me despair, in that you would not remain where you are. And now I no
less despai^e, i^ that you write, that you continue there willingly. Then, I
was vext^ beca^s^ you were not contented to be recommended by my letters; now,
I am di^pleas'd, because you live contented, being separated from me. But yet I
had rather suffer the want of my p^esent desire, then not to behold you in that
state, I hope to see you in. I cannot utter, how glad I am, that you are entered
into amity, with Caius Matius, a courteous and learned man. Use all means
po^sible, to endeare him to you. Undoubtedly in this Province, you cannot make
a greater purchas^. See you look unto your health. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Ep. 16.
IN the Tragedy entitled the Troiane Horse; it is written as you know toward
the end. The Troianes wit be^gins too late: But you, little one, delayed not
long to get wit. In the beginning you wrote letters ^o me full of complaints
rather foolish, then otherwise. Afterward you were not very ^ond to see
Britannia, for which, I can not blame you; and now, I see you wholly addicted,
to the winter residences: and you think not to stir a foot. You must be wise
every way; [for] ^his is the course to improve you. If I did use to sup abroad,
I would have satisfied Cneius Octauius in his desire. But I could not forbear,
he inuiting me so often, to ask him, who he was? Not to jest: he is an honest
man: I would you had taken him along with you. Let me understand by all means
what you do, and whether you mean to come into Italy this winter. Balbus
writes to me of a certainty, that you will become a rich man. I will not now
examine, whether ^ee spoke after the Roman phrase, that you were to have money
enough, or else according to the Stoickes, who affirm, that all they are ^ich,
which enjoy heaven, and earth. As many as come from thence, aueire, that you
are so haughty, as you sc^rne to answer, to a demand made: Nevertheless you
have reason to rejoice; in that it is generally known, that at Samarobrina,
there is not a learneder man in the laws, then your self. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Epist. 17.
I Have given my brother thanks, as you wrote [I should:] and now finally I
may commend you; seeing at last your determinations are firm, and stable In
the first months you ^rouck't me much to anger: and sometimes (I'l^ tell it
ye, with your patience) you appeared very mutable, in desiring ^o return to
Rome; sometimes ^ counterfeit; otherwhiles timorous, in those commands that are
imposed upon soldiers; and often, which was not wont to be your fashion, h^lfe
pre^umptuous, and impudent: For you would presently r^turne, full of money; as
if you had gone to Caesar, with a bill of exchange, and not with a letter of
recommendation. And you remembered not how they that went to Alexandria, with
letters of exchange to recover their debts, have not yet received ^o much as
one Harrington. If I had aimed at mine own profit, I would undoubtedly have
desired to keep you about me; for your conversation yielded me no small
contentment; and your counsel, and endeauours, were very beneficial. But
knowing the trust you reposed in me, and the affection you bare me, even from
your younger years; I had ever a mind, not only to preserve your estate, but
to increase both your honor, and profit. Wherefore, when I had an opinion to
go into my Province, you may remember what place I offered you, without being
entreated. But after I changed my resolution, perceiving how Caesar held m^ in
good esteem, and loved me affect^onatelie: and knowing his wonder^ull
courtesy and rare constancy; I sent you to him; and recommended you, with the
greatest efficacy, possible. And he has often written to me, that for my sake
he will show you all favors. Even as to your self also, both in words, and
effects, he has manifested. Having there^o^e light upon such a man: if you
think I either know any thing, or wish you well, neglect him not: and if any
thing peradventure o^^end you; supposing, that either through his great
occupations, or that he is not able, he does not so suddenly remunerate your
service: bear a while, and expect the end; which will yield you, honor, and
contentment. And take my security for the same. It hoots not that I spend more
words in persw^d^ng you; only I give you this advise, that neither, to
purchase absolutely the love of so honorable a man, and so liberal, nor to
settle you in a Province of worthy emplo^ments, shall you euerlight upon the
like occasion. Besides, your bodily vigor, ca^ never be better. And (as you
use to write in your books.) So thought Quintus Cornelius, I am very glad you
went not into Britannia; both because you suffered not the discommodities [of
such a journey,] and in that you have not to relate unto me those events. I
pray write unto me, where you mean to keep your winter, and with what hope,
and condition. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Ep. 18.
I Received at one instant some letters of yours, that were written at diverse
times: Every thing pleased me: that you prepare your self for this war; and
that you are a worthy fellow. And though at the first you seemed to me
somewhat unconstant; yet I thought not, that this proceeded from a wavering
mind, but from an ardent desire to be with me. Give not over therefore, so
promising a beginning; pass thorough this warlike employment with an
invincible mind. Assure you, you will gain much thereby. I Will renew your
commendation: but when the time shall be fitting. Build upon this, that you
cannot desire more th^n my self, that your present absence may be very
beneficial. And in testimony thereof, conceiving that your laws do not
help you much, I sent you some few days since, a letter in Greek, by which
you might be aided. I pray write unto me, of the success of the wars of
Gallia. For I give credit, to every foolish and idle fellows reports. But as I
said, all that you wrote pleased me; only I maruailed, that you wrote against
all common use; many letters with your own hand, of one, and the same tenor.
For, as for writing to me, upon r^zed paper, I see your frugalitie, and I
commend you for it: But I am a considering, what it might be that was first
written there; which you would rather cancel, then write out: unless
peradventure, they were your law cases. For I cannot be persuaded, that you
would raze out my letters, to insert your own. Was it happily your meaning to
let me know, that your employments, were unfruitful, and that you get not so
much, as may buy you paper? This is your own fault, who carried with you
shamefastness, and would not leave it behind you here with us. I Will commend
you to Balbus, when he comes thither, after the Roman manner, that is, with
all efficacy: and if you receive not my letters so suddenly, do not wonder.
For I will be abroad all the month of April. I write this in P^ntinum,
staying a while, in the Farm, of Marcus Aemilius Philemon: From whence I was
wont, to hear the noise of my Clients, who by your means, committed
themselves to my care. For 'twas confidently told me, that a multitude of frogs
were assembled together in Vl^bra, to come and visit me. Farewell. They viij.
of April, from Pontinu^.

THough your letter which L^c^us Aruntiu^ delivered me, was very innocent;
because it contained nothing, that might not securely have been read in the
hearing of the people: yet I rent it, as well because of Lucius Aruntius
words; who said, that he received from you the like commission; as because in
the end of the self sa^e letter you put me in mind to do so: but no more of
this. I marvel that you never since wrote unto me; especially so great news
having occurred. F^^evvell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Epist. 19.
SEE, whether I love you: (though certainly upon just occasion^ for, I do not
go beyond you in love) for being now far o^f, I could not withhold that from
you, which in R^me I would not grant, nor so much as promise you: wherefore, so
soon as I dep^rted from V^li^, I began a ship-bord, to compose the Topics of
Aristotle: and the sight of that City, because it was so aff^cted to you, made
me have a desire unto it. I sent you the book from Regium: in which you shall
see, that I have entreated of that matter, as plainly as possible I could: but
if some things seem obscure unto you: you must imagine, that no science can
be learned out of writing, without an Interpretor; and without some exercise:
and not to go ^a^ from the matter; your Laws, think you they can be le^rn'd
out of books only? which, though they be many; nevertheless, they requi^e a
teacher, and exposition. Though, if you read my book attentively, and often, I
will not say, you shall reap a^l the fru^^ that you desire; but at least, you
shall understand the matt^r of your self. And, i^ you will have also the
places, from whence you draw your arguments, when any question is propounded,
to come readily to mind; exercise is necessary: wherein I will help you, if I
return safe, and find things safe at Rome: Farewell, the xxviij of July, from
R^gium.

Cicero to Trebatius. Epist. 20.
SInce I knew the affection that the City of Velia bears you; I thought her
more worthy of my love: though she loves not you only, who is beloved of
every one; but also your Ru^io, who is as much desired, as if he were one of
us. But I think you very wise, in causing him to come to your building. For,
though Velia is of no les^e est^eme then Lupercal, nevertheless, I had rather
you would make a building in Rome, then any where else. But for all this, if
you will follow my council, as you were wont, you shall not sell your fathers
possessions, which you have here; (I speak this, because the Velienses
something doubted thereof) Neither shall you leave Hele^es an excell^nt river;
nor forsake the house, sometimes of Papi^ius: though it have a grove, where
even strangers are wont to rest themselves. Notwithstanding, if you cut it, you
will have a goodly prospect. But it may be very commodious for you,
especially in these times; first, to have their City for a receptacle, to whom
you are dear; then your own house, and your farms also; especially in a
remote, heal^hfull, and pleasant place. And, I think, my Trebatius, it will
also be fit for me. But regard your health, and have a care of my matters,
expecting me, by the Gods help, before Autumn. I have caused Sex^us Fabius,
to give me his Master Nico^s book, wherein he treats of eating well. O
sweet Physician! how willingly I learn these precepts: I marvel our Bassus
never spoke word to me of this book. It seems he spoke to you. The wind
rises, have a care of your health. From Velia, the xxth. of Iulie.

Cicero to Trebatius. Epist. 21.
AFter I had informed you of the cause of Silius; he came to me: and I
telling him that you were of opinion, that promise without prejudice to his
right, might be made in this form: If Quintus Caepio the Praetor, has given
me possession of the goods of Turpilic^ He answered me, that he vnde^stood
from Seruius Sulpitius, that a will is nothing worth, if it be made by him,
that has no power to testate. Adding, that Offilius a^firm^d the same; but
that of this, he could not talk with you: and he prayed me to commend his
cause unto you. Be assured, that besides you, I have not a greater friend then
he: neither know I a better man. Therefore it would please me very well, and I
much entreat you, that you would ^inde him out. But do it, if you love me, out
of hand. Farewell.

Cicero to Trebatius. Epist. 22.
YEster-night, at the Table, you laughed a^ me, because I said, it was a
doubtful case, whither an hei^e might in right, challenge a th^^^, which was
committed before his time. Wh^reupon, though I returned late home, and full of
wi^e; nevertheless, I noted ^he place, where the said case is written; and I
sen^ it you: because you might know, that Sextus Aelius, Marcu^ Man^lius, and
Marcus Brutus, are of a contrary opinion: and yet I agree to S^euola's
opinion, and yours. Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Fabius Gallus. Epist. 23.
I Had not been long come from ^rpi^as, when your letters were delivered me:
and by the same messenger, I received one from Anianus: wherein ^e courteously
promis^d me, that at his coming, I should become his debtor, for what time I
would. Imagine a little, that you are my self. Do^ you think it stands,
either with your modesty, or mine; first, that I demand a day of paimen^; and
^^at afterward, I should requ^re it for above a yeere^ but all had be^ne ^ell,
if you had brought those things, which I desired, and ^or such a sum as I
would. And neuerthel^s^e; with that, you write you have bought, I shall not
only be content, but take also great pleasure therein; knowing evidently, that
you have used not only diligence about it, but also love: and that you have not
bought a thing, which you thought not fit for me. But have first satisfied your
own judgment, the which in every thing I have always reputed excell^nt. Yet
I would not have D^masippus change his mind: Because you have not bought a
thing ^o my liking. You have, not knowing my mann^r, bought these four, or
five statues, at so great a price, as I would not give it for all the sta^ues
that can be found. Besides, you parallel these statues, with the Mus^s of
M^tellus. What comparison is there? First, I would never have so high prized
the Muses themselves: and all the Mus^s would have been contented with this my
judgment. Nevertheless, they would have well beseem'd my Library, as a
convenient ornament for our studies. But the statua's of Bacchus, how they like
me! Oh they are fair! I know it too well: and I have se^ne them often; but if
they had pleased me, I would have given you special commission [to buy them:]
For, I use to buy those statues, the which after the manner, as is accustomed
in schools; may adorn my room, in the Palaestra. But the statua of Mars, how
can that fit me, who ever procured, and persuaded peace? I am glad there was
never a statua of Saturnus. For it, and that of Mars, I should have thought,
would have indebted me. I rather would, that there had been one of Mercurius:
because I think, Auianus would have come to a more reasonable price. Whereas
you write, that you would have that Tr^pesophorus, or Statua, which supports
the table; if you like it, I Will give it you: but if you be changed, I Will keep
it my self. With the money, certainly, which you have spent upon these
statues, I could far more willingly have bought a lodging at Tarracina, not
to be always troubling my friends, by lying in their houses. But I see the
fault is in my freeman, to whom I specified the things I would have: and
likewi^e in Iunius; who, as I suppose you know, is absolutely for Amanu^. I
have begun in a gallerie of my Tusculan^m, certain ^^^ting rooms, the which I
would adorn wi^h fair pictures. For, if any such like things delight me,
picture pleases me. But yet if these statues must lie upon my hands, certefie
me where they are, when I mu^t send for them; and how to convey them along.
For, if Damasippus will not have them, we shall find some other Damasippus,
though I should lose somewhat therein. As for the house, when I received your
other letters, I was upon my departure: and therefore I left the care to my
daughter; and spoke also thereof to your Nicia, who, as you know, is a friend
to Cassius. But when I was returned, before I could read these your last; I
demanded of my daughter, if she had done nothing in it^ she answered me, that
she had spoken thereof to Licinia, Cassius sister, with whom I suppose, he
conue^seth not much. And she said^ that she durst not part with that house,
without Decius her husbands knowledge, who is gone into Spain. It l^kes me
well to see, that you make so great account of conuersing, and living with me;
first that you would take that house, wherein you shall not only dwell near
me, but as it were with me; besides, because you have so great a desire to come
to it; which notwithstanding, let me not live, i^ it be greater then mine.
Wherefore I will use all ^he mean^s I can therein, perceiving how much it
imports both the one, and other of us. If I can do any thing you shall
understand of it. Write back to ^e of every thing: and certify me if you
please, when you will come. Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Fabius Gali^^. Ep. 24.
Whether soever I turn my self, I see manif^st signs of the love you bear
me: which was the occasion, that you were disple^^^d about Tigellius. I thank
you therefore for your good will: but I Will deliu^r you the case briefly. Capius
(i^ I be not deceived) was wont to say, I sleep not to every man: So, I serve
not every body. But what ^er^ice is this? Heretofore, when I was in great
esteem, I was not so much observed, and reuerenc^d of every body, as I am at
this present, by all Caesar's friends, e^cept only by this man. Wher^of me
thinks I make great v^e, in that I cannot tolerate such an one; more
pestilent, then his country it selfe^ And I think he took this h^rd conceit
against me, because himself could have liked well of the praises, which Calu^s
Licinius bestows upon me, after the manner of Hipponactes. But see, wherefore
he is in choler with me; I undertook to defend the cause of Phamea, out of a
desire to do him a favor: for he conuersed with me very domesticallie: Now,
he came to me, and told me, that the Judge would hear his cause, presently on
that day, when I was to sit in counsel about Publius Sextius. I answered him,
that I was desirous to pleasure him; but that it was not possible: and upon
any other day, when he thought good, I would not fail him. He, knowing that
he had a Nephew, which played sweetly, and sang very well, departed from me,
so far as I could perceive, half angry. You may see the nature then, of
these Sardi: they are like those which are sold in the open ma^ket place, one
worse, then anoth^r. You have heard my reas^ns, and the fume of this Sala^on.
Send to me your Cato, I desire to read it. It Is a shame for us both, that I
have not yet read it. Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Fabius. Gallus. Ep. 25.
Grieve not that I rent your letter; for I have kept it; and you may have it,
when you will. I thank you for aduertising me; and I pray you to a^uertise me
continually: For you seem to fear, that if we have other superior, then this
man, our joy, may change into mourning. But do you not see, that the Master
comes, sooner then we thought? we must lay down the pensill: to the end that
the praises given by us to Cato, turn not to our prejudice. Be a^sured my
Gallus, that, that part of your letter, could not have been set down more to
the purpose; where you say, other things are ^ransitorie. Hear this in secret:
keep it to your self: tell it not to Appella your freeman: no man writes
after this manner, but we two. I do not say, well, or ill; suffice it, that no
man writes as we do: pros^qu^^e then your style, and never give it over. For
it is that, which teaches us ^o speak well^; and I begin to spend therein
also a part of the night. Farewell.

Cicero to Gallus. Ep. 26.
Having now been ten days grievously sick of the colic, and not being able
to persuade them, that would have employed me, that I was ill; having no
fever. I sl^pt away to Tuscula^um: where finding my self very weary of
that infirmity, especially having continued two days without tasting a drop
of water, or any thing else: I thought that you should rather have a care of of
me, then I of you. I use to be greatly afraid of all diseases; but most of
that, for which the Stoics reprehend your Epicurus, hearing him say, that the
difficulty of urine, and of the bloody Flix, disturbed the peace of his
mind. One of which diseases is thought to proceed from superfluity of
meats; and the other by a more dishonest occasion: I doubted much in the
beginning, lea^t it would have been a Flux: but it seems I received good by
change of air: or peradventure, because I have freed my mind of many cares;
for, this ^uill was already in declination. Neuertheles^e because you shall
not wonder, from whence this disease grows, and from what disorders: the law
upon expenses, which seems to have brought continency, made me err. For
while these gallants, who are curious in their meats, begin to bring into
reputation those things, that spring out of the earth, which are exempted from
the l^w; they season mush^oanes; and little, and all sorts o^ herbs; with so
great Art, that better cannot be ^aten. Having therefore eaten thereof in
Lentulus horse; a cruel Flux came upon me, which has h^ld me till now: and
so I that easily refrained from Oysters, and Lampries, I have been deceived;
by what? by Beetes, and Mallows. Hereafter therefore we will look b^tter to
it. But it had been your part, having understood it by Anitius, who saw me
vomiting; not only to send, but to have come, and seen me. I make account to
stay here, vvh^le I recover my dissipated forces. But if I can rid my self of
the disease, I hope easily to recover them. Farewell.

Cicero to Gallus. Ep. 27.
I Know not wherefore you complain of me^ having no occasion: and though you
h^d, yet should you not complain. Y^u write, that when I was Consul, I made
use of you; and that Caesar will restore you, into your country. You speak it
too confidently; but none believes you. You add, that you demanded the
Tribuneship for my sake. I would you had been alw^ies Tribune. For you should
not have been to seek of an Intercessor. Afterward, you sting me, saying,
that I dare not speak ^r^ely; as if I had not freely ^nswered you, when you
imm^destly entre^ted me. This I write unto you, to giu^ you to understand, that
in these qu^^kes of wit, in which you ^uppose your self, to be some body; you
deser^e no commendation. But if you had mildly complained of me; willingly, and
as p^easingly I would have justified my self. I d^slike not what you have
done, but what you have written. And I wonder much, that you should not esteem
me a free man, having preserved others liberty. But if the things were false,
which you, as you say, laid open to me: what am I bound to you for it? if true^
you may be a sufficient testimony, how much the people of Rome, are bound unto
me. Farewell.

Cicero to Curious. Epist. 28.
I Remember, I ^hought you heretofore not ver^e wise, in that you wou^d live
rather there ^h^^ with us: for ^he situation of this City, when it was a
City, was more conformable to your affable and sweet nature: then all
Pelopo^nesus, therefore far more then Patrae. Now contrariwise, it appears
unto me, that you were very circumspect; when, seeing no remedy for the
matters of Rome, you went into Graecia: and that you are at this present not
only wise, in being far from hence^ but also happy. Though now a days,
who can be happy that knows any thing? But as you are gone into a part, where
you here not the iniquities that are here committed; so have I found out
another means not ^o hear them. For, since I betook my self to my friends
that come to visit me: who for this cause also, come hither oftener then they
were wont; for they think they see a white bird, when they see a good
Citizen; I retire me to my Library. From whence I compile works, that
peradventure will please you. For I once vnde^stood, that you reprehending my
affliction; said, that you perceived not in me that greatness of mind, which
my Book inferred. But as in that time, I mournd for the Commonwealth: which
not on^lie for her benefits toward me, but also for mine toward her, was
ve^ie dear unto me: so now, though not only reason comforte^h me, which is
of great force, but also time, which impaireth grief, even in fools; yet I
lament, that common liberty is so lost, that no hope remains, to regaine it.
Neither hitherto can we complain of him, that gouernes all things, (except
peradventure this be his offense) but Fortune has been in fault for some
things; and for some, our selves also. So that we must not grieve for that
which is past. As for that, that is to come, I see no hope at all. Whereupon I
return where I began. You were wise, if judgment; happy, if fortune caused
your departure. Farewell.

Manius Curious, to Cicero his Master. Epist. 29.
FOR, though Atticus bought me, you enjoy me: so that the fruit is yours, and
the possession his: which, if (...) would sell, he could find but a little for
it. But what think you of the testimony I make, whersoeuer I come? By saying,
that I acknowledge all my good from you; that I liu^; that I have; that I am in
any esteem? Wherefore my Cicero persevere constantl^ in preserving me, and
co^mencing me, especially to Sulpitius your successor: that I may the more
easily obey your precepts, and see you at Rome, to my great contentment; and
more commodiouslie carry my things from hence, and conueie them with me. But
show not this letter to Atticus. Let him believe, that I am an honest man, and
that I use not to gratify two men with one thing. Be careful theref^re good
Patron, to maintain your health: and salute my Tiro in our behalf, The xxix.
of October.

Cicero to Curious. Epist. 30.
NOW I neither persuade, nor entreat you to re^urne home: nay, and I also
desire to d^part, and arrive in some quarter, where I may not hear the name,
nor the works o^ the children of Pelops. You will not believe what blame I
think my self worthy of, f^r being present at these things. You seem to have
foreseen long before, what would ensue, when you departed from hence. For
though these things be also bitter to hear; yet ^o hear, is more tolerable
then ^o see them. You were not in Campus Mar^ius, when, at two a clock, the
people being to be assembled, for the creation of Quaestors, Quintus M^ximu^
his seat was placed, whom ^hey nominated Consul: but his death being
understood, his seat was carried away: and Caes^r, leaving the crea^ion of
Quaestors, created a Consul, who was to hold his Magistra^i^, from seven a
clock, till ^he Calends of Ianu^^ie, which were on the morning of the day
following. So that, all the while Caninius was Consul, no man dined; neither
was ^here any hurt done. For he was so vigilant, that he never slept in all
his Consulship. You think these things worthy the ^^u^hing at: because you
are not here: but if you were, you would not forbear tears. And what if I
should write unto you of further matters? For there are an infinite company of
such like: the which doubtless I could not endure, if I had not retired my
self into the Port of Philosophy; and had our Atti^us, for a com^anion in my
studies. To whom, seeing you wri^e, that the possession and power of your
person belongs, and to me to employ, and enjoy you: I am content therewith. For
then a thing is possessed, when a man enioyes, and uses it. But of this, at
some other time, I Will write more at large. Acilius who was sent into Greece
with an army, is much obliged to me: For in the better times of the
Commonwealth, I defended him twice, in cases of high importance. And he is a
thank^ull man, and do'es me great honor. I have written exactly, this fastened
l^tter, in your fauour^ which when he receives, what o^fers he makes you, I
would be glad to understand. Far^well.

Cicero to Curio. Epist. 13.
BY your letters I easily comprehend two things, which I have always desired:
one, that you g^eatlie esteem me; another, that you know your self beloved of
me: Let Us therefore contend in courtesies one to another; wherein, whosoever
remains superior, I shall be equally satisfied. I am glad that it was not
nece^^^rie ^o deliu^r my letter to Acilius. I see you have had no great need of
the Sulpicius offices; because your matters were so shefled up together, that
they have as you write, neither hands nor feet. I would they had their feet,
to the end that you might once return, because you see, that those witty and
ingenious mottoes, so long in use, are every day more and more decaying, if we
few, preserve not the ancient Atticke glory: as Pomponius, who next to you,
in promptness of witty sayings, is the chiefest; and I after him, might
deservedly say. Come therefore, I pray you, to the end that the seed of witty
jests may not be destroyed, as the Commonwealeh is extinguished. Farewell.

Cicero to Voluminous. Epist. 32.
BEcause familiarlie, as you should, you have written unto me, without your
forename: first, I was in doubt, whether the Senator Voluminous with whom I
entertain great friendship, wrote unto me; Afterward, the witty conceits of
the letter made me think that it was yours. In which letter every thing gave
me great contentment^ but this; that you do with little diligence defend the
possession of my essaies: writing to me, that after my departure all the
sayings, even to those of Sextius, are attributed to me. Do you then suffer
it? do not you defend me? I thought I had left my mottoes so signed, that they
might have been discerned from others. But seeing in Ro^e is such ignorance,
that no saying is so improper, that appears not wit^y unto some man: I entreat
you, by the love you bear me, if there be not some pregnan^ conceit in those,
which Julius in my second book of the O^ator, produces, that you will affirm
all the rest not to be none of mine, offering to wager against him, that will
not believe it. Whereas you complain of the Judgments, I care much less, let
the worst en^ue that may of all defendants. Let Selius also be so ^loquent,
that he can make men believe that he is Free borne, I care not much. But I
pray, let us defend with all ou^ power, the possession of graceful wi^tie
passages. Wherein I only prefer you [and] contemn all others. You think
that I ^est with you? Now I see you have wit. But speaking in good earnest,
your letters appeared to me very elegant. And though they should be, as they
were ridiculous. Yet did not I laugh: Because I would, that our ^riend should
govern himself, with all wisdom, both for his own respect; (for I love him
well, as you know) as also for the Commonwealth; which though she be ingrate
toward me, nevertheless, I cannot forbear to love her. Now my Voluminous,
seeing you have begun; and that you find you are dear unto me, write unto me
often of the affairs of Rome, and of the Commonwealth. I take great pleasure
to read your letters. Besides this, though Dolob^^^a be very desirous to do
me any pleasure, and bears me entire affection; yet exhort him to persevere
in his good will; and work so, that he may be wholly mine. I use unto you al
importunity herein, and yet am not satisfied. Neither does this grow, because I
doubt; but because I desire it beyond measure. Farewell.

Cicero to Voluminous. Epist. 33.
THough you are not now here, when we exercise our selves in declaiming; yet
have you no prejudice thereby. Neither need you envy Hirtius; as you write
you should do, if you loved him not. Except you would envy him, rather for
his eloquence, then for hearing my disputations. For, my sweet Voluminous, I am
of no worth; and if I be worth any thing, yet I hate my self, having lost
those companions, for whose sake, you held me happy. And though otherwhiles,
I published something worthy my name; now I lament, that these my darts were
thrown, not against armed men; but against birds, as Philoctetes says in
At^ius, ^aring no more for glory. But yet I shall be merry, if you come;
though, you shall come in the very height of occupations. From which, if I can
free my self, I will leave these businesses, to live with you and our common
frend^. For your Cassius, and our Dolobella, (though both the one, and other,
may be termed ours) attend also to the same studies: and I give ear unto them
willingly. Here we have need, of your so exquisite, and perfect a judgment,
and of that your so profound knowledge; so that many times, it makes me
reserved in my speech. I am constantly resolved, if Caesar will, to lay aside
hereafter that person, wherein I have many times given him satisfaction, and to
shut my self up in studies, ^o enjoy an honest vacancie, together with you,
and others, that have a desire to understand. I would not have had you to
doubt, that your letters would have annoyed me, i^ they had, as you write,
been long; for, I assure you, the longer, the more acceptable. Farewell.

THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Marcus Coelius to Cicero. Epist. 1.
AT my departure, I promised to write diligently to you, of all things that
should fall ou^ in R^me. Whereupon I have collected every flying news so
particularly, as I fear, lest this my ^oo affected diligence, has exceeded
those bounds, beyond which it grows irksome. Although I know, how curious
you, and how glad they, that be far from their Country are, to understand
every little matter that occurreth. Nevertheless, I earnestly entreat you, to
hold me for a man, that sets not too much by himself, though the pains be not
mine, but committed to others: not because, it is not pleasing unto me, to be
often mindful of you: notwithstanding all my employments, and natural
slothfulness, in writing to my friends, which you are privy to. But the
profunditie of the book, which I send unto you, will easily, as I suppose,
excuse me. I know no man so discharged of business, that could completely,
not only no^ have written all things ther^in contained; but not so much as
have observed them. You shall there see, all the decrees of the Senate, all the
Edicts, all the Comedies, even to the vulgar tales that a^e dispersed. And if
peradventure such aduer^isments please you not, let me know it^ that hereafter
I disturb you no more, at my charge. Important aff^ires of the Commonwealth
occurring, that ^hese mercen^rie writers cannot display in that manner, as were
requisi^e; I will write them: and give you notice, both of that which has
happened, and of the judgment that afterward passed thereof, and what is
therein expected. Now, at this present, there is nothing in hand, of any moment^
There is a report spread, as far as C^ma only, and no further, about those
conuentions of people beyond Poe; at my return to Rome, I heard no body speak
a word of it. Withal, Marcellus propounded not in the Senate, that there
should a new governor be sent into the Galliae. He told me, that in the
Calends of June, he would propound it. But certainly, he came very much short
of that feruencie, which he showed, when we were both in Rome. I would be
glad to know, if you have found Pompeius, as you desired: what your opinion of
him is? what discourses you have had? and what mind, and resolution it seems
to you, I will not say, that he has, but what he makes s^ew to have? For,
he uses to speak one thing, and reserve in his mind to do another.
Although he is not of so circumspect a wit, that he can so disguise his
thoughts, that they may not outwardly appear. Of Caesar, there is every
moment some ill news: but nothing ver^fied. True it is, there is great
muttering. One says, he has lo^t his Cauallerie: which I take to be most
true: Another affirms, that his seventh legion was discomfited, and that the
Bellouaci have closed up the passage, that he cannot return to the other
people. And though the^e be no certainty; nevertheless, not being
contraried; the vulgar speak thereof: and some, who you know, withdraw
themselves to reason together: and I can tell you, that by this time, Domitius
lays his hand on his mouth. On the 13. of May, a rumor was raised by the men
of news, at Penny-lesse Bench, that you were dead: which returns upon his
head, that dispersed it: so that over all Rome, a report was divulged, that you
were slain on your journey, by Quintus Pompeius. I, that know how Quintus
Pompeius is at Bauli, in so great misery, that he maintains his life, by
carrying men for hire; was not much moved thereat, and I desired, that all
perils that may accrue to you might prove like to this. Your Plancus is at
Rauenna, and though Caesar gave him a great present, yet is he not in
prosperous estate, nor furnished, as it were requisite. Your books, wherein
you frame the state of an excellent Common wealth, are read of every one with
admiration. Farewell.

Marcus Caelius to Cicero. Epist. 2.
Well, he is absolved. I was there when his absolution was published, and that
not only by one part of the three, which are to judge; but by them all: and by
all sentences he is absolved. Oh! will you say; speak you in good earnest?
it is as I tell you. None would have believed it, and it seems a thing very
strange. I, who grea^ly desired, for the amity betwixt us, his absolution,
rather prepared my self to condole with him: but seeing sentence past, in his
favor, I was altogether a^tonished, and it seemed to me a miracle: Then
imagine, what it seemed to others. With great exclamations the judges replied,
showing ^uidently, that it was not a thing to be supported. Whereupon, though
he be ^ree'd by the Law Licinia, he seems to be fallen into a greater danger.
Withal, the day after the said absolution, Hortensius presented himself in
Curio's Theater, as I think to be seen, and because we should rejoice with
him in his joys. But, as many as were there, began to ^rample, rore, to make a
thundering, to cry out, and keep a buzzing: which was the more observed,
because Hortensius was come to old age, without ever having been whistled at^
But on that day, he was so soundly handled, as it might suffice any man, for
all the days of his life. Of the Commonwealth, I can write nothing to you.
Marcellus irruptions are pacified; not out of neglect, but in my opinion, for
some secret respects. Of the creation of Consuls, not knowing the time, I can
give you no certain advertisement. Marcus Octauius, son to Cneius, and Caius
Hirrus, are competit^rs with me, in the petition for the Aedileship: the one is
really noble; the other pretends to be noble, but is not. I was desirous to
write this, to put you into greater expectation of the issue, hearing that
Hirrus is my concurrent. Nevertheless as soon as you are advertised of my
creation, I pray, remember the Pan^hers, and to procure Sitius to pay me. I
gave to Lucius Castrinius Paeto, the first volume of the matters of Rome; the
second, to him that brings you these. Farewell.

Marcus Caelius to Cicero. Epist. 3.
What will you say now? do I not write unto you? do I not quite contrary to
that you said? Yes certainly, so that my letters come to your hands. And in
this, my diligence is the greater; because when I have time to spare, I cannot
have a better recreation. When you were in Rome, and I had no business, I used
to come, with great contentment to your house, and to pass the hours with
you, in sundry discourses. I would I could now do so? for in truth, since
your departure, me thinks I am not only left alone, but that Rome remains
void. And whereas before many times (such was my negligence) I let slip many
days without coming to see you. Now in conclusion, I am ready to tear my
self with my ^eeth, because I cannot be every day with you. But Hirrus my
competitor is the greatest cause, that I desire you, day and night. Oh! if you
knew, how this your concurrent in the Augurship, is vexed; and faynes not to
see, that my plots take better effect, then his: of which I desire you may be
advertised, for in truth, you would wish it more for your own respect, then
mine. For if I remain A^dile; it may so be, that I shall be created, with some
rich associate: But if Hirrus get it not, we shall have such sport, at his
repulse, that for all the time of our life, we shall never want matter to laugh
at. May this be? so it is certainly. Neither can Marcus Octauius in any sort
pacify their hatreds, that are opposite to Hirrus, who are many. As for Milo's
goods: I have so wrought, that Philotimus your wives freeman has restored
them to his kindred; (...) have acknowledged herein his fideliti^, and love,
giving him in reward of his service, as much, as you set down. Now, it
remains, that I entreat you, that if you have spare time, as I hope you shall,
to direct unto me some work: that by this I may know, you are mindful of me.
Questionless you will say; your request is not foolish, but how came this into
your mind? I would, that among so many compositions of yours, some one might
come to light, which might also be a testimony to posterity, of our
friendship. For the quality of the work, I refer it to you: for you having
all knowledge, can best determine of the subject: In general I tell you, that
I desire a thing, which may be fit me, and that it may be replenish't with
documents; to give men occasion, more willingly to read it. Farewell.

Marcus Caelius, to Cicero. Epist. 4.
I Envy you, because you have every day so great news, as makes you wonder:
first, that Marcus Messalla, was absolu^d, and afterward condemned: that Caius
Marce^lus remains Consul: that Marius Calidiu^ after his repulse, was accused
by Marcus Gallius, and Quintus Gallius, brethren: that Publius Dolabella is one
of the fifteen. But I envy you not, because you did not see, how many colors
came into Lentulus Crusc^llus countenance, when he had the repulse. For
certainly there was never a more delight some thing to behold: and
peradventure he thought it would not so have past with him: and Dolabella
himself had little hope thereof. But if our Gentlemen had not had their eyes
open; undoubtedly, he had overcome his suit: and his opposite would almost
voluntarily, have given over the enterprise. I do not think you wonder, that
Seruius, chosen Tribune of the people, should be condemned. Whose place Curio
has demanded: and in their hearts, who know not his gentle disposition, he
has imprinted a strange fear. But as I hope, and desire, and as he makes
show, he will not start an inch from the Senate; nor from the party of good
men: he is now wholly for this. And that he took upon him such a resolution,
Caesar was the occasion, who not using to respect money for the obliging of
every man to him, how base soever he were; seemed to make little reckoning of
him. Wherein I think, as also by others he has been advertised, that a matter
of pleasant admiration ensued, Curio who ever before had carried himself
inconsiderately, having used all his wit, and cunning, to frustrate their
designs, which made opposition to him in his Tribunship: I speak of the
Laelij, Antonij, and other bragadoshi's. I deferred to write unto you, because
the creation of Magistrates hanging in suspense, I was enforced continually, to
attend unto negotiations: and partly I was desirous to tarry the end; that so I
might advertise you of every thing; and supposing they would presently be
dispatched, I expected till the first of August. The creation of the Praetors,
was prolonged, through certain impediments. I know not how favorable fortune
will be to me, in the creation of the Aediles Curules. It is true, that in that
of the Aediles of the people, manifest signs appeared more in favor of me,
then Hirrus. Of Marcus Caelius Vicinianus I have no fear. You know how we made
a scoff of him, when he said, that he would put on for the creation of a
Dictator. The fool propounded it, and remained vilified: and many cries were
heard against him. The same people afterward seemed to have an extreme desire
of Hirrus: I say to pleasure him over the shoulders. I hope 'twill not be long,
ere you understand that from me, which you expect, and that of him, which I
durst scarcely hope for. As for the state of the Commonwealth, we did not
hitherto look for any new matter. But the one and twentieth of July, the Senate
being assembled in the temple of Apollo, and debating of the stipend that
should be given to Pompeius, there was speech also of those soldiers, which
formerly Pompeius had lent Caesar: how many they were; and how many they should
be: so that Pompeius being overcome by a continual importunity, that some ill
tongued follows made to him, was urged to say, that by all means he would
call back the said soldiers out of Gallia. Afterward he was demanded his
opinion, about sending a successor to Caesar: who replied that generally the
matter of the Provinces, should be put off till the said Pompeies return: who
was to go to Ariminum, to the Army: and presently he went thither. I think it
will be treated of, on the xxiij. of August: and without doubt, something will
either be concluded, or some Tribune shall be nominated, that will not refuse
the charge. But such an one will be blamed, because Pompeius in consultatation
has said, that it were fit, that every one should obey the Senate.
Nevertheless, I am certain, that nothing will be done, se^ing Paullus elected
Consul, shall be the first to deliver his opinion. I am v^ry careful to put
you in mind, that you will procure me to be paid by Sitius; desiring to let
you know, that it greatly imports me. In like manner; for the Panthers I pray
yo^ deal with the Cybiratae, and when they are ready, cause them to be
conveyed to me. Besides this, it is understood, and held for certain, that the
King of Alexandria is dead. I pray, advertise me diligently, what you would
council me to do; how that kingdom stands; and who has taken upon him the
government thereof. The first of August. Farewell.

Marcus Coelius, to Cicero. Epist. 5.
I Know not what your mind is, about the peace of your Province, and the
countries adjacent. Certainly I stand in great doubt thereof: For, if we could
order the matter so, that the greatness of the war, might not exceed the
forces of your Army; and that we might obtain so much victory, as might serve
to get the triumph; and that we might avoid that dangerous, and terrible
battle: great would our happiness be. Now, if the Parthians stir at all, I
know there will be no small matters to do; and your army is scarce able to
defend a Passage. But none considers ^his: but it is rather thought, that a
governor of a Province, as you are, is bound to provide whatsoever is
nec^ssarie: supposing that he may do i^ sufficiently. Whereunto may be added;
that I cannot see, that you are to have a successor sent you, by reason of the
controversy ^isen, about ^ending one into Gallia. And though I think you have
already taken some course the^ein; nevertheless, to give you occasion the
rather to intend it, I thought good to adu^rtise you, how the matter is like to
hang in suspense. You know the ordinary accidents: the Senate will d^termine
of the Gall's: A Tribune will come, that will be opposed: then another shall be
propounded; who, if the Senate be not permitted, to send a governor into any
Province whatsoever; will likewise hinder the expedition of other Provinces.
And ^hus trifling; this dance will last so long, that for two years no effect
will ensue. If there were any thing new, about the Commonwealth, I would not
fail according to my custom, to write diligently unto you, both what were
done, and what I expected would succeed. It seems that the opposition of these
Provinces, slacken the course of other busin^sses. M^rc^llus makes all instance
for it, as he has ever done, but for all the diligence he uses: he cannot
draw a full counsel to set thereon. And, if after this year Curio enter into
the Tribuneship, and there be also treating of the Provinces. I know you well
perceive, how easy it will be then to cross every thing, and what strife
will by Caesar, and those that favor his cause, and not that of the
Commonwealth; be introduced. Farewell.

Marcus Caelius, to Cicero. Epist. 6.
I Know certainly you have understood, how Appius was accused by Dolabella;
but not with that popular disgrace, which I expected. For Appius did not like a
fool; but presently when Dolabella came before the Tribunal, he went into
Rome, and gave over demanding Triumph: by which he silenced what was spoken of
him, and showed himself more expert, then his accuser looked for. Now he has
great hope in you. I know you are rather a friend to him then otherwise: this
is an occasion to bind him to you, as long as you list: and, if some enmity
had not fallen ou^ betwixt you, you might now at your pleasure help him; but,
if you be so rigorous to handle him as he deserves: I can tell you, many will
think, that you have not conc^aled your wrath, with that pur^tie of mind,
which is expected from a sincere, and faithful man. And on the contrary; If
you ^auour him, none can say, that you had respect to the inward Amity, that
you have held with D^labella. I will not forbear to certify you, that
Dolabella's wife departed from him, at the same time, when Appius was accused
by him. I remember that, which you said to me, when you departed: and I suppose
you carry in mind that which I wrote unto you. It is now no time to write,
more at large: only I would admonish you, that if the course dislike you not,
yet show no sign of your inclination, while you see, what success he has in
this cause: to the end that the matter being known, you incur not some
blame: and assuredly, if you manifest your self, it will neither be with your
praise, nor profit; and he cannot conceal it, for the conueniencie of the
thing, conformable to his hope; and because in the present enterprise, it will
augment his reputation, especially he being a man, that though he knew it would
draw some extreme hurt upon him if he spoke thereof, yet could he hardly k^epe
it secret. It is said that Pompeius is very favorable to Appius, so that men
think, he will send one of his sons to speak to you. Here, we absolve every
body. And certainly here have been some of the ^icke^est, and most
dishonest things past, that can be imagined. Yet we have Consulls that are so
vigilant, that hitherto they could pass no decree, but one, upon the
sacrifice, which ordinarily is made on Mount Albanu^. Our Curio is cold in his
Tribuneship as Ice, and I cannot possibly give you to understand, how every
one here, stands with their hands at their girdle. If I had not found something
to do, with hosts, and watermen, a great lethargy would have ceazed upon al
Rome. And, if the Parthians set not you one heat in those parts, we shall
still be colder, and colder. Nevertheless, whatsoever our sleep be now, I
would be loath the Parthians should awake us. It is said that Bibulus
encountered with the enemy, on Mount Ama^us; and that he has lost, I know not
how many companies of soldiers. I told you Curio was as cold as Ice; now, I
tell you, he begins to be heated, and so toils himself, that he is enflamed.
For when he saw he could not obtain time to pay his debts, he plaide a
pretty pranke: he is gone from the Senates side, to the people, and has
undertaken to speak in savor of Caesar. Besides he has diuulged, how he
determines, to enact a law upon the ways, not unlike to that of Rullus, about
the division of ground; and another upon meats: conformable to which the
Aediles must bear themselves: which yet he had not done, when I wrote the
first part of this present epistle. Be pleased to interesse me in Appius
favor, by this occasion of assisting him; and as for Dolabella, I advise you
to let the matter hang doubtful, both in respect of the same Appius; as also
for your honor; and not to bring you into ill opinion with men. It is, and
will be your disgrace, if I have not Panthers out of Graecia. Farewell.

Marcus Caelius to Cicero Epist. 7.
I Know not how soon you desire, to depart from thence; I desire it, the
rather, because hitherto the war of the Parthians, has ^allen out well with
you, for which, while you remain there, I shall be perplexed, fearing least
some sinister accident may disturb my joy. I write briefly, because the
messenger, who carries the Taxe-masters letters, hastens his departure.
Yesterday by your Freeman, I wrote at large. There is no news: except I should
write these, which undoubtedly you desire. Cornificius, the young man, has
concluded a marriage with the daughter of Orestilla. Paulla Valeria, sister ^o
Triarius, without any occasion brake off the marriage, on the day that her
husband, should have arriue^ o^t of the Province. She is to be mar^^ed to
Decimus Brutus, but yet they have not publis^'t the matrimony. Many incredible
matters of this nature, ^^ue happened. Seruius Ocella, could never make men
believe, that he was an adulterer, but that in less th^n three days, he was
taken twice in ^he act. Shall I tell you where? where certainly I would not.
I Will give you leave to ask of some other. Neither do I dislike, that an
Imperator, be inquisi^^ue, who has been discovered, and wi^h what woman.
Farewell.

Marcus Coelius to Cicero. Epist. 8.
THough I have to write unto you, about the state of the Commonwealth: yet I
am persuaded, there is nothing will like you better then this. Understand, that
Caius Sempronius Rufu^, and Rufus in effect, who was won^ to be your Honey,
and Darling; was convinced with great scorn, for a false accuser, Will you
know in what matter? After the Roman sports, he accused Marcus Tu^ius, his
accuser, as a man that had committed violence. And this he did out of malice;
seeing, that he was constrained to defend himself, before the Judges of this
year, except some extraordinary accident were enterposed. And he knew very
well, what would ensue thereon. This presentation he would not put up against
others, but only against his accuser. And, although he had none, that would
subscribe to the accusation, yet he came before the Tribunal, and accused
him. Which being heard, I presently ran, to present my self, in defense of the
accused^ not a^tending to be o^he^wise invited thereunto. I came before them: I
spoke nothing of ^he cause: I bent all my speech against S^m^ro^ius, wresting
^uen that fiction to my pu^pose, which he, for the inuries he had done ^o
^estorius, had alleged: that, for you ^^k^ he would be content, to be
r^st^red. Another cause is in hearing, o^ no small moment. Marcus Seruilius
being absolutely brok^n; all his goods sold; and fallen into every man's
dises^eeme; repaired to me for defense. And I alleging against Pausania his
Creditor, that he might be satisfied by them, who had bought his goods;
Laterensis the Praetor, accepted not of my defense: and Pilius, kinsman to your
Atticus, having accused him, as a man that had imbezel'd moneys in the
Province, presently a great arguing grew, and a voice was spread, that he
should be condemned. Afterward comes Appius the younger, driven, as it were,
with a most violent wind of fear, lest Seruilius should be left so bare,
that he could not pay him 24. thousand Crowns, which he pretends to be due
unto him by this right; that his father being accused by Seruilius, and coming
to an agreement with him, gave him the said sum; to the end, he should not
proceed against him in worser matters. You wonder he should be so foolish.
But you wou^d marvel mo^^, if you knew some other, his notable sopperies; and
how his father confessed so infamous a crime to be true. He accepted of the
same Judges, which gave sentence against his Father. And the decrees being as
many of the one part, as of ^he other, Lat^rensis, not knowing the Law,
denounced that which each Bench had judged, and at last, according to the
custom, said, I will record the absolution. Seruilius was gone; and every man^
thought he had been absolved: when the Praetor, taking the wri^ten Law in his
hand, and having read the hundred and first head thereof, wherein were these
formal words, Let the Praetor give s^ntence, according to the opinion of the
great^r part of the Judges, he record^d not the ab^olution; but wrote, that of
three orders, the Senatorian, Equestrian, and Plebeian; two h^d absolved, and
not condemned him. After this, Appius again impor^uning; he contracted with
Lucius Lollius, and ^ayd, that he would register the absolution. And thus
Seruilius, neither absolved, nor condemned, but half defam^d, must answer to
Pilius imputations. Appius also himself would have accused him of such a
misdemeanor: but having sworn him false accuser of his father, he durst not
contend with Pilius, which of them two should plead against him. He was also
accused by the Seruilij, as one that raked up money in the Province, by
unlawful means: And besides this, by a certain friend of his, who was wont
to be his instrument, in accusing of others, him^^lfe was accused of violence
committed. They both hang well together. As for the state of the Commonwealth;
the business of the Ga^^iae, has cros^ed other businesses for many days. But
at last, after it had been diverse times debated of, and suspended, Pompeyes
pleasure being known, that the next March to come, Caesar should give over his
go^uernment, the Senate passed a decree, which I send unto you. Which was
subscribed unto, by the Senators, herevnder nominated. The last of
Septemtember, in ^he Temple of Apollo, there were present, Lucius Domitius
Aenobarbus, son to Cu^ius; Quinius Cicilius Me^ellus Pius Scipio, son to
Quintus; Lu^ius Villius Annalis, son to Lucius, of the Tribe Potina; Caius
Septi^^ius, son to Ti^us, of the Tribe Quirina; Caius Lu^ceius Hirrus, son to
Caius, of the Tribe Pupinia; Caius Scribonius Curio, son to Caius, of the Tribe
Popilia; L^cius Atteus Capito, son to Lucius, of the Tribe Aniensis; Marcus
Oppius, son to Marcus, of the Tribe Terentina. Marcus Marcellus, Consul having
propounded the nomination of the Consular Provinces, the Senate enacted
thereupon this present decree: That Lucius Paullus, and Caius Marcellus,
Consuls for the future year; on the Calends of March, which will be the first
day of their Magistracy, should propound unto the Senate, the affairs of the
Consular Provinces, and only propound it, omitting all other businesses: And
that in this, they should not have respect to the ordinary impediment of those
days, when the people are called to parliament: to the end that the decree may
pass howsoever: and when they do this, they shall have ample authority, to
let none of those Senators enter into counsel, which are in the number of the
three hundred Judges: and in case it be needful, to speak thereof, to the
people, or Plebeians, that Seruiu^ Sulp^^ius, and Marcus Marc^llus, Consuls for
the present year, or the Praetors, or Trib^nes of the people, whether of them,
they think good, shall take care to discharge this office: and if the
forementioned will not do it, the Magistrates of the year ^ollowing, shall
not fail to perform it. A note of the Senators, which confirmed the decree.
The last of September, in the Temple of Apollo, there were present, Lucius
Domitius Aenobarbus, son to Cneius; Quintus Cicili^^ Metellus Piu^ Scipio, son
to Quintus; Lucius Villius Annalis, son to Lucius, of the Tribe Pon^ina; Caius
Sep^imius, son to Titus, of the Tribe Quirina; Caius Scribonius Curio, son to
Caius, of the Tribe Pupinia; Lucius Atteius Capito, son to Lucius, of the Tribe
Aniensis; and Marcus Oppi^^, son to Marcus, of the Tribe Tere^tina. Marcus
Marcell^^, Consul, having propounded the motion of the Provinces; the Senate
censured, that none of those, that have power to hinder, or oppose, should put
in any delay, that the Consuls might not presently propound to the Senate, and
the Senate forthwith deliberate of things appertaining to the Commonwealth.
Whosoever shall oppose; the Senate judges such an one, to have attempted
against the Commonwealth. And if any resist the present decree; the Senate
ordaines, that his opinion be set down in writing, and be discussed of in
the Senate, and in the present^ of the people. To this decree, Caius Coelius,
Lucius Vicinius, Publius Cornelius, and Caius Vibius P^nsa, opposed themselves.
Besides, it has pleased the Senate, concerning the Soldiers that were in
Caius Caesar's army; that, of such of them, as had finished the term of their
service, or had any just occasion to give over their entertainment, the Senate
might be informed, that their reasons may be considered. If any man resist
this decree, the Senates pleasure is, that his mind be put in writing, and
that the matter be propounded to the Senate and people. This decree Caius
Coelius, and Caius Pans^, Tribunes of the people, withstood. And besides this;
the Senates pleasure is, that the next year, the Praetors of the year present
be sent, into the Province of Cilicia, and into the other eight Provinces,
which are governed by those that have been Praetors; and that they that are
sent, shall be sent by lot; and if these be not so many as may suffice, that
Praetors be chosen out by lot, of the next precedent years, which have not
been in government; and that they be sent by lot, to the government of the
said Provinces. And if there be not so many of these, as may be sufficient;
that one after another, the Praetors of the immediate next years cast lots,
that have not been deputed to government; and let this be so long done, while
the number of them is made up, which are to be sent, to the government of the
Provinces. If any oppose this d^cree, let his mind be specified in writing to
the Senate. This decree, Caius Coe^ius, and Caius Pansa, Tribunes of the
people, opposed. Moreover, it was observed by those words of Cneius Pompeius,
and great hopes thereby was conceived, that he could not without injustice,
determine of Caesar's provinces, before the Calends of March: but that after the
Calends, he would think thereupon: And being demanded, what if any man should
then oppose? he answered; that it should be as much as if Caesar should suborne
one, not to suffer the Senate to delib^rate; as if openly he should deny to
obey it. And what if he, (said another) would be Consul, and keep the Army
too? he replied, free from choler. What if my son, would give me the
bastanado? By these words it was collected, that Pompeie, and Caesar were not
of accord. Whereupon, Caesar, as I perceive, will now descend to one of these
two conditions; either to remain in the government of the Gauls, and so
being absent he cannot demand the Consulship: or else obtaining it, he will
depart. Curio sets himself wholly against him. I know not what he can do. But
I see, that he aims at a good end, and therefore cannot be ruinated. He shows
me great courtesy. But the present he made me, will redound to my loss. For
if he had not given me those Panthers, which were brought out of Africa, for
his sports; peradventure I had never entered into this dance. But seeing I am
entered, and that I must celebrate my sports: I put you in mind of that, which
so often I have written; that you will procure me some Beast, from those parts.
And I commend unto you the credit I have with Sitius. I have sent Philo
thither my freeman, and Diogenes Graecus: who will speak to you in my name,
and deliver you my letters. I recommend them both unto you, and the cause for
which I sent them: the which, how much it imports me, you shall see in the
letters, that they shall present you. Farewell.

Marcus Caelius, to Cicero. Epist. 9.
Do you think that Hirrus remained scorned? but you do not well know all.
For if you knew how easily, and with how little pains I put him down, you
would blush; calling to mind, how he was sometimes so impudent as to concur
with you. And after this repulse, he laughes with every man: to counterfeit a
good Citizen, he speaks against Caesar: he blames the Senate, for being so
slack to deliberate: he follows Curio with ill words: what needs more? this
repulse has made him change nature. Besides this; though he never appeared in
the Forum, and has little practice in pleading: yet is there not a more
courteous advocate then he. He entertaines and follows every cause, but
seldom after noone. I wrote unto you, that on the xiij. of August, the matter
of the Provinces would be determined: but because Marcellus chosen Consul for
the year following, was of another opinion, it is put over to the first of
September. The Consulls were so far from doing any thing else, that they could
not bring many Senators to Counsel. I sent not these, before to day, which is
the second of September: and hitherto no course at all is taken. For any thing
I see^ this cause will be deferred ti^l the next year: and so far as I
conceive, you must leave one in the government of the Province. For otherwise
exchange cannot be made; se^ing it cannot be resolved, that a new governor
should be sent into the Galli^; which must needs stand in the same condition,
that other Provinces do. Of this I make no doubt: and I meant to write to you
thereof, that you might know how to dispose of your self. Almost in every
letter I write unto you of the Panthers. It will be l^ttle credit to you, that
Patiscus should send ten to Curio, and that you should not send me many more.
Curio gave me those ten, with other ten besides, which he had out of Afri^a: to
the end, you may not suppose, that he can only give possessions. You may have
as many as you will, so you will be mindful, in sending to call for those
Cybiratae; and writing into Pam^hilia, where they say a number are taken: and I
importune you more now, then usually, for I determine to solemnize my spo^ts
separate from my Colleague. For my sake, strain your nature a little: use
diligence herein. You were wont to be pleased, as well as my self; to have but
fe^ businesses; now, you shall have no ^urther trouble, then to speak, that is
to command, and give in charge. For when they are taken, you may leave the ca^e
of keeping and conducting them, to those men, whom I have sent, to recover my
debt of Si^ius. And peradventure if you put me in hope of having them, I will
send others for the same purpose. Marcus Fe^idius, a Roman knight comes in
those parts for his occasions. He is an honest young man, vali^nt, and son to
a friend of mine. I recommend him to you, and entreat you to repute him in the
number of your friends. He has certain land in your Province, which pays
part of the increase. He would by your favor be freed from this imposition.
Which thing is both easy, and honest for you to grant him: and you shall
bestow a benefit, upon men grateful, mindful, and replenished with bounty. I
would not have you think, that Fauonius has not had their favor, who sell
their voices at a price, but he found none of the better sort of Citizens
favorable to him. Your Pompeius says openly, that he will never permit, that
Caesar shall hold his Province, with an Army and be Consul: nevertheless, he
gave council, that the Senate should not for the present, enter into any other
deliberation; and that Scipio, should be expected to deliver his opinion
thereof, the first of March: and that then the matter should be propounded in
the Senate, and that nothing else should be done, before this be ended. Which
opinion daunted Balbus Cornelius, and I know he complained thereof to Scipio.
Calidius in defending himself, was most eloquent, in accusing another, rather
cold then otherwise. Farewell.

Marcus Caelius, to Cicero. Epist. 10.
WE were much grieved a^ the news, which by the letters of Caius Cassius, and
King Deiotarus, we understood. Cassius writes, that the Parthian soldiers have
passed Euphrates: Deiotarus, that they came into our Province, by the country
of the Comagens: There was none more vexed then my self, and that for your
cause: knowing that you are ill provided in your Army, and fearing least this
commotion, might cause some prejudice to your honor, for I should fear your
life, if you had a greater Army. But because it is but little I imagine, you
will not join battle, of which necessity, I know not what construction will
be made. I c^nnot certainly, rid my mind of this care, till I understand that
you are come into Italy. But this news of the Parthians passage, has raised
up diverse opinions. Some give counsel, to send Pompeius thither: others, that
he should be retained at Rome: othersome, that Caesar should be sent with his
Army: and others, that the Consuls should repair thither. But no man is of
opinion, that this enterprise is to be committed to private Citizens. And the
Consuls fearing least, the Senate should send them, or confer this charge
upon some other to their disgrace, use all means to prevent a session of the
Senate. So as they appear not to be very careful, in the necessities of the
Commonwealth. But this negligence, or cowardice, or fear, whether we may call
it, is covered with reasonable pretexts, making show that they refuse the
Province, out of modesty. Your letters are not yet arrived, and, if those of
Deiotarus, had not come so suddenly, men were about to believe, that Cassius
had feigned the Parthian war, and caused the Arabians to overrun his
Province, to the end it might seem endamaged not by him, but by the enemy.
Whereupon, by my advise, you shall write with diligence, and warily, how
matters there pass: to the end it may not appear, that either you have
followed any man's humor, or concealed any particular of importance. Now the
year is at an end; for the xviij. of November, I wrote these presents, I see
not how any thing can be concluded before January. You know how cold, and slow
Marcellus is: and in like manner, how sl^ck^ Seruius is. What may you judge of
these men? and how can you believe, they will do that which they have no mind
unto, when they perform that which they affect, so coldly? for they seem to
have no will thereunto. At the change of Magistrates, if the Par^hian war
proceed, this manage will spend the first months: but if there be no war
there, or only the same; that you, or your successors, with the least succors
sent, may prosequute it: I see Curio, will use all means; first to cross
Caesa^^ and then to assist Pompeius, in what soever thing he can; little, or
great. Paullus by lofty words, shows what a desire he has to go into the
Prouin^e. To whose ambition, our Furnius will oppose himself: touching others
I know not what to think. I have written to you, what I know. I cannot see,
what else will happen. I see that time produces many things, and that many
daily are a framing: but they will be all comprehended within these bounds. I
will not for^et to certi^ie you, how Curio sues for a division of the Campa^
territory: It is said, Caesar cares little for it: but that Pompeius desires
much, it should be divided: to the end that C^sar at his coming may not enjoy
it. As for your departing out of the Province, I cannot promise you to obtain,
that a successor may be sent you; but I assure you, your time shall not be
prolonged. If in regard of the present war, the Senate enjoin you to remain
there; and if you may not refuse it with your honor: you may take what course
you think good: It Is sufficient for me, that I remember, with what vehemency
at your departure, you entreated me, that I would not permit, the time of your
office, to be prolonged. Farewell.

Marcus Caelius, to Cicero. Epist. 11.
YOur supplications procured no long, but great trouble; there was a strange
obstacle interposed it self: For Curio your loving friend, s^eing himself too
unjustly cros^ by the Consuls, that he could not treat of any thing with the
people, gave to understand, that he would in no wise support, that a decree
should pass in the matter of supplications; not to loose that, which through
P^ullus fury, he had purchased: to the end it might never be said, that he
had betrayed the people. Whereupon we accorded with the Consuls, that this
year they should propound no other supplica^ions to the Senate but yours; In
truth, you must thank both the Consulls, but especially Paullus: For Marcellus
answered Curio, that he had no hope in these supplications: Paullus said that
for this year, he would not procure them for any other. It was told us that
Hirrus would oppose vs^ I sounded him: he was not only, not contrary unto us,
but coming to the matter of the enemies: when he might easily have hindered
the cause, if he had but demanded the number of the sl^ine; he remained
sil^nt: only he said; he was cont^nt to be referred to what Cato had said:
who had commended you, but yet not counseled, that your supplications should
be granted. The like did Fa^^nius. So that having respect to the nature, and
fashion of every one; you should thank the three forementioned, and Curio:
them, because though they spoke not in your favor, yet they showed a good
mind, and being able to offend you, entered into no opposition: Curio, because
he interrupted the course of his own actions for your sake. Furnius, and
Lentulus, as reason required, no otherwise, then as interessed in their own
honor, joined heads with us. I may also praise my self, for the indeauor and
friendly solicitation of Balbus Cornelius, who spoke effectually to Curio,
af^irming that if he did otherwise, he should wrong Caesar, and give him
occasion to esteem him for a counterfeit friend. Domitius, and Scipio, who
grudged: that you should have this honor, were notwithstanding assistant. Do
you know the cause? because they thought the matter would never have past: to
whom Curi^, perceiving that in urging him to oppose, they solicited the effect,
answered like an honest man; that he was not willing to contrary it, because
he sawsome, who procured the supplications, would not have them take effect.
A^ for the state of the Commonwealth, they are yet indiscussing the business
about the Provinces, neither do they treat of any thing else. It seems that
Pompei^s, and the Senate are agreed together, that Caesar shall leave the
Galliae, before the xiij of November. Curio is resolved to expose himself to
any disaster, rather then suffer this: and has given over all his other
enterprises. But our friends, whose humor you well know, dare not come, to the
trial. The sum of all is this. Pompeius, to show that he labors not
against Caesar, but constitutes that which he thinks to be but reason, says,
that Curio seeks to raise discords. But he will permit by no means, and
fears much, that Caesar will be elected Consul, before he have left the
Army, and the Province. Curio treates him very crossely: and speaks hardly of
his second Consulship. I conclude, that if the Senate extend the uttermost of
their authority to suppres^e Curio, Caes^r will be de^ended: but if they
fear, his resistance, as they make show, Caesar shall r^maine in his province
as long as he will. What each man's opinion in the Senate was, you shall find
it ^n the book, of such matters as passed in Rome. Wherein you may only read
that, that you shall think worthy to be understood, and pass over many other
toys, inserted therein to no purpose, especially of sports, obsequies, and
other such like things. For I had rathe^ err, in ^xposing to your
understanding, that which ^ou desire not to know, then in omitting any thing,
which was requisite to be understood. I am glad, you were mindful of my debt,
with Sitius, but seeing you perceive them ^la^ke enough in observing their
promise, I pray you to be careful of it, as mine Attorney. Farewell.

Marcus Caelius to Cicero. Epist. 12.
I Am ashamed to confess unto you the truth, and to complain of App^us, as
ungrateful toward me^^ as a man may be. For after the receiving of many
benefits from me, not being able to frame his auaritious nature, to requi^e me:
he begins to bear me hatred, and has stirred up war against me secretly.
And yet not so secretly, but that, besides the being of it made known unto me
by many, I my self perceived, that he bare a very bad mind toward m^. But
after I found out, how he had wrought the Coll^dge of Augures, and spoken
openly to some, that he would order the matter with Domitius, who, so far as
I perceive, is my great enemy, that Pompeius should accuse me; I could not,
knowing him to be indebted to me for his life, frame my mind to entreat him,
that he would not do me such an injury. But what did I? I spoke presently
with some Friends, who were witnesses of my deserts toward him: And when I saw
my self of so little esteem with him, that he would not vouchsafe to come
unto me and excuse himself. I rather made choice to be beholding to Lucius
Piso his Colleague, who as well ^or other respects, as for your sake, wished me
ill; then to come before that Ape. Which, when he knew, being puf^ up with
choler, said, that I sought, to break with him: as if I took occasion, ^o^ not
being paid, to persecute him. Afterward he forbear not to call unto him in
public, Serui^s the accuser, and to plot with Domitius: and betwixt them
three, finding no just cause to accuse me: they deuis^d a way; but did not
perceive, that they could not hurt me: and like insolent men took order, to
call me to judgment, the last day of my Circensian sports, by the law
Scantinca^ Seruius had scarcely made an end of speaking, when also by the same
law, I called Appius the C^n^or in judgment. I never saw a matter betterfall
out: For the people, and ^uery inferior man seemed to take so great
satisfaction therein; that the aspersion of this made Appius more to grieve,
then the accusation. After this I demanded a Chapel, which he had in his
house^ The long delaie of this servant, has much wronged me. For after I
delivered him this, he stayed for the letters of more then ^ortie. I know not
what to write; but you know that Domitius fears the day of hearing I ^xpect
you with great desire, and wish to see you presently. I pray you so grieve at
my injuries, as you imagine I was wont both to be sorry for yours, and to
revenge them. Farewell.

Marcus Coelius to Cicero. Epist. 13.
I Am glad you have married your daughter to Dolabilla; who, in the conceit I
have of him, is certainly a man of great goodness. For, what belo^gs to his
other defects, by which hitherto, he has got himself but little profit, they
are now worn out, with his years. And if any yet remain, I assure my self,
your conversation, your authority, and your daughters mod^sty, will correct
them. For, he is not obdurate in vices, neither wants he wit, to discern
what is best Further, a great occasion of this joy, is the love I ^eare him Do
you see, Cicero, how C^^io has compassed his intents? For, his resistance
being scanned in the Senate, as it was determined; and Marcus Marcellus
persuading, that the Tribunes should be moved in it; the Senate would not
consent thereunto. Pompeius has now such a weak stomach, that almost nothing
can be ^ound to please him. The Senate had decreed, that he who would not
dismiss his army, and the provinces, could not stand for the Consulship:
which, how it will please Pompeius, when he perceiues, what will become of the
Commonwealth, if he either cannot, or care not; I leave for you old, rich men
to consider. Quintus Hortensius, when I wrote these, dyed. Farewell.

Marcus Coelius to Cicero. Epist. 14.
IF you had taken the King of the Parthians, and vanquished the City of
Seleucia, it were nothing, in respect of the being present at these things.
Your eyes would never have pained you more, if you had but seen Domitius
countenance, when he had the repulse for the Augureship. The contestation was
great, each party having many favors. Few respected merit; every one assisted
his kinsman, or friend. So that Domitius is my great enemy: insomuch, as he
hates not that acquaintance of his, whom you wot of, as he does me: and the
rather, because he thinks he had wrong done him; and that I was the principal
occasion of the injury. Now, he is stark mad, that men so rejoice at his
cross, and that I was so favorable to Antonius. Afterward, he accu^ed Cneius
Saturninus, the younger; one, questionless, for his life past, infamous. And
now the issue of this trial is expected. And he conceiues good hopes, because
Sixtus Peducius was absolved. Concerning the sta^e of the Commonwealth, I have
written many times to you, that I can yet discern no peace. And the more this
controversy increases, further then is convenient, so much more imminent the
danger appears. Pompeius is resolved, not to suffer Caius Caesar to be made
Consul by any means, before he leaves the army, and the Provinces: upon
which the chief of the City will contest, that Caesar, except he first give
over his army, and the one, and other G^llia, shall not be created Consul.
On the contrary, Caesar is of a constant opinion, that he leaving the army,
his ruin will ensue. Yet he offers this condition, that both of them should
leave off their army. And so, that love, and discommendable union, turns not
into secret hatred; but to a manifest war. I know not what side to take, and I
think for the same cause also, you will be much perplexed. For one part I
love, and am beloved: in the other, I hate the opinions, not the men: and I
think you know, that every one follows the more honest part, while they
proceed without arms: But when they come to a war, the strongest; supposing
that to be most honest, which is most secure in this discord: I see, that
Cneius Pompeius will have the Senate and Judges of his party; and to Caesar,
all those will apply themselves, that live in fear, or with cold hopes. The
armies will not be equal: but there will be time enough, to consider the
forces of either part, and to choose the best. I had almost forgot to write one
thing to you, which was not to be omitted. Know you, that Appius the Censor
does miracles? Know you, that he abates the pomp of statues, and pictures?
that he allots the measure of land? that he constraines debtors to pay? he
thinks the Censorship, is either paste of beane-floure, or niter: but in my
opinion, he is deceived: for, minding to purge himself of filthiness, he
opens all his veins, and all his bowels. Run, I beseech you, for Gods and men's
sake, and come quickly to laugh at these novelties; that Drusus is constituted
Judge of the accused, by the Scantinean Law: and Appius is about statues and
pictures, I Will promise ye, you have cause to come in haste. It Is thought Curio
has done very wisely, in permitting a stipend to be given to Pompeius. To
conclude, will you know, what I judge must fall out? If one of them go not
against the Parthians, I see cruel discords will arise, which must be ended
with the sword. Either of them has a great mind, and great forces. If
infinite danger had not therein concurred, Fortune had prepared for you, a
great, and pleasant spectacle. Farewell.

Marcus Caelius, to Cicero. Epist. 15.
When did you ever see a more foolish man then Cneius Pompeius; who using to
promise so many things, has raised so many disorders? But when did you either
read, or hear, of one more prompt, and courageous in an enterprise, then our
Caesar, and more temperate after victory? But what will you say to this other
thing? If you did but see our soldiers now, who have done nothing all the
winter, but march in the rain, and wind, through difficult and cold places;
you would think they had eaten of the most delicate apples, that could be
gotten. Oh! will you say, you begin to glory in good time. But, if you knew in
what turmoyles I am, you would scoff at this my glory, which nothing
concerns me. I cannot write my gr^efe unto you: but I hope shortly, to open
it, by word of mouth. For, Caesar determines to call me to Rome, when he has
driven Pompeiu^ out of Ita^y: which I ^hinke is already performed: Exc^pt he
had rather be^eaguer him in Brundusium I would I were dead; if the infinite
desire I have to see you, and communicate unto you, all my secrets; be not the
greatest occasion of my coming thither so suddenly. I have a thousand things
to tell you. I am afraid, lest, as many times it falls out, I shall have
forgotten them all, when I see you. But what offense have I committed, that I
must now go toward the Alps? And to go thither about the Intimelij, who,
for a matter of nothing are up in arms? Bellienus, servant sometime to
Demetrius, borne of a maid servant; who was there with some strength, took one
Domitius, a Gentleman of that town, and a friend to Caesar: and having
received money of the contrary party, caused him to be strangled. The City
rose up in arms; whereupon I must now go thither through the snow, with two
thousand Foot. Certainly, will you say, the Domi^ij have ill fortune every
where? And I would that Caesar, who is descended from Venus, had been so
resolute against your Domitius, as Bellienus, who was borne of an hand-mayd,
was against this other. Salute your son in my name. Farewell.

Marcus Caelius, to Cicero. Epist. 16.
I Felt my life leave me, in reading your letters: by which I understood, that
none but melancholy thoughts possessed your mind. And though you have not
clearly laid open your meaning; nevertheless, you have made manifest, what
your disposition was. I presently wrote these letters unto you. I pray you, my
Cicero; I conjure you; by the care you have of your own state, by the love that
you bear to your children, that no resolution come into your mind, by which
your own safety, or that you possess, may incur any danger. For, I call Gods
to witness, I call men, and our entire amity; that I never foretold, or put
you in mind of any thing, which proceeded not from deliberate counsel: but
since I spoke with Caesar, and by him vnde^stood, what his determination was,
after victory obtained: I gave you thereof advertisement. If you suppose, that
what Caesar was in the prosecution of his courses, the same he will be in
pardoning his adversaries; your conceit deceiues you. Every thought of his, is
cruel and rigorous, and also every word. He departed angry with the Senate.
These oppositions of the Tribunes of the people, vexed him very much. I assure
you, he will open his ear to no humiliations. Wherefore, if any affection
toward your self, or to the only son you have; if of your family, or any
other thing within your hopes move you; if you have any respect to us, or your
son in law, so honest a man; you should not disturb their fortunes, by
imposing a necessity upon us, of hating or abandoning that part, on whose
victory our saftie depends; or, by being an occasion, that against your
preservation, we bear wicked resolutions. Finally, you must consider, that
what displeasure soever you could show to Pompeius, you have absolutely done it
him, in this your delay. Now, if you think to stir against the Conqueror;
whom, while events were doubtful, you never went about to offend; and to
accompany them that are now put to flight, whom you would not follow in time,
when they made resistance: it is the greatest folly of the world. Take heed,
whilst you count it shame, with little care to prosecute the office of a good
Citizen, lest you be careless of your own good. But if I cannot absolutely
persuade you to what I would; at least attend, till aduertisements come, of the
success in Spain: the which I can tell you, at Caesar's arriual will be ours.
Whereon their hopes will depend, when Spain is lost, I cannot perceive. And
being so; what reason should persuade you, to join with desperate people, I
cannot with my self imagine. This your intention, which, without telling it,
you intimated to me, was now come to Caesar's ear: and as soon, as he had
saluted me; what he had heard of you, he presently told me. I said, I knew
nothing. Yet I entreated him, that he would be pleased to write unto you a
letter, which might persuade you not to leave Italy. He takes me along with
him into Spain. For if this were not, before I went to Rome, I would come
poasting to you wheresoever; and being present with you, I would fervently have
discharged such an office; and with all my power r^tained you. Be very wary,
my good Cic^ro, that you be not an occasion of utter ruin, to your self, and
all yours^ and that you put not your self wittingly into that danger, out of
which you see there is no hope for you any way to escape. And if the cries of
Cit^izens reputed honest, do move you; or that you cannot ^toope to support
the pride and insolency of some particulars: me thinks you should do well to
make choice of some town far from the tumult of arms, while these things
are dispatched, of which the final effect is expected. If you thus dispose of
your self, I shall judge that you have done wisely, and you shall not herein
offend Caesar. Farewell.

Marcus Caelius, to Cicero. Epist. 17.
ACcursed be the Fortune, which was the cause, that I was rather in Spain
then at Formiae, when you went to Pompeius. But I would to God, that either
Appius Claudius had not been of your part, or Caius Curio of ours; whose
friendship has drawn me to that side, which maintains the more unjust cause.
For I know, that hatred, and love have bereaved me of my best senses. And you
also, when I came to you by night to Ariminum, performed the office of an
excellent Citizen, but not of a Friend; giving me commission to treat of
peace with Caesar, without aduising me at all in that, which concerned me.
Neither think I speak this, as fearing that our part shall not vanquish: but
certainly it is better to die, then see these men. And were it not for fear of
your cruelty; we had long time since, been expelled from hence^ where there
is no man, nor any society, besides a few usurers, which is not a Pompeian. I
have procured, that the Plebeians especially, and people, are yours, which
first were ours. For what occasion, you will say? but li^ten to the remainder.
I Will make you overcome though you would not. You sleep: and in my opinion ye
obser^e not, where we lie open, and are most weak. And this I will not do in
hope of reward, but because wrath, and choler are of great for^e in me. What
do you there? attend you battle, which you cannot tell how to maintain? I
know not what manner of men yours are: but our soldiers are inured to fight
manfully, and to support all cold, and famine. Farewell.

THE NINTH BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Cicero to Marcus Terentius Varro. Epist. 1.
AT^icus read a letter of yours unto me; by which I understood what you do,
and where you are; but I could not learn when we should see you. Yet I hope
that your coming in near at hand; which Gods grant, that it may disburden me
in part of the afflictions I suffer: although, we are overwhelmed with so
heavy a ruin, that he would s^ew himself but a fool, that should any ways
hope to be eased. But howsoever we may peradventure in some sort help one
another. For after I came to Rome, I reconciled my self to my old friends,
that is, to my books; whose conversation I had left: not because I was angry
wi^h them, but in that I was a^hamed: it appearing unto me, that I had not
obeyed their instructions, in that I exposed my self to danger for the love of
such, as were not faithful friends. But they pardon me, and call me to my
usual studies, saying, that you have been wiser by whom they were never
forsaken. Wher^fore, seeing I am in favor with them, I nourish good hopes,
that I shall easily, when I see you, pass ^uer the burden, both of present,
and future evils. Therefore, if you please, let us retire either to Tusculanum,
or to your C^ma^um; or else, (which by no means I would) to Rome: so we may be
together, I Will assuredly b^ing matters to that pass, that both of us, shall
reap benefit. Farewell.

Cicero to Varro. Ep. 2.
OUR Caninius coming to me very late; and telling me, that the day following
in the morning, he was to come to you: I told him, that in the morning I would
give him a letter; and desired him to return for it. I wrote in the night, and
yet he returned not. I thought he had forgotten it. Yet I would not have f^iled
to send you it by one of mine, if by the foresaid party, I had not understood,
that the day following in the morning, you were to depart from Tusculanum. A
few days after, Caninius comes early, beyond my expectation; and tells me that
even then he was to come to you; I would not have that Epistle to be frustrate,
which I wrote in the night: and so; though it were old; (especially so much
news having since occurred;) yet I gave it him. And to him, who is a learned
man, and your good friend, I delivered as much by word of mouth, as he by this
time ha^h communicated unto you. In my opinion, we must both shun the eyes
of the mul^i^ude, though their tongues we cannot. For the Victors, exalted in
pride through victory, look upon us as vanquish^d: and they who grieve, that
our faction has lost, fret, that we are still alive. Why then, you will
peradventure say, take not you a course to live out of Rome, as I do? Because,
you go before me, and every man else in prudence. I think all secret things
are manifest to you: you never erred. Who is so quicke-sighted, that walking
through such darkness, may not stumble sometimes? and yet I bethought my self
long since; that it had been good, to go into some part; not to see, nor
hear, what is here done, and spoken^ But after I had considered with my
self; I imagined, that whosoever met me, would surmise at his pleasure; or
else, if he suspected nothing, he might say; This man either fears; and
because he is afraid flies: or he has some project in his head; and a ship
ready provided. In conclusion, he that suspected least ill, and knew me
peradventure more inwardly; would think that I bare hatred to certain
persons, and that I left Rome, for no other cause, but by reason I could not
suffer mine eyes to behold them. These cogitations have detained me in Rome
hitherto: besides, that leng^h of time, has by little and little caused as it
were an insensibilitie of mind to grow in me, so that it feels no longer. You
have understood the reasons that kept me in Rome. Concerning your courses, I am
of opinion, 'twere good for you to stay where you are, till this exultation be
somewhat abated: till it be known what end the war has had: for I make no
doubt but ended it is: and it auailes much to understand, after victorious
success; what disposition the Conqueror manifested. Though I may imagine it:
yet I expect to understand it. If you will follow my counsel, you shall no^
go to Baiae, before you see all these reports settled that fly abroad. For it
will be greater honor to us; then d^parting from hence, it be thought we are
retired into those places, rather to mourn, then to bath our selves. But
herein, I refer my self to your wisdom: I think good that we tie our
selves to this resolution, to live together in our studies, and so much the
rather, because whereas before, we studied only for contentment of mind, now
we are reduced to such a point, as without the sustentation of letters, our
life would fail us. If any would make use of our counsel, and endeavor, to
recover the consumed body of the Commonwealth; then indeed, leaving studies,
we must run to the performance of so worthy an office; And fortune denying
us this wished occasion, to practice in the Senate, and Forum; we will ^race
the footsteps of those so learned, ancients, partly composing as they did,
about the true form, of living well, and governing justly: partly also in
reading their works. By which study, if we cannot otherwise, we shall benefit
the Commonwealth. This is my opinion. I should be glad, that you would write
unto me, what resolution and opinion you are of. Farewell.

Cicero to Varro. Epist. 3.
I Had nothing to write: yet Caninius com^ing to you, I would not have him
depart without my letters^ But what should I write unto you? that which I
think you desire; that I will shortly come to visit you. Although it is a
matter to be considered of, how convenient it is; that now when the City is
so ouerladen with miseries, we should go to the Bathes; which are places of
solace. We shall minister matter to them to talk of, who know not; that by
changing of place, we neither change life, nor ^ustomes. And yet we cannot
avoid, the talking thereof. But what remedy? in retiring our selves to a
reposed life, now when all men are employed in wicked and bad actions, should
we regard the being censured? I resolve constantly to contemn the ignorant
vulgar, and to follow your footsteps. For though our m^series be very great;
^et it seems the study of ver^ue, is now more beneficial unto us, then it
was at other times: or be it that in this storm, we see no other Port; or
else that the grieuousnesse of the infirmity makes us the better to know the
necessity, or want of Physic; whose efficacy we did not discern, while we
were healthful. But what do I? The writing of these things to you; in whose
house they properly grow, is a carrying (as they say) of Owls to Athens. But
I wrote them for no other end, but to give you an occasion to write unto me
something back again; and to acquaint you with my coming. Therefore answer,
and expect me. Farewell.

Cicero to Varro. Epist. 4.
KNow, that of things possible, I hold the same opinion with Diodorus: and
therefore if you are to come: I say it is necessary that you come: and if you
are not to come; on the contrary; I say, that it is impossible you should come.
Now to this purpose, examine whither be the better opinion, this of Diodorus:
or that of Chrisippus, which pleased not our Diodorus very well. But we will
discourse together of this argument, at a more convenient time. Which according
to Chrisippus, is possible to happen; but it is not for all that, necessary.
As for Costius, it contented me well, and I had given commission also therein
to Atticus. If you come not to us, we will come to you flying. Let there be a
garden in your Library, [and] it is no matter for the rest. Farewell.

Cicero to Varro. Epist. 5.
YEs indeed will it be a very fit time on the seventh of the month, both in
respect of the Commonwealth, and for the season of the year. Therefore I am
pleased, that you made choice of this day, to which I also refer my self.
They who followed not our course, we see they now repent them: and though they
should do otherwise, yet should not we repent us. For we went to the war,
not out of hope to overcome, but through a desire, to discharge our duties to
our Country: and when we left it, we abandoned not our duties, but a desperate
enterprise. And so we had a greater care of our honor, then they that never
stirred from home: and more wisdom then those, who being vanquished, and
defeated, would not return home. But above all things, it grieves me to see
our selves so bitterly checked by them, that never went out of Rome: and
howsoever the matter be: I more esteem those, that were slain in the war,
then these men, who repine, that we survive. If I have any time to come to
Tusculanum, before the prefixed day, I will see you there: if not, I will find
you out in Cumanum: and I will send you word thereof before, that the Bathe may
be ready, at my coming. Farewell.

Cicero to Varro. Epist. 6.
Our Caninius told me in your behalf, that if there were any thing, which I
thought imported you to understand, that I should not fail to advertise you
thereof. You shall therefore understand, that Caesar is expected: though I
persuade my se^fe you know it. But notwithstanding he having written that he
would come, as I remember, into the Alsian territory: his friends wrote back
again to him, that he should not come: For many would disturb him, and he
many: and that it were better for him to arrive at Pontinum. I knew not,
wherefore it imported him more, to arrive at Pontinum, then about Alsia: but
Hirtius told me, he had written of it to him: and that Balbu^, and Oppiu^ had
done the like: all which three, I knew to be well affected to you. I meant to
advertise you of his coming, to the end, you might know in what place, or
rather in which of these two places, you should provide you of a lodging: for
it is not certainly known, where he will arrive. And I did it also, to
inform you, that I am familiar with these men; and that they make me partaker
of their counsels. Which, I cannot perceive, why it should not like me.
Although I support what is necessary to be supported: yet it follows not,
that I should commend that, which is not praise worthy. Though I know not,
what I may not commend; besides the first occasions. For, what afterward
ensued, f^ll out through our error. I savv, (for then you were not there) that
our friends affected war, and that Caesar desired it not so much, as he
feared it not. The war therefore grew through our defect: what after happened,
could not fall out otherwise: it being of necessity, that one part must
vanquish. I know your grief, was equal with mine, perceiving tha^ a
slaughter of innumerable Citizens must ensue, with the death of the one, or
other General: and besides this; knowing, that there could not be a worser
inconvenience, then victory of civil wars: the which I expected not from
our enemies only, but also from our friends: Who terribly threatn^d ^uch, as
had not followed their (...); and ha^ed both of us: you, because you desired
peace, and me, in that I openly approved it. And if they had subdued, their
victory would have bin cruel and immoderate. For they bear an incensed mind
toward us; as if we had taken a course, that would not be as beneficial to
them, as to our selves, if they would have followed it: or as if it had been
better to have gone into Africa, hoping to overcome, by means of the
Elephants; then either to die, or live with any better Fortune. Oh, we live, in
a turmoyled Commonwealth. I cannot deny it; but let them take care, that have
not provided for any kind of life. And to come to this point, I have extended
my self, further then I would. For having ever reputed you, for a man of great
worth; I now value you much more: For in this so general a storm, almost you
only have had the understanding to retire you into a Port; where rea^ing
wonderful fruits of your knowledge, you intellectuallie discourse of things of
such a quality, as are much more estimable, then any profit, or pleasur^ of
these Conquerours. What sweet days do you enjoy now in Tusculanum? This may
truly be termed a life. I would I might live so; free from greater
disturbances. For I could willingly resign over unto others, all the riches
of the world. But I do what I can to imitate you, and with singular
contentment, I live in the repose of studies. And why should not every man
grant us, now the Commonwealth, neither can, nor will employ us, that we may
retire to letters? The which, I know, by many learned men, (with what reason I
cannot tell) were preferred before the Commonwealth. If therefore in the
judgment of famous men, we may rather apply our minds to these studies, then
to the government of public affairs: how much more now, when the
commonwealth her self is content therevvith, may we follow them hourly? But
I do more then Caniniu^ imposed upon me: he wished me to advertise you of
matters you knevv not, and these that I now write unto you, you know better
then my self. Hereafter therefore, I Will be ruled by Caniniu^ direction: I Will
inform you only of that which belongs to the quality of the present times,
and that which I shall understand to import you. Farewell.

Cicero to Varro. Epist. 7.
I Was at supper with S^ius, when your letters were brought us. I am of your
opinion, that it is now time to depart from hence. And in that hithe^to I have
calumniated you; I Will tell you with what craft I did it. My mind was, that you
should have entertained the time, in some place near hand, if happily we could
obtain the favor of C^sar, when we went both together to meet him. Now, that
every thing is dispatched, without any doubt or delay, we must be gone. For as
soon as I heard of the death of Lucius Caesar the son; I ^ayd unto my self;
what will he do to me? whereupon I sup often with these men, which have a
kind of dominion over us. What should I do? We must observe the times. But
let us leave ^esting: for it is now time to be in earnest. A^rica is up in
arms, and trembles fearfully. There is no disaster, which I fear not. But
whereas you demand of me, at what time he will come, in what part, or into what
place: Hitherto we know nothing. They say it is true, that he will disimba^ke at
Baiae. Some think, that he may come by Sardinia. For the farm which he there
has, he never yet saw, neither has he a worser, but yet he accounts of it. I
rather believe, that he will come by Sicilia: but we shall presently know it. For
it cannot be, but Dolabella will arrive. I think^, he shall be our Master. How
many scholars are more sufficient then their Masters? Howsoever if I may
understand, what course you will t^k^, my resolut^on shall be conform^ble to
yours^ and therefore I will attend your letters. Farewell.

Cicero to Varro. Epist. 8.
ALthough it be not the manner; no not of the common people, except they be
urged, to be importunate in dem^nding a present; whereof there was formerly an
intention and promise made: neue^thelesse the expectation that I have of your
promise, mooues me not to solicit, but to challenge you of performance. And I
could not choose; but send you four books: which shall admonish you to pay
the debt, without any great respect. This new Academie, having, as I suppose
you know, rather a presumptuous form, then otherwise. And therefore I doubt,
that these four books, which I send unto you, coming out of the center of
the same Academie, will challenge your promise, with too much importunity:
which I have enjoined them, that they should but only put you in mind, that I
lived in expectation, that you would have honored me with the dedication of
some work of yours: and for this cause I forbear to write unto you: to the end
that having first seen your present, I might have devised the like to
recompense you. But observing your slackenes^e, (though I will rather term it
diligence, then slacknesse) I could not forbear to write the said books unto
you, to manifest unto the world, in the best manner I could, the firm knot,
both of our studies, and mutual love, by which we are con^oyned. And so I have
digested in form of a Dialogue, that discourse we had together in Cum^num,
Pomponius At^i^^s being present. And because I conc^iued, that Antiochus
opinion pleased you; I have brought you in to def^nd it: and I maintain that
of Philo. You will in reading, wonder at some things uttered by us, which neu^r
were spoken. But you know the custom in Di^logu^s. Hereafter we will between
us endite many things, and upon the subject of our selves. Which we should have
done before now: but for the time past, the Commonwealth excuses us; for the
time to come, the blame should be laid upon us. And would to God, that in a
retired life, and in a state of our co^ntrie, though not ^rosperous, ^et
secure; we might exercise our studies together. Al^hough occasions would not be
then wanting, to meditate, and practice something else. But now, without
studies, what a life would ours be? In sooth, I know not certainly, whither
with them I may likewise live: but without, I shall never be able. But we will
discuss this together hereafter, and very often. Whereas you write unto me,
about the house you have bought, and how you are gone to dwell there: I wish
you all happiness therein, and I think you have done very wisely. Have a care
of your health. Farewell.

Dolabella to Cicero. Ep. 9.
IF you be well, I am glad of it: I am in health; and our Tullia is exceeding
well. Terentia felt her self very ill: but I know certainly she is
recovered. All your other matters, stand in very good state^ you know, that
before now, I persuaded you to follow Caesar's part, or else to retire you into
some secure, and quiet place: neither am I persuaded, that you imagine, that I
advised you, more for the interest of our faction, then for your own good. And
therefore now, that we are even upon the point of victory; I should think I
committed a greater fault, if I did not exhort you a new. And I beseech you my
C^c^ro, to take in good part what I write, and if you like not to follow my
counsel; at least believe, that I have stirred in your actions, and done the
offices which now I perform; for no other end, but for the great love I bear
you. You see now, that Cneius Pompeius is nothing the better for the glory of
his name, nor for his so great prowess, or being so much followed by Kings and
Nations, wherein being lofty and proud he continually vaunted. He is driven
out of Itali^: he has lost Spaine^ And his army of old souldi^rs, it taken
from him: finally, he is now besieged; and that which never fell out to any
one, how base soever he was; happens to him; that he cannot fly without
dis^onor. Neither do I think that any of our Captains, were ever in such
di^grace. Where^ore being wise, as you are, consider well, what hopes now
remain, either to him or you, And in so doing you may dispose of your self,
to take that course, for your businesses which shall be most profitable. One
favor I demand of you, that if he escape this beleaguering, and fly away by
Sea, that you look well to your own estate, and resolve at length, to be
better to your self, then to any other what^oeuer. You have di^charged your
duty; you have satisfied the inward amity you had with Pompeius; you have
satisfied also each part; and that Commonwealth, which you judge to be good.
Now it remains, that you must be contented with that we have: seeing you
cannot be in that, which so much pleased you. Therefore I desire, my sweet
Cicero, if peradventure Pompeius be driven out of the place, where he is; and
be constrained to retire himself anew, into other countries; that you withdraw
your self, either to Athens, or else into some other quiet City. And when
you do so, be pleased to advertise me: for, if it may be, I^le come spe^dily
to find you. And besides, that I am certain, your self shall obtain of
Caesar, whatsoever you will, about your honor; because he is very courteous; I
am also furth^r of opinion, that he will be much moved at my entreaties. I know
your fidelity, and love; the one, makes me believe, that the carrier of this
present, may return hither again securely; and the other, that he will bring
me your letters. Farewell.

Cicero to Dolabella. Ep. 10.
I Thought it an error not to write unto you, our friend Sal^ius having
occasion ^o come where you are: although, to say truth, I know not what to
write: more then that I love you tenderly: which though I should not write; yet
I am certain, you would hold it infallible. I should rather look for letters
from you, then you from me: nothing passing in Rome, which you care to
understand: except peradventure you would know this: that our Nicias, and
V^dius, have made choice of me for their Judge. One produces (as he seems to
inform me) a loan made to Nicias, written in two verses: the other like a
second Aristarcus, says it is false. I as an ancient Judge, must determine
whither it be false or true. I suppose that you reasoning now within your
self, may say unto me. Have you then ^orgotten those mushromes, which you eat
in Nicias hou^e? and those great banquets of Sophia, daughter to Septimia? But
wh^t's your meaning by this? do you th^nke I have forgotten my self so far,
that whereas before, I was very severe; now, that I have the authority of a
Judge, should I make no account of Justice? I Will carry the matter so, that our
Nicias shall not be wronged: neither will I in any case condemn him, to the end
that you may have no occasion to restore him; least he go to Plancus Burs^, to
instruct him in letters. Bu^ what do I? I range too far, not well conceiving
whither you have a reposed mind, or, as it falls out often in the wars,
whither you find your self plunged in some care, or business of importance.
When I understand, that you are in case to laugh: I Will write to you more at
large. Yet will I not omit to tell you this, that the people were wonderfully
touched with the death of Pub^ius Silla, before they knew the certainty. Now
they never strive to understand how he died, they think it enough to know that
he is dead. I for some reason, bear it patiently; I am afraid of one thing:
that by this man's death, Caesar's public out-crie will be hindered. Farewell.

Cicero to Dolabella. Ep. 11.
I Had rather you should understand by my letters, of mine own death; then
that of my daughter; which assuredly I should the better support, if I had you
about me. For your words would have comforted me exceedingly, and the
unspeakable love you bear me. But, because I hope within a small time, to see
you again; you shall find me at such a pass, that I may receive also from
you^ no small assistance; not that I am so afflicted, that I have forgotten my
self to be a man; or that I conceive not, that Fortune should be resisted:
Nevertheless, as I was wont to be the most cheerful and mild man of the
world: upon which you took such liking to my conversation: So now am I turned
quite contrary; yet you shall understand, that I have not a whit diminished
that freedom, and constancy of spirit, I was wont to have, if it be ^^ue,
that ever I had it. Whereas you write, that you defend me stoutly against my
detractors; I make not so much account of that, as I desire it may appear, as
questionless it does, that I am beloved of you. And I pray you with the most
effectual entreaties that can be used, be pleased to persevere, in that so
loving an offic^; and to p^rdon me, though I write briefly to you: the which I
do, first in this respect, because I imagine we shall shortly be together:
Besides, because this blow, has so astonished me, that I find not my self yet
in case for writing^ Farewell.

Cicero to Dolabella. Ep. 12.
I Congratulate with the Baths of Baiae, seeing as you write, on a sudden they
are grown healthful, against their old custom. Except peradventure they are
enamored of you, and desire to apply themselves to your occasion, giving over,
while you are there, their ordinary disposition. Which, if it be true; I
marvel not, though even heaven, and earth leave their usual properties, for
your commodity. I send you the brief Oration, which I made in defense of King
Deiotarus: which I knew not to be about me. The subject is very mean, and
almost incapable of ornaments; nor very worthy to be set down in writing.
But because Deiotarus is my guest, and a friend of many years standing; I
thought good to send him, this poor present, as a garment of a gross grain;
like those presents, he was wont to send to me. I advise you to show, wi^edome,
and valor: to the end, that by your modesty, and gravity, the injuries of
your enemies, may light upon their own heads with dishonor, and infamy.
Farewell.

Cicero to Dolabella. Ep. 13.
Caius Suberinus C^llenus, is a familiar of mine, and an inward friend to
Lepta, our most domestical. This man to avoid the war, going into Spain,
with Marcus Varro, with a resolution to remain in that Province, where none of
us (since Afranita was defeated) supposed that any rumors of war would have
risen: did light precisely into those very mischiefs, which he labored to
shun. For on the sudda^ne, he was surprised with a war^e, which being first
kindled by Scapula, was afterward in such sort, reinforced by Pompeius, that
in no wise, Suberinus could dis-intrica^e himself from that misery. Mar^us
Planiu^ Haeres, is as it were in the same perplexi^i^s, who is likewise
Calenu^, a familiar friend of our L^pta. I commend therefore unto you, both
these, with the greatest love, and efficacy possible. I desire to do them
favor: and not only amity, but even humanity mooues me thereunto. Besides,
Lepta being so much grieved thereat, that he could not be more in case of his
own substance: I am urged to feel therein, if not as much affliction, at the
least little less. Whereupon, though I had many times, by proo^e understood,
how entire the love you bear me is; neuerth^lesse be as^ured, that I shall
more securely judge thereof, in this present occasion. I pray you therefor, so
wo^ke, that both these Caleni; miserable, not by fault, but through Fortune, to
whom every one is subject, may receive no damage; to the end, that by your
means I may do this favor to them; and also, to the company of Calenus, with
whom I have great friendship, and to Lepta, which more imports then all the
rest. What I am to speak, I think is not much to the purpose: nevertheless
it is not hurtful to deliver it. I say therefore, that one of these has very
little substance, and the other hardly so much, as may maintain him in the
rank of a Caual^ere. Wherefore seeing Caesar, out of his clemency, has given
him his life, besides which they have not much to love; see if you can procure
favor; if you love me so much, as quest^onlesse you do; that they may return
home: wherein they gain nothing else, but a tedious journey; which will not
be wearisome to them, so they may live and die with their friends. Which thing
I request you most earnestly to procure with all end^uour, or rather to effect
it; for I am of opinion, that you are able to do it. Farewell.

Cicero to Dolabella Consul. Epist. 9.
THough I could content my self, my Dolabella, with your glory, and take
therein wonderful satisfaction, and contentment: yet I must need^s conf^sse,
that I feel my self replenished with infinite joy, seeing, that by the common
opinion of men, I am made partak^r of your praises. With whomsoever I come to
speak thereof, (And every day I speak with very many, for there is a great
number of virtuous men, which for the means of health, repair to these
places: and besides this, diverse others my ne^re friends, which come unto us
from pr^u^ledged places, all which) aft^r they have exal^ed you to heaven with
exceeding praises, they presently give me the great^st, and most effectual
thanks that can be. For they say, they make no doubt, but that you, following
my documents, and instructions, may discharge those offices. Which to an
exc^llent Citizen, and hono^able Con^ull are conformable. And though I may
answer them in all truth; that the matters you compass; your own judgment,
and likeing moves you to effect them; and that you need not another advise:
neuer^he^esse, neither do I wholly yield to their words, because I would not
extenuate your praise; in that it may seem, wholly to proceed from my
Councels: nor do I altogether oppose them: because I am more hungry after
glory then is convenient. And yet, that de^oga^es not from your dignity,
which Agamemn^n king of kings, reputed ^or so great honor; to hauesome N^stor
for a Coun^ellor: and to me it brings great renown; that you being a young
man, and Consul, should increase in virtuous operations, as nourished and
brought up, under my discipline. Luciu^ Caesar certainly, whom I went, to meet
at Naples, al^hough terrible bod^lie torments a^flicted him; nevertheless,
before he saluted me, said, I rejoice with you, my Cicero, in that you are of
such power with Dolabell^, that, if I had as much with the son of my sister; we
might, secure from all danger, now, lead a life reposed. But with your
Dolabella I rejoice, and g^ue him thankes^ to whom in truth, since your time of
being Consul, we may only ascribe the title of true Consul, He afterward
used many words, about your actions, and prowess: concluding, that there was
never more honorable and illustrious enterprise p^rform^d; nor from which
greater benefit accrewed to the Commonwealth. And every one gen^rallie
concurreth with him in this opinion. Now, I ^equest you; that you will permit
me, to assume this, as it were a false inheritance of another glory: and
suffer me in some part, to enter into a participation, of your praises.
Although my Dolabella (for what I said hi^herto, I spoke out of merriment) I
would more willingly pour upon you, all my commendations, if any praise be due
unto me, then diminish any of yours. For I having always so loved you, as
easily you may conceive: [and] now especially, these your atchieuements have
enflamed me with so ardent an affection, that no man was ever, more set on fire
with love, then my self. For there is nothing, (believe me) that is more
lovely, beautiful, or amiable then virtue. I ever loved, as you know, Marcus
Brutus, for the excellency of his wi^; for the sweetness of his customs; and
for that bounty, and constancy, wherein none is comparable to him: and
nevertheless, on the xiii of March, my love toward him, was so augmen^ed;
that I wondered, how a thing could grow greater, the which long time since I
thought had attained to it ^ull growth. And who would ever have thought, that
the love I bear you, could in any so^t, have been enlarged? and yet it is so
increased, that paralle^ling the love I now bear you; with that which hitherto
I professed ^owards you, me thinks that seems vu^gar, and this singular. To
what end therefore should I exhort you, to have ^he object of your thoughts to
be ever reputation, and glory? Shall I set before your eyes, the example of
m^n famous for their virtue; which they usually do, that exhort men to praise?
I cannot find a more famous man then your self. You must trace your own
footesteps, and seek to go beyond your self. And me thinks, having a^readie
wrou^ht such wonderful things; you can do no less, then resemble your own
actions. And being so, exhortations, are not necessary: it is rather needful,
that I should rejoice wi^h you: a matter having fallen out to you, which I
cannot say, ever happened to any other; which is; that, the having with
rigorous severity punished an offense, did not displease; but pleased the
people: and did as well to all good men, as to the meanest people, bring
singular contentment. If this had happened through the ^^uour of Fortune; I
would have rejoiced with you, in your h^ppie success; but this fell out unto
you, first through the magnanimity of your mind, and then by your own
wisdom and council. For I have read the Oration that you made unto the
people. I never saw any thing fuller of understanding. For point, by point, you
do^ so clo^ely come up, to demonstrate the occasion of the fact, and then
afterward you retire your self with that dexterity; that by an universal
consent of every man, It seemed the matter it self solicited you, to chastise
the malefactors. You have therefore freed the town from danger; and the
Citizens from fear. Neither only at this instant; but for ever, while the
memory of so notable an act shall continue, you have exceedingly benefitted
the Commonwealth. Therefore you must conceive, that the whole Commonwealth
relieth only upon you: and that to you it belongs not only to preserve, but
also to exalt them to honorable estate, ^^om whom the beginning of liberty is
derived. But of these things, so far as I hope, it will not be long; ^re we
discourse presentially. In the mean while; seeing you preserve the
Commonwealth, and us, attend with singular care, to preserve your self.
Farewell.

Cicero to Papirius Paeto. Epist. 15.
I will answer two of your Epistles: one, that I received three days since
from Zethus; another, which Philerus the Poaste brought me. By the first, I
understood, that you were well pleased, to hear me so inquisitiue of your
sickness. And I am glad, that you conceive my affection toward you: though I
assure you; that you could not so well apprehend it by my letters, as it is in
effect. For, perceiving my self to be honored, and beloved of many; (for I
cannot say otherwise;) amongst all those, there is not any one, more dear unto
me then you are: not only because you lou^ me, and have loved more of long
time, and with perseverance: (which, though it be a great, and peradventure a
very extraordinary matter: yet is it common to you, with many others:) but
also, because your self is so amiable, sweet, and every ways courteous: which
is a part proper to you alone: to which we may add, a manner of ^easting, not
according to the Atticke, but conformable to the ancient R^mane use, more
ingenious th^n that of the A^ticks. And I, (make what reckoning of me you
please) am wonderfully delighted with witty c^nceipts, especially with ours
of Rome: which heretofore lost a great deal of their luster, when our City
came to be ouer-thronged with foreign nations; in that the tittle of
Citizens, which then was belonging only to the Latin^ people; now conferred
upon nations, which come from beyond the mountains, is the occasion that it
daily loses that ancient facetious manner of speaking: so that almost no
footsteps thereof remains. Wherefore when I see you, me thinks I see all the
Grani^, all the Lucilij, and also to speak, as it is, all the Crassi, and
Laelij. I would I were dead, if besides your self, I see any left me, in whom
I can discern any similitude of those ancient pleasant strains of wit.
Whereunto adding, so great love, as that is, which you bear me: do you
wonder, that I was so t^oubled for your grievous, and dangerous malady? And
whereas in the other Epistle you excuse your self, by saying, that you never
diswaded me, from the purchase that I would have made at Naples, but that you
advised me to continue at Rome: neither did I ever understand it otherwise. In
deed I conceived that, which by these letters I apprehend, that you ^hought it
was not good for me, as I also thought, to depart from hence; not altogether;
but yet with a determination, to return hither seldom. You speak to me of
Catulus, and of those times. What conformity is there? Then, it disliked me to
remain long time far of, from the custody of the Commonwealth. For we sat
in the stern, and governed the Rudder: but now we have scarcely any place
about the pumpe. Do you think now, though I shall be at Naples, that for this
cause they will forbear, to pass decrees in the Senate? when being at Rome,
and attending to public affairs; the decrees of the Senate are registered in
a friends house of thine, my familiar; and when they please, they subscribe my
name thereto, as if I had been present. And I sooner hear of some decree,
transported into Armenia, and Syria, which seems to be passed according to my
mind, then word is delivered to me thereof. And think not, that I speak this
in ^east: Because you must note, that letters are already brought me from the
farthest distant Kings that are; wherein they thank me, for giving them in the
Senate, the title of Kings: the which I had not only, not done; but scarcely
knew there were any such in the world. What must be done then? So long as this
our master of ceremonies remains here, I will nevertheless do as you
counsel me: when he is gone, I Will come to your Mushromes. If I shall have an
house; the charge which the law limiteth us for one day, I Will distribute into
ten: but if I cannot meet with a scare, that contents me; I am determined to
lie with you. For I know I cannot better gratify you. About Silla's house, I
had now almost lost all hope, as I last wrote unto you: but yet I have not
altogether lost it; I should be glad, that you as you write, had viewed it in
the company of some Masons, for if there be no fault in the walls, or the
roof, the rest will like me well enough. Farewell.

Cicero to Papirius Paeto. Epist. 16.
YOur letters pleased me: and first, I was glad to understand, that the
affection you bear me, induced you to write unto me, doubting lest Silius,
with the news he brought m^e, might have put me to some trouble of mind.
About which thing, you wrote before unto me, twice after one manner: so that I
easily conceived your dislike: and I had diligently returned answer thereunto,
to the end, that so well as in such an occasion, and time I was able, I might,
at the least, in part, if not altogether dispossess you of your sorrow. But
seeing in these last letters also, you show what a care you have of it: be
assured of this, my Paeto, that, whatsoever could be done with Art, (for now
council s^rues not the turn, some new policy must be invented) I say, what
by Art may be attempted, or invented, to purchase the love of these
Caesarians: that have I labou^ed, and procured with all diligence possible: and
in my opinion, very successefully. For, I am so honored, and reverenced by
them, to whom Caesar wishes well, that I believe I am beloved of them. For,
though I could hardly discern true love from fained, except upon some
occasion, wherein, as gold by the fire, so true love may be tried, and known
by some danger; for other, are but common signs: nevertheless, I build upon
this, rather then any other thing, to think, that I am heartily, and ^ruely
beloved: that, both my fortune, and theirs is such, as there is no cause to
dissemble. Then, as for him, who is Lord of all, I see not why I should fear;
except in that, there is no security, where reason has no authority. Neither
can one promise any thing certain to himself, where, on others will (not to
term them appetites) every thing depends. Notwithstanding, I have not
offended his mind in any thing: and therein I have carefully used all my
dexterity and prudence. For, as other whiles I thought, that it rather
appertained to me, then any other, to speak freely; as to him, that had been
a preserver of the common liberty: so now, seeing it is lost, I think it not
fit for me, to speak any thing, wc may offend either Caesar's mind, or his
friends. But, if I should omit the occasion, of some excellent saying, I should
lose the opinion conceived of my wit: the which, if I could, I would not refuse
to do. But yet Caesar himself has a very good judgment. And even as your
brother Seruius, whom I take to have been very learned, would readily say,
this verse is not of Pl^^tus, this is; because he was accustomed to read Poets
and to note their passages: so I understand, that Caesar, having of himself,
made volumes of worthy sayings, if any thing be presented him for mine, which
is not, he uses to reject it: and he does it now much more, because his most
familiar friends, lead their whole life almost with me. Now, many things fall,
in sundry disc^urs^s, which peradventure, after I have uttered them, yield some
savor of learning and understanding; these are of^ered to him, together with
other conceits, which daily are invented: For, so he has commanded. From
hence it proceeds, that, if afterward he hear any thing of me, he thinks
it not worthy to be given ear unto. For which cause, I make no use of your
E^omaus, though by way of merriment, you have added there^o the verses of
Accius. But what envy is there? or, what thing is there in me, for which I
should be envied? But suppose, that it is, as you say: I see, that it so
pleased the Philosophers, that is, those that seem alone unto me, to
understand the force of virtue: it pleased them, I say, that a wise man should
not be bound, to render account of any thing, but of offense: from which I
perceive my self free, two ways: First, because I always had an upright
mind: next, in that when I saw, there was no means to defend our opinions, my
conc^it was, that we ought not to contend with the more mighty. I cannot
therefore certainly be blamed in the office of a good Citizen. It remains,
that I neither do, nor say any thing rashly, or foolishly against them, that
govern the Commonwealth. And this also, I deem to be a point of a wise man.
For other things, that which another says I have spoken, or how Caesar
construes my sayings, or with what fidelity they live with me, which daily
court, and honor me, of this I cannot be secure. And thus I comfort my self,
partly with the memorial of my life past, and partly by living now moderately:
and that similitude, which the Poet Attius makes, I attribute not only to
envy, but to fortune also: the which, as a weak thing, should be vanquished,
and broken by every val^ant mind; no otherwise, then as a wave, is broken by a
rock. And in truth, the Greek stories making mention; how, wise men have
always supported the dominion of Tyrants, either in Athens, or Siracusa;
having been in some sort free, during the servitude of their Ci^ies: I Will not
imagine, that I can so preserve my state; that it neither off^nd the mind of
some man, nor diminish mine own honor. Now I come to your pleasant conceits:
seeing, after At^ius his Oeno^a^es, you bring in, not as they were wont,
Attellanus, but as the custom at this day is, Mimus. What Popilium, or
Denarium, do you t^ll me of? What dish of strong cheese? out of my ingenuous
disposi^ion, I hither^o ^upported these things; now the matter goes otherwise;
I have scholars in speaking, and masters in ^ating, Hirtius and Dol^bella.
For, I suppose you have heard (if peradventure all things come to your hearing)
how they continually d^claime in my house; and I ^at at their house. And it
boots not you to swear, tha^ you want the means: for, when you were addicted
to gather wealth; by my reasons, you made your self more studious therein:
now, in that you consume your substance with such patience; do not believe,
that I Will come into your house, like a Judge to cor^ect you. And if I endamage
you any thing: it will be a less evil, to be damnified by a friend, then by
a debtor. Neither do I expect from you, such sumptuous suppers, that there
remain great superfluities. The meats that are, let them be exquisite, and
well dressed. I remember, you were wont to t^ll me of a supper of Phamea's: Let
yours be made more moderately, but after the same manner. And though you go
about to inuit me to ^upper at your mo^h^^s, it shall also content me. For, I
will see this bounty of mind, that dares put before me such things, as you
write of, or else a Tolypus, as red, as that [miniated] I^u^, which stands in
the Capitol. I am of opinion, that you dare not perform so great matters.
Before my coming, the r^port will come to your care, of the delicate meats, I
begin ^o feed upon; you will admire at it: and look not I should rest contented,
with that mingled beuerage of wine and honey: for I will by no means, abide ^o
see it. I care no more for your Oliu^s, and Salciccia's: But why discourse we
of these things? I would we might once come thither: I will content my self
with that salt cheese, which you were wont to use: and I Will put you, (for I Will
rid you out of pain) to this only charge, to cause of necessity, the Bath to
be hea^ed. For other matters; follow our ordinary custom. These former things
I uttered by way of mirth. As for the Silician Farm, you have done me diligent
offices therein, and written most pleasantly ^hereof: so that I mean to leave
it: for the place is very pleasant. but there are few persons there, like unto
the place. Farewell.

Cicero to Papirius Paeto. Epist. 17.
YOu are a good man surely; seeing our Balbus lying with you, you would
understand from me, what will become of these lands, and towns. As if I knew
any thing he knew not; or if I do at any time know any thing, that I use not
to have from him. Nay, and if you love me, procure that I may understand, what
will become of us. For, you had Balbus under your power, of whom you might have
known it. If not when he was sober, at least, when you saw him well ^ipled.
But I hunt not my dear Paeto, after these news: first, because we have now
lived four years by gettings, if one may term it getting, or this may be
called a life, to survive the Commonwealth: then; in that I suppose I know,
what will fall out: For, that s^all fall out, which they affect, that are most
powerful; and arms are ever most powerful. We must therefore be contented
with that, which is granted us. And he that could not satisfy his mind with
this, did well to dye. They fall a measuring the Territory of Veia, and
C^pena, which is not very far from my Tusculanum: yet I fear nothing: I enjoy
my self, while I am able, and desire to be able always. The which, if it may
not be: nevertheless, considering that I, who am a man of a great spirit, and
a Philosopher, have thought life very precious; I cannot but love him, through
whose benefit, I now live. Who, though peradventure, he desire that the
Commonwealth should be such, as he wo^ld, and all we ought to wish for: yet
can he dispose of nothing, he is so colleagued with many. But I range too far,
and I do it, because I write to you. This I tell you in conclusion, that not
only I, who am not present at consultations; but not so much as the great man
himself knows, what is to ensue. For, we serve him; he, the times: and so
neither he can conceive, how the times will sort; nor we, what he thinks. I
wrote not back these things formerly unto you; not because I use to be
negligent; especially in writing; but having nothing of certainty; I would not
perplex you, with ambiguities, nor put you in hope wi^h my affirmations. I will
notwithstanding add ^his, which is most true; that in these troubles, I have
hitherto heard nothing of this danger: yet, out of your accustomed discretion;
you should wi^h the best, forecast the worst, and support what comes.
Farewell.

Cicero to Papirius Paeto. Epist. 18.
BEing idle in Tusculanum; because I have sent my Disciples to meet Caesar
their acquaintance, with hope by this means, to recover me his favor; I
received ^our most pleasant letters: by which I understood, that my counsel
pleased you. For, as Dionysius the Tyrant, being driu^n out of Siracusa, set
up, as is reported, a school, at Corinth: So I, Courts of Judgment being put
to silence; and my Kingdom, of pleading causes, lost; have applied my self,
as it were, to keep a school. What desire you more? I am also glad I run this
course. For, I come by this means, to obtain many things: first, that which
principally, at this instant, is necessary; I fortify my self against this
terrible season: I know not how good the way I hold is; but well I s^e, it is
not wors^, then that which has be^n held by others: except peraduen^ure it had
b^en^ be^ter to dye: in ones b^d, I Will grant: but this came not to pass: and
at the battle I was not. others, [as] Pompeius, your Lentul^^s, Scipio, [and]
Afranius, dyed reprochfully; but Cato honorably: And this questionless, when
we will, we may do^: yet let us endeavor; as we do, that it may not be so
necessary for us, as for him. This is therefore the first thing, which I
purchase: and there is yet another, that I grow better; first, in my health,
which giving over exercise, I had lost; then, that fluent vttera^ce, which I
was wont to have, (if I ever had it) if I had not been reduced to these
exercises, would have been impaired. The last gain I make; which peradventure
you will esteem, above all the fore-m^ntioned, is this; that by this time, I have
eaten more Peacocks, the^ you have done Pigeons. Make your self merry there,
with Atteri^n broth, I Will be [merrie] here, with that of Hirtius. Come
therefore, if you be a good fellow, and learn, now at length, to live as you
desire. Though I consider, I teach the Dolphines to swim. But seeing I
perceiu^, that you cannot sell the possessions had of your debtors, for
payment, according to Caesar's valuation; nor fill a pot wi^h money, it b^hooues
you to return to Rome. I hold it far better, that you should dye here with
eating too much; then there, for want of meat. I see you have consumed that,
which you had. I hope your friends have done the like: you are therefore blown
up, if you look not to your self. You may ride to Rome upon that Mule, which
you say, is left you, seeing you have eaten your G^lding. You shall have a
place in the school, as an Usher, under me, and withal, you shall have a
cushion. Farewell.

Cicero to Papirius Paeto. Epist. 19.
ANd yet you leave no^ your wonted malice. You write ^h^t B^lbus was content^d
with a very little: as minding to infer; that if Balbus be contented with
less then indifferent suppers, much more ought I to be therein satisfied, who
am in respect of him, as one that has been Consul, is in respect of a King,
much inferior. You know no^, that I have wrung every thing out of his mouth:
you know not, that he came presently, to light at my house. Neither do I wonder
so much, that he lighted not rather at yours, as, that he went not unto his own
So soon as I saw him; said I, what does our P^to? and he swear unto me, that he
never was more willingly in any place. If you have made him this man with
words, I Will frame my ^ares as apt to to hear you as his: but if with good
cheer: Let me in favor request you, not to think, that the Balbi are more
worthy, then the eloquent. Every day some impediment grows upon me: but if I
can shake off matters, so, that I may come thither: I will work after such a
sort, that you shall not be abl^ to excuse your self, that you were too late
advertised. Farewell.

Cicero to Papirius Paeto. Epist. 20.
YOur letters affoorded me a double contentment; both because I have laughed;
and in that I understood, that you, at length, can laugh. Neither am I
displeased, that like a bad soldier, you have loaded me with apples: but I am
sorry, that I could not come thither, as I determined. For, not for few days,
but continually, I would have lodged with you. And think not, that your dish
of wine and honey, should more have served my turn; From an egg to roasted
veale, that is, from the beginning of supper, even to the last, you should have
seen me raven like a Wolf. You were wont to commend me as a man easily to be
satisfied, and with a slender meal: now, I am wholly changed. For now, I
think no more on the Commonwealth; nor, what opinion I should deli^er in the
Senate; nor, how I am to plead, and handle causes: I apply my self to an
Epicurean life: not to the dissolute [life] at this day: but to that delicate,
and moderate one, which you used, when you had plenty to spend: though at this
time, you have more Farms then ever you had. So that, be prepared: you have
to do with a man, that can eat soundly, and that now at length understands
somewhat: and men that have learned late, you know how troublesome they are to
content: and you must forget your banqueting dishes, and dainty Cakes. We are
now come to that point, that we dare en^ite to supper, your Verrius, and
Camillus: and you know, what delicate fellows they are. But^ observe yet, a
further presumption: I invited Hirtius also to supper; but he gate no
Peacockes. And at this supper, my Cook, (besides hot broth,) sent up no
dishes, like to those that were usual at Hirtius suppers. This therefore is
now my life. In the morning, I visit at home, many honest men, but in
miserable condition; and these joyful Conquerors: Who in troth, very
courteously, and lovingly entertain me. After this my visitation, I shut my
self up to my studies: either I compose something, or else I read. Some also
come to hear me, as a learned man, because I am a little more learned then
they are. Afterward, all the rest of the time ^is spent, about bodily health.
I have lamented my country, more bitterly, and longer time, then ever Mother
lamented her only child. If you wish me well, procure your health: to the
end I may not d^u^ur your substance, while you are sickelie. For I am resolved
no^ to s^are you, be you never so diseased. Farewell.

Cicero to Papirius Paeto. Epist. 21.
IS it possible? do you think you are fooli^h, in seeking to imitate me, in
the flashes (for so you term them) of my speeches? you should be foolish
indeed, if you could not attain thereunto: but, seeing in this, you do not
only equalize, but exceed me; you should ^coffe rather at me, then at your
self. That saying of Trabea, concurres not with you: I am he that labors in
vain. But tell me a little? What seem I to you, in my Epistles? do you not
think, I discourse with you, in vulgar terms? For we must not always
speak after one manner. It is one thing, to write an Epistle; anoth^r, to
plead a cause; another, to speak to the people. Nay, the causes themselves
are not to be handled after one fashion: In private matters; and not in all;
bu^ in those of light importance, ^uery thing must more nicely be scanned: but
where a man's person; his goods; or his honor is questioned; greater ornament of
eloquence is required. Epistles are wont to be framed of words daily used. But
I pray you, my Paeto, how came it into your mind to say, that there was never
any Papirius, which was not a plebeian? For, mean^r f^milies, have been of the
Patrician order. The first of them, was Lucius Papirius M^gi^^an^us, who was
Consul, with L^cius Sempronius Atratinu^, having b^ene before Censor, with the
sam^ [colleague] 312. years after the building of Rome. But then, you were
c^lled Papi^^. After these, there were xiij. more, which obtained of the higher
dignities, before Lucius Papirius Crass^^, who was the first that gave oue^^ he
name P^pisius. This man was dict^tor, and had for captain of the rank
M^letarie, Lucius P^piri^^ Cursor, 415. years after the building of Rome: and
four years after he was Consul, with Ceso Duillio. After these came Cursor,
a very honorable man: then Lucius Masso, who in demanding the Aedileship
died. After him, many Massenes: of which Patricians, I would have you reserve
pictures in your house. Then follow the Carbones, and the Turdi: these were
Plebeians, of whom I would have you make no account. For besides this C^^ius
Carbo, who was slain by Damasipp^s, none of the Carbones, ever benefitted the
Commonwealth. We knew C^eius Carbo, and that his infamous brother. Who can be
more wicked then they were? of this friend of mine the son of Rubria I say
nothing. There were three brethren, Publius, Caius, Marcus, surnamed Carbones.
Publius, accused by Flaccus, was condemned. Marcus fled out of Sicilia: Caius
being accused by Lucius Crassus, as 'twas said, poisoned himself. Thi^ man was
a seditious Tribune of the people, and was reported to have murdered Publius
Scipio Africanus: but in my judgment, there never lived a verier villain then
this fellow, that was slain by our Pompeius at Lilibaeum. And also his father,
accused by Marcus Antonius, it is not well known after what manner he came to
be absolved: wherefore my opinion is, that you should cleave to the
Patricians, for you see, what bad members the plebeians have proved. Farewell.

Cicero to Papirius Paeto. Epist. 22.
I Love the modesty; but rather the liberty of speech. And Zeno was of this
opinion, a very ingenious man questionless; but greatly opposite to our
Academians: But as I say, the Stoics are of opinion, that every thing should
be called by it own name: affirming, that in it, is neither obscenitie, nor
inciuilitie: and they prove it by this argument. If there be any obscenitie in
speech, it must needs be either in the thing signified; or the word signifying;
it can be no where else. In the thing signified it is not; And therefore we
see, that not only in Comedies, the act is plainly expressed, as it is:
whereupon Lucilius in his Demiurgus, brings in one uttering these words: which
peradventure you have heard upon the stage, and you may call to mind Roscius,
when he recited them. He left me lately naked in such fas^ion: where the speech
in respect of the words, is altogether modest; as for the matter, a little
inmodest. But in Tragedies also: what think you of that verse; What woman's
that, that I seely with him?


And of that other; Who with another did desire to lie?


And of this; How could this man, be so presumptuous:
As to enjoy great King Phereus wife?


Or of these other: Though I unwilling, once in maids estate,
Wit^stood him; yet, he did me violate.


In stead of violate, he might have used another word, signifying the same
thing: but it would have sounded too immodest. You see therefore, that a thing
is not dishonest that is uttered with honest words: and yet the words alter not
the signification: which is a sign, that every thing is honest by nature. And
therefore, if there be no dishonesty in things, much less in words. So that,
if the thing signified be not dishonest, the word that signifies, cannot be
dishonest. You do not say anus, but you ^erme it by the nam^ of some other
thing. Why? if the thing signified be dishonest; express it wi^h what words
you will, the matter shall ever be dishonest: if it be not? Why do you not
term it by it own proper name? Auncien^ly cauda was called penis, from whence
the word peniculus proceeds; because it has some similitude of that Cauda,
or tail: but at this day, the word Penis, is accounted among strude words, or
dishonest: and Piso Frugi in the book^s of his Histories complains, that young
men are dedicated to [that] Penis. That which in your Epistle, you term by it
proper name, he covertly calls penis. Which word being grown common to so
many; is now accounted as dishonest, as that you used. Now, what shall we
think? Whereas vulgarly men say: Cu^ noste volumus conuenire. Appears it not
obscene to say, Cum nos? I remember that a wise Consular, speaking in the
Senate, uttered these words: Hanc culpam maiorem, an illam dicam? Could he have
fallen into greater obscenitie? You will say it was no obscenitie: because he
uttered it not in that sense: words therefore are not they which make
obsceniti^: and, that things make it not, it is manifest by that which I have
before delivered. We must therefore conclude, that the same not being in words,
nor in things, is no where. To endeavor to get children, is so honestly spoken,
that Fathers themselves are wont to put their children in mind thereof: but
the proper ^erme of such endeavor, they dare not utter. Socrate^ learned the
Art of playing upon an Instrument, of an excellent Musician, whose name was
Connus: take you this to be an obscene word? When we say, Terni, we speak not
unmannerly; but when Bini, it is immodest. To the Graecians, you will say.
There Is therefore no dishonestie in the word: For I understand Greek also: and
yet I say unto you bini: and you perform it, as if I had spoken it in Greek,
and not in L^tine^ Ruta, and Menta be honest words: but if I would term the
little Menta, after the same manner as we say Rutula, it would not do well.
You say, bell^ tectoriola: give me therefore the diminutiue of pauimenta,
'twill sound ill. Now you see, al these are but fooleries: and that there is no
obscenitie in words; much less in things; from whence it follows, that it is
no where. Therefore let us couch dishonest things under modest words. For I
would know; is not Diuisio a modest word? but some immodest sense is included
in it: and Diuisio belongs to the agen^; intercapedo to the patie^t. Are such
words upon this occasion, dishonest? And we cockscombs, if we say, This man
strangled his Father, we put not in before, Sir reverence: but if we would
nomina^e Aurelia, or Lollia being Harlots, before we name them, we must say,
with reverence. And certainly, words modest, are used sometimes for immodest.
T^ say, Batuit, it seems uncivilly spoken: Depsit, more vnciuillie: and yet
nor the one, nor the other is dishonest. The world is full of fools. Test^s,
in place of judgment, is a very honest word; in another place it is not so:
you may also honestly say, Colei Lanuvini: but Cli^e^ini cannot be so modestly
spoken. And not only words, but things also, are sometimes honest, sometimes
dishonest. To say, suppedit, is an obscene speech: but let a man speak it of
one, that is naked in a Bathe, and it is not obscene. You have heard the
Stoickes reasons. If you be wise, you will speak ciuillie. I have made a long
tale, upon one word only of your Epistle: I am glad, that you take leave to
speak with me, without respect. I like, and ever will like to follow the
modesty of speech: as Plato accustometh. Whereupon I have treated of this
argument, with shrouded words, which the Stoickes handle very openly: but these
men affirm also, that farting should be as free, as belching. I have therefore
used ^his respect, in reverence of the time present. Vouchsafe to love me, and
be careful of your health. The first of March. Farewell.

Cicero to Papirius Paeto. Epist. 23.
YEsterday I came to Cumaenum: to morrow peradventure I Will be with you: and, if
I come, you shall know of it a little before. Though, when Marcus Ceparius met
me in the wood Gallinaria, and I demanded of him, what you did; and he told me,
you kep^ your b^d, by reason you had the gowt in your feet: I was
questionless sorry, as reason required. But notwithstanding, I am resolved to
come and see you, as well to visit you, as to sup with you. For, though you
have the gowt in your feet; your Cook, I hope, has it not in his hands.
Expect me therefore, but as a man of spare diet, and an enemy to sumptuous
suppers. Farewell.

Cicero to Papirius Paeto. Epist. 24.
THough I had bin offended by this Rufus, your friend, of whom you have now
twice written unto me: yet would I not forbear to favor him, in what I were
able; seeing you are so careful of his occasions: but having now both by your
letters, and also by those which he sent me, gathered and judged, that he
entirely affected my safety; I cannot but be a friend unto him; not only for
your recommendation, the which, as reason requires, is of great force with me;
but wi^hall, thorough mine own inclination, and understanding. For I would you
should know, (my Paeto) that the original of my i^alousie, and the diligence,
that I used in looking carefully to my self; grew from your letters: to which
the letters of many others, were afterward conformable. For both in Aquinum,
and Fabrateria, there were practices against me; which I see, you came to
knowledge of. And they, as it were, presaging, how troublesome I should be unto
them, minded nothing, but to oppress me. Whereof, I having no jealousy,
peradventure I might have fallen into some danger, if I had not been by you
advertised. And therefore this your friend, with me, needs no recommendation. I
desire nothing now, but that the fortune of the commonwealth prove so, as he
may acknowledge me for an excellen^ pay master. But enough of this. I am
sorry, you have given over going to banquets. First, because you have deprived
your self of a singular delight and contentment; and then (for between our
selves we may speak truth) because I fear, you will lose what before you had
learned; and that you will forget to make those delicate suppe^^, For if, when
you had one to imitate, you profited not much; what may I think you will now
do? when I had told Spurina the matter; and explained the customs of your
life past; verily, he demonstrated, that the Commonwealth underwent a great
hazard, if at the beginning of the Spring, you ret^rned not to your former use
of banqueting: but now while winter lasts it might be endured. In good
earnest, I advise you; if you mean to lead an happy life; to keep company
with your good, pleasant, and loving friend^. [For] nothing more befitteth
life, nothing affords greater happiness then it. Neither spe^ke I this, in
respect of the pleasures, but in respect of liui^g, and eating together, and
the liberty of mind: which is more enjoyed in familiar discourse, ^hen any
way else, and this is most pleasing at inuitements^ so that our country men,
named it much more wisely then the Graecians did: they called it (...), or
(...), which signify to drink, and sup together, our country men termed
them Conuiula, because then especially men live together. Do you observe how
I by Philosophical reasons, labor to reduce you, to your old custom of
seasting? Regard your health: wherein nothing will more help you then to go
often abroad to supper. But if you wish me well, suppose not, though I write
ieastingly, that I have laid a^ide the care of the Commonwealth. Be persuaded
of this my Paeto, that day, and night, I attend and solicit, no other thing;
but that my Citizens may be safe, and enjoy their liberty. I omit no occasion
to admonish, endeavor, and provide. I have finally propounded to my self, to
repute it for my greatest Fortune, if need were, to lay down my life, in this
care, and administration. Once more Farewell.

Cicero to Papirius Paeto. Epist. 25.
YOur letters have made me a very valiant Captain. Questionles^e, I knew not,
that you understood so much, of the art of war: I see you have read, and read
over again, the books of Pyrrhus, and Cynea. Whereupon I am resolved to obey
your precepts: and moreover, to have a little bark ready upon the coast. And
they say against the Parthian Cauallerie, there cannot be found a better
armor. But why jest we? You know not with what a Captain you are to buckle. I
have put in practice, whatsoever I read in Xenophons Cyrus, which book I had
worn out with continual reading. But we will jest another time at our
meeting; and ere it be long, as I hope. Now come to be commanded, (as the old
saying was) or (to speak more plainly) to obey me. I hold an inward amity,
with Marcus Fabius, as I think you know: and I love him exceedingly; first,
for the rare bounty, and singular modesty, I discerned in him; then, because
in these controversies, which I entertain, with the Epicureans, your table
associates; I am wont to reap from him great furtherance. He coming therefore
to me at Laodicea, and I desiring, that he would remain with me; he was
presently stricken with terrible letters; wherein was written: how the
H^rculanensian grange of his brother Quintus Fabius, was exposed to sale;
though it belonged not to him only, but was common between them both. Whereat
Marcus Fabius, was deeply discontented: and grew to be of opinion, that his
brother, as a man of small understanding, was thereunto induced by his enemies.
Now, if you love me my Pato, take upon you this whole busines^e, and remove
Fabius out of this perplexity. You may herein further us, with your
authority, council, and ^auour. Permit not, that two brothers go to suite,
and contest, to the shame, and prejudice of them both. Enemies to Fabius, are
Matho, and Pollio: What needs more words? Undoubtedly, I cannot write unto
you at full, what a pleasure you shall do me, in drawing him out of this
labyrinth. Which he understands to lie in your power; and makes me also
believe it. Farewell.

Cicero to Papirius Paeto. Epist. 26.
I Was set at the table, about nine of the clock, when I wrote to you this
present letter. You Will say, Where? In the house of Voluminous E^trapelus: and
there were, your two familiar acquaintances, Atticus, and Verrius; Atticu^
above, and Verrius beneath me. Do you wonder, that being her^tofore so
regular, I should now be so much delighted with merry entertainments? What
should I do now? I ask counsel of you, who hears a Philosopher. Should I
bury my self in thoughts? Should I excrutiate my self? What might I get
[thereby]? And then, to what end? you might live, you will say, in letters. Think
you, that I do not so? I could not live, if I sought not to live in l^tters.
But even of those, there is also, not a satietie, but yet a measure, or
proportion. Whereunto, when I have a while bent my mind, I repair to
inuitements, because I know not what else to do, before bed time: Although
inuitements (whereon your controversy grew with Dion the Philosopher) are of no
great esteem with me. Hearken to the rest. Under Eutrapelus was placed
Cyt^ris; Oh! you will here cry out, that, that Cicero should never have gone to
such an inuitement; Whose presence when the Grecians did behold;
They daunted fled. [How fast, cannot be told.]
I must confess, I knew not of her being there. But, neither did the
So^raticke Aristippus so much as blush, when it was cast in his teeth, that he
kept Laida: I keep Laida, said he, but Laida keeps not me. This sounds
better in Greek. Do you, if you please, expound it. But none of these things
ever moved me in my youth, much less in old age. I am delighted in meetings:
there I freely speak, what I will: and I turn my bitter tears into laughter.
Now, see if you can lead a better life then this? You once brake a jest upon a
Philosopher, who exposing himself to resolve any doubt should be propounded
to him: you demanded of him, where you might get a supper, that might dure as
long, as from morning to night. The silly man thought, that you would have
demanded of him, whether there were but one, or innumerable heavens: What good
was that to you? But tell me truly, did the supper do you good? especially
from a Philosopher? Now this life pass we: every day, we read, or write
somewhat: then; to entertain time also with our friends, we meal together;
yet not so, that our inu^tements exceed the limits of the Law (if now, there
be any Law,) But rather it is less, then the Laws tolerate. Therefore you
need not stand in fear of my coming: you shall lodge a man, that eats not
much, but will be very iocund. Farewell.

THE TENTH BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Cicero to Lucius Plancus, Imperator, elected Consul. Epist. 1.
I Was departed from Rome, to go into Greece: when in the midway, imagining I
was recalled, as by some voice of my Country, I ^ooke a cour^e to return.
Since which return, Marcus Antonius has held me in cont^nuall turmoyles: who
is, I will not say, so insolent, (for many have this defect) but so wicked, and
cruel, as he would not, that any man, not only in words, but not so much as
in show, should enjoy a freedom. Whereupon, I remain in great perplexity; not
about my life; to which, by years, and endeavors; and, (if it ought auailed) I
may tell you, that even with glory also, I have given satisfaction: but I
grieve for my Country, and principally, for the expectation of your
Consulship: which is so prolonged, as we may desire, [but] to live till that
time. And what hope remains, if all matters be be ouerswayed by the arms of
^he most insolent, and most unbridled man that lives? If the Senate, and
people, be of no force? If the authority of the Laws, and Tribunals, is
fallen? If there be no more, either form, or foot-step of a Commonwealth?
But because it imports not, that I should write unto you all particulars: they
having been specified unto you by others: I will acquaint you with that, which
love moves me to tell you of, which I have borne you from your childhood; and
have ever, not only preserved, but augmented it: remembering, and exhorting
you, to embrace with all study and care the Commonwealth: which, if it
continue till the time of your Consulship, it will be no great trouble to
govern it: but to procure, that it may so long continue; there is required,
not only special diligence, but also no little favor of Fortune. Yet I hope,
we shall enjoy you so^what ^ooner. And besides that I am bound, to give
assistance to the Commonwealth; your honor does so nearly touch me, that I
will therein employ all my council, endeavor, offices, labor, pains, and
diligence, to augment your reputation. By which means, I know I shall easily
discharge my self, both to my Country, which to me is most dear; and to our
amity; which in my esteem, ought by us most sacredly to be observed. I wonder
not, but rejoice, that you carry your self toward our friend Furnius, as his
courtesy, and place requires. And be assured, that I will hold that esteem,
of whatsoever you do in honoring, or benefitting him, as if you had honored,
and benefitted mine own person. Farewell.

Cicero to Plancus. Epist. 2.
I Would not have failed to employ my self in your behalf, in respect of our
inward amity, if I could have come into the Senate, either securely, or with
honor. But no man, that thinks freely of the Commonwealth, can without danger
converse in the midst of arms, and such extreme licenciousnes^ neither do I
judge it befitting my quality, to speak in the occasions of the Commonwealth,
in a place, where armed men may better, and nearer at hand, hear me then
Senators. Therefore in private occasions, I will n^uer fail you, either in
offices, or favor: nor yet in public, will I ever be wanting, though with
peril; if there be any business in hand, that requires my presence^ to
maintain your dignity. But in such matters, as without my being there, may be
brought to effect, I will request you, to be content, that I may have reference
to mine own safety and reputation. Farewell.

Cicero to Plancus. Epist. 3.
I Met with Furnius, to my great contentment, for his own sake: but much
greater, in that hearing him, me thought I heard you speak. He declared unto
me, how valiantly you bear your self in the war; how uprightly you govern
the Province; and finally, what prudence you manifest in all your actions:
yielding withal a te^timony, both of your humanity, well known to me before,
in our familiar conversation; and of your singular courtesy used toward him.
All which things have afforded me great delight; but the last, together with
delight, contentment. I retained near amity, my Pl^ncus, with your Family,
somewhat before you were bo^ne: I loved you, from the tender years of you^
infancy, and in confirmed age, we held familiar conversation; proceeding from
the love I bare you, and from the good opinion, you conceived of me. And for
these considerations, I wonderfully affect your advancement; the which I
esteem to be common betwixt us. Fortune, but rather your own virtue, has
ex^lt^d you to high degrees of honor, you being ye^ but a young man. From
whence, the envy of many, which you have outstripped by wit, and industry,
proceeds. Now, if you will follow my rule, who love y^u equally, to any other
old friend of yours whatsoever: From this time forward, seek to purchase all
honor, from a well reformed Commonwealth. You know, (for being wise, what
know you not?) how there was a certain time, when men supposed, that you too
much followed the quality of the times. Which I should also surmize, if I
thought you approved the things you tolerated. But, I, conceiving what you
thought: supposed you prud^ntly observed that which you could. Now, all things
are carried after another fashion. Judgment is your own, and free: you have
been elected Consul in your rip^r years, with notable eloquence, when the
Commonwealth stood in greatest need of such like persons. Bend your self, I
beseech you, to that care, and cogitation, which may bring you the highest of
esteem, and glory. And to ascend soon to renown, especially in these times,
when our Country has been now for many years so incumbr^d; there is only
one way: to be a good Citizen in public in^erests. I thought good to write
these things unto you; rather instigated out of love, then that I supposed you
to have need of my admonitions, and documents. For I knew, that you had them
from the same fountain, from whence my self formerly drew them. Therefore
I Will end. Thus much I thought good to deliver unto you, rather to signify my
affection, then to manifest any wisdom. In the mean while, with all
affection and diligence, I will that ways bend mine endeauours, wherein, I
suppose, I may add any thing to yout reputation. Farewell.

Plancus to Cicero. Epist. 4.
YOur letters were very acceptable to me; which, as Furnius words did
intimate, I conceive, were written with your own hand. I had written to you
before now, but that I understood, you were departed from Rome: and I was
adu^rtised of your return, not long before the receipt of yours. Me thinks I
cannon omit any office, that concerns you, how small so^u^r it be, without
gr^a^ blame. Whereunto I am bound for many reasons; for f^iendship paternall;
for my ancient observance; and for the love you bear me, equal to that which
I bear you. Wh^refore, persuade your self, my Cicero, that only you, as a
Father, I must devoutly honor: in that for your years also, you, may be a
father to me; I, a son to you. Whereupon it comes to pas^e, that all your
counsels, seem unto me full, not only of singular prudence, which exceeds;
but of fidelity, which I measure by mine own conscience. And if I were of a
contrary opinion to yours, your instructions doubtless might change my mind: and
if I were doub^full of any thing, I would upon your exhortations, dispose my
self, to follow what course gave you best satisfaction; But now, my opinion is
wholly conformable to yours. What fortune has allotted me, and what by mine
own endeuou^ I have obtained; though you, blinded with love, judge it to be
more, then in effect it is; yet, it is so much in any man's judgment, though he
were my very enemy, that besides a good name, I see not what is wanting. And
therefore, hold this for certain: that, what I am able with my power to
effect, with my counsel to provide; or with my authority to move; it shall
ever be wholly applied to the benefit of the Commonwealth: your mind lies
not concealed from me: and if I could be near you, as questionle^s^ I would
desire: In every thing I would follow your counsel. And now, I will endeavor
so to order the matter, as you shall not be able in reason, to reprehend any
action of mine. I look for aduertisements, from all parts, by which I may
understand, what is done in the hither Gallia; and what passes in Rome, in the
month of January. In the mean while, I am here, in great perplexity; for
f^are, lest these people, among others defects, may take some evil
opportunities from our country men. But if Fortune favor me, according to my
desert; you shall see, that I will give good satisfaction; both to your self;
which I exceedingly desire; and to all men of honest meaning. Have a care of
your health, and love me, as I do you.

Cicero to Plancus Imperator, elected Consul. Ep. 5.
I Received two letters from you, of one tenor; which was unto me a manifest
sign of your diligence. For I perceived, how much you desire, that your
letters more then any other thing by me exp^cted, might be delivered me. I say
therefore, they were most welcome to me: and they have made me doubtful,
whether I should hold dearer; your love toward me; or the affection you did
manifest toward the Commonwealth. Certainly as I judge, affection borne
towa^ds our coun^rie, is a matter of great moment; but the love, and
conuinction of two minds, comprehends a greater delectation. That part
therefore, where you commemorate the friendship I had with your father, and
the l^u^ which from your childehood, you bare toward me; and somewhat more,
which you have written to that purpose, afforded me infinite contentment. On
the other side, it was pleasing to me, to behold; how well you were disposed,
both now, and ever to assist the Commonwealth. And this my contentment was the
greater, because it was annexed to the masters above mentioned. Wherefore, I do
not only exhort you my dear Plan^us; but effectually I entreat you; as I did
in those letters, to which you so courteously made answer; that, with all your
understanding, and the whole force of your mind, you will study to procure
the good of the Commonwealth. There is nothing, that can redound to your
greater benefit, and glory. And of all worldly things, there is not any one
more excellent, and honorable, then to be beneficial to our country. I
speak freely to you, because I think that you, like an affable and wise man,
will accept of it as hitherto you have done. By the help of Fortune, it seems
you have obtained great honors. The which, though without virtue, you could
never have achieved: yet, in all men's opinion, Fortune, and the quality of
the times, have had the greatest hand therein^ But now, that the commonwealth
stands so afflicted; every help which you shall administer, will only be
attributed to your self. It is an incredible thing, how odious Marcus Antonius
is to all Citizens; except to those, who together with himself, have betrayed
their country. We hope much, in you, and your army, and promise much to our
selves understand, I beseech you, how to apprehend the oppor^unitie of such a
Fortune, and so great glory. I admonish you as a son: I wish the same to
you, that I do to my self: If I incite you to Action, my country, and the
great love I bear you, moves me thereunto. Farewell.

Cicero to Plancus Imperator elected Consul. Ep. 6.
THe matters which our Furnius has delivered touching your affection toward
the Commonwealth, were very acceptable to the Senate, and highly pleasing to
the people of Rome. But the letters openly read in the Senate, seemed not to
confront with Furnius speeches: For in them you exhorted to peace; now, when
Decimus Brutus your colleague, a ^enowned person, is beleaguered by wicked
Citizens: who; arms being laid apart, either ought to seek peace; or, if
they demand it with arms in hand, this peace must be obtained with victory,
and not by way of accord. But Lepidus letters, and yours, concerning the
persuasion of peace; how far they were accepted of, you shall understand from
your brother, an excellent man; and from Caius Furnius. I, for the affection I
bear you; although you neither want counsel, neither is the love and prudent
fidelity, of your brother, and Furnius, ever like to fail you: nevertheless,
infinite reasons of ^ur Friendship leading me thereunto, am also moved, out of
the interest I have in you, to set you down some instruction. Believe
therefore, my dear Plancus, that all the degrees of honor, you have hitherto
obtained, (and you have enjoyed the greatest) will be no true honors, though
they carry the title, If you join not your self with the liberty of the
people of Rome and the authority of the Senate. Many in the commotions of our
Commonwealth, were Consuls: but he that wrought nothing worthy of his
Consulship, was never held for Consul: Such an one therefore, it is fitting
that you should be. First, that you fall off from the league of wicked
c^tizens, much unlike your self; Then, that you resolve, to be head,
principal, and conductor of the Senate, and all good men: [and] lastly, that
then you judge it to be a peace; not when arms are laid down; but when all
fear of arms, and ^eruitude is removed. If you perform, and approve of these
things, you shall then not only be Consul, and Consular; but also a great
Con^sull, and a great Consular. But if otherwise; these so much reputed titles
of honor, will not only not honor you; but call upon you great dishonor. The
love I profess unto you, has made me peradventure, to write too freely; but
you shall understand, that I have spoken the truth, if you make thereof but
that trial, which is requisite. Farewell.

Plancus Imperator, elected Consul, to Cicero. Epist. 7.
I Would write more at large unto you, of my counsels; and I would give you a
particular account of all things; that you might the better conceive, that I,
both according to your instructions, and mine own promi^e, have done what I am
able for the benefit of the Common-weal^h: for I ever desired a^well your good
opinion, as your love; and my in^e^tion was not to be defended by you in
erro^rs, but for my deserts to be commended: but I intend to be brief for two
causes: one is, because in my public letters, I have particularly set down
all things: another, by reason, that to Marcus Varisidius, a Roman knight, and
my friend, I have given order, that he should come of purpose to find you out,
and that he should inform you of whatsoever had occurred. Certainly I felt
extreme grief, seeing others enjoyed the possession of praise: But I would
attempt no enterprise, determining to prepare my self thereunto after such a
manner, that I might atchieue something, which might be worthy of my
Consulship, and your expectation. And if Fort^ne deceive me not, I hope my
disseigne will fall out as I would have it: that every one, may both now
perceive, and hereafter remember, that I have given great aid, and assistance
to the Commonwealth. I beseech you be favorable to my dignity; and endeavor,
that those rewards may be yielded me, which you propounded unto me in
recompense of my commendable labors: which doing, you shall more incite me
hereby, to the defense of my country. I know that your power herein, is
equal to your desire. Be car^full of your health, and love me, as I love you.

Lucius Plancus Imperator, elected Consul; to the Consulls; Praetors; Tribunes
of the people; Senate; people; and Communaltie of Rome. Epist. 8.
IF some peradventure think, that I have held too long in suspense, the
expectations of men, and the hope, which the Commonwealth had of me: I suppose
it, first requisite for me to excuse me to these men; before I promise, that
from this time forward, I will discharge my du^ie. For, I will not appear to
have corrected an error committed: but I would it should be known, that
having always borne a real mind; now, when I found a convenient time, I have
discovered it. I understood my self thus far; that in so great troubles, and
in such a tumultuous esta^e of the City, it was very profitable to give a
testimony of an affectionate Citizen: and I saw diverse had received great
honors; upon the like occasion; but Fortune having brought me to that pass;
that if I manifested my self for you, too soon, I should frustrate my
designs, and lose the hope I had to assist the Commonwealth; and in not
laying my self open, I might have greater oportunities to do you service; I
made choice to have a regard to common safety, more then to mine own
estimation. And what man in the world, in the fortune I have had; after I had
lived, as every one knows I did live; being in the hopes that I am in; could
ever support any base action, or desire any, which might be dangerous? But,
time, great labor, and mighty expense, was requisite; to per^orme that, in
effects, which I to the Commonwealth, and all good men had promised; and to
repair to the aid of my Country, with such forces, as were answerable to my
intention. It was behou^full for me, to confi^me the Army, tempted oftentimes
with great rewards; and to induce it, rather to hope for moderate ma^^^rs from
the Commonwealth, then infinite bounties from one alone. It was convenient, to
confirm diverse Cities, the which our enemies^ the year part, by large
donatiues, had obliged to th^mselues: whom it was expedient to persuade; that
they should not esteem gifts, which proceeded from men of that condition; and
that it were mo^e commendable for them to receive the same benefits, from
persons, that bare a better mind toward the Commonwealth Besides thi^, It
was behouefull, by policy, to win the hearts of others, which had the
government of neighbor Provinces, and of the Armies: to the end they might
esteem it bet^^r, to defend general liberty in the company of many; then
with a few, to obtain a victory lamentable to the whole world. And besides the
things forementioned, it was nece^sarie that I should fortify my self by
engrossing the Army; and, to multiply succors: to the end; that when
afterward I openly revealed my mind; then, though some took it ill, there
might be no danger to make known, what part I would defend. Therefore, I will
never deny, that I fained diverse things against my will; and dissembled many
with my grief; to attain my end of such designs For, how dangerous it was,
for a good Citizen, before due time to manifest himself; by my Colleagues
case, I had conceived. And for this respect, to Cai^s Furnius, my Legate, a
valiant, and resolute man, I gave more commissio^s by word of mouth, then in
writing: to the end, they might more secretly be to you co^ueied; and my self
r^maine more secured. I also informed him of the provisions, which to secure
the common safety, and to arm us, is behoouefull. From whence it may be
collected, that long since, the defense of the common wealth had in my heart
made deep impression. Now, through the Gods benignity, I being well furnished
of all things: I desire, that men would not only hope well of me; but settle
on me a secure, and infallible judgment. I find my self to have five
Legions, under their Standards; for their fidelity, and valor, much affected
to the Commonwealth; and, through the bounty I have used to them, as ready at
my command as possibly may be. I retain the Province, together with all the
Cities well affected; and more then careful to discharge their duties: [And]
as many horse and foot, as these nations can raise; to defend their safe^ie and
common liberty. As for me, I am so encouraged, either to defend the Province,
or to go whither the Commonwealth shall summon me, or to resign, the army,
succors, and Province; that I refuse not to take upon my self, even the whole
brunt of the conflict: so that, by my ruin, I might but confirm my countries
safety, or abate the peril. If I make these offers (every thing being now
set^ed, and in a peaceable estate of the City,) with the prejudice of mine
own praise: yet shall I rejoice in the benefit of the Common-weal^h. But if
the same dangers still remain: I refer my self to just Judges; that may
defend me from the malignitie of those, that envy me. A large satisfaction ^or
my endeavors, shall be the safety of the Commonwealth. I think good to
entreat you, that you would take these soldiers to your special
recommendation; who moved by my authority; but much more, trusting in your
fidelity; have suffered themselves to be deceived with no hope, propounded to
them; nor with any danger have been daunted. Farewell.

Plancus Imperator, elected Consul to Cicero. Ep. 9.
I Am glad, that neither I, wrote rashly to you; nor you promi^'d any thing to
others erroniously, concerning me. Certainly, you have so much the greater
testimony of my affection; by how much I desired my designs might be known
sooner to you, then to any other. But I hope you perceive well, how my deserts
toward the commonwealth, grow every day greater: and I assure you, you shall
continually better know it. As for me, my Cicero, (so the Commonwealth may be
freed by my help from imminent ruin) I in such manner value you^ honors, and
rewards; worthy questionless to be paralleled with eternity; that I will
notwithstanding, without them, abate nothing of my courage, or of my
constancy. If, amongst many excellent Citizens, the resolution of my mind
appear not singular, and the effects remarkable: I will not, that one ^ot be
by your favor added to my dignity. Now, I ask nothing in mine own behalf,
rather, I affect the contrary. But, I am content, you should be the man, to
dispose of the time, and affairs at your pleasure. The reward, which a
Country gives to a Citizen, ought to seem neither late, nor little. I p^ssed
over Rhodanus, with mine Army, the xxvj. of April. I sent a thousand
Caualiers before, to Vienna, by the shorter way, and by great days iourneyes
I, not being hindered by Lepi^us, will be answerable in expedition. But if he
oppose himself to me in the way, I Will take a course as the time permits me. I
lead such an Army, as gives great hopes; both for valor, number, and
fidelity. I pray you love me: because you may perceive your self beloved of
me. Farewell.

Cicero to Plancus Imperator electe^ Consul. Ep. 10.
THough I vnde^stood sufficiently by our friend F^r^ius, what your
determination, and advice was, about the Commonwealth. Nevertheless, having
read your letters, I mo^e manifestly discerned your whole int^nti^n Wherefore,
though the whole fortune of the Commonwealth depends only upon one battle;
which questionl^sse, I did think by that time you should come to read this
letter, would be determined: Notwithstan^ing by the fame only, that is
dispersed of your good meaning, you have gained great commendation. Whereupon,
if the Con^ull had been at Rome: the Senate to your great honor would have
manifested, how acceptable your fo^ce was, and preparation: of which, the time
is not only not ^ast, b^t hitherto, so far as I can judge, no^ come. For that
only was wont to appear unto me, true honor, which is con^^rred upon valiant
me^; not t^rou^h hope of future benefit, but for a recompense of worthy
actions. Wher^fore, so there be any Common wealth, wherein honor may be
re^ucent; be secure, you shall obtain all honors. And in my opinion, that
which is bestowed upon men, to inuit them to noble attempts, cannot truly be
termed honor: but honor is that, which is bestowed for deeds performed.
Therefore, my Plancus, strive by all means, to get praise eternal. Rescue
your Country: succor your Colleague. Assist this affection, this miraculous
league of all the nations: I Will help you in your occasions, I Will further you
in your honors, and in all occurrents, I Will be most loving and faithful to
you. For, to the many reasons, which are between us, of true and ancient
amity: there is annexed the joint affection we both, bear to our Country:
And this is the cause, that I prefer your life, before mine own. Farewell.
The 29. of March.

Plancus to Cicero. Ep. 11.
I Give you, and while I live will give you infinite thanks: for, to return
you deserts, I dare not promise: because I think not my self able to
counteruaile your so many kind offices. except peradventure (as you gravely,
and prudently have written) you are of this opinion, that to remember an
obligation, be a rendering of good turns. If there had been an occasion,
touching the honor of your own son; doubtless, you could not more
affectionately have labored therein. Your first motions; by which you sought
to procure me infinite rewards: those that followed; where you applied your
self to time, and the opinion of friends; your continual, and perpetual
discourse of me; your contestations made with adversaries in my defense, are
very well known unto me. So that, I must take no slender care, to show my
self toward the Commonwealth, a citizen worthy of your commendations; and
to your self, both mindful, and thankful. For the rest; prosecute that
which you have begun: and if in effect, and trial, I prove such an one, as you
have striuen to set me forth; defend me, and take me into protection. Having
passed my men over the river Rhodanus, and sending my brother before, with
three thousand horse; In my way toward Mutina, I heard of the battle
fought; and how Brutus was freed from the siege of Mutina. I considered that
Antonius, and those men that remained with him, had no other receptacle but
these quarters; and, that they might have two hopes; one, of Lepidus, and
another of his army^ one part of which, carries no better minds, then the
followers of Antonius. So that I caused my Cauallerie to return. I, stayed
upon the territory of the All^broges, that I might be ready, as occasion
served. If Antonius retire hither, without Forces: my mind gives me he may
easily be resisted; and, we may effect that for the Common-w^alth, which you
desire; though he should be received by Lepidus army But, i^ he bring men with
him: and, if the old tenth Legion, the which by my means, with the others,
betook thems^lues to our defense, shall again rebell^ yet I will have an eye,
that no great damage shall accrue: and th^^ I hope to do, till aid may come
from th^nce, and so being all joined togeth^r, we may more e^sily extirpate t^^
seed of wicked Citizens In conclusion I promise you thus much^ my Cicero: that
n^^ther courage, nor diligence, shall be wanting on my part. To speak truth, I
desire, to t^ke away all trouble remaining: but if any be left; I will give
place to no man; neither in resolution, affection, o^ patience in your service
I end^uour also what I can, to draw Lep^^us to join (...) this enterprise: and
I offer my self in all (...) to be at his comm^^d; so he will st^nd for the
Common wealth I use h^^e^n the help and means of my brother, o^ La^^ensis,
and ou^ friend Furnius Particular h^treds shall be no hindrance to me, but that
with nay greatest en^mie I will agree, for the safety of the Commonwealth.
And in case I should do no good; I will not abate my courage; and I will be
more ready, and hardy then before: and peradventure, it may redound to my
greater glory, that I have de^ended the Commonwealth with mine own forces
only. Look to your health, and to love me, as I do you Farewell.

Cicero to Plancus Imperator, elected Consul. Ep. 12.
THough I ought to rejoice in the behalf of the Commonwealth, that in times
of such necessity, you have so greatly assisted her: Nevertheless, may
Fo^^une so grant, that I may embrace you a Conqueror, in the happy state of
the Commonwealth; as a great part of my joy, proceeds from your digni^y:
which I know now, to be very eminent, and will also be so hereafter. For I
assure you, that more acceptable letters then yours, were never recited in the
Senate. And this happened, both through a singular greatness, of the good,
that you have done in the Commonwealth; and also, through the gravity of the
words, and sentences. Which questionless, seemed no new thing unto me, who was
well informed of your valor; and called to mind, what you promised me, in the
letters you sent me; and had fully also by our Furnius been advertised of your
designs. But the Senate, apprehended greater matters, then were expected: not
that it ever doubted of your disposition, but it had not full information,
neither what you were able to do, nor what you intended to attempt. Wherefore
Marcus Varisidius, having delivered me your letters, on the vij. of April in
the morning; I took, in reading them, infinite contentment: and a great
multitude of excellent Citizens accompanying me out of my house, I presently
made them all partakers of my contentation. Afterward came our Munatius, out
of his wonted custom, to see me, and I showed him your letters; for as yet he
knew nothing, because Varisidius came first to me: and he said, that so you
appointed him. A little after, Munatius gave me those letters to read, which
you sent both to him, and to the public state. We thought good presently, to
go and present the letters to Cornutus, Praetor of the City: who, because
the Consuls were out of Rome, according to the ancient custom, supplied their
place. The Senate was forth with co^uented: and almost all the Sena^ors
^ss^mbled, through the fame and expect^tion of your letters. Which being
recited, Cornu^us had a scruple of conscience, by reason the Pullarian
southsayers took notice, that he had not used requisite diligence, in making
the diuinations. And this was approved by our College. Whereupon the business
was de^erred till the day following. On which day, I contended much in defense
of your honor with Seruilius^ who having by favor obtained, that his opinion
should first be heard: the greater part of the Senate opposed him and my
opinion, which was the second, to be moved, being allowed of by the greater
part of the Senate: at Seruilius entreatie, Publius Titius spoke against it.
The matter was referred over to the next day. Seruilius came provided with an
unjust mind, even against Jove himself: in whose T^mple the matter was heard.
Now, how roughly I handled him, and how roundly I cut of Titius, that opposed
himself against us, I wish you may understand by other men's letters^ take this
only from mine: That the Senate could not be more grave, more constant, nor
more favorable to your praise, then at that instant it showed it self. And
yet, the Senate was not more friendly to you, then the whole City. For there
was a wonderful accord to deliver the Common wealth: and all the peo^l^ of Rome
concur to this enterprise: prosequute therefore, as you do, and make your
name ^ternall: and all these semblances of glory, rai^'d from vain
appearances of renown; contemn them as s^ort, flitting, and transitory
things. True honor consists in virtue: which illustrates it self more then
any way else, by effecting great services for the Commonwealth: whereof Fortune
sets bef^^e you, a most admirable oppo^^unitie. Which having once embraced^
suffer it not to fly from you: but procu^e that the Commonwealth may be no
less bound to you, then you to her. As for me, you shall perceive, that I will
not only be favorable to you in honor, but I will also seek, how to augment
it in you: not to fail in the office I owe, as well to the Commonwealth,
which I love above my self; as also to our unfeigned amity. And in those
courses which I have vnde^taken for the advancement of your honor, I take
great delight; for, the fidelity, and wisdom of Ti^us Mana^us, othe^wise
has been well known unto me, mo^^ evidently perceiu^d, in the love and
diligence he has used in your occasions. Farew^ll.

Cicero to Plancus Imperator, elected Consul. Ep. 13.
Whensoever occasion was offered me, to advance your honor, I omitted nothing
in your commendation; laboring, that your valor might be as well exalted with
words, as acknowledged with rewards: as by the Senates decree it self, you may
perceive. For so was it recorded in writing, even as I reading the written
paper of mine own hand^ had persuaded: and the greater part of the Senate,
followed my o^inion, with singular desire, and general cons^nt. Though I, by
the letters you sent me, understood, that you were more delighted with the
approofe of good men, then with outward appearance of glory; nevertheless, I
thought fit we should enter into consideration, though you demanded nothing,
how far the Commonwealth was indebted to you. Finish you tha^, which was
begun by others. And whosoever suppresseth Marcus Antonius, that man shall
finish the war. And therefore Homer called neither Ajax, nor Achilles, the
bane of Troy; but Ulysses. Farewell.

Cicero to Plancus Imperator, elected Consul. Ep. 14.
O Acceptable news, two days before the victory: of your succor, endeavor,
expedition, and army. Understand, that though your en^mies be discomfited: yet
all hopes remain in you: it being informed, that from the battle of Mutina,
the principal Captains of the adverse par^y are fled And it will be no less
acceptable to make an end of the remainder of this wicked war, then to have
repelled it at the beginning. I, questionless, together with many others,
expected ere this your letters: and I was in hope, that Lep^lus also,
admonished by the sequel, ^ould have united himsel^e with you, and the
Commonwealth. Prosequute it therefore, my Plancus, to this issue; that not a
spark of that abominable war, may remain vnquenched^ which if you procure,
the Commonwealth shall acknowledge from you an infinite benefit, and your
self shall purchase eternal glory. Farewell.

Plancus Imperator to Cicero. Epist. 15.
Having written these letters, I thought it imported the commonwealth, that
you should understand what followed. My carfulness, as I hope, has produced
good effects, both to my self, and to the commonwealth. For by daily means, I
wrought with Lepidus, that al private contestation laid apart, and being
reconciled with me; with joint affection we might succor the commonwealth; and
that he should make more account of himself, of his children, and of his
country; then of a wretched, and base robber: and that in so doing, he should
dispose of me in all things at his pleasure. I have therefore obtained my
purpose by the means of Laterensis. He has given me his fidelity, that he
will persecute Marcus Antonius with arms, if he cannot keep him far from
his Province. Entreating me withal, that I would approach, and join my forces
with his. And so much the rather, because it was reported, that Antonius was
strong in Cauallerie, and Lepidus has but a small troop of horse: and of
those few he had; not many days before, ten of the best came away from him,
into my Camp. Which when I heard, I made no delay, supposing it requisite,
that I should aid Lepidus, while he had so good an intention. I saw, what
benefit my arrival would procure, either because with my Cauallerie, I might
pursue, and defeat Antonius horse; or because that part of Lepidus army,
which had been seduced, and alienated from the Commonwealth, by the presence
of my Army, might be bridled, and kept under. Whereupon, making a bridge, in
one day, over Isara, a great r^uer, that runs upon the confines of the
Allobroges, I passed over with my Army, the xii of May. But it being told me
that Lucius Antonius, sent before with horse and foot, was come into Forum
I^lij, the xiiij. of May I sent my brother, with four thousand horse, to
affront him. And I by speedy days iourn^ies, with four expedite Legions, and
with the r^st of the horse, will follow after. If the fortune of the common
wealth afford us never so little favor, we shall here make an end of the
insolency of these rascalles, and our own trouble. If that these, upon our
coming begin again to retire himself into Italy; It will be Brutus part to
confront him: to whom I know, neither courage nor counsel will be wanting.
Notwithstanding my self, if this happen, will send my brother with the horse,
to pursue him, and to defend Italy from forraging. Have a care of your health,
and as I love you, love me. Farewell.

Cicero to Plancus. Epist. 16.
Dear Plancus I have seen nothing ^uer happen more glorious, nothing more
acceptable, nor in respect of the time it self also, more opportune then your
letters. For in a full Senate, they were presented to Cornutus, at the same
instant, when he had read the most inconstant, and cold [letters] of Lepidus.
After which, yours were presently recited, whereupon great shouts arose. For,
besides their being most acceptable for the matters they contained, and ^or
your benefits, and affection toward the Commonwealth, they were replenished
with most grave words, and sentences. The Senate importuned Cornutus, that he
would presently propound about your letters. He said he would consider thereof;
whereupon recei^ing a great che^ke from the whole Senate, five T^ibun^s of the
people, cons^ited of them. S^r^ius at the instance of some others, p^o^longed
the matter. I delivered such an opinion, that all agreed thereunto. Of what
tenor it was, by the Senates decree you shall understand. you, though you need
no counsel, but are rather fit to counsel another: must nevertheless bear
this mind; not to refer any thing hither: and upon these so sudden, and
urging accidents, not to think to demand Council of the Senate. Be you a
Senate to your self: Whither soever the benefit of the Commonwealth calls you,
go that way: and procure that we may hear of some notable action, before we
can suppose, you went about it. I assure you, that whatsoever you atchieue, the
Senate will approve it, not only as loyally, but wisely undertaken. Farewell.

Plancus Imperator to Cicero. Epist. 17.
ANtonius the xv. of May, came with his vaunt-guard into Forum Iulij. Ventidius
lies two days journey from him. Lepidus is expected at Forum Voconij. Which
place from Forum Iulij, is four and twenty miles distant. There he means to
attend me, as he has written to me. Whereupon, if no alteration grow, either
from him, or Fortune; upon my credit, I promise you, presently to accomplish
this enterprise, according to your desire. I wrote last unto you, how my
brother, overcome with continual travail, and posting up and down, was
grievously sick: nevertheless so soon as he was able to march; esteeming that
he was recovered, not so much for himself, as for the Commonwealth, he
refused not to be the foremost in all dangers. But I have not only exhorted, but
enforced him, to repair thither: first, because being yet weak, he might
rather prejudice himself, then further me: and then; because I thought that
the Commonwealth remaining naked by the lamentable death of the Consuls, might
have need of such a Citizen to be Praetor in the affairs of the city^
wherein, if any of you commend me not: know, that there wanted prudence in me to
advise him, and not any fidelity in him toward his country. Lepidus has in
conclusion performed that, which I desired, In s^nding me Ap^ll^ for hostage of
his fidelity: and of the league concluded between us in defense of the
Commonwealth. Lucius Gellius, one of the three Segauian brethren, has made me
understand his good disposition therein: and last of all I have used him as a
means with Lepidus. Of whom I willingly give testimony, and will ever render
it to them that deserve well. Be careful of your health, and love me in the
same manner, that I love you: and take my honor to your protection, as
hitherto most lovingly you have done.

Plancus to Cicero Epist. 18.
WHat I was resolved of, when ^^uius, and Nerua departed from me; by the
letters I gave them, as also by themselves, you may app^ehend^ who were
p^esent, at all my Actions, and at all my Counsels. That, has befallen me,
which to a man jealous of his honor, and desirous to satisfy the
commonwealth, and all good men, is wont to happen: That, to discover my good
inten^ion, I followed a course which was rather dangerous, then secure; which
by malignant minds might be con^rou^ed. Whereupon after the departure, of the
Amba^^adours, seeing that Lepidus with two letters, one after another,
entreated me to come: and Laterensis, much more fervently as it were with
tears, coniured me to the same: for no other cause, but in that he feared the
instability, and in^^de^ity of his army; of the which I al^o stand in fear: I
thought it fit to succor him; and to expose my s^l^e to danger, for his ^afety^
though I knew, it had been a far more secure course to have bin attending
upon Isara, while Brutus had passed over his Army; and joined with him, as the
custom of the wars is, to have marched against the enemy. But if Lepidus being
well affected, had received the least prejudice, I saw all this would have
been ascribed, either to my obstinacy, or fear: to my obstinacy; because it
would have been said, that I had abandoned a good citizen, for some
particular enmiti^s: for fear; because in so necess^rie a war, I had avoided
battle. So that, I le^t that secure course; supposing it better to expose my
self to danger, that with my presence, I might defend Lepidus, and ouer-awe
his army; Questionless I think, there never was any man, more sorrowful,
for de^^cts that were not his own^. For whereas, the ma^ter was no ways
doubtful: now, when the Army of Lepidus fails, it d^^ues me to great care,
and seems unto me, as it is; a point of great impo^tance. For if I had been
the first to encounter with Antonius: he should no^ doubtless have held out an
hour^^ so confident I am in my self, and so much I contemn his shack-ragge
people, and those of Ventidius the Mule-driuer. But I cannot but greatly fear,
being suspicious, least under the skin there be some hidden wound, the which
may first festor, before it can be discovered, or cured. But certainly, if we
encamped not both in one place, both Lepidus himself would be in great danger,
and that part of the army, which is well inclined toward the Commonwealth.
Our wicked enemies had also made great profit, if they had gleaned any men from
Lepidus. Which disorders, i^ by my arrival I do remedy, I shall thank
Fortune, and mine own constancy, which incited me to make this trial.
Wherefore the xxi of May, I removed the Camp, from the River of Isar^, leaving
the bridge yet ^tanding there, which I made upon it, with two Towers, at each
end one; and with a strong guard: to the end, that to Bru^us, who was coming;
and to his army, without any delay, the pa^^age might be ready. I hope within
eight days after the date of these presents, I shall unite my self with
Lepidus forces. Farewell.

Cicero to Plancus Imperator. Epist. 19.
THough my desire was not, that you should thank me; knowing, how exceeding
thankful, b^^h in thought, and deeds th^mselues, you are: yet, (I must
confess,) it contented me above measure. For I have seen, as men with the eye
behold objects; that you love me. You^le say, what did you before? To deal
truly, I always saw it; but never more apparent. Your letters are wond^ous
well-come to the Senate; as well for the affairs themselves, which were
weighty, and great; compassed by an invincible spirit, and with deep
consideration: as also, for the gravity of the words, and sentences. But,
noble Plancus, strive to the utmost of your power, to bring this war to a
period. Thu^ shall you arrive unto the depth of favor, and the height of
glory. I wish all good unto the Commonwealth: but I give you my faith, that
finding my self now wearied out in conse^uing her, I do not much more seek
her profit, then your glory. Of which the eternal gods having, as I hope,
offered you all opportunity; embrace it I beseech you^ For, it is he shall
make an end of this most impious, and dangerous war; that subdues, Au^onius.
Farewell.

Cicero to Plancus. Ep. 20.
ALL news were so uncertain, that came from thence, as I knew not what to
write unto you. For sometimes we heard such things of Lepidus as we wi^hed,
other whiles the contrary. Of you notwithstanding, there was a constant report,
that none can either deceive, or vanqu^sh you. In the one of which things
Fortune ha^h a hand; the other is proper to your own wisdom. But I recei^ed
letters from your Colleague, dated the xxv. of May: wherein was contained, how
you had written to him, that Lepidus gave no entertainment to Antonius. The
which will be more certain if you write the same unto us. But you dare not
peradventure do it, by reason of the vain joy of the le^ters past. But, as you
might well err, my Plancus, (for who is he that erres not?) so it is well
known to every one, that it was impossible you should be out-reached^ And now,
you cannot only, not be deceived, but you can no more err; because the very
vulgar reprehends that man, who stumbles twice upon one and the same stone. But
if the matter so stands, as you write to your Colleague; We are rid of all
care: but to assure our selves thereof, we expect your letters. This, in brief,
as many times I have written unto you, is my opinion: whosoeu^r cuts off the
relics, he will carry away the glory, to have ended the whole war. Which
honor, I wish, may be yours, and I am confident, it will be so. Touching the
diligence I have used in your affairs; which undoubtedly could not be greater;
I am exceeding well pleased that you take it in so good part: and I wonder not,
for I conceived as much. But if matters pass well there, you shall observe my
diligence to be greater; and in far greater effects. Farewell. The xxix. of
May.

Plancus to Cicero. Epist. 21.
I Should be ashamed of the inconstancy of my letters, if it had not grown
from another leuitie. I have assayed all means, to unite my self with
Lepidus, in defense of the Commonwealth: to the end, that with your less
mol^station, we might be able to resist wicked Citizens. All things he
demanded, I have promised, and proferred him of mine own good will. And I
wrote unto you two days since, how I trusted, that Lepidus would help me; and
follow the war with common consent. I gave credit to the letters of his hand,
upon Laterensis affirmation, being present: who then was with me, and
entreated me to be reconciled to Lepidus, and to give him credit I could not
long conceive this good hope of him. I looked narrowly to the matter; and will
be careful, that through my credulity, the State of the Commonwealth suffer
no detriment. Having passed the river Isara with my army, a bridge being in
one day made over the same, and using expedition therein, according to the
importance of the business; he having requested me by letters, that I should
hasten my coming; his messenger came to me, with other letters; wherein he
advised me, that I should not come: for, he could perform the service of
himself: [and] in the mean while, I should stay for him, at Isara. I will lay
open unto you the rash course I had meant to have undertaken. I,
notwithstanding was resolved to go; imagining, that he was not desirous to
have any companion in the glory [of the service. Yet] conceiving that he was
beyond measure, ambitious of this honor: I would not attempt any thing
therein, but only lie in places near hand; to the end, that if need required,
I might be able without delay to succor him. This I simply cast in my head:
but behold, Lat^rensis, a sincere man, wrote unto me with his own hand, and to
my friends in like manner; showing, that he had no more hope of himself, nor
of the Army, or of Lepidus fidelity; and lamenting, that he was betrayed.
wherein he plainly admonish^t me, that I should take heed of being deceived:
that he was no more bound to that, he promised: that I should not be wanting
to the Commonwealth. I have given the copy of his letters to Titius, the
Originals themselves, and those to which I give credit, and those to which I
supposed no credit was to be given, I will deliver to Laeu^^ Cispius, to be
conveyed: who was present at all these things: To help the matter; Lepidus
speaking in public; his soldiers wicked, and disloyal of themselves; and
being also corrupted by the R^freni, and Canidij, their Commanders; and by
others, whom, when time serves, you shall know; c^ied out, (See the charity of
y^ men) that they would have peace; and, that they would not sight with any,
having seen the death of two famous Consuls, and of so many Citizens for their
Country; and the Commonwealth having banished, as rebellious, all Antonius
followers, and confiscated their goods: and Lepidus never punished them, for
this their disloy^ltie, nor did he in any sort remedy the same. And, had I
come thither, and unto two Armies lying together, exposed a loyal, and
faithful Army; great succors; the Princes of Gallia; and the whole Province:
I saw, what a wonderful folly and temeritie it would have been: and, that when
I had been defeated, and had with my self ruined the Common^wealth, th^re was
none that in my death, would have afforded me any honor; nor have had so much
as compassion of me; whereupon I am to return back: nor will I endure, that
vagabonds shall have so great a fortune. I will seek to plant mine Army in
places of advantage, to defend the Province; though Le^idus Army do rebel
against us; [and] to preserve every thing in it present state and condition,
till you, from thence, send succors; and may wi^h equal felicity here also
defend the Commonwealth. Neither to fight, if occasion se^ue; nor to endure a
siege, if it be necessary: nor to dye, if the case so fall out, in your
service; shall any be more ready then my self. I exhort you therefore, my
Cicero, to procure, that fr^sh men be sent out of hand, before the enemy grow
stronger, and we more danted. Wherein, if expedition be used, the
Commonwealth shall remain in possession of victory, and the wicked be
ex^irpated. Be careful of your health, and wish me well. I think I shall not
need to excuse my self to you; though my bro^h^r, a valiant Cit^zen, and
ready for all services, be not come thither. By running up and down, he has
gotten a continual sever, and very troublesome. As soon as he can, I will
procure him to c^rne without delay: that he may in no place fail the
Commonwealth [o^ his s^ruice]. I pray you, be tender over my reputation. It
is not requisite that I should desire any thing at your hands, knowing that ^ou
do and may, as I desire, i^fini^^ly love me. Your kindness toward me, how
great you will it shall be, and in wh^t time demonstrated, I l^^ue to your
consideration. Now may de^^^e is, that you wou^d procu^e me Hirtius place, for
the l^ue that you bear me, and for the observance that I owe you. Farewell.

Cicero to Plancus. Epist. 22.
ALL our hope is in you, and your Colleague: and we attend good effects from
divine favor. Your agreement, which the Senate understands by your letters,
has given wonderful contentme^t, both to the Senate, and also to the whole
City. What you writ unto me about the division of the Camps; if the Senators
had been solicited for their opinions, I should have joined with him, that had
yielded the honourablest opinion of you: which sentence, I my self would have
pronounced: but, seeing that the time would draw us on too long, by reason of
the opinions delivered in sundry matters, of which, none concluded any thing;
it seemed very convenient to me, and to your brother Plan^us, to make use of
that decree; about which, who, was an impediment, that it was not made
according to our mind, I suppose, by the letters of your said brother, you
have understood. But, if you desire any thing, either in the Senates decree, or
in any other respect: be persuaded of this, that the affection, all good men
bear you is so great, that you can imagine no kind of ho^our, how great so
ever, which you may not easily obtain. I expect, with great desire, your
letters; and expect them, such as I exceedingly desire, they should be.
Farewell.

Plancus to Cicero. Epist. 23.
I Will never repent, my Cicero, to have undergone great perils, for my
country; so that, when any misfortune befalls me, I may not be taxed with
temeritie. I would confess I had erred through in discretion, if I had ever of
mine own head given credit to Lepidus: for credulity is rather an error, then
an offense: and indeed it easily falls into the mind of all honest men. But
this was not the defect that had almost deceived me. For I knew Lepidus too
well. What was it then? the regard of my honor, which in the wars, is of
great importance, urged me to expose my self to this danger. For if I should
not have united my self with Lepidus, I feared, least some malign fellow
might have suggested, that I made more account of that private enmity which
was betwixt us, then of the interest of the Commonwealth; and also that I
nourished the war, by my protraction. Whereupon, I lead my men, almost in
sight of Antonius, and L^pidus, encamping my self some forty miles from them;
with dissigne, that I might presently make an app^oach, or retire my self,
without loss. I had these respects, in making choice of the place. First, to
have the river before me, where^s the^ should stay to pass ou^r. Then, that
the Vocont^^ should b^ nee^e me, that so I might securely m^r^h with my men,
through their count^ie. L^pidus, being o^t of hope of my coming; the which he
watched carefully, to suprise me; joined with A^t^nius, the xxix. of May: and
the very same day, they moved their Camp toward me. When they were within
twenty miles of me; I h^ard thereof. I labored by the gods help, with
cel^ritie, so to ret^^e my self; without making show of flight; that not a
Soldier, foot, or horse, nor any of the carriages might be lost, or intercepted
by those ^auenou^ the^ues. Whereupon the iiij. of June, I passed over Isara,
with all my m^n, and I cut down the bridges, I had made thereon: to the end
that my people might have time to be reincouraged^ and that in the mean while
I might join with Brutus, whom I expected three days after the date of this
present, I must ever confess, that our Laeterensis, was of a singular
fidelity, and courage toward the Commonwealth; but certainly, his too great
trust in Lepidus, per^i^ted him not to foresee the d^nger, which might ensue;
who seeing himself d^ceiued, and be^trayed by ^epidus, would have sl^ine
himself ^i^h his own hand: seeking to do^ that to his own body, which he
should have performed upon L^pidus: In which case he b^ing hindered, he yet
lives, and as it is said, he will escape it. But nevertheless, of this, I
have little certainty. I, to the trayto^s great grief, have escaped their
hands. For they came ^nraged against me, with the same fu^ie, that they came
against their country. Whe^eunto they had fresh prouocations: because I had
continually solicited Lepidus to end the war: because they reprou'd the
meetings hel^ [to this end] because I denied the Ambas^^dors, to come into my
presence, which were sent under Lepidus safe conduct; because I intercept^d
Caius Caninius Vestinus. Tribune of the soldiers, sent unto him from Marcus
Antonius, with letters. Whe^ei^, I take this contentment; that certain^ly, the
more they sought to entr^p me, the more grie^e 'twas to them, that they had no
success therein. Look you, my Cicero, to do that which hitherto you have
done, [that is] carefully, and stoutly to favor us, that follow the wars.
Let C^sar come, with all his mighty forces; or if any thing hinder him, let
his army be sent: considering that he also is in great danger. Whatsoever
force this accursed society could make against their country, is by this time
at the highest. And for the Cities security, why should we not use all our
forces? I certainly, for what concerns my self, if you that are there fa^le
not, will every way give sufficient satisfaction to the Commonwealth.
Questionless, dear Cicero, my love to you daily increases, and the benefits
you daily confer upon me, augment my care, that I may not loose a jot, either
of your love, or opinion. I desire, that in presence, with my observance, and
endeavor, I may now at length show you, that I am mindful of your
deseruings: to the end that you may remain satisfied for that, which you have
performed in the behalf of my honor. Farewell: the vi. of June, from Ciuaro,
on the confines of the Allobr^ges.

Plancus Imperator, elected Consul, to Cicero. Epist. 24.
I Cannot but give you thanks, for all your favors, and deserts: but in truth
I am ashamed to do it. For neither to so great a friendship, as you have
pleased to hold with me, seems it that ceremonial offices are befitting;
neither do I, for so great benefits received from you, seek willingly to give
you words for recompense. I had rather personally, by observing you, by
pleasing you, and by being continually about you, give you to understand; that
I think upon my obligation. But while life lasts me, I will exceed all
acceptable amities, and religious affiniti^s, in observing, pleasing, and
courting you. For the love you bear me, and the opinion you retain of me,
whether it will procure me more perpetual honor, or more daily content, I
cannot easily determine. Concerning the benefit of the soldiers. I see you
have had a c^re: whom I; not by reason of my greatness, (for I am privy to
mine own mind, that I affect nothing, which is not profitable) have sought
they may be rewarded by the Senate: but, first of all, because I judged, that
they had so deserved; and then, in that my intention was, that upon every
occasion, they might have been more engaged to the Commonwealth: and finally,
that alienating their minds, from whomsoever would attempt to corrupt them I
might still uphold them in that good affection toward you, wherein hi^herto
they have continued. We have as yet kept things in the state they were. Which
course of ours; though I conceive, how desirous men a^e of such a victory,
(and not without reason;) yet I hope, by you 'twill be approved. For, if any
discomfiture should light in these Armies, the Common-weal^h ha^h no great
succors on ^oot, by which, the sudden viol^nce, and imp^ous wills of traitors
mig^t be resisted: and I think ^y forces are well known unto ^ou. In my Camp
there are three old legions, and one of fresh men, fl^u^is^ing above all the
r^st: and in Bru^us Camp one old Legion; another of ^ouldiers of two years
standing; and eight, of new ^upplies. And so the a^mie is mighti^ in number,
and little in power. And i^ battles, what confidence may be put in fresh
soldiers; ^x^^ri^nce has t^o much taught us. Wi^h (...) fo^ces of our A^mies,
if the A^^rican host, which is of old soldiers; or that of Octa^ian^s were
conjoined, (...) would willingly come to a battle, and expose the Common
wealth ^o hazard. It is true, that for what belongs to Octauian, we did see
the effect something near. I have not failed to persuade him by letters: and
he has always affirmed, that he would come without any delay: and now I
perceive, that, changing this resolution, he enter^ into other desseignes
N^uerthelesse, I have sent unto him our friend F^rnius, with commission and
letters, to see whether he can work [any thing ^ith him.] You know, good
Cicer^, ^^uching the loving of Octaui^nu^, that I accompany you: either
because being familiar with Caesar, when he lived, it was then fit for me to
embrace and love him: or else because he, so far as I could discern, was of
a m^st discre^t, and affable condition: or ^lse, in that I having entertained
so inward amity with C^sar; me thinks it were a bru^^ish thing, not to
retain Octau^anus in the same degree: who by his, and your judgment, was
adopted in place of a son. But what I write unto you, I swe^re, I rather
write it out of grief, then any rancour. That Antonius at this day lives; that
Lepid^s io^nes with him; that they have armies of no small account; that they
hope; that they dare attempt; they may acknowledge it wholly from Octauianu^.
Neither will I rip up things past; but at the same instant when he offered to
come, if he had come; the war had either now been finished, or out of
Italy; and to their great prejudice reduced into Spain, which is their
greatest enemy. Now, what reason moved Octauianus: or who advised him, that
from so great a glory, and so necessary for himself, and his security, he
fell off, and turned his mind, to demand so foolishly [or with such an
insulting importunitie] the two months Consulship, to the great amazement of
men; I cannot imagine. And as for the present necessity, I am of opinion, his
friends may move him greatly, no less to his own, then the ben^fit of the
commonwealth. Your self may also do much, as I think: from whom he has
[receiued] as great benefits, as any man living, except my self. For I will
never forget, how I stand bound unto you, for infinite respects, and of
greatest moment. I have enjoined Furnius to treat with him of these things.
And if he will believe, and follow my counsel, as he ought: he shall thereby
reap a great advantage. In the mean while we sustain the war, upon hard
conditions. For neither do we judge, that we may very securely come to
battle; nor yet, by avoiding it, would we give occasion, that the
Commonwealth might receive greater prejudice. But if Octauianus have any
regard of his honor; or that the African Legions come out of hand; We will
work so, that you shall be secure in these parts. I pray you love me, as you
have begun; and persuade your self, that I am yours as much, as your own
nearest proprieties. This xxviij of Iulie, from the Camp.

Cicero to Caius Furnius. Epist. 25.
IF it import, as men suppose, that you, as you have begun, and hitherto have
done, should ^ndeuour your self ^or the benefit of the Commonwealth; and be
conversant in weighty employments, which belong to the extinguishing of the
relics of the war: it seems you cannot undertake any thing better, more
commen^able, or more honest. And I ^m of ^pinion, that this your endeavor,
diligence, and affection toward the Commonwealth, is to be preferred before
the Praetorship: the which, not being ^et time, you sue for. For I would h^u^
you understand how great praise you have purchased, the which certainly is in
a manner equal to that of Plancus; and by Plancus own testimony; and besides,
by fame; and the knowledge of every man. Wherefore I advise you, not to depart
from thence, till every spark of the war remaining, be ex^ingu^sh't: for,
nothing can procu^e you greater honor. And you know, honor should above all
things be preferred. And when you think you have given full satisfaction to the
Commonwealth; then, I would counsel you, to come out of hand, and demand the
Praetorship; in that Praetors are shortly to be created. But take heed, that
this ambitious haste, diminish nothing of that glory we have attained. Many
men of renowned fame, being abroad in the service of the Commonwealth, forbear
to come to Rome, that year, that was allotted them, to stand for Magistracy.
Which you should so much the rather do, because this is, not your proper year:
but if you had been Aedile two years since, then this had been your year.
Now, though you should forbear to demand the Praetorship, it will not seem
that you have omitted a moment, of the usual and ordinary time of demanding
it. And when Plancus shall be Cousull, though without his help, you might
easily obtain it; nevertheless, I see, that then your demand will be, with
far greater reputation; so that, matterrs there succeed, as they are wished. I
know 'twas not necessary, for me, to speak much to this purpose; knowing you
to be wise, and of profound judgment: but I was desirous y^u should understand
my opinion; of which this is the sum: that I would wish you to be carried,
rather by true honor, then ambition: and to esteem greater benefit to consist
in the perpetuity of your ^r^is^; then in the hastening of a Praetorship. These
very points have I di^cus^ed at home, in the presence of my brother Quintus,
and of C^cina, and Ca^^isiu^, your dear^st friends; Dardanu^ your freeman,
being there, at the same instant. All of them thought, that I was herein of a
sound opinion, yet I refer my self to your mature judgment. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Furnius. Epist. 26.
Having read your letters, wherein you intimated, that it was requisite, either
to let the N^rbon^ns^s depart, or with danger to join battle: I was much
perpl^xed^ through doubt of the fight: and now, I am glad to understand, that
you have shunned it. As touching that you write unto me, about the concord of
Plancus and Brutus: I herein repose great hope of victory. Of the affection of
the Galli, we shall one day understand, as you write, who was the principal
occasion. But, I assure you, we know it already. Whereupon, reading your most
pleasant letters, I was, toward the end, a little moved, in that you wrote;
that if the creation of Praetors were put over to the month of August, you
would come out of hand: and sooner, if they were created already; not to
appear more foolish with your own peril. Oh, my Furnius, how ill, you
manage your own occasions. Considering, that you so easily learn to
prosecute another man's. You suppose now, that you are to be one of the
elected, to stand for the Praetorship: and you resolve, either to come in all
post, to be at the Creation, or else it being past, to come, to remain at
your own house. And this you write, you will do; affirming, that to proceed any
further in the dangers of the wars, were but a mere folly, for it would cost
you too dear. I think you speak not in good earnest, knowing you, to be
desirous of true praise. But if your mind be answerable to your words, I
reprehend not so much you, as my self, which before this time, could no better
look into you. To obtain then a Magistracy before the time, which is
ordinarily bestowed on every man; and is of no great repu^ation, being
attained unto, as the most part do; would you lose so many attributes of
houor, by which every one d^seruedly, extols you to the skies? It precisely
imports you, rather to be made Praetor at this creation, then at that which
is to come. The maine point is, that you so steed the Commonwealth, that
afterward, all honor and Magistracy may be due unto you. Do you not see
now, to what an high degree you are mounted? or care you not ^or it? If you
perceive it not, I hold you excused: the blame is mine. But if you discern it;
how is it possible, that you can prefer this Praetorship, either before a
duty, which every man stands bound to pay unto his Country? though few do
pay it; or to renown? which usually is dearest to all men. In this, I, and
Caluisius, a very wise man, and your great friend, condemn every day your
judgment. And yet with all our power, we labor, to prorogue the Creation,
till January; we judging, that for many res^ects, it may redound to the
benefit of the Common^wealth. Conquer therefore, and live in health.

Cicero to Marcus Lepidus, Epist. 27.
Having, in resp^ct of the infinite love I bear you, an hearty desire, that
you should attain to some supreme, and high degree of honor: I took it ill,
that you returned not thanks to the Senate; having been prefer^ed, by those
orders, to eminent honors. That you are desirous to labor a peace between
fellow Citizens, I am glad; If you can but quit that peace from servitude, you
shall benefit the Common^wealth, and ^our own honor. But if this peace be, to
re-establish that same bad fellow, in the possession of his unbridled dominion;
conceive that all good men are of this resolution, rather to dye free, then
live in serui^ude. And therefore in my judgment, you shall do far more
wisely; not to interpose your self in this accord: of which, neither Senate,
people, nor any honest man receives contentment. But these matters you shall
understand from others, or else be cer^ifi^d of them by letters. You, according
to your accustomed wisdom, may be able to resolve, what is best. F^rewell.

Cicero to Caius Trebonius. Epist. 28.
OH how I wished, that you had invited me, to that same glorious banquet o^ the
xv. of March: none of those relics should have remained, which put us now to
so much trouble, that, that divine piece of service of yours, performed in
behalf of the Commonwealth, is accompanied with some blemish. And because
that wicked wretch^ was taken at one side by you, (though I know, you did it to
a good end) and [that] through your favor, this pestilence yet lives though I
ought not, yet^ I cannot choose sometimes, but I must be half angry with you.
For, you have left more molestation to me alone, then to all others
whatsoever. Because, so soon as after the reproachful departure of Mar^us
A^tonius, the Senate could freely be as^emble^; I returned to defend the
Commonwealth, with that vnd^unted mind, I was accustomed; for which, you,
together with your Father, a most noble Citizen, have ever commended, and loved
m^e^ By reason, that the Tribunes of the people having ^ummon'd the Senate, the
xx. of D^c^mber, and another busin^sse being pro^ounded, I sp^ke in genera^l,
touching the sta^e of the Commonwealth: and my courage transporting me
further then my wit, I so effected, that the Senate, now crazie, and
languishing, seemed to reassume its former vigor, and custom. This was the
first day, that the people of Rome, moved by the efficacy of my words, and
actions, conceived some hope of recovering their liberty. And yet after that,
I omitted no time, not only to bethink me, but to endeavor something also for
the benefit of the Commonwealth. And, if I thought not, that you had
particular advertisement, by some other means, of that which passes in Rome:
I, though most busied, would not be wanting therein, to give you satisfaction.
But I know you shall have notice thereof, by the letters of some of your other
friends: from me you shall understand some few matters, and that briefly. We
have a worthy Senate; the Consulars partly fearful, and partly ill affected.
Great prejudice did accrue by the death of Seruius Sulpicius. Lucius Caesar
carries a very good mind: but because he is Antonius Uncle, he proceeds
not so freely. The Consuls can be no better then they are. Decimus Brutus
bears himself wondrous well: and so does Caesar the yo^th: who, I hope, will
prosecute, as he has begun. Be^ assured of this; that if he had not presently
taken into pay the old companies; and if two Legions of Antonius Army, had not
come under his command; and that this ter^our h^d not oppo^ed him; there is no
impiety, or cruelty, which Antonius would not have commi^ted. Though I
suppo^ed you had heard of these things, yet I was willing to lay them more open
unto you. I will write more at large, when time permits me. Farewell.

Cicero to Ampius. Ep. 29.
With what care I have labored about your affai^es, and safety, I suppose
your friends have certified: who I know on my part remain well satisfied.
Neither will I yield to them, though they bear you singular love, that they
should affect your good above my self. But necessarily they must grant this
unto me, that now, I can do you more good, then they can. Which certainly I
have not ^ailed to perform, no^ ever will. And I hau^ already discha^ged it in
a most impo^tant matter, and laid the foundations of your safety. Be of good
cheer, and rouse up your spirits: being most assured, that I will never fail
you, in any occurrent whatsoever: the sixth of July. Farewell.

Seruius Galba to Cicere. Epist. 30.
THe xvj. of April, on which Pansa should have bin in Hirtius Camp, with whom
I was, (for I went an hundr^d miles to meet him, that he might come the
sooner;) Antonius with two L^gions, the second, and the five and thirtith, and
two Praetorian Cohorts, one, his own, another of Si^anus, and a part of the
extern, or outlandish soldiers, came marching toward vs^ imagining that we
had only four Legions: But Hirtius sent by night, the Martian Legion, which
was wont ^o be under my command, and two Praetori^n c^horts; to the end we
might come more secur^ly to his Camp. At the discovery of Antonius Cauallerie;
the Martian Legion, and Praetorian cohorts advanced and pressed on. And we of
force followed, because we could not retain them. Antonius had his men at
Fo^um Gall^rum; neither would he hau^ had it known, that he h^d the Legions^
only he made a show, of his Cauallerie, and of some light armed t^oupes. When
P^nsa s^w the Legion advance without his leave, he commanded that two Legions
of new souldier^ should follow them When we had passed the narrow straights of
the marshes and woods, we ordered a squadron of twelve cohorts. The two
Legions were yet scarce come v^, when Antonius conducted his people out of the
Borrough, and without delay came to an assault. At the beginning, they sought
so, that they could not on either side have fought more fiercely. But the right
wing, wherein I was, with eight cohorts of the Martian Legion, at the first
ch^rge, put to rout, the thirty fifth Legion of Antonius, ^o that from the
place where the fight began, it pursued them above half a mile. Whereupon the
Cauallery intending to inu^ron or hem our wing abo^t, I began to retire, and to
oppose my light armed, to the Morish horse, to the end they might not assail
our men in the rere-gard. In the mean while I perceived, that I was in the
midst of Antonius troops, and that behind, Antonius himself, was not far
of. I presently spur^ed towa^des that fresh Legion, which came from the Camp,
clapping my shield to my B^cke. Antonius troop^s pursued me, and our own men
began to throw darts at me: and it was great for^une that I escaped, had not
our comp^n^es presently discoue^ed me. Also ^n the way A^m^lia, w^ere Caesar's
Praeto^^an cohort was, they fought a long ti^e. The left wing, which was very
weak, wherein were two cohorts of the Martian Legion, and the Praetorian
cohort, began to retire, being environed with the Cauallerie, wherein
Antonius is very strong. When all our squadrons were retired, I my self also
began to retire unto the Camp. Antonius as Conqueror, thought he might have
ceased on our Tents: whereunto being come, he there lost many of his men, and
did otherwise no good. When Hirtius heard of this success, with twenty old
cohorts, he came and assailed Antonius, as he returned to his Camp: and hewed
all his men in pieces, and put them to flight, in the same place, where they
fought at Forum Gallorum. Antonius four hours after Sunne-setting, with his
Corne^s retired to his tents at Mutina. Hirtius betook him to those lodgings
from whence Pansa issued; where he had le^t two Legions, which were confronted
by Antonius. And so Antonius has lost the greatest part of his old soul^ie^s;
but not without some weakening of our P^ae^orian C^horts, and the Ma^tian
Legion. We won two Aegles, and three^core colors of Antonius; the victory was
ours. This twentieth of Aprill^ From the Camp. Farewell.

Caius Asinius Pollio to Cicero. Epist. 31.
YOu need not marvel, that I have not written any thing unto you, about the
Commonwealth, since the war began. For ^he Castulonensian forest, which
has ever stayed our posts, though it be now fuller of thieves then ever; yet
procures it not so much delay, as they do, who being dispersed in all
quarte^s, by the one, and other side, seek after Posts, and detain them. For
which cause, if letters had not bin conveyed by Sea, I could have known of
nothing, that passed with you. Now, having found opportunity, in that they
begin to go by sea, I will very willingly, and as often as I can write unto you.
There is no fear that I should be moved to discourse of his works, who,
though there be none, that can abide to see him, yet is he not so hated of men
as he deserves. For I so abhor him, that I account every thing odious, in
which he has a finger: and my nature, and studies draw me to a desire of
peace, and l^bertie. Whereupon, I often bitterly bewailed that beg^nning of the
civil war. But being enforced to betake my self, to one of the parts, for I
had great enemies of all sides: I fled that Camp, wherein I knew I could ^ot
be secure, from the complots of mine enemy. Being driven thither, whither I
would not: not to be in the number of the last, I courageously exposed my self
to dangers. But because Caesar, in so great a Fortune, having known me but a
little before, held me in that esteem he held his auncientest familiars, I
loved him with the greatest affection and fidelity I could. Those things which
I could discharge according to mine own mind, I so performed, that every
honest man commended me: and that which was imposed on me, I effected after
such a fashion, as it was well known, that I did it as constrained, and
against mine own inclination. The hatred of which actions, unjustly borne me,
might well teach me, how fair a thing liberty was, and how unhappy that
life, which is led under an Aristocracie. And therefore if now men strive, that
once again, every thing should be reduced under a Monarchy: whosoever he
be, I protest my self an enemy to him: neither is there any danger, from
which I withdrew my self, in the prosecu^ion of liberty; or whither, I seek
not to be sent. But the Consulls, neither by the Senates decree, nor by their
own letters, gave me commission what I should do. For I at the last received
but one letter after the xiij^ of Ma^ch, from Pansa; wherein he advised me to
write to the Sena^e, that I remain at his command with the A^mie. Which was
nothing to the purpose; Lepi^us a^^irming in his public declamations, an^
writing to every one, that he ^tood for Anteni^^: For with what provision in
his despigh^, could I conduct the Legions through his Province? Or, if I had
p^ssed ^he test, could I also fl^e over the Alps, which were guarded by his
people? Besides, letters co^ld by no mean^s, ^aue had sec^^e pass^^e. F^r in
infinite places, men lay hold o^ the curtie^'s, and they are also det^^^^^ by
Lepi^^^: No man can (...) ^^rduba, spe^ki^g to the A^mie, I spoke this^ tha^ I
was not to resi^^e the P^ouince, bu^ to him, that by the S^nat^s order was come
^or that pu^pose. For, to ^ssigne ou^r the (...) L^gion, how great ^^stance was
made unto me, I cannot suffici^^^^y set down in writing: the which i^ I had
r^signed, I knew how much more weak ^ h^d rem^in'd ^or ^he ^eruice of the
Commonwealth. For, do^ no^ im^gine, that any great^r courage^ or expedi^ion i^
fight can be ^equir'd, then (...) in this Legion Wherf^re, reta^ne this opinion
of me, that I (...) inf^n^tely desire peace; (^or certai^^ly I wish the
p^ese^uation of all Citizens) and next of all, that I am prepared to restore
the commonwealth, and my self to liberty. Whereas you write that you hold my
domestical acquaintance, in the number of yours: it pleases me beyond your
own valuation. And yet I envy him, that he walks and jests with you. You Will
demand, how much I esteem of this? if ever I be permitted to live in a reposed
life, you shall k^ow it. For I will not start an inch from you. I much wonder,
that you wrote not unto me; wh^^her remaining in the Province, o^ leading mine
Army into Iealie, I might giu^ best satisfaction to the commonwealth. For my
part, though it be more se^u^e, and less labourious to remain: nevertheless,
because I see, that in these troubleso^e times, you have much more n^^d of
Legio^s, then of Provinces; especi^lly which may be recovered, without an^
travail; I have propounded at this time, to depart with my forces. You shall
hereafter understand all, by the letters, which I have written to Pansa: for I
have sent you a copy of them. The xvi. of March: from Corduba. Farewell.

Caius Asinius Pollio to Cicero. Epist. 32.
BAlbus the Quaestor, by recovering public duties, having amassed together, a
great qu^ntitie of ready coin; a great weight of gold, and a greater of
silue^, without ^o much as disbursing to the ^ouldiers their pay; still, and
clo^ely ^^pa^^ed ^^om G^des: and for the space of (...), being detained (...)
the first of (...) to Bogud's ki^gdome, (...) well f^^nished with mone^ (...)
be^^g, whether he will re^urne to (...) o^ to Rome, (for upon euer^ b^^st (...)
nevves, he shamefully alters his (...)) I do not yet know. Bu^ (...) ^^rging
the companions o^ ^h^ people of Rome; besides the^ts^ and ^^^ines; he h^th also
don these things that is (as he was wont to boast) the sa^^^ that Caius Caesar
did. In the public fest^u^^ies that he celebrated at Gades; he brought in,
Herennius Gallus, the Comedian, the last day of the shows, giving him a ring
of gold, to set in the foureteenth degree: (for so many several degrees had he
made, for the ranking of the knights.) He prorogued the Quatuor virat: The
solemn elections of two years, he dispatched in two days: that is, he created
them to be officers, whom he thought good: he called home the b^nished men^ not
of these times, but of those, when the Senate was hewn in pieces, and expel^ed
by seditiou^ persons, S^x^us ^a^rus being vice consul. But this he did not
after Caes^rs example. For in his sports, he repre^ented his voyage in a
Com^die, when he went to assail L^cius L^ntulus the Consul and moreover in
the recital thereof, he wept, as mou^d at the me^oriall of his execut^ons.
A^te^wards, i^ the encounte^s o^ the Fencers, because on Fadius, Pompei's
s^uldier, having ^wi^e fough^ without reward, being urged by another into the
listes, ^t his requ^st would not fi^ht; and made his ^^fuge to the people:
First he set Gaull^sh horsemen against the people, (^or he had stones cast at
him, when Fadiu^ was dra^ne by force) ^^t^rw^rds, drag^ing him away, within
(...) put him in a pit, and burnt hi^ ^^^ue At which time he having di^^d, b^re
footed, unbraced, with his hands b^^^nd him, he stru^ting, walked up and dow^e;
and, to that poor w^^tch, who (...) said; I am a ^i^tizen of R^m^, he made
answer; Now go, c^^u^ f^^ou^ of the people. Besides this, he c^st unto the
wild beasts R^nare Citizens. And amongst th^se a certain out-cryer, a man
ver^^ well known in Hisp^li^, he gave to be torn asunder by the same Beasts;
for no other cause, but that he was deformed. I have had to do with this
monster. But when we be together, we will talk of him more a^ large. Now, more
to the purpose; ordain what I should do. I have three Legions of valiant
soldiers. One of which, that is, the eight and twen^ith, Antonius in the
beginning of the war, having called it to him, with this promise, that the
same day it arrived in his Camp, he would give them five hundred [ Romane]
pence a man: and in victory; the same rewards, as to his own Legions. Which
largesses, would have been in^inite, and beyond all measure. It being very
desirous to have gone to him, I detained it, [but] hardly undoubtedly. Neither
could I have detained them, if I had had them all in one place; considering
that some of those cohorts mu^ined, though they were remote, one from another.
The other Legions, he has not ceased, to incite by letters, and large
promises. As also Lepidus, has urged me both by his own, and Antonius
letters, to send unto them the thirtieth Legion. Whereupon, if this Army which
I have, I would neither sell for rewards, nor diminish, for fear of those
dangers, of which, Antonius, and Lepidus, remaining Conquerours, I might be in
jealousy. you may well judge, that it was by me detained, and reserved for the
service of the Commonwealth, and [you may] hold for most certain, that I would
have performed whatsoever you had commanded me to do, perceiving I had done
that, which you imposed upon me. For, I have kept the Province in quiet, and
the army under my power. I never went beyond the extent of my Province, to go
any whither. I never sent a soldier into any part, not only of the Legions,
but not so much as of strangers, or those that have colleagued themselves: and,
if I found any horsem^n stealing away, or parting, I have punished him. For all
which actions, I shall think I have received a great g^erdon, if the
Commonwealth continue. But if it, and the greater part of the Senate, had well
known me, I might ere this, have done them greater service. I have sent that
Epistle to you, which I wrote to Balbus, while he was yet in the Province. In
like manner, the Comedy, if you please to read it, call for it from Gallus
Cornelius, my friend. This seventh of June, from Cor^uba. Farewell.

Caius Asinius Pollio to Cicero. Epist. 33.
LEpidus, by having detained my posts for nine days, was the occasion, that I
had more late advertisement of the battles fought under Mutina; although we
ought to desire, that the news of so great a loss to the Commonwealth should
arrive very slowly; especially to them, that can no ways help us, nor give us
any remedy. And I would to God, that by the same decree of the Senate, with
which you called Plancus, and Lepidus into Italy, you had likewise imposed
upon me to come thither. Undoubtedly the Commonwealth had no^ received a wound
so dangerous. Whereat, if any at this present rejoice, for it seems that the
Captains, and old soldiers of Caesar's party are dead: nevertheless, they
must afterward needs lament, when they shall behold the ruin of Italy. For
the very strength and race of good soldiers is extinguished; if the nevves we
hear be in any part true. And I knew it evidently, that if I had joined with
Lepidus, I should wonderfully have assisted the Commonwealth. For whereas he
hunge off, and was doub^full, what part to cleave unto, I would by all means
have persuaded him, to have resolved on a course, especially with the aid of
Plancus. But he writing unto me such letters, as you shall peruse; and like to
the open speeches, which they say, he uttered at Na^bona; it was necessary, I
should draw him on with fai^e words, if I meant to get provision, marching
through his Province. Besides this, if the battle had been fought before I
had effected my determination, I doubted that my good intention might by mine
adversaries have been discovered, and misconstrued; considering the
acquaintance I have had with Antonius: which notwithstanding, was no greater
then what Plancus had also with him. Whereupon, at Gades, in the month of
April, I embarked two messengers, in two ships, and I wrote unto you, to the
Consulls, and to Octauian, that you would inform me, how I might be best
serviceable to the commonwealth. But according to my account, on the same day
that Pansa joined battle; on the very same, the ships set out from Gades: For
since the Winter, there was no setting of Sail before that day. And in truth
not supposing, that any civil tumults would have grown, with a settled mind, I
had bille^t^d my Legions in Lusitania; to the end they might lie there al ye
winter. But both of them after such a manner sought to fight, as if their
greatest fear had been, that the war could not be ended, without the utter
ruin of the Common wealth But, if the^e were occasion of have. Then, I see
that Hirtius in all things demeaned himself, like a most valiant Capta^ne. For
these things were written and certified unto me, out of Gallia, which is in
Lepidus government: that P^nsa's Army was hewn in pieces; Pansa himself
slain, with many wounds; the Martian Legion destroyed in the same battle;
together with Lucius Fabatus, Caius Peduceus, and Decimus Carsulenus. Then, that
in Hirtius battle, both the fourth Legion, and generally all those of
Antinius, passed the edge of the sword^ In like manner, Hirtiu^ ^ourth Legion,
having ceased upon Antonius tents, were cut in pieces by the fifth Legion: and
here also Hirtius, and Pon^ius Aquila perished. And I hear, it is reported,
that Octauianus was there sl^ine: which news if they be true, (as God ^orbid,)
I shall be infinitely sorrowful. Mor^ouer, that Marcus A^tonius dishonourab^^e
left the si^ge of Mutina: but that the Cauallerie, and three armed legions
under their Standards, and on^ of Publius Vagienus: with a great ^u^ber of
di^a^med men, and that Ven^idius al^o is united with him, with three Legions,
ye seventh, the ^ight, and the ninth: and that if L^pidus fail him, in whom he
has great hope, he will be take him to his last refuge; and will raise not
only the nations, but even the very slaves. I understand also, that Parm^ has
been sacked, and yt Lucius Antonius possesses the Alps. Which things if they
be true, it is not fit that any of us, should stand at the gaze, or expect,
what the Senate will determine. For every one that affects the safety of the
Empire, or finally the Roman name, is enforced to give present succor;
seeing Brutus, as I hear, has no more, but seventeen cohorts, and two
imperfect Legions of new soldiers, which Antonius had entertained. And yet I
make no doubt, but all the remainder of Hirtius Army will make head with him.
For of leuying of new forces, I think there is no great hope: especially there
being nothing more dangerous, then to give Antonius time, to be refortified:
and the season of the year, the rather inuites me thereunto, because the corn
is either in the fields, or in the villages. Therefore in my first letters, I
will set down, what I mean to do. For I will neither be wanting, to the
Commonwealth, nor survive her. But yet I grieve without measure, that my
journey will be so long, and dangerous; for all aduertisements come to me above
forty days after the execution. Farewell.

Marcus L^pidus, Imperator the second time, and Pontifex Maximus, to the
Senate, and people of Rome. Epist. 34.
IF you, with your children be in health, I am glad: my self also am so: I
call to witness, both gods and men, (O conscript Fathers) of what intention,
and affection I have ever been toward the Commonwealth, and how light I have
set by all other things, in respect of common liberty, and saf^tie. The which
I had very shortly made manifest unto you, if Fortune had not by force diuer^ed
me from the dissigne, I had intended. For all the Army coming to a mutiny,
would maintain their ancient custom, in prese^uing Citizens, and embracing
peace with all men: and to say truth, it has enforced me, to undertake the
protection of the safety, and preservation of so great a multitude of Roman
Citizens. Wherefore, I beseech you, and entreat the gods (O conscript Fathers)
that, laying apart all particular hatred, you will provide for the State of the
Commonwealth, and not repute our clemency, and the mercy of our Army in a
civil discord, for disloyalty. And, if you have respect to the honor, and
safety of all men; greater benefit will redound both to you, and the
Commonwealth. The xxix. of May, from Pons Argenteus. Farewell.

Marcus Lepidus Imperator the second time, Pontifex Maximus, to Cicero. Ep. 35.
IF you be in health, I am glad, for so am I also: Having heard, that Antonius,
with his forces, sending Lucius Antonius, before with a part of the Cauallerie,
came into my Province; I departed with my companies from that place, where
Rhodanus meets with other streams, and took my way toward them. And so by
a continual march I came to Forum Vecontij: and a little beyond, along the
river Argentea I encamped against the two Antonies. Publius Ventidius joined
with him his three Legions, and pitched his Tents above me. He had before that,
the second Legion, and out of other Legions a great multitude, but disarmed. He
has a strong Cauallerie: for he lost but few of them, in the battle: in so
much, as they are above thirty thousand horse. So that diverse of his
soldiers, both foot and horse, departing from him, are come to my camp. And
day by day, his men diminish^ Si^^nus, and Culeo have left him. We, although
mightily offended with them, because they went to Antonius against our will:
nevertheless, out of our humanity, and love, we have thought good to save
them. And yet we employ them not, nor do we keep them in our Camp: nor have
we given unto them any command. As touching this war, we will neither be
wanting to the Senate, nor Commonwealth. Of what we have since that time
done, we will advertise you^ Although at all times, between us, for the
familiarity we have had together, there have passed great demonstrations, and
effects of love, ^yther of ^s striving to exceed the other: Yet, I make no
doubt, but that in so great, and sudden a commotion of the Commonwealth, by
malignant minds, some things have bin reported to you of me, altogether ^alse,
and vnbeseem^ng me; which have much moved your mind, out of the affect on you
bear to the Commonwealth. And ^o such relatio^s; I am certified by my Agents,
that you gave no great credit; nor thought you good, so lightly to believe
them. Which things, as they des^rue, are most acceptable unto me: as also I
remember those favors, which in times past, moved out of love, you performed,
to increase my honor and reputation Whereof I will never be forgetful. I
request you, my Cicero, of all favor; if, in my life, and care, which I have
always in times past, most diligently employed in the government of the
Commonwealth, you have known me for such an one, as is fit I should be; that
you would expect the same, and also better pe^fo^mance hereafter: and the more
I am bound unto you for benefits received, the more studious be you, with your
authority to defend me. Farewell.

THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Decimus Brutus, to Marcus Brutus, and Caius Cassius. Epist. 1.
THis shall serve, to inform you, in what state we stand, Yesterday in the
evening Hirtiu^ was with me, and declared unto me what Antonius meaning was; as
bad as might be, and most treacherous. For he said, that he could not give over
the Province to me: neither thought he that any of us, could remain secur^ly
in Rome: because the minds o^ the soldiers, and plebeians were terriblie
provoked. Both which things, that they are false, I think you very well
conceive; and on the contrary, that, that is true, which Hirtius rela^ed; that
Antonius fears, if our dignity get never so little assistance, no place would
remain for him in the Commonwealth. Finding my self in these perplexities, I
thought good to demand a free Embassy for my self; and for our other friends,
to find some honest means for our depar^u^e. Which he has promised me to
obtain. And yet I am not confident, that he can procure it: so great is men's
insolency, and their persecution of us. And yet if they should grant this
Embassy; nevertheless I su^pose, that not long after we should be e^^eemed
rebels; and they will publish some proclam^tion to interdict us ^ire, and
water. What is therefore your advise? We must ye^ld to Fo^tune; leave Italy,
and go to Rhodes, or into some other part of the world. If better fortune
present it self, we will return to Rome: i^ indifferent, we will live in
exile: i^ the worst of all, we will have recourse, to the l^st refuges^ Here,
peradventure some of you will say: wherefore will you attend while the last
cast, rather then presently attempt some thing? Because we know not whither we
should go, but to Sixtus Pompeius, and Bassus Ceci^ius: who I suppose hearing
this news of Caesar, will collect greater force. We shall come to them ^ime
enough, if we once know what they can perform. If you will have me promise any
thing for either of you two, I will pass my word: for Hirtius requires me to
do it. I pray, write ^acke unto me without delaie; For I make no qu^stion, but
Hi^tius will advertise me of the for^said matte^s, within the compass of ^oure
hours. Return me answer in w^iting, where we s^all meet, and whither I must
come. After Hirtius last discourse, I ^hought good to demand, that we might
have leave to remain in Rome with public guard: the which I think they will
not grant us. For all R^^e would become their enemy, if it saw that we could
not remain secure without a guard. I have notwithstanding prefe^red all those
r^quests, which I judged reasonable. Fare ye well.

Marcus Brutus, and Caius Cassius Praetors, to Marcus Antonius Consul. Epist.
2.
IF we made any question of your love and fidelity toward us, we would not
have written these things unto you: the which we are assured you will take in
very good part: being, as you are, our friend, and a man of sincerest loyalty.
We are informed by writing, that a great multitude of old soldiers, are now
come to Rome, and that the first of June there will be a far greater number.
If we either doubted or suspected you, we should do contrary to our
judgment, and usual custom. But certainly, we having been in your power; and
by your advise dismissing our municipall friends; and performed this not only
by edict, but also by letters; we are worthy to be made partakers of your
intention; especially in a matter wherein we are interres^ed. Whereupon we
request you, to let us understand, how you stand affected toward us; and
whither you think we may live secure, in so great a recourse of old soldiers:
who, as we hear, are determined to set the pillar up again. Whereunto if you
consent; it seems not that any man can think it well done, that has any
respect of our honor, and safety. The success has showed, that from the
beginning we aimed at quietness; and sought no other thing but common
liberty. None can deceive us herein, but your self; which were far from
your worth, and fidelity. Neither has any man else any means to deceive us.
For in you only we have, and must put our confidence. Our friends though they
well know your constancy, yet they are much perplexed for us; considering that
the multitude of old soldiers, may more easily by any other be excited, then
by you curbed. I pray be pleased to answer us particularly to every thing. It
were a great folly to believe, that these old soldiers are called to Rome,
because in the month of June, you were to take order in the Senate, about
their advancement. For, what can you think should hinder you herein, being
assured, that in this we no ways mean to oppose you? We ought not to seem
over desirous of life to any man; in that no mischief can fall on us, without
the ruin, and confusion of all things. Farewell.

Brutus, and Cassius Praetors; to Antonius, Consul. Ep. 3.
WE have read your letters, very con^ormable to your edict; outrageous,
threatening, and altogether unworthy, both of your self, and us. Antonius, we
have no ways injured you: neither did we think, that you would have wondered,
that, being Praetors, and men of that quality, we had by edict demanded any
thing of the Consul. Wherefore though you take it in disdain, that we were so
bold as to do it: [yet] give us leave to grieve, that you should not vouchsa^e
this favor to Br^tus, and to Cassius. For, whereas you say you complained not,
concerning the leuying of soldiers, and imposing of tributes, mustering of
armi^s, and sending of messengers beyond sea: we easily believe yo^, that you
did it out of a good inten^ion: nevertheless we confess not, that ever we
did any of these things^ and we wonder at you, that, having concealed these
matters, you could not suppress your choler, which has [so farre]
transported you [as] to cast in our teeeth the death of Caesar. But how this
may be supported, Imagine you: that, the Praetors resolving, for concords sake,
and liberty, by way of Edict; may not leave their own right in the government
they have, but the Consul should threaten them with arms. It imports not,
that you through confidence you have in them should go about to terrify us.
For it is not well done; nor is it fitting that we upon any danger whatsoever
should be frighted. Neither should Antonius seek to command them, by whose
action he himself has freedom. If we were induced by others occasions to
raise a civil war; your letters could be of no effect: they, bearing little
respect to threats, who prefer liberty before all things. But you know well,
that we cannot be provoked to any novelty. And peradventure you threaten us,
by reason that what we do out of judgment, you suppose proceeds from fear.
Our mind is this: that we desire so long as the Commonwealth may be also
Free, that you should therein be both great, and honorable: our desire is not
to have any enmity with you: but yet we make more account of our own
liberty, then of your ami^ie. Consider well what enterprise you undertake, and
what forces you have to support it, and think not how long Caesar lived, but
how little he reigned. We desire the gods, that your des^eignes may be
beneficial to the Commonwealth, and your self: If otherwise; we wish, that,
with the safety, and honor of the Commonwealth, they may be little
prejudicial to your self. The fourth of August.

Decimus Brutus Imperator, to Cicero. Epist. 4.
IF I made any question of your affection toward me, I would entreat you in
many words to defend mine honor. But doubtless that is true, which I persuade
my self; which is; that I have a great place in your heart. I went against the
Transalpini with mine Army, not so much to obtain the title of Imperator, as
to satisfy the soldiers, and confirm them in defense of our cause: the which
in my opinion I have obtained. For they have had a trial both of our
liberality, and affection. I have encountered with people warlike above all
others: I have there taken many Castles, and sacked many, I wrote not to the
Senate, without just cause, that they would afford me the honor of that I sue
for by supplications. Help me to obtain it: for you shall perform a matter
profitable also to the Commonwealth. Farewell.

Cicero to Decimus Brutus Imperator. Epist. 5.
LVpus our familiar friend being come from your parts; and remaining at Rome
some pretty time; I was [retired] in a place, where I thought my self secure.
For which cause Lupus returned to you, without my letters, having nevertheless
procured me to have yours. Now, I am come to Rome the ninth of December, and I
desired nothing more, then to go presently and find out Pansa: from whom I
heard those things of you, which I desired greatly. Whereupon, though I know
that I need use no provocation of words to incite you, having of your self
effected such a matter, as in the memory of man, there was never any more
famous: yet I thought good to certify you briefly, how the people of Rome,
expect all things from you; and that in you it reposeth all hope, that once it
shall recover it lost liberty. Now, I make no doubt, that, although day, and
night you should call to mind, (which I am sure you do) how great a matter
you have accomplished; [yet] you cannot be forgetful, how great those things
are, which you must yet compass. For if it should so come to pass, that
Antonius, should deprive you of Gallia; (to whom doubtless, I was ever a
friend, till I perceived, that he not only openly; but also wilfully, makes
war against the Commonwealth;) there would remain no refuge for our safety.
Where^ore, I request you; as also the Senate and people of Rome entreat you,
that you will for ever redeem the Common^wealth, from tyranny, that the end
may be answerable to your beginning. This is your o^fice: this is required, and
this I will not say is expected from you, but even challenged, not only by our
City, but by all the world. Al^hough, you needing no exhortatio^s, a^ I have
before written; I will urge this point no further, I will do wh^tsoeuer
belongs to me; and to promise you all offices, favors, endeauours, and
counsels; wherein soever i^ occurres, that by them your praise, and glory may
be advanced. And therefore I would have you fi^mely believe, that I, as well
in respect of the Commonwealth, which is more dear unto me then my life; as
also because I affect your honor, and the augmentation of your dignity, will
never fail, in your honest designs, and in your greatness, and renown to
further you. Farewell.

Cicere to Decimus Brutus Imperator. Ep. 6.
Our friend Lupus arriving at Rome, the sixth day after his departure from
Mutina, came the morr^w after betimes to find me; and carefully delivered unto
me, what you had committed to him; and gave me your letters. Whereas you
commend unto me your honor; I esteem, that at the same instant you recommend
unto me mine own: which ce^tain^ly is not dearer to me then yours. And
therefore, you shall perform a thing acceptable to me, if you assure your
self, that neither my counsel, nor favor s^all be any where wanti^g to your
commendations. The Tribunes of the people intimating, that the Senate should be
assembled the xx. of December; and I determining, to consult about a guard for
the d^signed Con^ulls: though I resol^^d, not to come into the Senate, before
the first of January: notwithstanding, because your ed^ct was published the
selfsame day, I thought it ver^ vnfi^^^ng, that there should either be a
Senate, wherein your divine merits toward the Commonwealth should be
forgotten, (which would have been looked unto, though I had not been present)
or that any thing should be spoken in advancement of your honor, in which I
had not been there assistant. And therefore in the morning I went to the
Senate house. Which being observed: a great number of Senators repaired
thither: and what I effected for you in the Senate, and delivered afterward in
speech unto the people, in the presence of an infinite audience, I had rath^r
you should vnde^stand by others letters. This I desire you would be persuaded,
that, all those things, which shall appertain to the increase of your
dignity, (which of it self is very great) I will always with especial care
embrace, and defend. Wherein though I perceive I shall have many associates;
yet will I endeavor after such a manner, that the first place shall remain to
my self. Farewell.

Cicero to Decimus Brutus Imperator. Epist. 7.
LVpus having called together me, Libo, and Seruius your cozen, at my house;
what my opinion was, I think you have understood from C^eius Seius, who was
present at that consu^tation. The rest, though Graeceius came a while after
Seius: n^uerthelesse, from Grae^eius you may understand it. But the sum is
this; which I would have you well to note, and keep in mind: That in
preserving the freedom, and safety of the people of Rome, you should not
attend upon the authority of the Senate, not yet at liberty. (For, this were a
controlling, and reuocation of what you have done: for, if you should reduce
the Commonwealth to liberty, this you had done by no public counsel, but of
your self: and therefore 'twas your greater praise.) and you should infer,
that young (or rather the child) Caesar did foolishly, to embrace so public
a business upon his private counsel. Finally, you should make show, that
first you held all the old soldiers, your war-associates, for fools;
rus^icall men; but valiant persons, and excellent Citizens: as also the
Martian, and fourth Legion, who denounced their Consul, Rebel; and revolted,
to de^end the safety of the Commonwealth. The will of the Senate must be held
for authority, when authority is by fear hindered. Last of all, you have now
twice taken the enterprise upon your self: Wherefore, you must stick to what
you have done, First, the thirteenth of March; and then again lately; because
you assembled a new Army, and new forces. And therefore you must be so
prepared, and provided for every thing, that you stand not upon commission, in
performance of every service: but, that you effect those matters, that may
with wonderful admiration, of every man, have allowance. Farewell.

Cicero to Decimus Brutus Imperator. Epist. 8.
WHen Paula, your wife, gave me to understand, that if I would write any thing
to you, I might do it: I then had nothing to write. For all things hung in
suspense, by reason of the expectation of the Ambassadors, from whom, as yet,
there was no news, what they had effected. Yet I thought good, to write this
unto you: First, that the Senate, and people of Rome, do think of you, not
only in respect of their own safety, but also for your dignity. For, all
Rome is wonderfully affected to your name, and bears you singular love; h^ping
constantly, that as before you freed the Commonwealth from a Tyrant, so at
this present, you will deliu^r it from Tyranny. There is a press of soldiers
in Rome, and thorowout all I^aly, if it may be termed a press, when all men
willingly offer themselves: so great a feruencie is entered in^o the minds of
men through the desire of liberty, and out of the hatred, of so long a
servitude. For the rest, we must now depend upon your letters, and be
aduertized what you do, and our Hirtius, and my Caesar: who, I hope ere long,
will in you company be victorious. It remains, that I noufie unto you in
writing, that, of my self, which I hope and desire, you may understand from
your friends, that I neither am, or ever will be wanting in any thing, that
concerns your honor. Farewell.

Decimus Brutus to Cicero. Epist. 9.
YOu know what loss the Commonwealth sustained, by the death of Pansa, now it
is requisite, that you, with your authority and prudence, should provide; that
our enemies, by the death of the Consuls, may not hope to recover themselves. I
will take a course, that Antonius shall not be able to stay in Italy. I Will
pursue him without delay. These two things I hope to compass: That neither
V^ntidius shall escape, nor Antonius plant himself in Italy. Above all, I
entreat you, that you would send to that same wavering, or inconstant Lepidus,
to the end he may not renew us the war, by colleaguing himself, with
Antonius. For, touching Pollio Asinius, I suppose you conceive, what he
resolves on. The Legions of Lepidus, and Asinius, are very many, and mighty.
Neither write I these things unto you, because I know not, that you in like
manner have them in consideration; but, because I am assured, if peradventure
you should be doubtful; that Lepidus will never perfo^me the office of a good
Citizen. I also pray you, so to work, that Plancus may aid us: who, I hope,
now that Antonius is overthrown, will not fall from the Commonwealth. If
Antonius pass the Alps, I am resolved to place a Guard there, and to
aduertize you particularly of what succeeds. The xxviij. of April, from the
Camp at Regium.

Decimus Brutus to Cicero. Epist. 10.
I Do not think the Commonwealth more bound to me, then I am to you. And you
see very well, that I cannot be more grateful to you, then they are to me
maglignant. And if it seem, that I speak this, to apply my self to the
quality of the times; I desire your judgment, rather then all theirs of
the other side. For you, without all passion, and according to truth censure me:
which they, hindered by extreme malice, and envy, do not. But let them
gainsay at their pleasure, that I may not be honored: so they prohibit
not, that I may conveniently execute the affairs of the Commonwealth. The
which, in how great danger it is, I will explain unto you, with the greatest
brevity I can possible. First, what a confusion grows in the City, by the
death of the Consuls, and what a passion men enter into, when that Magistracy
is uacant, you know sufficiently. I make account I have written to the full of
those matters, that may be committed to letters, for I know to whom I write.
Now I return to the business of Antonius. Who, after the discomfiture,
finding his power to be but a small band of disarmed foot: by setting the
bondmen at liberty, and pressing by force all sorts of men, he has drawn
together a good number of soldiers. Whereunto the force of Ven^idius was after
joined; which with a most toilesome march, is arrived at Vada, beyond the
Appenine, where it is united with Antonius. There are with Ven^idius of old
soldiers, and armed, a very great number. A^^onius intentions must needs be
these; either to repair to Lepidus, if he can be received: or to lie upon the
Appennine, and the Alps, and scowring the Country with his Cau^llerie, which
he has in abundance, to sack those parts, which he scowreth: or to retire
again into Hetruri^, because that quarter of Italy, is without any Army. But
if Caesar had past the Appenni^^, as I did council him; I had bro^ght Antonius
to that straight, that he should rather by famine, then by sword, have
perished. But neither can we command Caesar, nor Caesar his Army: which are
two difficulties of great consequence. Now matters standing in these terms, I
care not though men, in respect of my self, as before I wrote, do cross me.
But yet I fear, that either fit provisions cannot be made, or, that when you
shall make them, some obstacle will be interposed. I can no longer pay the
soldiers. When I took in hand to free the Commonwealth, I had more then four
millions in ready money. Now, I have not only not any part in mine own
substance; but all the friends I had, I have engaged. I give maintenance to
seven Legions; with what difficulty, imagine you. If I had Varro's treasures,
I could not defray the charges. As soon as I have any certainty of Anton^us,
I will let you understand of it. Be pleased to love me, especially, when in me
you find the like affection. This fifth of May, from ^he Camp at Derthona.
Farewell.

Decimus Brutus Imperator, elected Consul, to Cicero. Epist. 11.
I Received your letters, written after the same form, as my servants
delivered them. The debt I owe you is so great, as I can hardly pay it you. I
wrote unto you of those things, which here troubled us: Antonius is on his way:
he goes to Lepidus: and, he is not altoge^her hopeless of Plancus, as I
conceive by his letters, which came unto my hands: wherein he made mention of
some, that were sent to Asinius, to Lepidus, and Plancus. I, nevertheless, not
hanging long upon the matter, sent presently to Plancus; and within two days,
I expect Ambassadors from the Allobroges, and from all Gallia, whom I will
send back to their Countries well affected. Provide, that all things needful
to be performed with you, may be dispatched, according to your mind, and the
occasions of the Commonwealth. And, if you can; oppose the maleuolence of men:
if you cannot, comfort your self with this, that they shall not by any
outrages whatsoever, divert me from my resolution. The seventh of May, From the
Camp, on the con^ines of the Statiellenses.

Cicero to Decimus Brutus, Imperator; elected Consul. Epist. 12.
I Received in one day three letters from you: one, a short one; which you
d^liuered to Flaccus Voluminous: [and] two very long; one, brought me by the
post of Titus Vibius; and the other sent unto me^ by Lupus. By your letters,
and Graeceius report it seems, that the war is, not only, not extinguish't,
but with a greater blaze again inflamed. But, I, out of your singular
prudence, assure my self; that you perceive, if it fortune that Antonius
recover any forces, that all those your memorable services for the
Commonwealth, are like to perish. For, this news came to Rome; all men were
of this belief; that Antonius, with a few disarmed men, daunted with fear,
destitute of all hope to be himself again, had escaped. Who, if he be in such
an estat^, as to encounter him, as Graeceius told me, would be dangerous: me
thinks he is no^ fled from Mutina, but that he has only changed the place of
war. Whereupon, men are in part as^onished, in part also they complain, that
you pursued him not. They believe, you might have suppressed him, had you therein
but used expedition. Questionless, this is a defect of the people, and
especially of ours, to abuse liberty toward him, by whom they have obtained
it. Nevertheless, it is good to have a care, that no just complaint may be
produced. Here lies the poynt^ He shall bring an end to the war, that
suppresseth Antonius. How much this im^orts, you may of your self imagine:
for, I purpose not herein to make you a further declaration. Farewell.

Decimus Brutus, Imperator, elec^ed Consul, to Cicero. Epist. 13.
FRom this time forward, it will not be fit, that I should thank you with
words. For, if I can hardly with effects, return you equal merit; how should
I think with words, ever to be able to requite you? I pray you consider well,
how matters now stand: for, being wise, as you are; reading diligently my
letters, you shall understand every thing: I could not, my Cicero, pursue
presently Antoniu^, for the reasons I shall allege unto you. I was without
horse; without beasts for carriage; I knew not that Hirtius was slain; I could
not be confident of Caesar, before I came unto him, and had talked with him;
The first day passed after this manner. The day following I was by Pansa called
early to Bononi^. Being on the way, news came, that he was dead. I posted
presently to my poor companies; for, so I may truly term them. They are
wondrous bare, and through want of all things, in marvelous ill condition.
Antonius got two days journey before me, making much more way in his flight,
then I, in his pursuit: for, he fled at random, and I followed in warlike
ordinance. Wheresoever he passed, he set slaves at liberty, and took by
force, whomsoever he could: he staid in no place, till he came to Vada: which
place I will discypher unto you. It lies between the Appennine and the Alps,
and is almost impassable. I being some 30. miles off him, and he having
already combined his forces, with those of Ventidius, an oration of his was
brought unto me: wherein he began to entreat the soldiers, that they would
follow him beyond the Alps, by reason he held correspondencie with Lepidus. At
this, shouts were raised, and principally by Ventidius soldiers, (for, of his
own, he has very few) that they were resolved to die, or vanquish in Italy.
And moreover, they began to importune him, that he would go toward
Pollentia. He, not being able to withhold them, gave order for his going
thither, the day following. When I heard this news, I presently sent five
cohorts to Pollentia, before they should arrive there, and took mine own way
thitherwards. Trabellius arriving with his horse at Pollentia, found my men,
which I sent to defend it, there, an hour before: whereat I much rejoiced.
For, herein I think, consists the victory. They conceived some good hopes:
for, they neither supposed, that Plancus four Legions, were equal to all
their forces: neither did they think, that an Army could so speedily be
conducted out of Italy. Against whom the Townes-men hitherto, joined with the
horse I sent before, have of themselves courageously resisted: and at my
arrival, I hope they will yet more valiantly oppose themselves. But if
peradventure Antonius should pass the river Isara, we will labor with all
our power, to make such defense, that he may do no hurt to the Commonwealth.
Be of great courage, and good hopes, about the interests of the Commonwealth,
seeing, that both we, and our Armies, united with singular concord, are
prepared for all enterprises, in your behalf, and service. Nevertheless, you
must use your wonted diligence, and procure, that there want neither men, nor
any other thing, which the necessity of war requires, to the end, that with
better confidence, we may fight for your safety, against this impious
conspiracy of our enemies: who, on a sudden, have turned those forces against
their Country, which in long time, under color of the Commonwealth, they had
collected. Farewell.

Cicero to Decimus Brutus Imperator. Ep. 14.
I Rejoice beyond measure my Brutus, that my opinions, and censures about the
election of the Decemuiri, and about honoring ^he young man, were by you
approved. But what get I by this? Believe me, who am free from vainglory, I
know no more (O Brutus) what to do. For the Senate was my organe, which now is
wholly out of tune. That same notable enterprise o^ yours, when you sallied
out of Mutina, [and] Antonius flight with the discomfiture of his Army, put us
in such hope, of having absolutely finished the war, as eue^ie one grew to be
recomforted; and those my contentions hee^etofore so violent, resembled
skirmishes against the wind. But to return to the matter: It is the opinion
of such as well understand the Martian, and the fourth Legion; that they
cannot, by any means, be brought unto you. Touching the money you demand,
there is course taken for providing it, and it shall be dispatched. In the
calling home of Brutus, and appointing Caesar for the guard of Italy, you and
I have one opinion. But, as you write, you have adu^rsaries: whom I withstand
with small labor: yet they disturb me notwithstanding. The Legions are
expected out of Africa: but every one wonders, that the war^e is renewed in
those parts. There never hapened any thing so far beyond expectation. For,
the victory being published on the day of your nativity, 'twas thought the
Commonwealth should have been put to no more trouble for many years. Now,
these new occasions of fear, come to disanull matters already performed.
Though in those of the xv. of May, you writ unto me; how, not long before, you
vnde^stood by letters from Plancus, that Antonius was not received by Lepidus.
Which, if it be so, all matters will go well: but if otherwise, the enterprise
will be difficult; whose end depends on you, to be brought about so, that I
may no ways fear it. I can do no mo^e, then what I have done: yet above all
others, I desire to see you, most reputed, and honorable; even as I hope you
shall be. Farewell.

Cicero to Decimus Brutus Imperator. Ep. 15.
THough the contentment your letters yield me is very great: yet this was
greater; that, being infinitely employed, you appointed your Colleague Plancus,
that he should by letters excuse you to me. Which he has performed diligently.
And certainly I could have received no greater content from any thing, then
from this your courtesy, and diligence. The union with your Colleague, and
your mutual concord, the which by both your letters, you have intimated, to
the Senate, and people of Rome, was most acceptable. For the rest; go on my
Brutus, and henceforth, strive not to overcome another, but to go beyond your
self. I must be no longer in writing, especially to you, whom I mean to
imitate in brevity. I expect with desire your letters, and attend them of such
a tenor, as I heartily wish, and desire them. Farewell.

Cicero to Decimus Brutus Imperator. Epist. 16.
IT much imports when this letter shall be delivered unto you: either when you
have some encumbrance, or else when you are free from all molestations. And
therefore I enjoined him, whom I sent unto you, that he should observe a due
time, to present it you. For, even as they, who personally come to visit us,
at an extraordinary hour, are many times troublesome: so letters offend, if
they be not delivered in due season. But if you be, as I hope, without
annoyance, and without disturbance: and I trust, I shall easily obtain, what I
desire of you; If he, to whom I committed this care, took a fit time to come
unto you. Luciu^ Lamia demands the Praetorship: This, is one of the most
intimate friends I have; we have of long time conuersed together, and known
one another; and which is of special consequence; his familiarity is, above
all other things, dearest to me. Besides this, I stand bound unto him for great
benefits, and deserts toward me. For in the times of Clodius, he being head of
the order Military, and defending my safety m^st courageously, was by Consul
Gabinius confined: which before that time in Rome never happened to any Roman
citizen. The people of Rome, retaining this in memory, it would be too soul
a thing, that I should be unmindful thereof. And therefore my Brutus make
your self believe, that it is I, that stand for the praetorship. For, though
Lamia be in wonderful reputation, and favor, having in the solemnities of his
Aedilship used a very profuse liberality: nevertheless, as if it were not so,
I have in his present occasion, taken upon my self the whole business. Now, if
you make that esteem of me, which undoubtedly you do; in that you may dispose
of the chivalry as their commander: give notice unto our Lup^^, that he may
herein, procure us their favor. I will not use more words unto you: this only
will I add, which is most certain, that, of all the pleasures I look for at
your hands, you cannot do me a more acceptable. Farewell.

Cicero to Decimus Brutus Imperator. Ep. 17.
LA^ia is one of the nearest friends I have: I will not say his offices; but
his merits have been very great toward me: and the people of Rome, can give
thereof good testimony. This man having showed extraordinary liberality and
bounty, at the f^stiuiti^s of his Aedileship, now demands to be Praetor, and
every one knows, that he wants neither reputation, nor favor. But, it both
appears, that the people will be so bribed, that every thing makes me
fearful; and, I must needs resolve, to take this suite of Lami^, wholly upon
my self. Wherein I very well discern, how far you may assist me: and yet I no
ways doubt, how much you desire to do me favor. Wherefore my Brutus, persuade
your self; that neither I can desire of you any pleasure, more effectually;
nor you, perform to me any thing more acceptable: [then] if with all your
power, and endeavor, you shall but fu^ther thi^ suite of Lami^. The which, I
entreat you, by all means may be effected. Farewell.

Cicero to Decemus Brutus Imperator. Ep. 18.
THough by the commissions, which Galba, and Voluminous did on your behalf
expose unto the Senate, we conceived, of what you thought we should be
fearful, and suspicious: yet they appeared ^o be more timorous commissions,
then beseemed your victory, and the Roman people. And you must understand, my
Brutus, that the Senate is resolute; and so are they that govern it^ and
therefore, they took it ill, to be reputed sl^cke, and timorous; by you, whom
above all others they judged to have been m^gnanimious. For every one, when
you were s^u^ up, conceiving wonderful hopes of your valor, Antonius being
then in his very Flower; who was he, that feared any thing when he was
defea^ed, and you delivered? neither did they fear Lepidus. For who would
judge him so foolish, that having affirmed he affected peace, in a time when
the war was at the hottest; now, that there is that peace which he desired,
he should make war against the Commonwealth? Neither do I doubt but you are
quicker sighted. But, the festiuitie being so fresh in memory, which by us in
your name, through all the temples of the gods was celebrated; the renouation
of fear, brought great disturbance. And therefore, I could wish, as I hope it
will succeed; that Antonius were wholly abandoned and overthrown: but if by
misfortune, he has recovered any force; that he might be made to perceive;
That, neither the Senate wants counsel, nor the people of Rome courage; nor,
(while you live,) the Commonwealth a General. The xix. of May. Farewell.

Decimus Brutus to Cicero. Epist. 19.
I Wish you might read the letters which I have sent to the Senate before they
are delivered: and that if there be any thing, which you would have otherwise,
you would alter it. You, shall perceive, that I have written upon necessity.
For, supposing I should have had the Martian Legion, and the fourth; as Drusus
and Paulus were contented, with whom your self accorded; I imagined there ^as
no great care to be taken of the rest. But finding now, new soldiers about me,
and those not paid, I must needs be very fearful; as well for mine, as your
occasions. The Vicentines, show special honor to me, and Marcus Brutus. I
earnestly pray you, that you will not permit any wrong to be done them in the
Senate at the instance of most base fellows. They have equity on their side,
[and] deserve greatly of the Commonwealth, and [haue] for their adversaries,
men of no valor, and affecting innouations. The xxj. of May, from Verse^^^s.

Decimus Brutus Imperator to Cicero. Epist. 20.
THough I be no ways afraid of mine own occasions, yet, I am enforced, out of
the love I bear you, and for your many good offices, to fear yours. For it
has been told me more then once, and I esteemed it not slightly: last of all,
L^^^^ Segulio, a man most like himself, told me he had been with Caesar, and
how they had a long discourse of you: that Caesar did not any thing complain
of you; but only said that you should say, that the young man was to be
praised, honored, and taken off: And that he would not suffer himself to be
taken off. But I believe that either Labeo reported these wo^ds unto him, or
else, they were not uttered by the young man, but rather feyned by himself.
Besides this, Labeo would needs make me believe, that the Veteranes, spoke
hardly of you, and that some ill would happen you by their means: and how they
took it in despite; that neither Caesar, nor I, were elected among the
Decemviri: and all things went only through your hands. Hearing this, and
being upon my way, I thought good not to pass the Alps, before I first knew,
what was done there amongst you. For, of your peril, be assured, that if they
can but daunt you wi^h brauadoes and thre^ts; or by putting some crotchets into
the young man's head; they hope some great profit will accrue unto themselves
thereby. And all this devise, depends on the design they have, to gain much. I
would therefore have you circumspect, and keep your self from all
embushments. For nothing can be dearer, nor sweeter to me, then your life. But
take heed, that fear, be not occasion of a greater fear: and be favorable to
the Veteranes, wherein you may. First, concerning the Decem-viri, do what they
would have you. Then, for the remunerations, if you think good, procure that
I, and Caesar, man consigne unto them, the lands of those ve^eranes, which
followed Antonius party. As touching moneys, be not too hasty: and after you
have seen what quantity there is; you may tell them, the Senate will take some
order therein. To the four Legions, to whom you mind to allow partitions of
land, or grounds, I see you may well allot them those of Silla, and the
Territory Campanum. I am of opinion, 'twere good to distribute unto the
Legions their lands equally, or by lot. And think not, that I am moved to
write these things unto you, to show my wisdom. I am moved, because I affect
you, and des^re a general peace: which without you cannot endure. I, if there
be no extraordinary need, will not leave Italy: I am about the arming of the
Legions, and putting them in a readiness. I hope to have a brave army, for
all accidents whatsoever, and to resist any violence that shall occur. Caesar
sends me not back, that Legion of the army which Pansa had. Answer me
presently to these letters: and if there be any secret of importance, which you
think fitting for me to know. Send to me of purpose one of your people.
Farewell. The xxiiij. of May, from Epor^dia.

Cicero to Decimus Brutus Imperator. Epist. 21.
THe curse of the gods light upon this Seguglio, the veriest knave that ever
was, is, or shall be. You think peradventure, that he only spoke with you, or
with Caesar. There Is none, with whom he could conveniently talk, to whom he
has not spoken the self same things. But nevertheless, my Brutus, I think
my self as I ought much bound unto you; in that you would have me know of
these fables, be they whatsoever. For this was a special note of love. And
touching that, where he says, that the old soldiers comp^aine^ because you
and Caesar are not in the number of the Decem-viri; I would to God, that
neither I had been of that number; for, what could have been undertaken of
greater vexation? notwithstanding, I having propounded, that it was necessary
to nominate them that had Armies; Those very men that were wont, crying out,
made opposition^ so, that though I made great resistance, [both] you were
excepted. And therefore, let us give no care to Segulius, who a^fects new
things; not because he has swallowed the old; for, he had nothing to ^haw: but
these which lately come to his hand, he has devoured, and digested with a
witness. Then, whereas you write, that being no ways afraid for your self,
yet you fear for my sake. I, my Brutus, whom I esteem the best man, and
dearest friend that can be found, will not have you fear any thing at all for
me. For in those things which may be foreseen, I shall not be deceived: and
for those, which cannot come to notice, I care little. For, I were a fool, if
I should require more, then the very nature of things has imparted to man. In
that you advertise me, to avoid, that in fearing, I be not constrained to a
greater fear; you admonish me wisely, and like a true friend. But be assured,
that you, being to ^uery man's knowledge, endowed pa^ticularly with this virtue,
never t^ ^ea^^, or be disturbed; I in this virtue almost equal you. And
therefore I w^ll ^ot be afraid of any thing, and I will l^oke abo^t me in all
things. But take you heed my Brutus, that at length, my fear proceed not
through your default. For though we were fearful, nevertheless, the hope,
that we repose, in your forces and Consullship, would expel all fearfulness;
especially, every one, but chiefly my self, being assured, that you bear us
a singular affection. Your aduertisements, about the four Legions, and about
the referring of the disposing of their lands, to Caesar, and your self, seem
to me very good. And therefore there being some of our Colleagues, who we^e as
glad of this charge of distribution of the grounds, as if they had already
obtained it; I crossed the matter, and reserved it wholly for you. If there be
any secret occurre^t, or, as you write, any secret of importance, I will send
purposely one of my men, that let^ers may the more faithfully be delivered unto
you. Farewell. The iiij^ of ^une.

Ci^ero to Decimus Brutus Imperator. Epist. 22.
I Entertain an inward amity, with Appius Clodius, son to Caius, ratified
by many kind offices, which we have done one ^or another. I request you, as
effectually as I may, that, either out of your humanity, or for my sake, by
the authority you have, which is ve^ie great, you will be pleased to take
order, that he may be secure. I desire that you being reputed for a man most
valiant, may be also esteemed most merciful. The preservation of th^s youth,
will redound to your great honor: who, in truth, the rather deserves
compassion: because being induced by tender love, to ^educe his Father from
banishm^nt, he followed the party of Antonius. Where^ore, though you should
not have so just an occasion, yet you may well find some probable reason, to
effect it: with a beck only you may procure, that such a person, [being] of a
noble family, of an excellent wit, very valorous, and besides, most officious,
and exceeding mindful of benefits; may be permitted to live in his country,
with security of his estate, and substance. Which I entreat you to perform,
with all the possible desire, and affection I am able Farewell.

Decimus Brutus, to Cicero, Epist. 23.
WE proceed well enough he^e, and we will endeavor to do it better: Lepidu^
seems well inclined to vs^ We must boldly prosecute the benefit of the
Common-weal^h. And though ^ll other things were contrary unto us; yet
considering we have three Armies on foot, so great and mighty, for the
particular service of the Common-w^alth: you ought to have that great courage,
which you both eu^r h^d: and now, Fortune favoring us, you ought to incre^se
it. The multitude disperseth that, which I wrote last unto you with mine own
hand, to affright you: but if you get but the bridle betwixt your tenth; let me
not live, if all of them, how many soever, have power to quack, if you but
speak. I, as before I wrote, till I receive your letters, will make my
residence in Italy. Farewell. The xxv. of May: from Eporoedia.

Cicero to Decimu^ Brutu^. Epist. 24.
I Tell you, I was at the first half angry with you, for the brevity of your
letters: now me thinks, that I, am too long. I will therefore follow your
style. In how few words, how many things have you intimated! that you do
reasonable well, and will end^uour to do be^ter: that Lepidus stands well
aff^cted: that having three Armies on foot, we ought to have a constant hope in
all things. Though I had been timorous, yet with this letter you would have
made me courageous. But, as you put me in mind, I have got the b^idle betwixt
my teeth. For, if I, when you were beleagured, reposed all my hope in you; ^ow,
that you are in the fi^ld with a v^ctorious Army, may I not repose a far
greater? I desire now at length, my Br^^us, to r^signe over my vigilancie to
you but so, that I may not be h^ld inconstant. Whereas you write, you will
r^side in Italy, till my letters come unto your hand: if you c^n do it,
without any hindrance to the wa^re, I thereu^to advise you. For many matters
are debated of in R^me: but i^ the war may be finished by your departure^
attend this, rather then the other. The mon^y^s, which were ready, or
consigned ^uer unto you: Seruilius is yours most aff^ctio^ate: I do what so
ever I am able. Farewell. The vj. of June.

Cicero to Decimus Brutus Imperator. Epist. 25.
I Expecting every day your letters, our Lupus on a sudden gave me to
understand, that if I would write any thing to you, I might: but I, though I
had not whereof to write, knowing that you are adu^rtised of what is done in
Rome: and conc^^uing, that letters without matter, are displeasing to you: I
meant to use all brevity according to your custom. Understand therefore that
all hopes are in you, and your Colleague. And as for Marcus Brutus, there is
yet no certainetie known: I, as you enjoin me, do not cease with my
particular letters to inuit him, unto a common war. And I would to God, he
were now, in these parts: we should the less fear that evil, which within
the city is not little: but what do I? I forget your Laconisme; I have
already written one whole page. Vanquish, and Farewell. The xviij. of June.

Decimus Brutus Imperator, to Cicero. Ep. 26.
IN my extremest grief, I have this consolation; that men know, that I f^ared
not the evil which has happened without just cause. Let them now d^liberate,
whether the Legions shall be transported out of Africa, and out of Sardinia or
no: whether Brutus shall be sent for, or no; whether they will assign a
stipend to me, or no. I have written to the Senate: and I tell you for a most
undoubted truth, that except the provisions I write for be made, we shall all
run an infinite danger. I pray you be careful, to whom you commit the
charge, of conducting me, the Legions. There is required therein both fid^lity,
and expedition. Farewell. The iij. of June, from the Camp.

Cicero to Caiu^ Matius. Epist. 27.
I Have not yet fully determined, whether our Trebatius, a very officious man,
and well affected to us both, bring me more trouble, or contentment. For,
coming in the evening to Tusculanum, he, the day following, not yet well
recovered, came in the morning to find me. And I chiding him, because he had so
sle^der care of his health; he an^swered, he was come, out of a desire to
speak with m^. And I, asking, what is the news? He intimated unto me your
complaint, to which before I make answer, I Will deliver some few things. For as
much as I remember of the times past, I have not an auncienter friend then your
self: but, touching the time; there are many, that in some circumstances are
equal to you: touching the love; none. I ^esolu'd to love you, the first day I
knew you: and the self same day I was also of opinion, that you loved me.
Af^erwards, your departure from R^me, which was for a long time, and the course
of my life unlike to yours, (I having lived in pursuit of honors) permitted
not, that our minds might with stronger knot be united through conversation.
Nevertheless, I knew well your good affection toward me many years before
the civil war, when Caesar was in Gallia. For you procured, that he wished me
well; honored me; and held me for his own: the which you thought, could not
but turn to my great benefit, and to Caesar himself rather profitable then
otherwise. I omit, many things, which in those times, we were wont most
familiarly to talk of, write of, and communicate. Because there are other
points of far greater consideration. I remember also that in the beginning of
the civil war, when you went toward Brundusium, to find out Caesar, you came
to me in Formianum. First, what esteem ought to be made of this only
demonstration, especially in those times? Then, do you imagine, I can forget
your discourse; council; and affection? At which, I remember, Trebatius was
present. Neither are your letters out of my mind, which you sent unto me, at
that time when I came to meet Caesar, (if I be not deceived,) in the territory
of Trebula. Then ensued that time, when I was constrained either by the zeal
of mine honor, my duty, or fortune, to go to Pompeius. What office, or
favor left you unperformed, either toward me absent, or my friends present.
Whom did all my friends find more kind to me, and them, then your self? I
came to Brundusium: Now think you, that I have forgotten with what celeritie
you came flying to me, so soon as you knew it, from Tarentum? How great love
showed you me, in your society; discourse; and rectification of my mind;
which was ouerlayed with extreme affliction, for the miseries of my country?
Finally we began again, to be resident together in Rome, where, in matters of
great consequence, about the manner, how I should proceed with Caesar,
according to your advise, I demeaned my self. And in other offices, you did
afford this favor to Caesar, and my self only; to come daily to our houses;
and often to spend many hours, in acceptable discourse. At which time, if you
remember, you urged me to write these Treatises of Philosophy. And after
Caesar's return, you intended nothing more effectually, then to make me
domestical with him: Which you obtained. Now, to what end have I made this
discourse, larger then I thought to have done? For this respect; because I much
wondered, that you who cannot but remember these things, could believe, that I
had wronged our friendship. For besides these which I have related, which are
clear, and evident, I have many secret passages, which with words, I can
scarcely explicate. Your whole carriage gives me satisfaction; but above all, I
am best pleased, partly [with] your singular fidelity in friendship; your
council; gravity; and constancy: and partly [with] your mirth; humanity;
and learning. Wherefore now I return to your complaint. First, I did not
think, you had given your consent to that Law. Th^n; had I so thought, [yet] I
should never have thought, you had done it, without some just occasion. Your
dignity is so eminent, that all men's eyes are fixed on you; and men's
malignitie is the cause, that there is more liberal speech of you, then were
befitting. And, if you do not hear of these mutterings, I know not what to
say. I, for my part, when it is my chance to hear them; defend you so far,
as I am sure, you are wont, to defend me against my adversaries. And I defend
you two ways. Some things there are, which I am accustomed absolutely to
deny: as particularly; for this giving of your voice: some, which I
demonstrate that you have out of zealous love, and tenderness performed: as in
that, about the charge of public sports. But you, who are most learned, know
well, that if Caesar were a King, as I suppose he was, you may for the office
you undergo be both praised, and blamed: praised; because your faith, and
humanity is to be commended, for loving your friend after death; which reason
I am wont to use: blamed; because our Countries liberty should be preferred
before the life of a friend; upon which your adversaries ground themselves. I
much desire, that the controversies I have had about these clamors, might be
related to you. But amongst others, there are two special particularities in
your commendation; which no man infe^s more willingly, or oftener then my self:
which is, that you persuaded more then any other, that the civil war might
be withstood, and the victory moderated. Wherein I never found any m^n, that
was not of my opinion. Wherefore I thank our Treba^ius, who was the cause,
that I wrote unto you these letters. To which if you give no credit, you must
needs judge me very discourteous, and inhumaine: which would wo^drously
displease me; and differ much from your own disposition. Farewell.

Caius Matius to Cicero. Epist. 28.
I Took great contentment in your letters; because I understood, that you
retain that opinion of me, which I hoped, and wished you should have. Whereof,
though I no ways doubted; yet in that I made great reckoning, that it might be
entirely preserved, it did a little touch me. It Is true, that I was privy to
my self, that I had committed nothing, that could offend the mind of any
honest man. And therefore I did the less believe, that, you being adorned with
infinite and excellent sciences, would be rashly persuaded to any thing;
especi^lly knowing well, that I ever did, and do bear you singular affection.
Which, having succeeded, as I wished; I will ^nswer to the false oppositions,
against which you have oftentimes defended me: performing an office, answerable
to your most ingenuous condition, and worthy of our amity. For I know what
matters they objected against me since the death of Caesar. They accuse me,
because I lament the death of a great friend, and that I am afflicted, because
a man is slain whom I loved: aff^rming that my country should be (...) before
any fri^ndship: as if they had already made trial, that such a death was
beneficial to the Commonwealth. But I will not argue subti^lie. I confess,
tha^ for mine own part, I cannot perceive it; and that I am not yet arrived to
this height of wisdom. Neither did I follow Caesar in civil discord: but in
that he was my friend, though the course displeased me, yet would I not abandon
him. Neither, did I ever approve the civil war, much less the occasion
thereof: having in the very infancy o^ it, applied all my endeavor, to
extinguish it. And therefore in his victory, though he was that great friend
unto me, that he was: I was neith^r delighted with honor, or money. Of which
rewards, others were insatiable, whose power was less with him, then mine was.
And, on the other side; my goods by Caesar's law, were damag^d: and by my favor
most of them, that rejoice at Caesar's death, obtained, that they might live in
their country. That the citizens who were vanquished, might be pardoned, I
labored no less th^n for mine own safety. I therefore, who labored for
eue^y man's pre^eruation, should I not grieve for his death, from whom I
purchased it? especially being hated for their occasion, who murdered him? You
shall therefore, undergo the penalty, (say they) because you dare question
that, that we have acted: Oh pride, never heard of! that some may vaunt in
their impiety, [and] others cannot so much as mourn without their overthrow.
And yet in all ages, servants have been allowed, to fear, to rejoice, and to
grieve, rather when they saw good, then any other. The which liberty, they
now, which make profession, to have given it us, (for so they often report)
seek violently to deprive me o^, by threatenings. But they labor in vain.
There shall be no danger so terrible, that shall make me halt in my duty, or
humanity. For I have always held, that an honorable death, should never be
avoided, but rather oftentimes desired. But why should they be angry with me,
for desiring them to repent them of what they had committed? I confess, I
would have every man to be grieved for the death of Caesar. Oh, But I am
enjoined by the office of a good Citizen to desire the safety of the
Commonwealth. That this desire is in me, if it be not known without my
relating it, both by those things which h^eretofore I have effected, and by
those which hereafter I hope to perform; I am content that in defendiug mine
own causes, words may not avail me. Therefore I earnestly entreat you, that
you will conceive better of my reasons, ^hen I am able to utter them: and that
you will think, if you be of opinion, that it is a good thing to do well,
that I can hold no m^nner of commerce with bad men. Were it peradventure fit
^or me, now, that I am laden with years, to go out of that path, wherein I
have led my youth, which carries with it some excuse for error? shall I again
n^w mould my self? This error I will not commit: nor will I do any thing that
may displease. Except I do lament the unhappy fortune of my dearest friend,
and so great a personage. And if I were of an other mind, I would never deny
it: least that, besides my being re^puted wicked in offending, I might be
thought timorous, and a false dissembler: True it is, that I had the change, of
the public shows, which Caesar the little youth made in honor of Caesar's
victory. But this had re^pect to a particular office, not to the state of the
Commonwealth. In which charge notw^thstanding, both for the memorial I
reserve of so great a ^riend, and for the desire I have to honor him thus dead
as he is, I could not be deficient. And the you^h of such great hopes, and so
worthy of Caesar, requesting me ther^unto, I was constrained to accept of it.
I also went many times to the house of Antonius the Con^ull^ to salute him: to
whom, you shall find, that even they, which este^me me little affected ^owards
my country, resorted daily, only to crave of him, or carry aw^y something. But
what an arrogancy is this? That Caesar did never forbid me, to converse with
whom I thought good, and even with persons whom he loved not; and these men
that have bere^u^d me of my friend, by carping, or reprehending me, do their
worst to enforce me, nor to love them that I like well of? But I know I have
hitherto lived so modestly, that hereafter evil tongues shall be little able
to defame me: and, that also they who love me not, because I still persevere in
loving Caesar, would rather ^ish to meet with friends, like me, then like
themselves. For my part, if things fall out conformable to my desire; I mean
to pass so much of my life as remains, quietly at Rhodes: but if it so happen
that any accident disturb me, I will remain in Rome, and remain there
always, wishing that they may do well. I give great thanks to our Trebatius;
because he plainly declared unto me, how your mind stood toward me: which I
discern to be full, of sincerity, and affection: and, because he was the
occasion, that I having ever willingly loved you, should now also be further
tied, both to honor, and respect you. Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Oppius. Epist. 29.
I being, as our At^icus knows, very doubt^ull about this journey. In that, my
mind on either side suggested many r^asons: your judgment, and coun^^ll
greatly induced me to deliberate, and make my resolution. For you both
plainly wrote unto me what your opinion therein was; and A^ticus related that
unto me, which you had spoken unto him th^reof. I ever took you to be wise
in deliberating, and very faithful in aduising: and I have had good exp^rience
thereof, when, in the beginning of the civil war, I requiring you by
letters, that you would advise me what I should do, either in going to
Pompeius, or remaining in Italy: you persuaded me to do that, that stood
best with mine honor. By which I perceived, what your opinion was therein: and
I admired that you were of so great fideli^ie, and in adui^ing me ^o hon^st a
man; ^or, you thinking that the contrary was desired by him that was your best
friend, you had greater r^spect to my office, then his will, or pleasure.
Certainly, before this fell out, I loved you: and ever knew that my self was
by you beloved. And when I was absent, and stood in great danger, I remember,
that in my absence yo^ defended me with great care, using the like humanity,
to all mine that were in Rome: and after my return, how domesticallie you
lived with me, and what opinion I retained of you, and what things I diuulged:
all those that usuallie look into such actions, can truly testify. But how
faithful in loving you, and how constant you reputed me, you then evidently
showed, when after Caesar's death, you betook you wholly unto mine
acquaintance. Which opinion of yours, i^ I by my dearest love, and best offices
do not acknowledge, I shall not repute my self a man. Persevere you, my Oppius
in loving me, (although doubtless I write this unto you, not that I think you
stand in need of any such remembrance, but because it is usual to write thus)
and take all my affairs, into your protection. Whereof, that you may be fully
informed, I have given commission to Atticus. And when I shall be at better
leisure, I will write unto you more at large. Be careful of your health. [For]
you cannot do me a greater pleasure.

THE TWELFTH BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Cicero to Caius Cassius. Epist. 1.
BE assured Cassius, that I never cease to think upon you, and our Brutus, that
is, of the whole Commonwealth; which has reposed all her hope, in you, and
Decimus Brutus. And certainly from this time forward, I begin to conceive
better hopes: seeing may Dolabella has performed such material service to the
Commonwealth. For that evil, which sprung up in the City, continually
dispersed it self, and every day so increased, that for my part, I held both
the City, and the peace of Citizens, utterly lost. But it is so stopped, that,
as for that reproachful danger, I suppose, we may live for ever secure. Other
things, that yet remain to be acted, are important and many: but you must be
the man, that must effect them al: Though we are intentive to dispatch those,
which are of greatest moment. For, touching that which has hitherto been
done; we have freed our selves of the King; but not of the Kingdom. For,
though the King be slain, yet we put all that in execution, which the King
appointed to be performed. And not only this; but some things also, which he
himself, if he had lived, would not have acted; we approve because he
designed them. And of this, I know not when we shall see an end. New Laws are
propounded: exemptions are granted: great taxes imposed: banished men are
restored: [and] false decrees of the Senate are produced: so as it seems, that
the hatred only of that wicked man, and the grief of servitude is removed;
but the Commonwealth is still torment^d with those troubles, whereinto he
brought her. Of all these things, you must make an end, of necessity; and not
suppose, that the Commonwealth has had already from you what was sufficient.
She has indeed so much, as I would never have hoped for: but she is not
content with this: and the greatness of your benefit and courage considered,
she expects, and desires from you, greater matters. Hitherto, with the death
of the Tyrant, and by your means, she is revenged of her injuries: but which
of her ornaments has she recovered? Take you, peradventure, these for
ornamen^s, that she obeyes him dead, whom living she could ^ot support? or,
that we defend his writings; whose Laws we ought to abrogate? you will tell me,
we so determined. It is true: But we did it, to give way unto the times, which
in a Commonwealth, are of great ^or^^ But some, bearing themselves
indiscreetly, and vngratfully, assume too much security, upon our courtesy.
Of which, and many other things, we will shortly discou^se at our meeting In
the mean while, persuade your self, that I, both in respect of the
Commonwealth, which was ever most d^a^e unto me, as also for the love we bear
one another: have an especial care of your dignity. Look unto your heath.
Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Cassius. Epist. 2.
I Am very glad, that my sentence, and Oration, gives you content. The which,
if I could often use, it would be no great labor to us, to re-establish the
Common-weal^h in l^bertie. But this foolish, and debauched companion, (and a
wicked^^ wretch, then he was, of whom you we^e won^ to say, that there was
sl^ine an impious man,) se^kes all means to procure a murder: and he does,
for no other end charge me, that I plo^ted Caesar's death; but because the old
soldiers might rise up against me. Which danger no ways daunts me; so that I
may also purchase praise for that, which you most gloriously have ^ffected. And
thus, neither Piso, who was ^he first that spoke against him, without any man
to second him; nor I, who a ^onth after, did the like; nor Publius Ser^^lius,
who spoke after me; can secur^ly go into the Senate. For, that b^oudie fellow
uses all mean^s, to p^ocu^e some slaughter: and, the xx. of Se^tember, he
thought to begin with me. And I can tell you, he cam^ provided i^to the
Senate, having for many d^ies, in Metellus vill^ge, w^ll conside^ed that,
which he meant to utter against me. But, what sound consultations could he
have amiddest wine, and brothels? and therefore every one thought, as before I
wrote unto you, that after his accustomed manner, he would have vomited, and
not declaimed. Therefore, whe^as you write, that you trust, that some good may
be done by our authority, and eloquence: in truth, some benefit, in r^spect of
so many evils, has been already wrought. For, the people of R^me know, that
there are three consular persons, who, for having spoken freely, what they
thought behoouefull for the Commonwealth, cannot securely go into the Senate.
Neither must you expect any thing else. For, your greatest friend joys wholly
in his new affinity. So that, he cares no more for sports: and he hu^sts for
envy, seeing the favor, which the people, with cheerful shouts, ^^^ord your
brother. That other kinsm^n, is also pacified by the ^ew Comment^^i^s of
Caesar. These things are toler^bl^: But this is insuppo^table; that there is
one, who persw^des himself, tha^ in your year his son should be Consul; and
for this cause, he seems diligently to court this villain. Lucius Cotta, my
familiar friend, through a certain fatal des^aire, as he says, comes not
much into the S^nate. Lucius Caesar, an excellent, and valiant Citizen, is
hindered by sickness. Seruius Sulpitius, who is of great ^steeme, and desirous
of the general good, is not in Rome: the others, ex^ept those elected, pardon
me, if I term them not Consula^es you know, who are the principal defenders
of the Senate; who, if the Commonwealth were peaceable, were but a f^w: but,
fewer now, when she is in molesta^ion. Wherefore, all hope lies in you; ^he
which, notwithstanding, ^^es not in you neither, if you remain far off, for
your security; but if you en^er i^to any enterprise worthy of ^our glory; I
would it might be comp^ssed, wit^ our safety: If not; yet this is most
^^rt^ine, that by your means the Commonwealth in shor^ time shall be able to
recover her former being I ^^i^her am, no^ will be wanting to your friends:
w^o^ whether they seek m^e, or not, I w^ll discharge those office^, ^or your
sake, which may beseem the trust, and love I bear you. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Cassius. Epist. 3.
YOur friend does every day more then other, show his m^dnesse and
bestialitie. First, in the Statua, that h^ erected in the Rostra, he has in
graven these words. TO OUR BEST DESERVING PARENT. So that men think, that you
have not only committed homicide; but that you have betrayed your Country.
Why do I say, you? I should say, we: for that furious fellow affirms, that I
was the Ring^leader of that your notable service. I would I had been: he
should not now have thus molested us. But this concern^d you. Which, seeing it
happened not. I would to God I had counsel to give you. But yet I do not see,
what I should do my self; and what can be attempted against force, without
force? And all their design is this, of Caesar. Whereupon he, being by
Canu^ius, conducted to speak unto the people, the second day of October: in
veri^ truth departed disgracefully. But yet he uttered [^uch] things of you,
who have preserved your Country, as should have been delivered of one, that
had betrayed it. Of my self he spoke this; that he was most assured, that,
as you heretofore; so now, Canu^ius did all things by my directions. The rest,
how it is, judge by this; that they have taken away the provision from your
Legate, which is usually al^owed, for his journey. What is their meaning,
think you, in doing this? Vn^oubtedly, that he is the Legate, not of a friend,
but of an enemy to the Commonwealth. Oh wonderful misery! We could not
support the Master: and now we serve our fellow-se^uant. And yet, for all this,
(though I desire more then I can hope for) there still remains some hope in
your valor. But where are the men? I conceal the rest: and leave it to your
self to be considered. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Cassius. Epist. 4.
I Would you had invited me to that supper, on the xv. of March; not a dish of
meat should have remained. Now your relics disturb me, more then any man
else. We have Consuls of singular valor, but bad Consulars; the Senate is
very resolute, but those that are most resolute, have least au^horitie. You
can desire no more of the people: they are most valiant, and singularly well
inclined; and so is all Italy. On the contrary, Philippus and Piso,
Ambassadors, bear themselves after such a fashion; as there was never any
thing more brutish, or impious [For] ^eing sent to Antonius, to propound some
things unto him, in the behalf of the Senate; and he not willing to perform
any of them: they, without the Senates order accepted from him, and brought us
intolerable demands. And therefore every one has recourse to me; and at
length, in matte^ of public safety, I have the love, and concourse of the
people. But from you, I had no aduertisements, neither what you did, or
intended to do, nor where you were. The rumor was, you were in Syria, but
there was no certainty thereof. Of Brutus, not being so far off, the news
that come seem truer. Dolabella has been much blamed by men of
understanding, because he so suddenly sought for the government o^ Syria, your
Province; you having not been there full thirty days. Wherefore, every man
was of opinion; that he should not be received by you there. Great commendation
is ascribed to you, and Brutus; because men judge, that you have, beyond all
hope, raised an Army. I would write more at large, if I knew how things stood,
and in what estate you were. And what I now write unto you, I write out of the
opinion of men, and according to fame. I desirously expect your letters.
Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Cassius. Epist. 5.
I Suppose, that hitherto the winter has been some hinderance, that we could
not hear certainly, what you did; and least of all, where you were:
nevertheless, every one affirmed, (out of their desire, as I suppose) that
you were in Syria, and had forces. Which, was the more easily believed, in that
it seemed probable. Our Brutus has made ^urchase of singular praise: having
performed such great ma^ters, and so far beyond the opinion of all men; tha^,
besides their being acceptable of themselves; they are, for the expedition used
therein, much more welcome. Wherefore, if those places be in your power, which
we suppose; the Commonwealth is fortified with great defenses. For, even from
the first limits of Greece, as far as Egypt, we shall be assisted, by
excellent Citizens, that govern those quarters; and by their people. Although
(in my opinion) matters were at that pass; that all the danger of the war
seemed to be in Decimus Brutus: and we hoped, that he would free himself
from the asseige, by which he is environed; and valiantly come out into the
field; which, if it fall out, the war will be thought ended. Howsoever, he was
now at length beleaguered but by a few men. For, Antonius had a great garrison
in Bononia; and at Claterna, was our Hirtius; and Caesar, at F^rum Cornelium,
both of them with a great Army: and Pa^sa had in Rome, levied many men, which
were raised in Italy by choice. The winter was an impediment, that as yet, the
enterprise was not attempted. Hirtius made show, as by frequent letters he
signifies to me; that he would do nothing, but deliberately. Except Bononia,
Regium in Lombardie, and Parma, we had Gaul^ wholly devoted to the
Commonwealth. And the Transpadani, your Clients, stood wonderfully for us. The
[whole] Senate, (besides the Consulares,) was most resolved: of whom, there is
only Lucius Caesar, that is most constant, and who aims directly at the
public good. We have lost a great stay, ^y the death of Seruius Sulpitius^
The others, are partly hollow-hearted, and in part maleuolent: Some envy their
praise, whom they see commended in the Commonwealth. But the people of Rome,
and all Italy, are wonderfully united. These breefly were the matters, with
which I desired you might be acquainted. Now I desire, that from those
Eastern parts, the light of your valor may be resplendent. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Cassius. Epist. 6.
HOw things stood, when I wrote you these letters, you may understand from
Caius Tidius Strabo, an hohonest man, and very well inclined to the
Commonwealth; and to you, so affected, that only to come, and find you out,
he has abandoned his house and substance. And therefore it is needless, that
I should recommend him to you; his coming may be a sufficient recommendation.
As for our affairs, you are to imagine, and persuade your self thus much,
that all good men's ^^^uge ^^es in you, and Marcus Brutus; if it fortune, that
things succeed not in Italy, as they were wished; which God forbid. When I
wrote th^se letters to you, matter^ were reduced to their last trial. For,
Brutus could now no longer keep himself in Mutina. Who being preserved, the
victory is ours: if not^ which God grant otherwise; we will all fly to you,
as to the haven of safety. Wherefore, you must take upon you so great a
courage, and make such preparation, as is necessary for the recovery of the
Commonwealth. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Cassius. Epist. 7.
WIth what care, both in the Senate, and with the people, I have defended your
honor, I had rather you should understand from other friends, then from my
self. Which sentence of mine, in the Senate, would easily have prevailed, if
Pansa had not violently opposed it. This sentence being delivered, Marcus
Seruilius, Tribune of the people, brought me to speak unto the assembly. I
delivered of you, what I could, in the audience of so great a multitude, as the
Forum was able to contain; with such a shout, and consent of the people, as I
never saw the like I desire that you would pardon me, though I did in this
against the will of your mother in law. She, being fearful, as women are wont
to be, doubted lest Pansa might have been offended. True it is, that Pansa
speaking to the people, alleged, that your mother, and your brother, were not
willing, that I should have denounced such a sentence. But I was not moved with
these things: my mind was of another matter: I sought the good of the
Commonwealth, which I ever affected, together with your honor, and
estimation. But of that, which I both largely discoursed, in the Senate, and
delivered to the people; I would have you, to acquit my promise. For, I have
promised, and in a manner confirmed; that you neither did, nor would expect our
decrees; but that of yourselfe, according to your custom, you would defend the
Commonwealth. And though we had not yet understood, either where you were, or
what Forces were with you: yet I presupposed, that all the Forces, and people,
of those quarters, were in your power. And I held for certain, that the
Province of Asia, was ere this, by your means recovered. Now bear your self
so, that in augmenting your own glory, you go beyond your self. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Cassius. Epist. 8.
AMongst other aduertisements, which you have of the proce^dings of Rome, I
think you have understood, of the wickedness, extreme leuitie, and
inconstancy of your kinsman Lepidus. Which was the cause, that whereas we
judged, the war to have been ended, now we are enforced, to war, more then
ever. All our hope consists in Decimus Brutus, and in Plancus: but, to speak
truth, we have greater in you, and in my Brutus; hoping that you will not only
preserve us, if matters here, which God forbid, succeed not; but also establish
us in perpetual liberty. We heard of Dolabella, that which we desired: but we
had no certainetie thereof. For your self, be out of doubt, that hitherto you
are reputed, a great man: and it is expected, that hereafter likewise, you will
make your self, known for such. Proposing thus much unto your self, labor
to come on a pace, to the height of enterprises. The people of Rome, are of
o^inion, that there is nothing, but may by you be compassed, and obtained.
Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Cassius. Epist. 9.
THe brevity of your letters will be the cause, that I also shall be brief in
writing. And, to speak truth, I have not much whereof to write; knowing
assuredly, that the proceedings of Rome, are related unto you, by the ordinary
aduises; and of yours, in these parts, we hear nothing. For as if Asia, were
on every side shut up, there come no aduertisements unto us, but only a rumor,
that Dolabella is vanquished: which hitherto is not verified: though they still
talk thereof. When we supposed the war ended, upon a sudden through your
Lepidus, we are fallen again into exceeding great trouble. And the greatest
hop^ the Commonwealth has, is in you, and your people. True it is, that we
have mighty armies: nevertheless, though all things should succeed, as I
hope, happily, [y^t] it much impo^ts that you come [hither,] for, the hope of
the Commonwealth, is but little: I will not say, none at all. But, what is,
men look it should take effect, in the year of your Consulship. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Cassius. Epist. 10.
LEpidus your kinsman; [and] my familiar friend; together with others, that
revolted against the Commonwealth; were, by common consent of the Senate, the
last of June, denounced rebels. To whom notwithstanding, all August was
granted to be think themselves. The Senate, questionless, is full of
courage, and the rather by reason of the hopes they conceive of your succor.
The war at the writing hereof was very hot: for which we may ^hanke the
wickedness, and inconstancy of Lepidus. We hear every day that news, which
we desire of Dolabella. But as yet they have no ground; nor come they from any
person worthy of credit. There is only a muttering thereof amongst the
multitude. Nevertheless, by the informations of your letters, written from the
Camp the seventh of May; the City was of firm belief, that he was by this
time suppressed. And that you would come into Italy with your Army. To the
end, that if things here had the same issue, which we desired, we might employ
your council, and authority: But if through hard Fortune, they were
doubtful, as it ordinarily falls out in wars; we might be assisted by your
army; which I will help to the best preferment I am able. About which, it
will then be a fit time to negotiate, when it shall be known what aid it will
[now] afford the Commonwealth, and what formerly it has afforded. For
hitherto, their endeavors only have been heard of; extraordinary doubtless,
and generous: but, the effect is that, that is expected. Which, I trust, has
in some sort already succeeded: or will succeed very shortly. For valor, and
magnanimity you are above all men esteemed. And therefore we desire out of
hand to see you in Italy. If we have but you, we shall think we have a
Commonwealth. The war had been altogether finished, if Lepidus had not
received Antonius, who disarmed, and spo^led, took his heels. Whereupon,
Antoniu^ was never so hateful to the City, as Lepidus is at this present.
For the one raised war in the troubles of the Commonwealth; the other in her
peace, and victory. Against this man, we have Decimus; and Plancus, elected
Consulls. In whom, great hopes are conceiued^ But the uncertain issue of
Battles, makes us remain very doubtful. Be therefore persuaded, that all
lies upon you, and Brut^s. And, that you are both expected; but Brutus hourly.
And, though, as I hop^, your enemies will be vanquished before ^ou come; yet,
by your authority, the Commonwealth will get up again, and settle her self
in some estate, that shall be tolerable. For there are many things which must
be look^t unto, when it fortuneth, that the common weal^h, shall be wholly
freed from the danger of her wicked'st enemi^s. ^arewell.

Caius Cassius Vice-consull, to Cicero. Ep. 11.
IF you be in health, it pleases me: I am healthful. I give you notice, that
I am gone into Syria, to se^ke Lucius Marcus, and Quintus Crispu^, Imperator's.
Who, when they had heard in what agitation things were at Rome; as excellent,
and valiant Citizens, they gave into my hands their Armi^s: and courageously,
together with me, they apply themselves unto the service of the Commonwealth.
And I further advertise you, that the Legion, that Quintu^ Caecilius B^ssus
had, is come to me. And that Aulus Allienus h^th consigned over the four
Legions which he conducted out of Egypt, to me also. Now, I cannot imagine it
to be any ways needful, for me to exhort you to defend the commonwealth,
and us, so far a^ is requisite. I desire you should understand, that powerful
aids are not wanting, either to you, or to the Senate. Wherefore, with
cheerful hopes, and great courage go on, to defend the Commonwealth. About
the rest, Lucius Carteius, a friend of mine, shall confer with you. Farewell.
This fi^t of March. From the Camp's amongst the Taricheae.

Caius Cassius Vi^e-consull, to Cicero. Ep. 12.
IF you be in health, I am glad; my self am so. I read your letters, wherein
I perceive your singular love toward me. For, you seem not only to favor
us; as, in respect of the commonwealth, and for our own sakes you ever did:
but further; to be very careful in our behalf, and to remain much
perplexed. Whereupon, I supposing you thought, that while the Commonwealth was
suppressed, we could have no repose; and that you were much troubled, in that you
doubted of our safety: I had no sooner received the Legions, which Aulus
Allienus conducted out of Egypt, but I presently wrote unto you; and sent many
post's to Rome. I also wrote unto the Senate; but, I appointed that my letters
should not be presented, till you had red them, if my people have observed what
I commanded. But, in case my letters have not been safely delivered; I am
sure, that Dolab^lla, (which killing Trebonius by treachery, has possessed all
Asia) has taken my Corrier's, and intercepted them. All ^he Armies which were
in Syria, are in my power. I have been somewhat slow in paying ^he soldiers
what I promised; [yet] now at length, I find my self rid of care. But,
because you know, that I have refused no peril, nor labor in the service of
the Commonwealth; And that persuaded, and advised by you, I have taken up
Arms, against a faction of wi^ked rebels; and that I have not only assembled
an army, in defense of the Commonwealth, and liberty; but also taken it by
force from most cru^ll tyrants; (whereof, if Dolabella had bin Commander, he
would have increased the forces of Antonius; not only by his going; but with
the fame, and expectation of his army:) let me entreat you to take mine honor
to your protection. And, if you conceive, that the deserts of the soldiers
toward the Commonwealth be of exceeding importance: for this, and the causes
before alleged, be careful to aid, and favor them. And so procure, that no
man may repent him of choosing rather to follow the Commonwealth; then hope of
spoil, and rapine. In like manner, take under your pro^ection, so far as in
you lies, the honor of Marcus, and Crispus, Imperator's. For, that retchlesse
Bassus, would not assign over unto me his Legion. So that, if the soldiers in
despite of him, had not sent me Ambassadors; he would have kept Apamea
beleaguered till by maine force, it had been taken. This I request of you, not
only for the Commonwealth's sake, which was ever most dear unto you; but
also in regard of our amity; which I assure my self, you greatly estimate.
And be secure, that, this Army which I have, is for the service of the Senate,
and every honest man, but principally for your self. And it both loves, and
esteems you, hearing daily of the affection which you bear it: but if it
understand that yo^ are careful of their profit, it will also think it self
bound to do what it is able in your behalf. After the writing hereof, I heard
that Dolabella was come into Cilicia, with his forces. I will make toward
him, and endeavor to certify you of the issue. I would fortune would grant me
such happiness, as is answerable to my deserts toward the Commonwealth.
Look to your health, and love me. From the Camp this seventh of May. Farewell.

Caius Cassius to Cicero. Ep. 13.
I Hope you are in good health, as I was at the writing hereof. First, we
rejoice for the safety; and victory of the Commonwealth; and then, in that
your praises are every day renewed. For, you proouing a powerful Consular, and
greater then when you were Consul, you have gone beyond your self. Whereat
we do rejoice, but cannot sufficiently wonder. There is annexed to your
virtue, something that is fatal, which we have now many times discerned by
experience. For your gown is more fortunate, then the arms of other men. Which
at this present also, has wrung the Commonwealth, out of the hands of enemies,
and restored it. Now, therefore we shall live in liberty. Now, we shall have
you, most eminent Citizen; and my dearest, and (in the adversities of the
Commonwealth) approved friend, I say, we shall now have you, a testimony of
our love, both to your self, and to the Commonwealth, which is so near unto
you. And those things, which you have many times promised, both to conceal,
while we were in servitude; and to disclose in my behalf then, when they
might be auailable: I now, desire not so much that you should utter them: as
that your self would but repute them what they are. For I more esteem of your
judgment then any man's whatsoever: neither desire I that you should commend
me above my deserts. And these our last exployts will not I hope, seem
dissonant from the rest; nor performed unadvisedly, and without counsel: but
conformable to those cogitations, whereof you are witness. Wherefore, you
ought to add no little to my esteem, that my country may entertain the best
hope of me. You have O Marcus Tullius, children, and neighbors beseeming you;
and to you wor^hilie most dear. You must also in the Commonwealth, next after
these, make a dear esteem of those persons, who are emulous of your studies.
Of which I desire there may be many; but yet I think not, that they are in ^o
great a number, that I must be excluded; and that you have no place left you,
wherein you may embrace me, and put me upon all things which concur with
your pleasure, and my desert. I have peradventure laid open my mind unto you:
but what my wit is, cannot through long servitude, be perfectly apprehended.
We have, from the Maritime coast's of Asia, and the Islands, taken all the
shipping we could. The press of such as were to row, though with great
opposition of the Cities, was not long in compassing. We followed the Armada
of D^labella; whereof Luciliu^ was Admiral. Who oftentimes bearing us in hand,
that he would unite himself with us; and oftentimes departing from us; at
length bare in with Corcyrus, and began to keep himself within the port.
Leaving it, we went to Cyprus; because we thought it better to return to the
Camp, in that an other Naui^ came after; which Tullius Cymber had the year
before, gathered together in Bithynia, which was commanded by Turulius the
Quaestor. And from thence; we thought good with all speed, to give you notice
of what had happened. The Tarsenses most disloyal associats, and the Laodiceni
far more foolish, have voluntarily called unto them Dolobella. By the aid of
which Cities (...) up a kind of army, consisting of Grecian soldiers. He
has encamped his men before the town of Laodicea, he has broken down a
part of the wall, and has united his soldiers with the townes-men. Our
Cassius, with ten Legions, and twenty Cohorts of the League, and with four
thousand horse lies within twenty miles of Palthos; and thinks he may vanquish
without coming to fight. Because Dolabella is already enforced to buy his
wheat at three Tetradrachm's. And, if he cause no provision thereof to be
conveyed in by the shipping of Laodicea; he must of necessity be shortly
famished. And, that he shall not be able to procure any such conueyance; by the
great fleet of Cassius, which is under the government of Sextilius Ru^us; and
those three, which are under the conduct of my self, Turulius, and P^tichus;
he will easily be hindered. Be you therefore of good hope, and confident; that
as you have there d^liuered the Commonwealth; so we, ^or our parts, will
therein use all expedition. Farewell. From Cyprus, the 13. of June.

Lentulus, to his Cicero. Ep. 14.
Having met with our Brutus, and perceiving that he meant to make some stay,
before his coming into Asi^: I returned thither, to collect the remainder of
my labors; and to send money forthwith to Rome. In the mean time I
understood, that Dolobella's Navy was in Lycia. With better then an hundred
great ships to embarque his army. And that Dolobella had made these
preparations, to the end, that if his hopes in Syria were frustrated, he might
get aboard, and make for Italy; to join with the Antonij, and residue of
Rebels. Whereof I was so fearful, that laying aside all other care, with a
few small shipping I made toward him. And, if the Rhodi^ had not crossed me: I
had peradventure ended that business. Howso^uer, the greatest number of those
ships were taken, and the whole Navy discomfited. Through fear of our
arrival, the Captains and soldiers fled: and we took all the great merchant
ships, of what burden soever. I am assured, that I have prevented Dolabella's
coming with any Navy into Italy, which I greatly feared; and I have crossed
his union with his Companions, which might have put you to some trouble. How
greatly the Rhodij, despaired both of us, and the Common-weal^h, by the public
letters which I have sent, you may gather. And certainly I have written less
of their enraged disposition, then in effect I found it. But, that I have
written somewhat thereof, do not wonder: Their folly is too palpable. Neither
did any particular injuries to my self, ever move me. Their bad practices
against our safety, their desire of following the factious; their standing out
in defiance of every honest man; could not by me in reason be supported. And
yet I esteem them not all knaves. But the same parties, who neither received
my father, when he fled; nor Lucius L^^tulus; nor Pompeius; nor other famous
Captains; the very same as it were ou^ of destiny, are either now themselves
in Magistracy; or else have such therein, as are at their disposing. So that,
persisting in doing evil, they show the same arrogancy. And it is not only
profitable to our Commonwealth, but also necessary, that such insolency
should be chastised; which will grow greater, if by impunitie it be supported.
As for our honor, I desire, you would have a care thereof: and when you have
any occasion, either in the Senate, or in any other occurrent, vouchsafe to
favor me. Seeing Asia is deputed to the Consuls, and they permitted, that till
they come themselves, they may place a Lieuetenant in the government; entreat
them, at my request rather to confer this dignity upon my self then any
other, and that they will constitute me Lieutenant, till either of them comes
unto their government. For they have no occasion to hasten their coming, or to
send hither any Army. For Dolobella is in Syria, and will, before these men
come, be suppressed by Cassius: as you divinely foresaw, and did prognosticate.
For Dolabella, being beaten from Antiochia; and in the assault he gave, ill
entreated; distrusting every other City, is retired to L^odic^a, which is
upon the coast of Syria. There I hope shortly he will be rowsed, and having no
place of refuge left him: nor being able to withstand so great an Army, as
that of Cassius; I make no doubt but that ere this time, he is defeated, and
subdued. Whereupon I think Pansa, and Hirtius, need not hasten, in their
Consulship to come unto their Provinces; but rather discharge their Consulship
at Rome^ wherefore if you request them, that I in the mean while, may have the
managing of Asia; I hope you may obtain it. Besides, Pansa, and Hirtius
promised me by word of mouth, and afterward wrote unto me thereof, and Pansa
affirmed as much to ou^ Verrius, that he would procure, that during his
Consulship, I should have no successor. Yet I protest that I affect not this
prorogation out of any desire I have unto the Province. For unto me, it has
ever been very troublesome, dangerous, and expensiue. But because I would not
have suffered in vain, so many discommodities, and be urged to depart from
hence, before I reap the last fruits of my laborious industry. For, if I
could send home those somms which I had gathered; I would require a successor:
but to get in that which I disboursed to Cassius; and that which we lost by the
death of Trebonius; and by Dolabella's cruelty; or by their per^idious
proceedings, who failed both me, and the Commonwealth, against the duty of
their allegiance: Which cannot be done, without time. I am v^ged to desire,
that you, as your custo^e is, would be a means, that I may have this
opportunity. I hope, I have so borne my self toward the Commonwealth, that
in reason I may expect, not the benefit o^ this Province, but as much as
Cassius, and Brutus: not only, in that I was an associate with them, in that
same action, and danger; but also because now, I am not wanting, in any
valor, or industry. For I was the first, that brake the laws of Antonius;
the first that drew Dolabella's Cauallerie, to take part with the
Commonwealth; and that surrendered it to Cassius; the first to press soldiers
for general safety, against that most wicked conspiracy; and that only
united Syria, and the Armies that were there, with Cassius, and the
Commonwealth. For, if I had not given so much treasure to Cassius; so many
men; and with that expedition I did; he would never have attempted to go into
Syria. Which if it had not been, the Commonwealth should by this time have
had no less cause, to fear Dolabella, then Antonius. And all these things I
did, notwithstanding, I was a familiar friend, and companion to Dolabella; and
by near affinity allied to the Antonij; and had also by their means, gotten
my Province. But because I bare greater love to my country, I was the first
that raised war against mine own familiars. And though I find, that for these
things, I have not hitherto, had any great recompense: Yet am I not altogether
out of hope: nor will I hold it troublesome resoluedly to persevere in the
desire of liberty only: but in labor also, and in dangers. N^uerthelesse if,
for the benefit of the Senate, and of all good men, I be also put forward, by
some provocation of just, and lawful glory; we shall be in the greater
authority with others, and consequently be able the more to assist the
Commonwealth. When I was with Brutu^, I could not see your son, because he was
then gone with the troops of horse to their assigned winter gua^ison^ But, that he
is so disposed, I ^weare unto you, I rejoice both for yours, and ^or his, but
especially for mine own sake. For I hold him in the est^eme of a Br^th^r,
because he is your son, and worthy of you. Farewell. From P^^ga: the 29. of
May.

Publius Lentulus son to Publius, Vice-quaestor, and Vice-praetor; to the
Consulls, Praetors, Tribunes, Senate, people, and Communaltie of Rome. Epist.
15.
DOlabella having by wicked means, oppressed Asia, I went into Macedonia, a
neighbor Province: and to the Guarisons of the Commonwealth, which Marcus
Brutus a renowned person, had under his government: and I sought to bring to
pass, that the province of Asia, and the impositions, might, by the means of
persons, which could easily per^orme it, be reduced within your authority.
Whereof Dolabell^, being very fearful: and after his sacking of the Province,
fingring the customs, but above all, most cruelly pillaging and selling all
the Roman citizens, he being so suddenly departed, that we could not in
time come up with our ^orc^s: it was not fit for me, to so^ourne there any
longer; or to expect supplies of soldiers. And I both thought it good ou^ of
hand to return unto my office, and to recover the remainder of the ^axations,
and to get in, that money which I had collected: and besides this, presently
to examine, wh^t sums had been seized on, and by whose negligence: that I
might absolutely in^forme you of ^he success thereof. In the mean while,
sailing amongst the Islands, which lay in my way to Asia, I being inform^d that
D^lab^ll's Nau^^ was in Lycia, and that the Rhodij had diverse ships furnished,
under sail, and in a readiness: with that shipping, which partly I brought
with me, and in part was gathered by Patiscus ^he vice Quaestor, (a person very
inward with me, both for the famil^aritie we have had together, and for the
affection we both jointly bear to ^he commonwealth,) I re^urned to Rhodes;
being confident i^ your au^horitie, and the Senates decree, by which you had
proclaimed D^labella for an enemy: and building upon the League, which Marcus
Marcellus, and Seruius Sulpitius being Consulls, was renewed with the ^hodij;
wherein they had taken oath, that they would esteem those enemies, which by
the Senate, and people of Rome were so reputed^ But we were much deceived. For,
they were so far from furnishing us with men, for the security of our Navy:
that even at the entry into the ^owne, at the Port, those habitations that
were without the City, denied our souldiers^ not only sustenance, but very
water: and we our selves, with one smal^ Bark, were scarcely en^ertained.
Which indignity, and disparagement of Majesty, not only to my place, but also
to the Empire and people of Rome, I for this cause digested; in that by
intercepted letters we understood, that Dolabella, being out of all hopes of
Syria, and Egypt, resolved (as necessarily must ^nsue) to embarque himself,
with all his thee^^sh followers, and with all the money, and so to com^ ^or
Italy And that, for this effect, the great Merchants ships also, of which,
there was none, that were of a lesser burden then two thousand Amphorae, that
were united in Lyci^, were laid for, by his Armada. ^oued (O conscript Fathers)
wi^h the fear here of; I the rather made choice to support these injuries:
and though with our disgrace, first, to attempt all other means. Wherefore,
being admitt^d into the Citt^e, and Senate, by their consent, I propounded the
cause of the Commonwealth, with as great vehemency, as I could: and set before
them, all the danger, which would ensue, if that Rebel should with his
associat's be ^mbarqued. But I (...) the Rhodij so perverse, that they thought
every one more loyal then those that really were so. Neither did they believe,
that there was such a concord, and union of all degrees, courageously to defend
Liberty: and were con^ident, that the Senate, and every honest man would as
yet be patient; and that it was not possible, that any man should dare to
denounce Dolabella ^or a rebel. Finally, whatsoever was ^alsely auer'd by
these knaves, they held more true, then in e^fect it was: or then that, which
we could beat into them Out of the same peruersitie also, before our
coming, and after Treb^nius was so unworthily murdered, and so many other
wicked actions; two Embassies of theirs went to Dolabella; and certainly,
without any presiden^, contrary to their laws, yea, and though they were
prohibited by their Magistrates. Whether they did these things for fear, as
they affirm of certain territories which they hold within the continen^, or
out of a bad intention, or through the ouerswaying power of some few; which had
also heretofore used the same vil^anie to renowned men; and being at this
present in highest dignities, would not by any example, either on your part, or
ours that were pr^sent, though easily they might, neither pr^uent our present
peril, nor that which menaced all Italy, and our city; if that Traitor
together with his th^^uish associates, being ^xpelled out of Asia, and Syria,
had there arrived. Some also were ^uspicious, that the said Magistrates, did
but entertain time, and delaie us, while Dolabella's Fleet might be
advertised of our coming. Which suspicion was the more confirmed, by some
particulars which succeeded; especially, because Se^tus Marius; and Caius
Titius, Dolab^lla's Legates departed suddenly out of Lyci^, from the Navy;
and in a Fust fled away. Leaving there, all the great ships: in preparation
and gathering of which, they had spent no small time, and labor. Wherefore, we
coming from Rh^des into Lycia with such shipping as we had; we took the great
ships and restord them to their owners, and freed our selves from the great
fear which possessed us, that Dolabella with his fellow rebels would have
made for Italy. The Navy which gat away, we pursued as far as Syda, which
is the uttermost lymit of my Province. There I understood, that one part of
Dolabella's shipping was fled; and another gone into Syria, and Cyprus. I
knowing that Caius Cassius, a famous Captain, and Citizen, was in Syria with
a great Fleet in readiness; re^urned to my charge: and will endeavor (O
conscript Fathers) to use for you, and for the Common wealth, all officious
care and diligence: and to recover those sums of money, with the greatest
possible expedition; and send them you, with all the accounts. When I have
run over my Province, and have notice, who have been faithful to us, and
the Commonwealth; in preserving the treasure by me laid up, and who those
wicked persons have been, that wilfully carried these public moneys to
Dolabella; I will thereof advertise you. Against whom, if you find it fitting,
rigorously to proceed according to their desert, affording me that
reputation, with your authority; I shall the more easily be able, both to
recover the remainder of the Customs, and to preserve it being recovered. In
the mean while, that I may the better hold the customs, and defend the
Province from insultat^o^s, I have dr^wen together, a necessary guard of men,
which offered themselves, o^ their own good will. When these le^ters were
written, there came into Pamphilia about thirty soldiers, that fled into
Syria, of those that Dolabella had entertained in Asia. These men brought
news, that Dolabella was gone to Antiochi^, which is in Syria, bu^ that he was
not there received; and striving diverse times to enter thereinto by force, he
was ever repulsed with disadvantage. So that loosing about an hundred men, and
leaving there diverse sick persons, he fled by night from Antiochia toward
Laodicea. And how in that might, all his Asiaticke soldiers left him: amongst
which some eight hundred returned to Antiochia, and yielded up themselves, to
those, which held that City for Cassius: the others by mount Ama^us, came
down into Cilicia: of which number, they likewise said they were. But, that it
was reported, that Cassius, with all his people was about four days journey
from Laodice^, when Dolabell^ went thither. For which cause, I assuredly hope
that this most wretched rebel will pay for his disloyalty sooner then is
expected. From Perga. The 2. of June.

Caius Trebonius to Cicero. Epist. 16.
I Arrived in Athens, the xxij of May, where to my infinite contentment I saw
your son dedicated to the noblest studies; and in great ^steeme for his
modesty. Wherein, what pleasure I took, you may understand without my telling
you. For you know well, how much I value you: and how greatly in respect of
our ancient and and sincere love, I rejoice at all your prosperities; much more
at this so great an happiness. Do not suppose, my Cicero, tha^ I deliver this
to you, to flatter you. Your youth, and therefore ours, (for I have nothing but
what is yours,) has above all others, won the hearts of eue^y man that lies
in Athens; and is more then any man studious of those virtues, which yo^
especially affect, and are most excellent. So that, in what I can truly
congratulate with you, I do it willingly; and no less with my self, then
you: that we find him, whom we must what so^uer he were, love of
necessity; to be of such condidition that we may love him wi^lingly.
Discoursing with me, he cast out a word, that he would see Asia; whereunto he
was no^ only by me invited, but entreated, that he would do i^; especially,
while I had the government thereof. And you may be assured, that I will use him
with that dear affection, that your self would. I will also take order, that
Cra^ipp^^ may come with him: to the end you may not think, that in Asia he
neglects those studies, whereunto you have exhorted him. I see him well
disposed, and far entered into a good way: nevertheless, I will not cease to
encourage him therein, to the end, that day by day learning, and exercising
himself, he may go forward. At the date of these, I knew not what was done
about the Common wealth I heard certain rumors, the which God grant, may be
false; that once we may enjoy a quiet liberty: which hitherto I never could.
Notwithstanding, in my Navigations, having found a little vacancy, I have
compounded a trifle, according to my manner, to present you with. And I have
collected together certain sayings, delivered by you, to my great honor,
which I have here under written. Wherein, if I seem unto you in some words a
little too free; excuse me, in that he, against whom I speak, is such an one,
as deserves worse, then I have spoken. Let me request you also to pardon our
choler, wc is but just, against such men and Citizens. And then, why should
Lucilius rather be permitted to take upon him this liberty, then my self?
Considering, that if the hatred he ba^e to them, of whom he spoke il, were
^quall to mine; yet were not they, more worthy then this man, with so great a
liberty of words, to be reproved. I look you should presently introduce me, a
speaker in your Dialogues, as you promised. And I am certain, that in w^iting
any thing of the death of Caesar; you will afford me, in that action, and your
own love, no little portion. Farewell: and let me recommend my mother, and all
mine unto you. From Athens; the 25. of May.

Cicero to Quintus Cornificius his Colleague. Ep. 17.
THe memoria^l you retain of me, is according as you signify in your
le^ters, beyond measure to me acceptable; and I entreat you to preserve it; not
that I any ways doubt the contrary, but because it is the custom, to be thus
^ollicitous. There Is news out of Syria, of certain tumults, which in that
they a^e nearer to you, then us, I am more so^rie for yours, then mine own
respects. Rome is in wonderful quiet: but it were far better, that it were
busied in some beneficial, and honoura^le ^rau^iles; which, I hope will be;
because I ^e^ Caesar has a desire th^reunto, Understand, that in your absence,
I e^d^e very boldly, because me thinks I may, you being absent: and among ma^y
thi^^^ which peradventure would no^ disl^k^ you, I have lately written of the
perfect form of speaking. Wherein, I thought many times, that you were
somewhat discrepant from my opinion; after that manner that a learned man uses
to dissent, from one, that is, unlearned. I would have you first, commend this
Book, for it own desert; and then, though you should think it deserves
nothing; yet to do me a pleasure. I will give it to your friends, to be
written out, that they may send it you. For I suppose, though you approve not
of the subject, yet finding your self now without employments, you will take
delight in every thing that comes from me. Whereas you recommend unto me your
dignity, and reputation, in this you follow the custom of others: but I
assure you, that besides, the great account I make of your friendship, I do so
estimate your virtuous studies, and understanding; and have so great hope, that
you will a^ise to eminent degrees of honor; as I prefer none before you, and
hold but few your equals. Farewell.

Cicero to Cornificius his Colleague. Epist. 18.
TO the last point of your last letters, I will first make answer, because I
have sometimes observed this custom in you that are great Orators^ you
complain that I write not unto you: and I ever wrote, when I heard by your
friends, that there was any opportunity. By your letters me thinks I
conceive, that you will do nothing but deliberately; and that you will not
resolve of any thing, before you understand, what will become of I know not
what Caecilius Bassus. The which I presupposed out of your prudence; and now,
your grave letters ratify as much. And I entreat you as earnestly as I can, ^o
write often to me: to the end I may understand what you do, and what is done,
as also what you mean to under take. Though at your departure from hence, I
was much grieved, to be deprived of your company: yet I was comforted through
hope, that you should go into great quietness, and remove your self from
affairs of moment, which were imminent. But the quite contrary has happened;
for, there you have war, and here we have peace: but such peace, as if you
were here, many things would disl^ke you: by which even Caesar himself is also
disgusted. For the end of c^uill war, is ever of this nature, that matters
are not carried according to the will of the Conqueror only, but they also
must be obeyed, by whose assistance the victory has been obtained. For my
part, I am now so accustomed hereunto, as in Caesar's sports I had the patience,
to behold Ti^us Plancus, and to hear the Poems of Publiu^, and Laberius. I
would have you know, that I want nothing more, then to have one by me, with
whom I might learnedly, and familiarly laugh at these things. You shall be the
man, if you come speedily: and this I suppose imports not only me, but your
self also. Farewell.

Cicero to Cornificius. Epist. 19.
I Most willingly read your letters, wh^rein I took great contentment,
perceiving that you had received mine. For I made no question, but you would
desi^o^sly peruse them: I only doubted of their delivery. By yours, I
understood, how Caes^r committed to you the war of Syria, and the gou^r^ment
thereof. I pray God, you may have good and happy success in that employment;
as I hope you shall, being confid^nt in your wisdom, and industry. But what
you write unto me, touching the suspicion of a Par^^ian wa^re, has much
disturbed me. Con^idering your strength, by what I gather from your letters,
and mine own conjecture. Wherefore I desire at this present, that the
Parthians may not stir, till those Legions are arrived, which must as I hear,
be brought unto you. And if you have not power enough to fight, fail not to
take the same course, wc was once taken by Marcus Bib^lus: who shut himself
within a well fortified, and very plentiful Town, so long as the Parthians
were with in the ^rouince. But you may better dispose of these things,
accordin^ to the time, and to th'occasio^^ I shall ever be pensive for you^
till I know wha^ h^th succeeded. I never hea^d of any mess^^ger that went to
you, bu^ I delivered him le^ters for you. I r^quest you to do ^^e like; and
above all, to writ^ v^^o your friends in such a manner, that they may conceive
me to be yours. Farewell.

Cicero to Cornificius his Colleague. Epist. 20.
YOur letters were very welcome to me, but that you disdained to lodge at the
little Inn at Sinv^ssa. But know, that, that little village will take it ill;
unless in Cumanum, and Pomp^^anum you reform the error you have committed.
Therefore do as I bid you, and let me have you to love me; and by writing
sometimes to me, inuit me to do the like. For I can more easily answer, then
provoke. But if you be negligent, as you begin; I will urge you: least your
lithe^n^sse, beget ignorance. More at more leisure. Th^se, I scribled in the
Senate. Farewell.

Cicero to Cornificius. Epist. 21.
Caius Anitius my familiar acquaintance, a well quallified person, comes into
Africa about his priua^e affairs, with a titular Embassy. I desire you would
assist him in every thing and procure, that he may dispatch his business, with
all possible conueniencie: and especially, which he much regardes, that he may
be honored, and respected according to his dignity. And I requ^st you that he
may have Lictors alo^ted him. Which in my Province, I ever allowed to all
Senators, without entreatie; having had frequent presidents thereof by men of
greatest account, upon mine own knowledge, and other men's relation. Therefore,
my Cornificius, let this be done. And in all other occurren^s, as you love me,
have a care of his honor, and occasions: for you cannot do me a greater
pleasure. Be careful of your health. Farewell.

Cicero to Cornificius. Epist. 22.
HEre, we have war, with Antonius our swaggering Colleague, a man beyond all
other, ^ost outrageous: but not upon ^quall conditions: For we, use words, he
arms. He speaks ill also of you to the people; but he shall not go so away
with it: for, he shall be made to know, whom he has iniuried. I suppose others
have written the news past unto you. But expect from me what comes hereafter,
which may easily be presaged. Every thing bends to ruin. Good men have no
Head. And they who sl^w the Tyrant, are in remote Countries. P^nsa is well
inclined, and speaks courageously. Our Hirtius is slack in the recovery of
himself. What will ensue I certainly know not: one hope remains, that the
people of Rome will once be like their predec^ssors I will not surely be
wanting unto the Commonwealth, and I, wha^soeuer ha^pens, wherein I am
innocent, will with a constant mind support it: and above all I will defend
your fame, and reputation. The xx. of September, in a fu^l S^nate, I passed a
decree, as well about other important matters, as also of this; that the
Provinces should remain to those that were in government, and be assign^d over
to none, but to such as should be sent thither by the Senates o^der. It is
true, that I p^opounded this cours^, for the respects of the Commonwealth; bu^
questionless, more for the preservation of your dignity. Wh^refore I entreat
you, out of our am^^i^, and exhort you for the Common wealths cause, that you
will not suffer any man, to take upon him any authority in your Province: and
that you will ever make honor your object; before which, nothing should be
preferred. I speak to you freely, as our inward friendship requires. Touching
Sempronius, if you had carried your self according to my letters, you would
have purchased great esteem with every man. But this is past, neither is it of
any great mome^^. What I will now tell you, much more imports. Be sure to
retain the Province, under the power of the Commonwealth. I would have
written more copiously, but that your men were in have: therefore excuse me to
our Cherippus. Farewell.

Cicero to Co^^ificius. Epist. 23.
STraetorius gave me ample information, both of the state of your Province, and
of the form you observe in governing it. Oh, what a number of intolerable
things are committed every where! But, by ho^ much the mo^e eminent your place
is, by so much the less, should you have digested those matters which happened
to you. For, though the indig^ities, which you support out of the greatness of
your mind and understanding, are not such, as you should take them deeply to
heart; ^et should you not omit, to revenge them. B^t of these things another
time. I know undoubtedly, that you are informed of the daily occurrents of the
City: and if I did not imagine it, I would write thereof my self unto you:
and I would also write of all the attempts of Caesar Octa^ianus; and how the
Vulgar believes, that Antonius has charged him wrongfully; that he might,
with violence, take the young man's treasure from him. But wise men, and of good
disposition, hold the matter for truth, and allow thereof. What should I say
more? There is great hope in him. It Is thought he will enter into any
enterprise, that may procure him praise and glory. But Antonius, our familiar
friend, observes himself to be so generally hated, as having ^urprized them in
his house, who meant to kill him, he d^res not discover them. The ix. of
October he went to Brundusium, to meet with the four Legions, that returned
out of Macedonia: being perswad^d, that with money, he could have won them to
his direction, and so conduct them to Rome, to bridle us here, and hold us in
servitude. This is, as it were, a model of the Commonwealth; if it be any
Commonwealth at all, where all matters are carried by Arms, and Soldiers. And
I am much vexed, to think, that you could not for years, relish the
Commonwealth, in a time, when it was entire, and out of danger: and yet in
former times, there was some hope: but now, even hope it self is taken away.
And what hope can there be? seeing Antonius durst tell the people, that
Canutius sought to obtain their favor, who could not, with his safety, be
permitted to remain within the City. For mine own part, I patiently endure
(thanks to Philosophy) these, and all things else, which are incident to man.
For, she does not only free me from grief, but also arms me, against all
the assaults of Fortune. And I advise you to do the like, and to make nothing
in the number of evils, wherein your self have had no hand. In which point I
will no further extend my self, because I will not speak of those things wc
you know better then my self. Our Str^torius ever gave me content; but now, I
am urged to love him, more then hitherto; perceiving that in your occasions, no
man could have used greater diligence, or have been more circumspect. Have a
care of your health: for herein you shall do me an unspeakable pleasure.

Cicero to Cornificius. Epist. 24.
IN every occasion, which presents it self, of honoring or assisting you, I
discharge those offices, I owe unto you: as you shall understand by your
friends letters; to which I refer my self But yet I cannot for^eare to
exho^t you, to be very careful of the Commonwealth. This is an action, worthy
of your courage, of your understanding, and of that hope, which you ough^ to
nourish, of augmenting your ow^e dignities Bu^ to this purpose, another time, I
will discourse with you more at l^rge; for at the writing of this, there was
nothing certain. The Ambassadou^s we^e not yet returned, which the Senate
sent, not to entreat Antonius for peace, but to put him in mind of war, if he
yielded not to the Ambassadors wo^ds. I neuerthel^sse, so soon as I had any
opportunity, according to my wo^ted custo^e, defended the Commonwealth, and
off^^ed my self, as head unto the S^nate, and people of Rome. And after I
embraced the cause, I ever defended safety, and common liberty. But my desire
is, you should also understand this by other men's letters. I recommend unto
you, Titus Pinarius, my special friend, and I recommend him with all
efficacy. I love him exceedingly, both because he is ado^ned with all virtues,
and in that he is delighted in our studies. He is Agent for our Dionysius, who
by you is much, but by my self, infinitely beloved. And therefore, though I
know it superfluous; yet I commend his affairs unto you, entrea^ing you to
have such a care thereof, as by the letters of Pinariu^, who will b^e very
gratefu^l, we may evidently vnde^stand, that you have been favorable, both
to him, and Dionysius. Farewell.

Cicero to Cornificius. Epist. 25.
ON the feasts of Ba^^^us, I received your l^tters, whi^^ Cornificius told me
he delivered, two and twenty days after the receipt. Ther^ was no Senate that
day, ^or the day following. The day of M^n^rua, in full Senate I handled your
cause: and it seemed, Min^rua herself, that day favored me. For the Senat^
(...) ^he self same day^ that I pl^aded for you, ordained, that the Statue of
Minerua, which I had set up in the Capitol, with this inscription, Custos
vrbis, and was by a gust of wind blown down; should be again erected. Pansa
recited your letters. The Senate approved highly of the matter, with much
alacrity, to the grief of Minotaurus, that is of Clauisius, and Ta^rus, and
an honorable decree was passed in your favor. There were some, which demanded,
that some disgrace might have been imposed upon them. But Pansa would needs
use all cl^mencie. I, my Cornificius, the first day, that ever I conceived hope
of liberty, the xx. of December, while others lingered, laid the foundations
of the Commonwealth. That very day I labored much, and wrought effectually
in the promotion of your dignity. For the Senate granted me, that the
government of the Provinces should not be altered: and ye^ I ceased not
afterward, to beat down, and impugn him, that with great scorn to the
Commonwealth, and injury to you held, being absent, this Province. So that,
exclaiming, and crying out upon him daily, I procured, that, whether he would,
or no, he betook ^im to the City, and was not only thrust out of the hope,
but the pr^sent security, and possession of his Province. I am very glad,
that for matters, which I d^seruedly, and most justly spoke against him, you
have by your sufficiency preserved your own honor, and that you have been
dignified with the greatest honors of the Province. Whereas you purge
yourselfe toward me, concerning Sempronius, I except of the excuse you make.
For, that was a kind of season, when it was requisite to live after another
man's humor. Now you must understand, that I, who was wont to counsel, and
favor you, being angry with the times, despairing of liberty, went presently
into Greece: but the Northern winds, like good Citizens, being displeased,
that I should abandon my Country, would not follow me; and those of the South,
blowing forcibly a contrary course, brought me back to Rhegium; that is,
amongst your kindred: and from thence being assisted with wind, and oars, in
great have I came into my Country. Where, the day following, in the Senate,
whereas others were in great servitude, I only was free; and spoke in such a
mann^r against An^onius, as he was not able to endure: but wi^h that drunken
fury of his, opposed himself against me. And se^king to shed blood, he did
not only desire, that some provocation wo^ld proceed from me; but also laid,
to y^ end, snares. This man belching, as it were, and vomiting, was by me so
repelled, that he lay open to the blows of C^sar Octauianus. ^or, the generous
young man, first to guard himself, and then for the interest of the
Commonwealth, has gotten forces togethe^. Which if he had not done, the
return of Antonius from B^u^dusium, would have been a plague to our Country.
I suppose you know, what afterward ensued. But to return, where I left, I
accept of your excuse for Sempronius. Then, in so great an hurly-burly, you
could not resolve of any thing. Now, the time permi^s, that we may live after
any other fashion, and that other cust^m^s may be embraced, as Terentius
speaks. Wherefore, my Quintus, enter with us into the same ship, and come up
to the stern. There Is now but one ship, fraught with all good men, which I
endeavor ^o keep from swaruing; God grant, with a prosperous course; bu^ what
wind^s so^uer blow, my skill shall never be wanting: And what can ver^ue
further effect? As for your occasions, be of a noble and haughty courage: and
be resolved, that all your honor must stand with the safety of the
Commonwealth. I will effectually wherein I can, favor Pub^ius Luc^^^us. And
i^ was not needful y^u should ^ecommend him: he being most dea^e unto me. We
have too much out of season lost Hir^us, and Pansa, our Colleagues, most
b^neficiall members to the Commonwealth, in their Consulships. For, though in
respect of that Rebel Ant^nius, the Commonwealth is secure; yet is she not
absolu^ely rid of molestation^ I will defend her, according to my custom, if
no accident hinder m^e: Though at this instant I am v^ry w^ary. But no
defatigation shall have power ^o far ou^r me, as to make me fail in offices,
or fidelity. And to this purpose, let these suffice^ I will write nothing to
you of my self; I leave that for you to understand from othe^s. We had
certain informations of you, which I would they were true. Of Cneius Minutius,
whom in certa^n^ letters you ex^old to the heavens, some h^rd reports are
dispersed; of which, as also of the proceedings in these parts, I desire to
hear from you the certainty. Farewell.

Cicero to Cornificius. Epist. 26.
QVintus Turius, who has negotiated in Africa, an honest man, and of a good
family, made his heirs, Cneius Saturninus, Sextus Aufidius, Cneius Ann^ius,
Quintus C^nsidius Gallus, Lucius Seruilius Posthumus, and Caiu^ Rubellinus, men
like unto himself. By their speech I conceived, that I was more bound to
thank you, for that you had done for them; then to commend them unto you. For
they so highly extol your generous disposition, and the courtesy, which I
saw you had afforded them, that I dare not further en^reat you. Nevertheless I
will presume, knowing of what power my recomendation is with you. And
therefore, I request you, that the same favor you showed him without my
letters, you will for their respect, afford it him more plentifully. And of my
recommendation the substance is this; that you will not permit, that Erotes
Furius, Freeman to Quintus Furius, usurp the inheritance of Furius, as
hithe^to he has done. And, that for my sake, you will make special esteem of
them in all other occurrents. Wherein, you will receive great contentme^t, both
for their eminency, and in respect of their observance toward you. And herein
I entreat you as earnestly as I am able. Farewell.

Cicero to Cornificius. Epist. 27.
S^xtus Aufidius observes me after such a sort, as I am not more honored by any
of my kindred. And so magnificent he is, that in this point no Roman Knight
is his Superior. Then is he of such a temperate, and mild behavior, that in
him, singular gravity, concurs with affability. I commend unto you his
businesses in Africa, with such sinceri^ie, and so heartily, as they possibly
can be recommended. You shall highly favor me, in doing your endeavor, to
let him understand, that my letters were of great authority with you. And this
is my maine request, dear Cornificius. Farewell.

Cicero to Cornificius. Epist. 28.
I Am also of your opinion, that they, who as you write, threatened Lilybaeum,
deserved there to be punished. But you are afraid, as you say, to seem too
forward in your chastizements: and ^herfore you were affrayd, ^o app^are a
grau^, and courageous Citizen: or such an one, as is worthy to be your self.
I like it well, that you renew our league in the preservation of the
Commonwealth, which you enterteined with me, as an inheritance from your
father. Which society, my Cornificius, shall always continue amongst us: I am
also well pleased, that you are of opinion, that you need not thank me in your
own behalf. For betwixt us, this office is sup^rfluous. The Senate should
often be sollici^ed about your dignity, but that in absence of the Consulls,
they are never assembled, except upon some new occurrents. And therefore by ^he
Senate there is nothing to be done at this present, either about those six
hund^ed Crowns, or about those twenty one thousand. And therefore I am of
opinion, that you must impose taxations, and take up at interest. Concerning
the state of the commonwealth, I suppose you are advertised by their let^ers,
who usually write unto you, of the occurren^s of Rome. I am in good hope. And I
am not wanting to my country, with my council, care, or endeavor. To the
enemies of the Commonwealth, I show my self a capital enemy. Matters
appear to me, to be in good state; and would be far better, if some men were
not culpable. Farewell.

Cicero to Cornificius. Ep. 29.
I Think there is not a man amongst the people of Rome, (much less you who
knows all my occasions,) tha^ conceiues not, what familiarity I retain with
Lucius Lamia: For it was manifested to all Rome, at the same time, when by
Aulus Gabinius the Consul he was confined, because valiantly, and freely he
had defended my safety; Neither did our love grow only from this; but from an
affection which was great, and of long continuance. Whereupon he refused not
to undergo any danger upon mine occasion. To which offices, or rather
deserts, so pleasing a conversation is to be added, that there is no man with
whom I ought to be more delighted. Now the reason of so special love being
made manifest unto you; I imagine you look not with what words I recommend
him. I would have you know thus much only, that if you defend Lamia's
occasions, his agents, his Freemen, and his very slaves, wherein it shall be
requisite; it shall more satisfy me, then if you had vouchsafed me this
courtesy, in defense of mine own proper substance, and interest's. And I m^ke
no doubt, but without my recommendation, your judgment of men is such, that
for Lamia's own sake, you will do any thing very willingly. Although 'twas
said, that you were persuaded, that he was present, at the recording of a
decree of the Senate, made in prejudice of your honor: whereas he was never
present at the passing of any decree, under those Consulls. And besides this,
all the decrees that then came from the Senate were false. Except you also,
bele^ue, that my self was p^esent at that decree of Sempronius: when at the
same instant I was not in Rome; as I wrote unto you, when the matter was fresh
in memory. But of this, hitherto. I request you, my Cornificius, with the
greatest efficacy I am able, that you will verily believe, that all Lamia^s
negotiations are mine own: and take order that he may perceive, that this my
recommendation has been very useful to him. You cannot do me a greater
favor. Be careful of your health. Farewell.

Cicero to Cornificius. Epist. 30.
Do I then write to you for none, but such as are contentious? And though this
be true, yet you cannot say, but I write often to you. For you have used the
matter so, that no man thinks he can obtain your favor without my letters.
But which of your men ever told me, that he came from thence as a messenger, by
whom I have not written back again? Or else, being denied to talk with you
face to face, what greater recreation do I find, then either in writing to
you, or reading your letters? I am rather grieved, that I am hindered by so many
employments, that I have no conueniencie to write unto you, as often as I
would. For then I would invite you not with Epistles, but with whole volumes:
with which in all reason you should provoke me. For though you are employed;
neuerthel^sse, you have more leisure then I. If you have no time to spare, be
not so shameless, and troublesome in importuning me, to write often to you;
considering that you write so seldom to me. For if heretofore I have been
encumbred with many occupations, (for I was busied in defending the
Commonwealth with all care;) much more am ^ at this present. For even as they
are more grievously sick, who seeming to be cu^'d of a malady, are relapsed:
so do we feel far greater disturbance, being enforced to war anew, when
we thought the war was almost finished. But thus much may suffice for these
things. You, my Cornificius, labor to persuade your self, that I am not of so
weak an affection, not to say inhumaine; as that I can be out-gone by you,
either in love, or courtesy. In truth I no ways doubted of your love; and yet
C^erippus has made it me much more manifest. Oh what a man is this! I always
took him to be fit for my conversation; but now I apprehend him to be
delightsome. As I live, he has not only revealed your mind unto me, with your
own words, but with your gesture also. So as, do not fear, that I am
offended with you, because you wrote unto me in the self same form, as you
wrote unto others. True it is, I was desirous you should write unto me in
another fashion then you wrote to others: but this I did, rather excited by
love, then choler. Touching the charge, you say you are, and have bin at, in
respect of the war; verily, I cannot ease you. For besides that the Senate by
the death of the Consulls, remains, as it were, without a guide; and there is
no way to raise any prou^sion; you would not believe into what distr^sse of
moneys the public treasure is brought; which is, on all sides exhausted, to
discharge the pays of ^he best deserving soldiers, which in my opinion can
never be wholly discharged, without some new imposi^ions. Of Accius Dionysius,
I think there is no news, in that Siratorius told me nothing of him. For
Publius Lucceius, I grant not, that you should better affect, then my self:
for, he is my bosom friend: but urging the Tole-masters, that they should
prolong his time; they made me apparently conc^iue, that they could not do
it, by the protestation, and oath, that they had taken. Wherefore I would
advise Lucc^ius to come home. Though, if he have followed the advice of my
letters, by that time you read these, he should be at Rome. Of other things,
especially of money, you not knowing of Pa^sa's death, have written, what you
supposed you might have obtained by my means. Wherein you should not have
failed, if he had lived; for, he loved you: but being dead, I see no means how
to give you contentment. About Venuleius, Latinus, and Hora^ius, in my judgment
you have done exceeding well. But yet this likes me not ouer-well, that you
write, you have dismissed the Lictors of your own Legates, to the end that
they might have less cause to complain. For your Legates, being men that
deserve honor: you should not value them with base fellows. And I am of
opinion, that not by any authority of the Senates decree, but by maine
violence, you have enforced their departure. This in brief, is an answer, to
the two letters I received from you, of one tenor. I have nothing else to
deliver unto you, but that your honor shall be as dear unto me, as mine own.
Farewell.

THE THIRTEENTH BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Cicero to Caius Memmius. Epist. 1.
THough I was not sufficiently assured, whither it would be somewhat
troublesome, or pleasing to me to see you in Athens: by reason that the
injury you have received, would have molested me; and the wisdom by which
you suffer it, have yielded me contentment; yet, I would rather, I could see
you, then oth^rw^se. For the molest^tion I ^eele, is not much abated, when I
see you not: and that l^^tl^ content that we could have had, would
questionless have bin gre^t^r, ^f I h^d seen you. Wh^refore I dete^mine to
take any course that I may see you, when I may do it conuenien^ly. In the
mean while I will handle that, wc I may both treat with you of by letters, and
as I hope, conclude of. Now, the first thing I request of you, is; that you
will do nothing in ^he behalf of my dignity, against your own liking. But,
if you think you shall do it willingly; then let me requ^st you to do that,
which I am to require of you; especially being such, as highly concerns me,
and is to you, no way prejudicial. Patro Epicureus, is wholly mine, and I his:
saving that in Philosophy I greatly differ from him. But both in the
beginning, when at Rome he observed you, and yours, he honored me above all
others: and lastly, when about his benefits and rewards, he obtained those
things which he desired, he prevailed more by my means, then by any other
defender, or friend he had: and besides this, he was commended unto me by
Phaedrus: who, when I was a child, before I knew Philo, I much esteemed as a
Philosopher, and afterward, notwithstanding [our difference of opinions] as an
honest man, very facete, and officious. Now, this Patro having written to me
at Rome, that I would procure him your favor: and request you to grant him
certain ruins of the house that belonged to Epicurus: I wrote nothing to you
thereof; because I was not willing, that your d^signe of building, should be
hindered, by my reco^mendation. The same party, when I came to Athens,
entreating me once more to write unto you, about the same matter; obtained his
request upon this occasion; in that amongst your friends, it was verily
thought; that you had given over that determination of building. And if it be
so: and that now you make no reckoning of it: my desire is, that, if you by
other men's peruersitie have been a^y ways provoked (for I know the condition
of that people) you would pacify your mind, by doing something which may be
either answerable to your courteous disposition, or ^ending unto my grace, and
honor. I for mine own part (if you will have me tell you my opinion) do not
perceive, why either he should be so impo^tunate; or you so unwilling to
grant it: except it may be far less allowed in you, ^o regard so
co^temptible a matter, then in him to crave it. Although I am sure you
understand, both with what words Patro excuses himself, and upon what he
grounds. He says, he cannot herein neglect his reputation; the Testament,
and authority of Epicurus; the ^arnest entreaties of Phaedrus: and that he is
engaged, to maintain that place, where famous men frequented, inhabited, and
conuersed. If we should reject this his instant importunity, we must needs
deride his whole course of life, and the profession he makes of Philosophy.
But because we are neither enemies to him, nor to others of that Sect; I am of
opinion, that he is excusable, though he be herein so deeply touched. Wherein,
if he offend it is rather out of folly, then malice. But not to be ouer-long,
(for I must at length utter it,) I love Pomponius Atticus as a brother. I have
not a dearer, nor more acceptabl^ friend then himself. This man, not because
he is of their Sect (for he is adorned, and complete in all those sciences,
that are befitting a Gentleman) but, in that he wi^heth well to Patro, and
loves Phaedrus exceedingly: has been so wondrous earnest with me herein. And,
though he be a man, that is not moved to do these offices, out of ambition;
neither uses to be ouer-burdensome in his requests, yet he never required any
thing of me more eff^ctuallie. And he assures himself, that I may obtain this
favor from you, with a beck only; yea, though you had a mind to build
there. But when he shall understand, that you have given over your intention of
building; and (yet for all this,) that I was not by you herein satisfied; he
will not suppose, that you were to me discourteous; but that I in his occasions
have bin careless. And therefore I entreat you to write to your friends, that
you are content, that the same decree of the Senate about the Areopagitae,
which they call a certain monument, should be disanulled. But to return to
our beginning: before you do this, I would have you resolve in mind to do it
willingly. Conceive therefore, that in showing me this favor, you shall do me
a very acceptable pleasure. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Memmius. Epist. 2.
I Have great acquaintance with Caius Auianus Euander, who dwells in your
Sanctuary; and greater, with Marcus Aemilius his Patron. I request you
therefore as earnestly as may be, that if you may grant it without your own
discommoditie, that you will accommodate him with a place of residence.
Because, for the multitude of business, which he has for many undertaken, he
will be much hindered by his sudden remove upon the calends of Iulie. I am
ashamed to use much entreatie: but, I make no doubt, being little or nothing at
all prejudicial to you, you will deal with me, as I should do with you, if
you demanded at my hands any courtesy. I assure you, it will give me very
singular contentment, Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Memmius. Epist. 3.
AVlus Fusius, besides, that he is one of my most intimate friends, and shows
me a great honor, and affection^ is further, a very learned and courteous
gentleman, and very worthy of your friendship. I desire you would use that
humanity toward him, which you promised me, at our last meeting. It shall
give me wondrous great satisfaction. For, I shall be infinitely well pleased,
and him you shall oblige, eternally, to be ready at your command in all
occurrents. Farewell.

Cicero to Quintus Valerius Orca, son to Quintus, Legate: Vice-Praet^r. Epist.
4.
THe V^laterrani, are my very kind friends. For I having conferred upon them a
benefit o^ note, they have returned me an ample gratuitie; considering that
they never left me, either in prosperity, or in misery. With whom, though I
had nothing to do; yet, because I love you entirely, and that I know you have
much honored me, I would put you in mind, and ^xhort you, to retain them so
in your recommendation, that their poss^ssions may not be confiscated:
especially having more reason to be heard then others. First, because they
shunned the cruelty of Sylla's times, through the benignity of ^he gods
immortal. And then, because with the great favor of the people of R^me in my
Consulship they they were by me defended. For the Tribunes of the people having
enacted a most wicked law ^ou^hing their lands, I easily persuaded the
Senate, and people of R^me, that they would have some respect to those
Citizens, whom Fortune as it were through compassion, had preserved. And this
my opinion, was approved, and confirmed by Caius C^sar, in his first
Consulship, when he renewed the law about possessions. Whereupon the County of
Volaterra, and the town, was by him perpetually freed from all encumbrance.
So as, I may be secure, that he, who was pleased to purchase new friends, would
continue his old benefits. And therefore, it befits your prudence, either to
follow his authority; whose part, and government you followed, with great
reputation; or at least to reseru^ unto him, the entire business. But
certainly, you shall do well, to make a firm resolution to oblige
perpetually unto your self so worthy, so mighty, and so noble a City, by so
great a benefit. But, what I have formerly written was to exhort, and advise
you; what follows; to entreat you: To conceive that I do not only council you
for your own benefit: but that I have also occasion to entreat, and seek unto
you. I therefore give you to understand, that you shall do me, a singular
pleasure, if you procure, that the Volaterrani may not in any respect be
ouerborne, or damni^ied. I commend their whole estates, Fortunes, and aff^ires;
to your fidelity, equity, and bounty: as having, both by the immortal gods,
and by renowned-cittizens of our Commonwealth, with the special favor of the
Senate, and the Roman people been preseru^d. And, if I, as I was wont, had
now, the means to defend the Volaterrani, in that manner as I used to assist
my friends: I would omit no office, vneffected ^or their benefit. And brie^ly,
I would refuse no cont^station in their behalf, and favor. But seeing I am
confident, I shall now prevail no less with you, then I have always done
with every man; by that inward amity, we hold together, and by that love we
mutually bea^e one another, I entreat you in favor, that you will vouchsafe
to use toward the Volaterrani, that humanity, and courtesy, as they may
judge this dispatch, to have been committed, as it were by divine providence,
to a person, whom I, their perp^tuall defender, was able more to dispose of,
then of any other. Farewell.

Cicero to Quintus Valerius Orca, son to Quintus Legat^: Vice-Praetor. Epist.
5.
I Am not sorry, that the near friendship I entertain with you, is known to
many: nor yet do I forbid you, as you may suppose, that in this office, which
by Caesar was imposed upon you; and is weighty, and difficult; ^ou should not
carry your self, as is required, both for your fidelity, and diligence,
according to his pleasure. For, though diverse seek unto me, for sundry
favors, because they assure themselves of your affection toward me: yet will
I not interrupt the course of your Office. With Caius Cur^ius, from my younger
years, I have had special familiarity. He compl^i^ed unto me of the great
damage he most unjustly suffer^d in the time of Sylla. And thinking, that they
who run into these mis^ortunes, might be permitted by ^uery ones cons^nt,
having lost all their substance, a^ l^a^t to re^urne into their country; I
helped him to obt^ine this favor He has in the territories of Volat^rra, a
possession, whither he had conveyed all the relics of his Fortunes,
redeemed, as it were from ship-wracke. Now, at this time, Caesar has created
him Senator; which dignity, if he loose ^his possession, he can hardly
support. It would be strange, that being exalted to an higher degree of honor,
he should fall into baser Fortunes. And there is no reason, that the same
po^^ession, which by Caesar's commis^ion is to be divided, should be taken from
him, who by Caesar's benefit is made a Senator. But I will not make the equity
of his cause to be my plea. To the end it may not appear, that you have
rather contented me in observing of justice, then doing me a kindenes.
Wherefore ^ very earnestly entreat you, to suppose, that the goods of C^ius
Curtius are mine own: and what you would do for my sake, if you perform it
for Caius Cur^ius, esteem it as done unto my self. But if he obtaines any
thing by my means, make your account, that you, are the man by whom I have
obtained it. An^ hee^ein I must seriously solicit your perfo^mance. Farewell.

Cicero to Quintus V^l^rius Orca, son to Quin^us vic^-Con^ull. Epist. 6.
I hope you are in good health, as I am. I suppose you remember how, in the
presence of Cuspius, I talked with you, when I accompanied you in your
departure toward your Province. And afterward about the same matter, I
re^soned with you, more at large requesting, that whatso^uer friends of h^s I
commend unto you, you would esteem them in the number of mine own: ^he which
out of your infi^ite good will, and love you promised me. Cuspius a very
officious man to all his friends, with wonderful feruencie, favors and loves,
certain men of this Province; because he has been twice in Africa, with
charge to dispatch important businesses of the Tax-masters. And, I am wont to
assist, as much as my power, and favor will permit me, his courtesy toward
them. Wherefore I have thought good, to manifest unto you in this Epistle, the
cause, why I recommend unto you, all the Cuspians. In other letters, I will
only put that mark, or token, that we have agreed upon; and withal, I will
signify unto you, that he is one of the friends of Cuspius. But conceive,
that this commendation of mine; by reason whereof I wrote you this present
letter, is so full of affection, that no man can devise, to use more fe^uencie
therein. For Cuspius in deep passion, has constrained me most carefully to
recommend unto you Lucius Julius. Which office though I should perform, after
the same manner as I was wont, when any thing was effectually required at my
hands; yet I think 'twere impossible to be answerable to the desire o^
Cuspius. He would have me take a new course: and imagines that I can herein
use, a certain artificial manner. I have p^omised him, that out of the
secretest cabinets of our Art, I will extract an admirable form of
recommendation. Which if I do nor perform; endeavor you; that by the effect, he
may he may belee^e [at least], that I have served his turn with letters full
of unusual Art, and motives. This will be done, if you show him all mann^r of
courtesy, that either your nobility moves you to, or by your authority is
permitted you; not only in action, bu^ also in words, and breefly, with your
^^ry co^ntenance. Which things, how much they prevail in a Province, I would
you had once put in practice. Nevertheless I hold opinion, that the man I
commend unto you, is very worthy of your friendship. And, believe it; not only
because Cuspius affirm^s as much unto me; though this might suffice: but in
that I know, he can censure of men, and has judgment in the election of his
friends. In a word I shall be enform'd of what force these letters were with
you; and as I hope, I shall have occasion to thank you. And in the mean
while, in any thing wherein I think you would be glad that I should use mine
endeavor, I will not fail withal effectual diligence, to employ it. Respect
your health.

PV^lius Cornelius the bearer hee^^of, was commended unto me by P^blius
Cuspi^s, to whom both on^ o^ love, and obligation, how much I desire to give
all satisfaction, by what is written, may be gathered. My especial request is,
that from this recommendation, I may out of hand receive the greatest, and most
frequent thanks that po^sible can be given me by Cuspius.

Cic^ro to Caius Clu^ius. Epist. 7.
WHen, upon your departure for Gallia, moved by our interchanged affection, and
the great respect you bear me; you came home to visit me. I spoke with you
about the A^ellani, who pay tribute for that part of their County which lies
in Gallia; intimating unto you, how nearly I was touched with their
interest's. And after your departure, the matter being such, as it mainly
imported a town of that worth, and which I so much esteemed; being confident
in your good inclination toward me, I thought my self obliged, to write unto
you thero^ with all possible diligence. Though I am not ignorant, either of the
condition of the times, or of your power. And I understand but too well, that
the charge y^ was given you by Caius Caesar was not to judge, but to execute.
Wherefore I request you, to do only so much, as I think you can, and will for
my cause willingly. And, first I would have you to conceive it to be true: that
all the business of this town or Incorporation is, that there maine interest
lies in this County which paies tribute: and now, through the burdensome
impositions it has endured, it is ^alne into extreme poverty. Which
inconvenience, though it appears that many other have equally suffered:
nevertheless I assure you, that this town in particular, has suffered mo^^
then other. Which I forbear to re^^^e unto you, least in complaining of my
friends miseries, I may seem to distaste those persons, whom unwillingly I
would. Wherefore, were I not confident in my hopes, that I can manifest unto
Caesar, how that town undeservedly, was ouercharg'd with such a burden: I
would never have solicited you, upon this occasion. But because I am assur^d,
and persuaded, that he will have respect unto the worth of the Town; to the
equi^ie; and also to the good affection, the inhabitants thereof bear toward
him: I thought good, to request and entreat you, that you will reserve this
cause to him to be dispatched. Which though I would not forbear to entreat of
you, though I had not heard that you ever granted so much before: yet I
entertain more lively hopes of obtaining it, seeing 'twas told me, how the
Rhegienses had obtained from you the selfsame favor. Who, though they be
linked in friendship with you, yet your love toward me, bids me hope, that
what courtesies you have done for your own, you will also perform for mine
acquaintance. Especially considering, that, having many friends, which would
sue for the like at your hands by my means; I request this kindenes only, for
these men. And though I assure my self, you understand, that I discharge not
this office, without cause; and that no vain ambition has tickled me on with
so great instance, to solicit you; yet would I have you give credit to my
sincere speeches, that I am to this town much obliged: it having ever; as well
in time of my prosperities, as disasters, made known their singular affection
to me. Wherefore, in respect of the viscerall amity we hold together, and for
that great loves sake which you have ever borne me, I do in the greatest
earnest I am able entreat you, that you, considering, that the estate of ^
whole Town is here handled; which is near unto me both in friendshipp^
office, and affection, will be pleased, to gratify me. And we shall so value
your favor, if we obtain from Caesar, as, our expected grace, we shall
repute it granted, by your benefit: if otherwise; we shall notwithstanding
remain in the same obligation; in that you labored to procure it us. And
besides the singular pleasure, you shall do me thereby: you shall by means of
such an important favor, further oblige unto yours^lfe, most bountiful, noble,
and most grateful citizens; and such, as shall be worthy of your friendship:
of whom you may always make any use, either in your own, or friends
occasions. Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Rutilius. Epist. 8.
BEing a sufficient testimony to my self, of the respect that I owe you; and
having by experience made trial of the love that you bear me; I have had the
boldness to requ^st a favor, as much importing me, as it was necessary for
me, to require it of you. What esteem I make of Publius Sextius; there is no
man knows better ^hen my self: and how much I ought to esteem him, you, and
all men can imagine. Having heard from others, how well you stand affected to
me; he requested me, that I would write unto you with all possible efficacy,
about the business of Ca^us Albinus the Senator: by whose daughter the same
Publiu^ Sextius had, that virtuous young man, Lucius. This therefore I have
written unto you, to the end you may apprehend, that not only I, am bound to
have a care of Publius Sextius; but Sextius of Albinus. Now the business is
this, Caius Albinus received in payments, certain Farms of Marcus Laberius,
at the prises they were valued at; which Farms Laberius bought of Caes^r,
being part of the estate of Plotius. If I should say, that i^ would not be
profi^able for the Commonwealth, that they should be divided: it might seem
that I did not entreat, but instruct you. But it being Caesar's pleasure, that
the sales, and assignements made by Sylla should stand good: to the end that
his, might be thought more durable: if the same Farms be diuyded, which Caesar
himself has sold, what security can there be in his sales? But how much
this point imports, let your wisdom consider. I request you, and request you
after such a manner, that with greater affection, iuster cause, and hartier
desire I cannot request you; that you would have respect unto Albinus, and not
meddle with those Farms, once in possession of Laberius. For it will not be
only a joy unto me, but after a sort a glory also; if Publius Sextius, to
whom I am so deeply engaged, can by my means give to so near a ^riend, and
kinsman satisfaction. This therefore, I double entreat you to effect: for you
cannot do me a greater pleasure; and you shall find it to be unto me most
acceptable. Farewell.

Cicero to Cra^sipes. Epist. 9.
THough with the greatest care I could, and by word of mouth, I commended unto
you, the Taxe^^asters of Bithynia; and knew, that both in respect of my
commendation, and also of your own freewill you were desirous in all things
that lay within the limits of your power, to show them favor. Nevertheless, I
was willing to write these unto you: because they, whose interests are trea^ed
of; supposed, that if I did also by letters declare unto you, how I stood
addicted to them; it would greatly further their occa^ions. For I would have
you to conceive, that having ever willingly made demonstration, that I
generally bare no small affection to the Publicans, and customers, as I stood
bound to do, by the great deserts of that Order; I am in particular a friend,
to that company, which receives the customs of Bithynia. Which company, both
for the place they have, and for the quality of the persons therein employed,
comprehends the greater part of the City, consisting of all the other
companies: and in it there are by chance many, with whom I retain great
friendship, and che^fly with Publius Rupilius, sonn^ to Publius, of the Tribe
Aniensis, head of that company. Whose honor, is now especially treated of. For
which reasons, I earnestly entreat you, that all the courtesy, and
liberality you may a^ford, you would show it to Cneius Pupius; who is employed
by the said Company: And so procure, as easily you may, that his companions
may remain very well satisfied in his endeavors: and wherein the interests, or
benefit of those his associates shall occur, (for I know what you may
perform herein, being Quaestor) vouchsafe to assist, and defend them. which
doing, besides the effecting a matter, that will give me singular contentment,
I promise you, and because I have heretofore made experience, I dare assure
you, that you shall perceive, that you have been beneficial, to men that are
both mindful, and thankful. Farewell.

Cicero to Brutus. Epist. 10.
I Supposed that Mar^us Vaerro your Quaestor, coming to you, should not stand
in need of any recommendation: believing that he had been sufficiently
commended, out of the very custom of our predecessors: Who, as you know,
esteemed of the Quaestors, as of their own children. But he being persuaded,
that a letter of mine, written effectually in his behalf, might greatly
prevail with you; I thought good to do that, which a friend supposed, might
be a ^urtherance unto him. But to the end you may conceive, that I am bound to
do it, I think good to tell you, that Marcus T^rentius Varro, when he first
began to plead, entered into friendship with me; afterward when he grew to
riper years, two respects occurred, of increasing my love toward him: one
was, because he followed those studies, wherewith we are at this day much
delighted; and he followed it, as you know with understanding and diligence.
And withal, because he entered betimes into the society of the Tole-masters;
which notwithstanding I liked not: in that he suffered great losses.
Nevertheless, he being one of that order, whom I ever received to special
protection, our amity grew more confirmed. Besides this, he having been an
advocate, and Judge, with apparent fidelity, and good esteem, before this
mutation of the Commonwealth, he applied himself to demand a Quaestorship,
supposing that this honorable degree, would be a recompense of his travails.
And not long since, I sent him from Brundusium to Caesar, with letters of
tru^t: wherein I evidently perceived, how much he loved me, in taking willingly
this charge upon him, and how faithful a friend he was, in bringing the
matter to effect. I was determined, having laid open the occasion of my love
toward him, to inform you particularly, of his honesty, and good conditions:
but having declared the reason thereof, I think I have sufficiently intima^ed
his uprightness. Nevertheless, I will not forbear to promise, and secure
you, that you will be much satisfied in his friendship, for the benefit which
will accrue unto you thereby. For you shall discern him to be a man, both
prudent, and far from all avarice, or ambition: and besides, of singular
endeavor, and industry. Neither should I intimate unto you these things,
which you will observe, when you have ^ad experience of them. Notwith^tanding,
in all beginnings of friendship it greatly imports; what the foundation is, and
with what good fame, we enter into an amity. To which effect, I meant to write
these present letters; though it was needless; the obligation of Quaestorship^
being a sufficient induction; the which nevertheless, may the more move you,
annexing thereunto my letters. Wherefore if you make that esteem of me, which
Varro beleeue^, and I am verily perswaded^ procure that I may understand, that
he received from this my commendation, that furtherance which he hoped, and I
doubted not. Farewell.

Cicero to Brutus. Ep. 11.
IN that I always knew you very desirous to be ignorant of nothing that
concerned me: I make no doubt, but you conceive not only, of what town I am,
but also how zealously I was wont, to assist the Arpinates, my countrymen: who
are not able, by any other revenues, then those that they have in Gallia, to
maintain the charge, which they are at, about the wors^ip of the gods, and
reparation of Churches, and public places. Now, to view the said revenues,
to recover the money owing by the countrie-people, and to rece^ue full
information of the matter, and to follow it; we have sent as Commissioners,
Quintus Fu^idius, son ^o Quintus, Marcus F^ucius, son to Marcus, and
Quintus Mamur^us, son to Quintus, all Roman knights. I earnestly entreat
you, for our inward amities sake, that you will be mindful of that business:
and procure effectually, that the c^use of the said Town may be heard
without any impediment, and w^thall expedition be dispatched: and that toward
the forementioned knights, you would use all those ceremonies of honor and
courtesy, which your gentle disposition shall incline you to. You shall herein
purchase the friendship of honest men, and oblige a very grat^fu^l Town unto
your self, by means of such a ben^fit. And to me also you shall hereby do a
g^^at^r pleasure; for besides that I ^m always accustomed to help my
cou^try-men; there is now somewhat mo^e to be considered; for this year, it
especially appertains to my care, and of^ice; in that I being desirous to
reduce that Town into better form, I have been the cause that my son, my
nephew, and Marcus Caesius, my great fri^nd, should be made Aediles; (for in
our Town, this only Magistracy is created, and no more:) These, you shall
honor, and especially my self; if by your favor, and vigilancie, ^he
Communaltie of this Town, shall end their business without difficulty; which
I request you to effect, as earnestly as I can possibly. Farewell.

Cicero to Brutus. Ep. 12.
IN another Epistle I did gener^llie commend unto you the Commissioners of
Arpinas, and with the greatest care I could. In this, I more particularly
recommend unto you, Quintus Fusidius, my especial friend, not any ways to
diminish the former, but to add this recommendation. For he is son in law to
my singular good friend Marcus Cae^ius: and heretofore in Cilicia he was with
me Tribune of the soldiers. In which place he so bare himself, as I thought I
had rather received, then bestowed a benefit. Besides this, he is delighted
with our studies, which you were wont to esteem highly. Wherefore I would
entreat you, to enterteine him with all cour^esie, and to use all means, that
this Embassy, which, being inioy'd by ^^ine authority, he has with his own
inconueniencie vndertake^, may ad glory to his industry. For he desires, as
^uery virtuous man naturally does, to reap great commendation, as well from
us, who persuaded him thereunto, as also from our countri-men. Which he shall
compass, if he obtain your favor by my recommendation. Farewell.

Cicero to Brutus. Ep. 13.
LVcius Castronius Patus, the chiefest, without comparison, in the town of
Luca, is noble, wise, full of courtesy, a man of great bounty, and graced
both by virtue, and also fortune; if this be any thing to the present purpose.
And besides, he is so far my most familiar friend, that he more respectively
observes no man of our order. Wherefore I commend him unto you, both as my
friend, and one that is worthy of your acquaintance. Whatsoever you do for
him, will assuredly be returned by your own content, and mine acceptance.
Farewell.

Cicero to Brutus. Ep. 14.
LV^ius Titius Strabo, a Roman Knight, of an honorable family, and of
great, and rich estate, is my bosom friend: and all intrinsecall right^ run
equally between us. This man should have certain moneys out of your Province,
from Publius Cornelius: The matter is remitted into Gallia, by Volcatius, a
judge of Rome. And because it is more honest to be careful of a friends
moneys, then of our own; I more seriously, then if it were an interest of
mine, request you, that about the procuring an end of the action, you would
interpose your self for expedition. And to endeavor so far a^ you think it,
just and reasonable, that Strabo's Freeman, who is sent for this effect, may
without any encumbrance, finish the business, and recover the moneys. And it
shall both give me great conten^ment, and you your self shall acknowledge
Lucius Titius to be most worthy of your friendship. And I heartily entreat
you to employ that care herein, which you were wont to take in every thing
wherein you found, that I delighted. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Caesar Imperator. Ep. 15.
I Solidly commend unto you, Praecilius; whose Father is your friend, my
familiar; and a man of great integrity: For besid^s, that I bear an infinite
love to this young man, being civil and modest, and because he loves me
entirely: I have manifestly found his father, in all my occasions to have been
much affected to me. This is he, who amongst others was especially wont to
laugh at my proceedings, and reprehend me; in that I did not join with you;
and the rather, because you invited me thereunto, with honorable conditions;
But his inducement^ dr^e not my consent.


Because on the other part, I heard those our great defenders of the
Commonwealth, cry out; Be valorous, that after world's may raise,
Some brain, to blazon thy deserts, and praise.
Thus, was I puckled in a foggie mist.


And yet he continued his exhortations. But they, though I were already
thoroughly hot; seeking by glory to inflame me^ said; Die not unuseful, and
without renown,
But die, that memory thy acts may crown.
But now, you may perceive they move me but a little. And therefore leaving the
lofty style of Homer, I betake me to the true precepts of Euripides; I hate
his council that is for others wi^e,
And in his own occasions wants his eyes.


Which verses, Praecilius the elder, commendes exceedingly; affirming, that we
may live warily; and yet retain our precedencie, and principality. But to
return, where we began, you shall show me a memorable favor, if out of your
singular courtesy, you enterteine this young man; and to the good inclination,
which I am persuaded you have, to pleasure him, and his Father; make upon this
my recommendation, some new addition. I have used a new style of writing, to
give you to understand, that I send no vulgar commendation. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Caesar, Imperator. Ep. 16.
AMongst all the mobilitie, I loved no young man so well as Publius Crassus;
and having conceived great hope of him in his tender years, I began to hope
better, seeing my judgment of him, to be verified. Now, you shall understand,
that even when he lived I much esteemed, and made great account of Apollonius
his Freeman: because he was affected to Crassus; and Crassus in his virtuous
studies made so good use of him, that he loved him dearly. Then after the
death of Crassus, I thought him also for this cause more worthy of my love,
and to be received into my protection; in that he held himself bound, to
observe, and honor those, that Crassus loved, and loved Crassus. Whereupon he
came to me in C^licia, and served me in many occurrents, both faithfully, and
prudently. And as I think, in the war of Alexandria, he never failed you,
in whatsoever he was able to compass, either by his fidelity, or industry.
And hoping that you also had the same opinion of him, he came into Spain;
first questionless, upon his own deliberation, but next for your assistance.
Neither did I otherwise promise to recommend him unto you: not but that I
supposed my commendation would be of some effect with you; but in that I
thought he needed not be to you commended, having been with you in the war;
and you for the memorial of Crassus, reputing him in the number of your own.
And, if he would have sought recommendation, he saw that other men also, would
have done him this pleasure. For the judgment I made of him, I have willingly
passed my word; both because he esteemed much thereof, and in that I knew my
testimony would be of some credit with you. I say therefore, that I have found
him a learned man; and studious of all ^xcellent sciences; and that even from
his tender years. For, when he was but a child, he remained a good while in
my house, with Diodo^^s, the Stoic, a person in my judgment very learned.
Now, set on fire, with the affection which he bears to your worthy acts, he
desires to write them in Greek, and I think he can perform it. He has wit,
and experience in humain^ actions, he has been long time exercised in these
manner of studies, and learning: and he desires to give life, and perpetuity
to your praises. This is the testi^onie of my opinion. But you that are most
wise, may give a sounder judgment hereof. And, though I said, I would not, yet
I recommend him: and whatsoever favor you show him, it shall unto my self be
above measure acceptable. Farewell.

Cicero to S^ruius Sulpitius. Epist. 17.
I Love Manius Curious, who negotiates at Patrae, upon many and worthy
occasions. For I have both had ancient friendship with him; en^ertein'd at his
first calling to the bar: and being sometime to go to Patrae, as well before
that miserable war, as in the time thereof, he freely always offered me his
house. Which, if I had been any ways urged thereunto, I would have used as
mine own. And there is further, a more religious tie, as it were, betwixt us,
in that he is most familiar with our Atticus, and loves, and honors him above
all others. If peradventure you have known him heretofore; I think the office
I do him will come too late: for he is so noble, and worthy, that I judge he
has already been commended unto you by his own demeanor. Which though it
be so, yet I earnestly solicit you, that if before the receipt of these, you
had any enclination to do him good^ now, in respect of this my further
recommendation, you will heap upon him your most en^ire affection. But, b^ing
of a very modest nature, if he came not to do^ you ^euerence, or, if yet you
have no great knowledge o^ him, or that for some occasion he has need of
further recommendation; I commend him after such a manner, as I am not able
with greater affection, or upon more just respects, to commend any living man
unto you. And I will do that, which they ought to perform, who religiously,
and without ostentation reco^mend. I will promise, nay, I do promise you, and
upon my reputation, secure you, that the customs of Manius Curious are such,
his bounty, and gentilitie of that quality, as when you know him, you will
acknowledge him worthy of your friendship, and this my earnest commendation.
Questionless, you shall do me a singular favor, if I understand, that these
letters took such effect with you, as to my self in writing them I promised.
Farewell.

Cicero to Seruius Sulpitius. Epist. 18.
I saw our friend Attic^^, become proud with joy, upon the receipt of
courteous, and delightful letters, which you wrote unto him. Which
notwithstanding, I will not yield, to have bin more acceptable to him, then to
my self. For though they were equally welcome to us both; yet I wondered, that
you wrote and made such unexpected offers to him, as, if he had entreated and
sought unto you, you could not more co^rteously have answered him: (which
notwithstanding we are assured in such a case you would not have omitted.)
About which, I ought not only, not to entreat you, that you would perform it
also more carefully for my respect; (for more cannot ^ee done then of your
self you have promised) but not so much as to give you thanks; beca^se you
have done it for his own sake, and out of your own free disposition. I must
confess notwithstanding, that what you have done has given me singular
satisfaction; in that I cannot but take full contentment, that you should have
such an opinion of him, whom I so highly estimate. And being so, it cannot but
be acceptable of necessity. But for all this; seeing by our domestical
amity it is permitted me, that I may also commit a sin in writing; both
those offices, which I have hitherto denied, shall be now performed. I desire
therefore, that to the some demonstration of courtesy which you made for the
sake of A^ticus, you will add as much more, as by our love toward him may be
procured. And whereas before I durst not be so bold as to give you thanks, now
I render them heartily: and desire that you would assure your self, that, for
what c^urtesie soever in the businesses of Epir^^, or in any other respect, you
oblige Attic^^^ for the same, in like manner will I esteem my self to be
obliged. Farewell.

Cicero to Seruius Sulpitius. Epist. 19.
LYso at Patrae, and I here, have long time lodged one another: which
domestical friendship, in my opinion, ought to be respected, as a sacred
mat^er. But, though I be tied with many others, in this bond of hospitality:
^here is none, that has in me so fami^iar an interest. Which, for many
pleasures he has done me, and by continual conversation, is so augmen^ed,
that there is nothing more intrinsicall, then our familiarity. This man,
remaining about a year in Rome, and leading his life so, as he lived with me;
though we were in great hope, that by my letters written in recommendation of
his goods and substance; you would (himself not being there) take them, as you
did, to your protection: yet all things remaining in one man's power, and Lyso
taking part with us, and arming himself in our assistance, we daily feared his
occasions. Neuerthele^se, in that he is a man of quality, and because I favored
him, together with some other of his friends, we obtained of Caesar what he
desired, which you shall have notice of by Caesar's letters. Now, though we had
our purpose, yet we do not only not forbear, to commend him to you^ as if
we had obtained all that was requisite: but further, with great efficacy we
importune you, to take Lyso into your love, and protection. This man's doubtful
fortunes we did the more respectively commend unto you, fearing lest some such
accident might fall ou^, that neither you could have prevented. But now, that
we are secure of his safety; with special care I entreat you, to do him all
the favors you are able. Amongst which, not to recount them, on^ by one; I
recommend unto you in general, his whole Family. And, because Caius Me^mius
G^mellus, my Clyent, being made a Citizen of Patrae, did, in the calamity of
his banishment, adopt the son of Lyso, according to the Laws of Patrae; I
request you, to undertake the protection of this young man also; and to defend
his cause, and the right of his inheritance. The maine is this, that you affect
Lyso: whom I have found to be an honest man, and very thankful for good
turns received. In doing this; I am assured, that in loving, and recommending
him hereafter to any other, your self will be of my judgment, and
disposition. I now use this feruencie in his recommendation, not only because I
desire beyond measure, that the matter may be effected; but because I doubt,
that if you do not entirely favor him therein, he may suppose, I have writ^en
but coldly in his behalf; and not that you are unmindful of me: because, by
my continual discourse, and also by you^ letters, he knows sufficiently, what
reckoning you make of me. Farewell.

Cicero to Seruius Sulpitius. Epist. 20.
I Have great acquaintance with Asclapo of Patrae, a Physician, and I have
taken great delight, both in his conversation, and his Art; whereof I have made
trial in my friends infirmities. Wherein, both for his knowledge, fidelity,
and good will, I have been satisfied. This man therefore, I commend by these
unto you; entreating you so to handle the matter, that he may perceive, that I
commended him with diligence; and that my commendation has been his
furtherance. Herein you shall do me an especial fa^our. Farewell.

Cicero to Seruius Sulpitius. Epist. 21.
MArcus Aemilius A^ianus has ever honored and loved me, even from his youth:
and he is an honest and very kind man, and every way wondrous officious. If
I thought he were at Sicyon, and not at this present (where I le^t him; and,
as I hear, he is remaining) at Cibyra. I should not need to write unto you
further of him: being assured, that he by his civil customs, and kind
behavior, without any recommendation, would cause himself to be no less of
you, then he is of me, and the rest of his friends, beloved. But, because I
think he is absent, I most effectually commend his house unto you, which is
in Sicyon: and his moueables: and above all, his Freeman, Caius Auianus
Ammonius: whom, for his own sake, I commend unto you, as one that I make good
esteem of, not only because he is a loving and faithful servant toward his
master, but by reason, that in my most intricate troubles, I had both loyal
and friendly seruic^s from him, as if I, of a slave, had made him a Freeman.
And therefore I require at your hands, as a special favor, that both in his
Masters matters, you would a^sist the said Ammonius, as his Agent; and that you
will love him for his own deserts, and repute him as one of yours. You shall
find him modest, officious, and worthy of your favor. Farewell.

Cicero to Serui^^ Sulpitius. Epist. 22.
I Make great account of Titus Manliu^, who negotiates at Thespiae: For, he
ever respected, and honored me, and he delights in the same studies, whereunto
we stand affected. To which may be added, that Varro Murena affects him
greatly, and desires to do him any pleasure: though he reposed great hopes in
those letters, wherein Murena had recommended him unto you: yet he verily
believes, that my recommendation will do him greater pleasure. I was therefore
enforced, partly through the familiarity of Manlius; and then, out of Murena's
affection, to write unto you, as effectually as I could. And, if in regard of
this my recommendation, you shall be moved, to show him the greatest favor
and courtesy, that you ever vouchsafed: that is, if you assist, and give
satisfaction to Titus Manlius, with all care, wherein, without prejudice to
your own honor, you may both favor, and further him; I shall think I have
received from you a singular courtesy and besides, I assure you, that from his
most pleasing and affable demeanor you shall receive that content, which you
use to expect from good men, and officious. Farewell.

Cicero to Seruius Sulpitius. Epist. 23.
LVcius Cossinius is my friend, and of the same Tribe that I am: there passes
great familiarity betwixt us. For, our conversation is not only ancient, but
through At^icus grown greater. So that the whole family of Cossinius loves
me; and especially Lucius C^ssinius Anchialus, his Freeman, who is of great
esteem, both with his Mast^^, and his masters friends, of which number I am
one. I commend him unto you, so, as if he were mine own Freeman, and in the
same esteem with me, as he is with his Master, I could not with greater
efficacy recommend him^ you shall therefore do me a wonderful pleasure, if
you accept of him into your ami^ie, and favor, Wherein soever you are able,
without your own inconvenience. Herein I shall remain much satisfied, and
your self contented. For you will find him to be very honest, courteous,
and obseruant. Farewell.

Cicero to Seruius Sulpitius. Epist. 24.
TAking contentment in my courtesy, when I remembered, how zealously I had
commended Lyso, my guest and familiar friend, unto you. I was afterward much
better satisfied, that I had so effectually commended him: understanding by his
letters, that you had found those relations false, which had been given of him.
For he wrote unto me, that my ^ecommendation stood him in great stead; in that
it had been told you, that he used in Rome, to speak liberally to your
dishonor: wherein, though he write unto me, that through your nobility, and
courtesy, he has iu^tified himself unto you. Nevertheless, as ^ought, I
first give you exceeding great thanks, that my letters prevailed so far with
you, as after the reading of them, you let fall all distaste received, from the
false reports, which you had heard of Lyso. And then, I would have you give
credit to my unfeigned words, (for I write not this more for Lyso, then for
every man;) That I never heard any man make mention of you, without your
singular commendation. And Lyso being almost every day with me; he
continually praised your words and actions, not only because he thought I
willingly gave care thereunto; but in that, with desire, himself entered into
speech thereof. Wherefore, though now you so entertain him, that from
henceforth he needs not my recommendation, and believes, that my first
letters suffice, to obtain that of you, which he desires: yet, I entreat you,
as earnestly as I am able, that you will embrace him, with all love, and
courtesy. I would write unto you of his qualities, as I did in my former
letters, but that I am assured at this time, he is of himself sufficiently
known unto you. Farewell.

Cicero to Seruius Sulpitius. Epist. 25.
HAgesaretus Larissaeus, receiving great favors from me in my Consul^hip, has
been mindful, and thankful, and ever since, has wi^h all respect honored
me. I really rec^mmend him unto you, as one that has given me entertainment,
that is, my familiar friend; and a thankful honest man; the che^fest of his
town, and most worthy of your acquaintance. You shall do me a special
favor, if you give him cause to conceive, that this my recommendation has
been powerful with you. Farewell.

Cicero to Seruius Sulpitius. Epist. 26.
LVcius Messinius is thus intrinsecall with me, because he was my Quaestor: But
this intrinsecalitie, which I out of the custom of our Predecessors, much
respected; he, by his own virtue, and nobility, has increased. And
therefore there is no man, with whom I converse more willingly, nor with
greater famili^ritie. This man, though he seems confident, that in regard of
himself, you would readily do him any reasonable pleasure, within your power;
is, notwithstanding hopeful, that my letters may be of great authority with
you. And besides, that of himself he conceived thus much; he had, by our daily
conversation also, often understood by me, what pleasing and especial amity,
there was betwixt us. I e^treat you therefore, with as great affection, as you
see I am bound to entreat, for so inward and familiar a friend; that you would
declare the suits he has in Achaia, as heir to Marcus Mindius, his brother,
who did negotiate in Elis; and not only dispatch them in equity, by the po^er
you have; but also by your council, and authority. For, we have given expr^^se
commission to our Agen^s in those parts, that in all cases of difficulty, they
should retain you for their judge, and make use of your endeavor, ^o it were
not with your discommodititie: which charge vouchsafe, I beseech you, to
undergo, on the behalf of mine honor. Besid^s this, if you think it no
prejudice to your repu^ation, you shall do m^e a ^ingular pleasure, if they
be so litigious, that they will not take up the matt^r without suite, to
refer them to Rome, considering they have to do with a Senator. Which, that
you may perform with l^s^e doubt, we have so wrought, that Marcus L^pidus,
the Consul, has writt^n to you thereof, not comm^nding, (for we thought that
might be some disparagement to your reputation) but after a manner, requesting
therein your favor. I wo^ld write, how happily the benefit you confer upon
Messinius would be bestowed; but first, I am confident, that you consider it.
Then, I would have you think, you do it ^or my self. For, I promise, and
as^u^e you, that his ^akes no l^sse impressio^ in my heart, then if it were
mine own business. But, besides my desire, that he may without any trouble
enjoy that, which in right belongs unto him. I would be also glad, he might
understand, that no small matter has accru'd unto him by my recommendation.
Farewell.

Cicero to Seruius Sulpitius. Epist. 27.
THough I have occasion to write many times unto you, after one for me, in
that I am to give you thanks, because you so carefully observe my
recommendations: which office I have both heretofore performed, and so far as
I perceive, shall do it often. Yet will. I not be sparing of my pains, but as
you use in your actions of Law, so will I do in my Epistles, writing to you of
the same matter in a diverse manner. I say therefore, that Caius Auianus
Ammonius has given me infinite thanks by letters, both in his own name, and
in the behalf of Marcus Aemilius Auianus, his Master; giving me to understand,
the honorable entertainment afforded unto himself; and the unspeakable
courtesy he received, in regard of his absent Master; which love and
courtesy of yours, as it has been dear unto me in their occasions, whom I,
moved by our inward amity, and near union, had recommended unto you; in that
Marcus Aemilius is one of the most domestical, and intimate friends I have;
and a person, both obliged to me for my great benefits; and after a sort,
above all others, that appear to have be^ne bound unto me, most thankful: so
was it much more dear unto me, to perceive you carried so good a mind toward
me, that you pleasure my friends, peradventure more then I should do; if I
were there present. And I believe it, because I should be more sparing in their
occasions, then you are in affording me favor. But I make no doubt, but you
conceive, that I take it in great good part. I pray you, repute them also to
be thankful men. Which I promise, and affirm unto you. Wherefore, I would
have you procure, if you may without any in conueniencie, that they may
accommodate all their businesses, while you hold the government of Ach^ia. I
lead a pleasant life with your Seruius, for we are ever in conversation: And he
yields me great delight, partly by his wit, and singular endeavor, and partly
by his virtue, and honest disposition. Farewell.

Cicero to Seruius Sulpus. Epist. 28.
THough I willingly seek unto you in the occurrents of my friends, yet I am
more willingly thankful, when you have done any thing, as you do always
upon my recommendat^on. For you would not believe, how many thanks they
return me, whom I commended unto you; yea, even they in whose recommendation I
wrote but coldly. All which things are acceptable to me; but the courtesy you
showed to Lucius M^ssinius, is most acceptable. For he told me, that you had no
sooner read my letters, but you presently offered all your assistance to his
agents, and that afterward in effects, you did far more then in words you
had promised. I would have you therefore to think, (for I can never be
satisfied in uttering it) that you have done me her^in a singular pleasure.
Wherein I rejoice the more, observing that from the same Messinius, great
contentment will accrue unto you. For besides his being valiant, ^ull of
courtesy, and bounty, and ready to honor any man: he is also studious in
that learning with which being hertofore delighted, our life also is now
nourished. In a word, I would have you augment your benefits, in all his
occurrents, when you may perform it with your honor: but in two things I
namely entreat you. First, if in making an acquittance to the party, any
security be required, that you will use the means, security may be given him
in my name. Then, considering the whole enheritance in a manner consists in
those goods, which Oppia, sometimes Mindius wife has purloyned; that you
procure and find a mean, that this woman may be brought to Rome. Which when
she perceiues shall come to pass, I am of opinion we shall end the business:
let me therefore r^quest you to give us this contentment. What I have
heretofore written I confirm unto you, and upon my credi^ assure you, that the
pleasures which ^ither you have, or shall confer upon M^ssinius, shall be so
well bestowed, that yourselfe will judge, that you have showed favor, to a
very grateful person, and ingenuous. For to that which you have performed for
my sake, I would also have this addition. Again, I do not think that the
Lacedaemonij any ways doubt, but that you will so receive them under your
protection, as befitteth your faith, and equity; and as their predecessors
dignity deserves. And I, as he that knows you well, never doubted, but that
you are fully informed of the rights, and deserts of each people. Whereupon
when Philippus, the Lacedaemonian requested me, that I would recommend unto you
the city: though I called to mind, that I was bound unto that City; yet I
answered him, that the Lacedaemonij, with you, needed no recommendation. So
that I would have you build upon this; that I, considering the present
troubles, repute all the Cities of Achaia happy, that you govern them. And
likewise I suppose, that you having not only read over our Records, but those
also of the Graecians, out of your voluntary accord, you neither can, nor will
be other then a friend to the Lacedaemonians. Wherefore I only request you,
that when you show the Lacedaemonians those favors, which stand with your
credit, dignity, and equity; if you think good, cause them to understand,
that you are desirous to hear, that the pleasures which you do them, may by
me also be approved. For it concerns me, that they should believe, that I have
a care of their Interests. This, I request you, with the greatest zeal that I
am able. Farewell.

Cicero to Lucius Plancus. Epist. 29.
I Make no question but you conceive, how, amongst all those friends your
Father left you, I am nearest unto you; not only for those reasons, which
carry a great appearance of alliance; but also for those, that consist in
familiarity, and conversation. The which you know, between your father and
me were the greatest, and most delightsome in the world. From these beginnings
spring the love which I bear you. Which love made our amity greater, then
that we held with your Father. And so much the more, because I perceived, that
so soon as you attained to the years, to be able to judge, in what proportion
every one deserved to be esteemed of you; that you began to honor, observe, and
love me above all others. Besides all this, we were knit together with a far
firmer knot; as by the knot of studies: which of it self greatly imports;
especially being of those studies, and those virtues, which of themselves
procure, that the parties which are of one mind, are also conioyn'd in
familiarity. I suppose you expect, what this far-fetcht discourse will tend
unto. First therefore, you shall understand, that I have not ripped up this
commemoration, without great and worthy respects. I frequent most familiarly
with Ca^us Atteius Capito. You know both the prosperous, and contrary events of
my affairs. Both in the one, and the other, I have made proof o^ Capito'^ good
will, and affection. And I did not only m^ke use, of his endeavor, authority,
and favor, but also of his goods, according as the necessity of my good, or
bad Fortunes required. Titus Antis^ius was a kinsman, to this man; Who by
accident being Quaestor of Maced^nia; and having no successor therein; Pompe^us
went thither with his Army. An^istius could not do as he would. For if he
might: his greatest contentment had been, to have returned to Capito, whom he
loved as a Father: especially conceiving what an esteem, he ^uer had, and did
make of Caesar. But being under another power, and in that he could do no
less; he took upon him some command. When the moneys were coined in
Apo^^^nia, I cannot say that he had the ouer-seeing thereof, nor deny that he
was present; But certainly, not above two or three months. From that time
forward, he never was in the Camp: he shunned all command. Believe th^s from
me, as a most true testimony. For he observed my coffeehouse in that war:
he imparted all his secrets to me. Whereupon he retired to hide himself in
Macedonia, flying from the Camp as far as he could: and not only from taking
upon him any charge, but from being so much as present From thence, after the
battle fought, he went into Bithynia, to A^lus Plancius his very good
friend. There Caes^r seeing him, he gave him not one bitter, nor sharp word^
he enjoined him to come to Rome. A few d^ies after he fell sick, and recouer'd
not that sickness; He come sick to Corcyra, and there dyed. Of his goods, by
force of a will that he made in Rome, when Paulus and Marcellus were Consulls,
Capito, of twelve parts, is to enjoy ten: the other two parts fall to them,
whose portion, without any just compla^n^ of any man, falls to the Public:
and amounts to the value of nine hundred Crowns. My Plancus, for the inward
am^tie, that passed sometimes betwixt me and your Father; and for the love we
bear one another; For our studies sake, and conformable manner of life we have
always observed; I request and entreat you, as effectually, and perswasiuely
as I am able, that you will repute it as mine own su^e, and employ therein
your whole power: and so procure, that Capito by this recommendation, and by
means of your favor, and Caesar's benefit, may obtain his kinsmans
enheritance. All the favors, which in this high renown, and esteem you are
in with Caesar, I could have had granted from you upon request: I will think
conferred upon me, out of your own voluntary free will, if you do but grant
me this petition. And because you may the more readily incline, to comfort him
herein, behold one reason well known to Caesar himself; that Capito ever bare
wonderful love, and great respect to Caesar. But Caesar himself can testify
thus much. I know he has a very good memory, and therefore I Will mention it
no further. I require nothing else, but that you will move Caesar in the cause
of Capito, with equal zeal, to the memorial you shall perceive, that he
retains of Capito. I Will deliver unto you, what experience I have made of him:
of what validity it is, your self shall judge. You understand what part I
took, and what cause was by me defended. You are privy, what men, and what
society of men I followed. Of thus much be assured: that if in this war, I
performed any thing against Caesar's mind, I was advised, ^xhorted, and even
driven unto it by others: and I am not ignorant, how Caesar himself knows,
that I was violently ha^^d thereunto: but if in the same war, I bare my self
more temperately, and moderately then any other; Capito was the man that
councelled and persuaded me so to do: like to whom, if my other friends had
bin, peradventure it might have been profitable to the Commonwealth, and my
self (I know) I should have infinitely benefitted. Now, my Plan^us, if you
satisfy me in this my desire, I shall be confirmed in my hopes, that I am of
you beloved: and you shall gain the same Capito, a most thankful, officious,
and very honest friend, in requital of a favor so important. Farewell.

Cicero to Acilius Vice-Consull. Ep. 30.
LVcius Manlius Sosis was sometimes of Catina, but he is now become a Roman
Citizen, together with the other Neapolitanes, and was created Decurio of
Naples. For before it was granted to the con^ederates of the people of Rome, to
be free denizens, and to those of Latium; he was chosen citizen of the Town
of Naples. His brother not long since died in Catin^. We do not think, he
will any ways be crossed, about the inheritances descended to him; for he is now
in possession of them: but in that besides these goods, he has other old
negotiations in Sicilia, I recommend unto you both this inheritance, left him
by his brother, and all other his affairs: but above all, I commend himself
unto you, as a man of great integrity, my very familiar friend, and one that
is adorned with those studies of doctrine, and that learning, wherein I
especially am delighted. I request you therefore, that whether he be there, or
not, you would call to mind, that he is one of my most intimate, and dearest
friends: and entreat you to carry your s^lf^^^^ toward him, that he may
perceive, that my recommendation did afford him great assistance. Farewell.

Cicero to Acilius Vice-consull. Epist. 31.
I Frequent Caius Flauius, a Roman Knight, of noble descent, and honorable
estate, very domestically: In that he was a viscerall friend of Caius Piso, my
son in law: and in that not only he, but also Fla^ius his brother, observes
me wi^h all respect. I would have you therefore, to honor me, show him all
those favors, and courtesies, which you may honestly perform, and without
empeachment to your dignity. I will take it for so great k^ndnesse, as you
cannot do me a gr^ater. And moreover, I as^ure you, (not out of vain glory;
but because out of ou^ familiarity, friendship, and truth it self, I may
affirm it.) You shall find Caius Fl^uius so o^ficious, and respective, and
withal so bountiful: and so esteemed of all his friends, as you will remain
much satisfied in having pleasur'd him. Farewell.

Cicero to Acilius Vice-consull. Epist. 32.
IN Alesa, a pleasant, and noble city, dwell Marcus, Clodius, Archagathus;
and Caius Clodius Philo, who in respect of the domestical entertainments, and
familiarity that pass betwix^, us are my singular good friends. But because I
commend many men unto you with equal importunity, I fear least it may seem,
that out of a certain ambition, I am led to prefer all my recommendations
after one manner. Though in truth, you satisfy to the full, both me, and all
those whom I recommend unto you. But you must understand, that this family;
especially these; are conjoined to me, as well by the ancient acquaintance we
have had together; as also through the mutual offices we have interchanged;
and breefly in respect of the love we bear one another. And therefore I
request you as effectually as I can, that you will afford all those
furtherances to the abouementioned, which may stand with your credit, and
dignity. And in so doing, I shall receive inestimable contentment. Farewell.

Ci^ero to Acilius vice-Consull. Epist. 33.
CNeius Otacilius Naso is my very dome^ticall friend, and so near, that I have
not with any man of his rank, more private conversation. For daily keeping
him company, I take wonderful pleasure, and contentment, in his nobility,
and honest disposition. It imports not that you should regard, in what words I
recommend him to you, he being so familiar with me as I have written. He has
certain businesses in your Province; where Hilarious, Antigonus, and
Demostratus, his Freemen, solicit them. These, together with the affairs of
Naso, I no otherwise recommend unto you, then if they were mine own. I shall
repute i^ for a singular pleasure, to hear, that this my commendation
prevailed with you more then ordinary. Farewell.

Cicero to Acilius vice-Consull. Epist. 34.
MY deceased progenitors, and those of Lyso Lilybaetanus, son to Lyso, made a
friendship in respect of the hospitality which passed betwixt them, which we
hau^ successively preserved. And besides, he greatly observes me: and I have
found him a man worthy of such a father, and grandfather; for he is of a most
noble Family. And therefore with the greatest zeal I am able, I recomme^d
unto you his house, and substance. And I require it at your hands as a special
favor, that you will cause him to perceive, that my recommendation of him to
you, turned unto his great honor, and benefit. Farewell.

Cicero to Acilius vice-C^nsull. Epist. 35.
Caius A^i^nus Philoxenus, is au^ciently wo^t to entertain me; and besid^s, he
is my very familiar friend. Caesar at my request made him a citizen amongst
the Nouocomenses. Besides he has taken upon him the name of Auianus, because
he was more then any man domestical friend of Flaccus Auianus. This ^laccus,
I think, you know to be my very loving acquaintance. All which things I r^p
up, to inform you, that this my recommendation is not vulgar. I therefore
request you to assist him, whereinsoeuer you may without your own prejudice:
and repute him in the number of your friends: and make him by any means to
understand, that my ^resent letters, gave him great ^u^th^rance. And I shall
take it for a special favor. Farewell.

Cicero to Acilius vice-Consull. Epist. 36.
Demetrius Mega and I, have of long time, used to lodge one another; and there
is betwixt us so great acquaintance, as there is never a Sicilian more familiar
with me. Dolabella by my entreatie, obtained from Caesar, that he was made
free-denizen: Whereat I was present. And therefore he is now called Publius
Cornelius. And Caesar having ordained, that the Table, wherein, the names of new
created citizens were engraven, should be cancelled, and taken away, by
reason of the abominable avarice of such, as sold his favors in this respect
granted, for money, he said in my presence to Dolabella, that he should take no
care for Mega; ^or he would have the favor, which he intended to him take
effect. This I thought good to tell you, to the end you might esteem him in
the number of the Roman^ ci^tizens. And in any occasions, I commend him after
such a manner, that I never with greater affection, recommended any man unto
you. If you ^o entreat him, that he may discern, that he was much graced by
my commendation, you shall do me an acceptable kindene^se. Farew^ll.

Cicero to Acilius vice-Consull. Epist. 37.
WIth the greatest desire possible, I commend unto you, Hippia Calatinus son
to Philoxenus, my host, and very good friend. His goods, as I hear say,
against the privileges of the Calati^j, are possessed by the public, for
certain moneys, which he owes to others. And if it be so: without my
recommendation, the busin^s it self, may inuit your equ^tie to assist him.
But howsoever; I ^equest so much favor at your hands, as to dispatch him, and
to procure him all conueniencie in these, or any other his occasions, so far
forth as may stand with your credit, and dignity. This will highly content
me. Farewell.

Cicero to Acilius vice-Consull. Epist. 38.
LVcius Brutus a Roman Cauallier, and a complete young man, is my g^e^t
^riend; and much ^espects me. Besides, I have had special amity with his
father, ever since my Quaestorship in Sicilia. It is true that this Brutus, is
now in Rome with me. But for all ^his, I commend unto you his family, goods
and solliciters, with as much efficacy, as I am able. You shall favor me
highly, if by the effects you manifest unto Brut^s, that my recommendation,
was as beneficial unto him, as I had promised him. Farewell.

Cicero to Acilius vice-Consull. Epist. 39.
With the Titurnian Family, I have had ancient, and inward friendship; of
which there remains only, Marcu^ Titurnius Rufus, whom I am bound to take
care of, and; to use all endeavor, and discharge all offices I am able, for
his benefit. It lies in you, to let him understand, tha^ I am of power to
^ssist him. And therefore I specially recommend him unto you, and request you
to work so, that he may perceive that he was greatly fur^hered by my
recommendation. And I shall receive, it as a great courtesie^ Farewell.

Cicero to Quintus Ancharius, vice-Consull son to Quintus. Epist. 40.
I Very familia^ly converse with Lucius, and Caius Aurelius, as likewise with
Lucius their father, a man of rare integrity. These young men therefore,
ado^n'd with all commendable virtues, my dea^e friens, and wor^hie of your
amity, I most heartily recommend unto you. If ever any recommendation of mine,
p^^uailed with you, (and I know many have greatly preuaild) I pray let this
take place. And if you entreat them honorably, and courteously; first, you
shall oblige unto you, two most grateful, and ver^uous young men: and besides,
you shall he^rein do me a pri^cipall pleasure. Farewell.

Cicero to Lucius Culleolus. Epist. 41.
THe kind offices you have perform^d, to the benefit of Lu^ius Lu^c^^us, have
been assuredly conferr^d upon a very grateful person, and y^u have not only
pleasured him, but also Pompeius: who, whenever he sees me, (and he sees me
very often) he re^urnes such ^hankes, as more affectionate cannot be given. I
will also tell you this, that I am certain you shall receive great
contentment; for I ^inde an inestimable satisfaction, in your love, and kindness
showed to Lucceius. Now, though I doubt not, but that you, having heretofore
used so great humanity toward him for our respect, will (not to be held
unconstant) still continue it. Nevertheless, I requ^st it at your hands, as ^
special f^uour, that what you promised from the beginning^ and pe^formed in
effect: you would be pleased to augment from good to better, and to bring it to
a full perfection. I affirm, and assure you, that you shall herein do a
great pleasure, to Lucceius, and ^^mpeius; and you shall receive both from
the one, and the other worthy recompense. A few days since, I wrote care^ully
unto you, about the state of the Commonwealth, of matters here, and of our
resolution: and I deliuerd the letters to your servants. Farewell.

Cicero to Lucius Culleolus, vice-Consull. Epist. 42.
LVcius Lucceius my friend, a man beyond all others grateful, talking with me,
highly commended you; declaring to me, how freely and liberally you offered
your self to his Sollicitors. If your courteous words were so acceptable to
him; what suppose you, will effects be, when you hold promise with him, as I
hope you will. It is true, that the Bylliones have said, they would satis^i^
Lucceius, in what manner soever, should be pleasing to Pompeius: but, that
this business may sort to a good end, it is very requisite, that yo^ should
int^rpose your pleasure, authori^ie^ and command. Which I earn^stly entreat
you. And I am wonderfully pleased, that th'Agents of Luc^eius perceive, and
that Lucc^ius himself by your letters written to him, has understood, that no
man's authority or favor can do more with you, then mine own. And that he
may have try^ll thereof, let me once more, and often request you. Farewell.

Cicero to Quintus Gallius. Epist. 43.
ALthough I hope, that in many things, you will c^use me to perc^iue, (as long
si^ce I have seen) that I am beloved ^f you: ^euerth^les, an occasion no^
pr^^^n^ it s^l^e, that you may easily ^^forme me, of the love you bear me.
Luc^^^ Oppius ^onne to Marcus, ne^otiat^s in ^hilo^el^^^ (...) is my fam^liar
acquaintance. And I recommen^ him ^o you, with all ^fficacie: and so much the
more, in that besides the affection I bear to h^mselfe, he sollicites the
business of Lucius Egnatius R^^us, with whom I conu^r^^ more domestically, th^n
with any other R^mane Caualli^re: and is near unto me, as well by reason of
our continual conversation; as our mutu^ll exchange of many, and great
of^ices. I entreat you the^fore, that you will so love Oppius present; and take
the affairs of Egnatius absent, into your pro^ection, as if they were mine
own occasions. I would have you ^o make a memorial, and commit it to some one
of your followers, who, when you arrive in your Province, may redeliuer it you.
But write it in such sort, that in reading it, you may readily call to mind,
how precisely I made you this recommendation. This, of all love, I request you.
Farewell.

Cicero to Quintus Gallius. Epist. 44.
THough both by your own letters, and those of Lucius Oppius my familiar
friend, I understood, that you have b^ene minde^ull of my r^commendation:
whereat I wondered not, considering your infinite love toward ^e, and the great
friendship that pass^th betwixt us. Yet once again, with all care I recommend
unto you, Lucius Oppius present, and the affairs of my most familiar friend
Lucius Egnatius, being absent; The friendship, and familiarity I hold with him
is so great, that if mine own Interests were handled, I could not be any
ways more care^ull. You shall therefore do me a special favor, if you so
effect, that he may perceive, that I am so much beloved of you, as I seem to
persuade my self to be. You can not do me a greater pleasure: and I earnestly
request it. Far^well.

Cicero to Apul^ius vice-Quaestor. Epist. 45.
I So familiarly converse, with Lucius Egnatius, a Roman^ Knight: as there is
none of his quality, that is so inward with me. I commend unto you Anchialus
his servant, and the businesses he has in Asia, as if I commended unto you,
any affairs of mine own. And I would have you understand, that we do not
only, daily, and d^mestically converse together; but fur^her, great favors
have passed, from one of us, to the other. Wherefore I earnestly request you, so
to procure, that he may vnd^rstand, that I wrote unto you, very effectually. Of
your good disposition toward me, he made no question: and I heartily entreat
you for performance. Farewell.

Cicero to Ap^leius, vice Quaestor. Epist. 46.
LVcius Nostius Zoilus, is ^o-heire, as I am; to his master. To this effect I
have written, both, to give you no^^^, that I have some cause to be his friend;
and that you might esteem him for an honest man, seeing his master so r^puted
him. I recommend him therefore unto you, as one of our family. And I shall be
very glad, that you would give him occasion to know, that this my
recommendation, turned to his help, and furtherance. Farewell.

Cicero to Silius. Epist. 47.
TO what end should I recommend a man unto you, whom you favor? Nevertheless,
that you may perceive, that he is not only liked, but beloved of me, I have
written these unto you. Of all the pleasures, you ever did me, which, to say
the truth, are many, and very important, it would be most acceptable to me, if
you would so use Egnatius, that he may p^rceiue, that he is of me, and I of
you beloved. This I request of you, with the greatest desire possible. There is
not now, that former estate of the Commonwealth, which gave such conten^ment.
Let them be comforted therefore in saying, as the vulgar do: who knows, that
this may not prove for the best? but we will talk of that at our meeting. Hold
you on your course, that you may love me, and know that I love you. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Sextilius Rufus, Quaestor. Epist. 48.
I Recommend unto you all the Cyprij, but more espec^ally the Paphij. Wherein
soever you assist them, I shall greatly be obliged. And this office of
recommending them, I perform so much the more willingly^ because I suppose it
will also redownd (as I desire) to your own commendation, coming first
Quaestor into that Island, to institute those orders, according to which,
others are to be governed. Which, as I hope, you may the more easily effect,
if you do but follow the law, of your loving friend Publius L^ntulus; and the
orders by me constituted. Which, I am con^ident, will purchase you great
estimation. Farewell.

Cicero to Curious vice-Consull. Epist. 49.
QVintus Pomp^ius son to Sextus, is for many and ancient respects of amity
interessed in me. If this man heretofore were accustomed to preserve his
goods, by my recommendations, favor, and dignity: Questionless now, when you
govern the Province, by means of my letters, he must needs take comfort in
observing, that he was never so highly recommended unto any, as at this present
unto you. Wherefore I request you earnestly, that whereas, for our private
amities sake, you are to observe all my friends as your own; above all others,
take this man so to your protection, that he may perceive, that nothing could
have turned more to his honor and benefit, then my recommendation. Farewell.

Cicero to Aristus vice-Consull. Epist. 50.
YOur observance of me, which I manifestly discerned, when we were together
at Brundusium, gives me encouragement to write with familiarity, and as it
were, with authority unto you, when any thing falls out that imports me.
Marcus Curio, who negoti^ted at Patrae, is so domestical with me, as a nearer
acquaintance can not be devised. I have received many benefits from him, and
he as many from me. And which is above all; we bear one another singular
affection. Which being so: as you have any hope in my amity; as you would make
the favors, and courtesies you showed me at Brundusium, to be of greater
accept^nce, (though they were most acceptable:) and as you seem to be beloved
of al yours: grant, and bestow upon me this kindenes, that Manius Curious suffer
no prejudice; and that by you, he may be freely exempted, from all exaction,
detriment, and molest^tion. And I assure you; and all your friends in my
behalf shall warrant, that from ^y friendship, and your humanity used unto
me, great benefit, and contentment shall acc^ew unto you. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius C^sius. Ep. 51.
PVblius Messi^nus, a Roman Knight, is a man so q^alifi^d, and complete, as he
is in nothing defective; and besides, he is my most Familiar friend^ Wherefore,
with the greatest care I can, I recommend him to you, entreating you both for
ours, and our fathers friendship, to take him to your protection, and to have a
care of his goods, and honor; you shall bind unto you a very honest man, and
one that is worthy of your friendship: and for me you shall herein do an
acceptable office. Farewell.

Cicero to Rex. Epist. 52.
AV^us Licin^us Aris^oteles, of M^lita, has anciently entertained me, and is
besides, my familiar acquaintance, out of the daily conuer^ation has passed
betwixt us. For which reasons I assure my self, you will hold him the more
effectually recommended: because I understand by many, that you make great
esteem of my recommendation. This man, by my means, obtained pardon of
Caes^r: For he took part with me, in the behalf of Pompeius: and perseuered
longer in action, th^n I did. The which very respect, in my judgment, should
make you conceive the better of him. Procure therefore my Rex, that he may,
find that these letters did highly pleasure him. Farewell.

Cicero to Quintus Thermus vice-Praetor. Epist. 53.
OF long time, I have had familiar acquaintance with Lucius Genucilius Curuus a
very honest, and grateful man. I recommend him to you in the best manner I
can^ and cast him wholly into your arms; entreating you, to be favorable to
him, in all his occurrents, so far as your trust, and dignity will suffer
you. And well it may in all things suffer you, for I know, he will require
nothing, but that which shall be correspondent, asw^ll to yours, as to his own
honest disposition. But par^icularly I commend unto you, his business^s in
H^llespon^us. First, that he be permitted to enjoy the privilege of the
exemption of lands granted him by decree, and given him by the city of
Parium, which he has ever enjoyed without controversy; And further, if he
have Suite with any one of Hellespontus, that you will refer it to that
Diocese. But seeing in general, I have commended him ^o you, with such
efficacy, me thinks I should not so particularly write of his affairs. The
sum is this: all courtesy, benefit, and honor, which you shall place on
Gen^cilius, I will repute it as performe^ to my self, and for mine own
interest's. Farewell.

Cicero to Thermus vice-Praetor. Epist. 54.
OF many offices, which you have per^ormed, upon my recommendation, there is
none, for which I hold my self mo^e bound unto you, then for the singular
cou^t^sie used to Marcus Marcilius, so^ unto my friend, and my interpreter. Who
coming to Laodicea, highly extolled you, and gave me infinite thanks, because
at my request, you had conf^rred upon him your favor. Wherefore nothing now
remains, but to request you, that seeing you bes^ow benefits on grat^full
persons, that you will for this respect, be the more favorable to them; and
v^e all means, that stand with your reputation, that the mother in law of the
said young man, be not called in question. As before I carefully commended
Marcilius, so now I recommend him much more carefully, having by long service
had experience of the singular, and as it were, incredible fidelity,
abstinence, and modesty, of the father of Marcilius. Farewell.

Cicero to Thermus vice-Praetor. Epist. 55.
THough, me thought I perceived, when I talked with you in Ephesus, about the
business of Marcus Anneius my Legate, how you were ready upon all occasions
to do him pleasure; nevertheless, both the same Marcus Anneius, is ^o dear
unto me, that I am inclined to effect any thing, that may be for his benefit;
and I esteem my self so near unto him, as I am assured, that besides your
^ormer disposition to do him good, you will add a new desire of favoring
him, upon my commendations. For though I have loved Marcus Anneius of long
time, and conceive that opinion of him which the effects demonstrate, having
voluntarily chosen him Legate; which office has bin sued ^or by many, whom I
ever refused: nevertheless, seeing he was with me, in the war; and in the
managing of military actions, I discerned in him so great valor, prudence,
fidelity, and good will toward me; that there are none more dear unto me
then himself. You know how he is in suits, with the Sardiani. In Ephesus I
in^orm'd you of the cause, which notwithstanding you shall face to face better,
and more easily understand. For the rest, I have qu^stionl^sse been long
doubtful, how I should w^ite unto you: it being plain, and to you^ great
commendation made manifest, after what manner you administer Justice: and we
having need of nothing else, but that you will proceed according to your
usual fashion. Notwithstanding, being not concealed from me, of what
authority a Praetor is; especial^y, if he be of that integrity, gravity, and
clemency, wherewith, it is openly known, you are endowed: I request you, for
our friendly league, and for our equal, and mutual offices; that with
authority, endeavor, and favor, you will so procure, that Marcus Ann^ius may
understand, both, that you loved him heretofore, as he supposes, and has
often told me: and that my letters, have made you love him more eff^ctuallie.
During your government, and au^horitie in that Province, no occasion can occur
unto me, wherein you can show me greater favor. Withal, I am assured, that
you understand, how well your favor, and courtesy will be placed, upon a man
that is so thankful, and so honest. Farewell.

Cicero to Thermus Vice-Praetor. Epist. 56.
Caius Cluuius, a Puteolan, observes me greatly, and is my familiar
acquaintance. He has certain affairs in your Province; which if he cannot
comp^sse, while you are there Governor, by means of my recommendations; he
will hold them for lost, and desperate. Now, seeing so great an iniunction is
laid upon me, by a friend more officious to me, then any other; I will impose
(so it be not troublesome unto you) the like charge upon your self, as being
encouraged by your former exceeding favors. Cluuius should have money of the
Mylasij, and the Alabandenses. Euthyd^mus told me once in Ephesus, that he
would cause the Mylasij, to send their Proctours to Rome. And there is nothing
yet performed. I understand, they have sent thither Ambassadors, but I should
be more glad, that their Proctours were come, that I might deal with them, and
conclude somewhat. Wherefore I require at your hands, as a favor, that you
would enjoin them, and the Alaband^nses, to send their Proctours to Rome.
Besides, Philotes the Alabandensian has bound, and made over unto Cluuius,
certain lands. I desire that you would urge Philotes, either to put the agents
of Cluuius in possession of the said morgages, or else, to pay the moneys. And
moreover, that you would take order, that H^racleotae, and Bargyletae, satisfy
the debt they owe to Cluuius, either with ready coin, or out of their
re^enues. The Caunij are also his debtors; but they say, the money was
committed unto them upon ^^ust: whereof I would desire you to be informed. And,
if you find that the^e be no decree nor ^dict passed, that free's them from
paying interest for the money so d^pose^; procure that it may be paid him,
according to the cus^ome in your Province. O^ the matters above men^ioned, I
take the greater care, because it conce^nes the particular in^erest of my dear
fr^nd Cneius Pompeius; and in that I see, that he is more careful thereof then
Cluuius himself; and because I much desire, that he may remain satisfied, in
my best offices. I beseech you therefore, in all love, that you will be pleased
to grant what I have requested. Farewell.

Cicero to Thermus Vice-Praetor. Ep. 57.
THe more I hear by letters, and messengers that there is great war in Syria,
the more I entr^at and enjoin you, by the great friends^ip that is betwixt us,
to send me presently Marcus Annelus my Legate back again: because I know, I
may make use of the endeavor, counsel, and experience he has in Military
discipline, to the infinite benefit of the Commonwealth. And, if necessity
had not urged him to come unto you; neither would he, upon any terms have
l^ft me, or I have granted that he should. I make account to set forward
toward Cilicia, about the first of May: and Anneius must needs before that
^ime be r^turned. I formerly spoke, and wrote unto you, about a matter he has
in hand with the Sardian people. And I now again most earnestly request, and
entreat you, to procure, that he may according to the merit of his cause, and
dignity be dispatched. I conceived by your words, when I talked with you about
it in ^phesu^, that you were inclined to show all favor to Marcus Anneius, for
his own sake: nevertheless, be assured, if I understand that he has by your
means a good end of the for^^^d business, according to his expectation; I
shall think, I have received from you a singular kindness. And, I most
^arn^stly entreat you, to use therein all exp^dition. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Titius Rufus, son to Lucius, Praetor in Rome. Ep. 58.
LVcius Custidius, is my kinsman, countryman, and familiar friend. H^ has a
certain su^e, which is likely to come into your Court. I should be as much
ashamed to demand any thing dishonest in his behalf; as you, out o^ your
respect to your office and honor, would be to grant it. I therefore only
entr^at you, that he may have favorable access unto you. And that having
right, you will grant it him. That he may understand, that my friendship, even
when I was furthest off, was of force with you to further him. Farewell.

Cicero to Curtius Poeduceanus Praetor. Epist. 59.
I Bear a singular affect^on to Marcus Fabius: and we have conuersed together
of long time, with great familiarity. In his suits; I request you not, to
judge, one way or other, (for you will observe that, which, upon edict, and
your ord^r, belongs to your credit, and your dignity:) but that he may only
have the benefit to be heard: and that you will, but willingly grant him, what
is just: to the end he may know, that my friendship, though I were far
absent, was beneficial to him; and especially, with your self. Which I make
my earnest request. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Munatius, son to Caius. Ep. 60.
LVcius Liuineius Trypho, is freeman to Lucius Regulus, my very familiar
acquaintance: whose misfortune is a cause, that I am more officious to him,
then usual. For I cannot be more affectionate to him, then I have been. But I
love Trypho, for his own deserts. For he did me great pleasu^^, in the time
of my mis for^unes: ^^er^in ^ might evidently perceive, each man's good will,
and co^st^ncie: I recommend him therefore to you, with the same vehemency,
with which those that would be accounted grate^ull, are bound to recommend
them, from whom they have received a benefit. I shall be highly pleased, tha^
he might perceive, that you out of your love unto me, took in good part also,
the kindness he did me, in exposing himself to many dangers for my safety,
and his often going to Sea for me, in the amidst of Winter. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Silius, Vice-Praetor. Epist. 61.
I Suppose you know well the great familiarity, which I have had with Titus
Pinnius: which he made mani^est in his last will and testament: he leaving me
both Guardian, and his second heir. His son a very studious, learned, and
modest child, is to receive a round sum of money of the Nicaeenses; of about
an hundred and sixty thousand Crowns: and for as much as I hear, they are
willing to give him satisfaction; seeing therefor not onely^ the other
Guardians, who know how much I am able to preu^ile with you, but the youth
himself, is also persuaded, that you will do any thing for my sake; you shall
do me a great pleasure, to use the means (so far as may stand with your
honor, and place) that by order of the Nicaeenses, the foresaid m^neyes may be
presently paid to Pinnius. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Silius Vice-Praetor. Epist. 62.
I Remained both much engaged unto you in the cause of A^ilius: for though I
came late, yet through your nobility, and courtesy, I preserved an honorable
Roman knight: And certainly I ever carried this mind, that by reason of the
conjunction, and inward amity, which is between me, and our Lamia, you were
wholly mine. Wherefore, first I thank you, because you freed me from all
trouble: and then, I must presumptuously requi^e another kindness; but I Will be
a good pay master for all: for, both at all times, and with all vigilancie, I
will observe you: and will ever have that care of your self, and affairs,
that ought to be had of one, to whom I bear a singular affection. I therefore
request you, if you wish me well, that you will make as great an esteem of my
brother Q^in^us, as o^ my self. And so you shall greatly augment the
greatness of your benefit. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Silus, Vice-Praetor. Ep. 63.
I Thought it a thing impossible, that words should have failed me: and yet I
want them, to recommend Marcus Le^ius. Whereupon I will in few words relate the
matter; yet so, that you may manifestly observe my desire therein. It is
incredible, what account, I, and my most deer brother made, of Marcus Lenius.
Which proceeds as well from his many offices done for us, as from his singular
sincerity and modesty. I unwillingly gave him leave, to come into your parts,
by reason of the familiarity and delight I took in his conversation; and
because I was desirous, to use his faith^ull and good counsel: but I fear,
lest you think I ouerflow in words; wherein I said, I should be defective. I
commend him unto you with that affection, with which you judge it convenient to
commend one, of whom I have delivered, what I formerly have written. And I
request you, in the best manner I can, that you will end the business for him,
which he has in your Province, giving him therein the best directions you are
able. You shall find him very affable, and courteous. And therefore I entreat
you, to send him forthwith back again unto me, absolved, and freed from all
molestation, with your absolute dispatch of his business. For thus, you shall
have both my self, and brother, yours obliged. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Silius, Vice-Praetor. Ep. 64.
I Shall never be able to relate unto you, how much my Nero commends you.
Questionless, he exalts you maruellously; telling me, that he could devise no
respects, wherewith you have not graced him. You shall thereby reap from him
great benefit, for he is the gratefullest young man the world affords: and
certainly I also take i^ very kindly. For, of all the Nobility, there is no
man dearer unto me. You shall therefore do me a singular pleasure, to
perform, what I require at your hands, upon his request. First, touching
Pa^sania, the Alabandensian; that you will put off the matter so long, till
Nero come: whom I perceive to be very studious of his good; and therefo^^ I
entreat you herein: Then, that you would esteem the Nicae^, who are Nero's
greatest friends, and whom he defends with all his ability, and power, as
zealously recommended: that the same City may understand, that Nero's
Patrocime, is unto them a pr^ualent protection. I many times commended unto
you, Strabo Seruilius; but now, I do it more effectually, in that Nero has
vndert^ken, to defend his cause. We require nothing at your hands, but that you
will procure an end of the cause; and not suffer Seruilius, an harmless
person, to be tired out in a tedious suite, depending in the Court, of such a
man, as taking contrary courses to you, only affects gain that is unlawful.
Wherein, besides the doing me a pleasure, you shall also give m^ occasion, to
observe the use you make of your noble disposition. The sum of this Epistle is,
that you will give Nero satisfact^^n in all points of favor, as you have
determined, and effected. Your ^rouinc^ has a large The^ter, which m^ne ha^^
not; [Wherein] the glory and commendation, of so noble, so ing^nuous^ and so
honest a young man [may be admired.] Wherefore, if you be favorable to him,
as undoubtedly you will, and have already been, the multitude of Clients
left him by his predecessors, may be obliged and confi^med by his own
benefits. Wherein, if you aid him, with the assistance that you pretend: upon
occasion he will return your favor with great advantage; and you shall
besides, do me a singular pleasure. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Silius, Vice-Praet^r. Epist. 65.
I Have great familiarity, and daily conversation, with Publius Terentius
Hyspo, who, in the public customs, has the place of Toll-master^ and we are
tied one to another, by infinite and m^^u^ll favors. It much concerns his
honor, to have an accord with the other Cities. Which, as I remember, we
attempted in Ephesus, and could by no means, from the Ephesians obtain it:
but seeing, (as ^uerie m^n believes, and I my self perceive) that out of your
great bounty, singular humanity, and clemency, you may confidently impose
any thing upon the Graecians, at your pleasure: let me, with all efficacy
request you, to do me the honor, that Hyspo may have this commendation. Besides
this, I have inward friendship with the Receivers; not only in that all the
same company are under my protection; but because I familiarlie frequent with
diverse of them; so that you shall first ^atisfie Hyspo for my sake; and further
you shall increase ye affection of the Toll-gatherers toward me: and besides,
your self shall reap great benefit, by pleasuring one that is a most
thankful man, and have the love of the Toll-gatherers, who are men of very
good worth: and on me you shall bestow a favor of importance. For I would have
you imagine, that in all the Province and Government under your command, there
is nothing wherein you may do me a greater pleasure. Farewell,

Cicero to Publius Seruilius Isauricus, Vice-Consull. Epist. 66.
COnsidering how ready you are in your accustomed assistance of your friends;
and how full of feeling commiseration toward the afflicted; I would not
recommend unto you Aulus Caecina, a most diuote and affectionate Clyent to your
Family: but that the memorial of his Father, with whom I held an especial
familiarity, and his own miserable fortunes, bind me to discharge those
offices, which I am tied in duty to perform, for one, that is most near unto
me in all respects of friendship. And the office is this, that I entreat you,
with the deepest passion I am able; that unto those aides, which of your own
voluntary election, without any man's in^ercession you can afford a man of so
great worth, in such extreme misery; you would be pleased, upon my let^ers, to
add some new desire and zeal, o^ assisting him, in all possible occasions.
And, had you be^n at Rome, me thinks, I assure my self, that by your means,
we might have procured the safety of Caecina: of whom, nevertheless, we live
in great hop^, being confident in the clemency of your Colleague. Now, in that
he means, being drawn by the fame of your Justice, to repair to your
Province, as to the haven of greatest security. In the most earnest manner I
can, I request and beseech you, to aid him, to collect the remainder of his
old accounts, and in all other respects, to receive him under your defense and
protection. 'Twill be the greatest tie yt you can lay upon me. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Seruilius. Epist. 67.
WHile I had the government of Cilicia, to which Province, you know, that three
Diocesses of Asia were assigned, I frequented with no man more familiarly, then
with Andron, son to Arthemon, of Laodicea. And besides, that he was the man,
who gave me entertainment in the same City; his customs also were very
conformable to my condition: and he gave me much satisfaction, both in his
life and conversation. And, as I loved him heretofore: so now, since I departed
from mine office, my love's redoubled: because I had found him, in many
occasions, thankful and mindful of me. Insomuch, that I cheerfully
entertained and respected him here in Rome, in acknowledgement of the honor,
which I received from him in Laodicea. This I I have written unto you, both to
intimate, that I recommend him not without a cause; and, that you may think
him worthy of your hospitality. You shall therefore do me a singular
pleasure, if you make him conceive, how much you love me; that is, if you
receive him to your protection; and, assist him, wherein soever honestly you
may, and without your own inconvenience. I shall take it in wondrous good part;
and I double entreat you for performance. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Seruilius Isauricus, Vice-Consull, his Colleague. Epist. 68.
REading your letters, wherein you gave me parti^ular notice of your
navigations, I took great contentment, in that I found you mindful of our
friendship, which so exceedingly pleased me, that nothing could befall me,
more acceptable ^o me. But yet I must tell you, it would turn to my far greater
contentment, if you would write familiarly to me, of the Commonwealth; that
is, of the state of your Province, and of your ordinances. Which, though by
many, I shall understand. For, the report of your n^me will procure, that they
cannot be concealed: nevertheless, I should be glad to understand of it by
your letters. I, touching my opinion of the Commonwealth, will not write often
to you, for the danger which accompanies letters of that importance: but of the
daily occurr^nts, I will write often to you. And yet me thinks, I conceive
some hope, that Caesar, our Colleague, would, and now intends, we should have
some form of a Commonwealth. At whose counsels, it much imports, that you
were present: but, if it turn to your greater benefit, that is to your greater
glory, to govern Asia, and to cure that weak and ill-conditioned part of the
Commonwealth; there is no reason, but I should abate my desire, upon the hope
of your benefit. If any thing fall out, wherein your dignity shall be
interessed, I will labor therein, with such affection and vigilancie, as
greater cannot be required. And above all, I will observe with due respect, your
renowned Father. Whereunto I am bound, by ancient amity, and your benefits,
and dignity. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Seruilius, his Colleague. Ep. 69.
Caius Curtius Mithres is Freeman to Posthumous, my familiar acquaintance; but
he honors and obseru^s me, as much as his own Master. Whenever I was in
Ephesus, I was no less bold with his house, then with mine own: and in diverse
occasions, I have found him to me, both a good, and faithful friend.
Wherefore, if it occur, that either I, or any of my friends have need of
any thing in Asia, I usually write to him: I make use therein, not only of
his fidelity and endeavor; but I command his house and goods, as freely, as if
they were proper to my self. Thus much I thought good to write unto you
somewhat dif^usedly, to give you to understand, that I recommend not unto you
any vulgar person, or, that I discharge this office out of any ambition; but
by reason, that by the intimate familiarity, and viscerall amity, I have with
him, I am thereunto excited. I beseech you therefore, in a suite which he has
about certain lands with one Colophonius, favor me, to back him, so far as
conveniently you may, without your own disparagement, or prejudice. Though I
know his modesty so well, that he will in nothing be bu^thensome unto you. If
by means of this my recommendation, and the merit of his own integrity, he
may obtain, that you will be his friend, and repute him for an honest man: he
will think, he has made the greatest purchase that the world affords. And
therefore I entreat you, the most effectually I can, to take him into your
protection, and to reckon him in the number of your f^iends. In all your
occasions, I will not fail, both with my counsel and endeavors, to do you
any acceptable pleasu^e. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Seruilius, his Colleague. Ep. 70.
BEcause every man takes notice, that you love me, diverse affect, that I
should recommend them to you: I sometimes herein satisfy the vulgar, but most
an end, my friends, as at this present. For, I have singular friendship and
familiarity, with Titu^ Ampius Menander, a thri^tie, diligent, and modest
person. Whose fidelity is well known, both to his Patron, and my self. I
shall take it exceeding well, that you would in any thing, wherein you may,
without your own prejudice, favor him. And this is my especial request unto
you. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Seruilius, his Colleague. Ep. 71.
I Recommend unto you diverse, upon necessi^ie; because our great friendship,
and your good will toward me, is known to every man. And, though I desire
you should be free of your favors, to all those whom I recommend: yet do I
not requ^st it equally to all men. Titus Agusius, in the time of my disgraces,
never left me, either in travails, nauigations, and turmoiles; nay, in my
very dangers he was always with me: neither at this time would he have
departed from me, had I not permitted him. Wherefore, I recommend him to you,
as one of my house, and as my very useful friend. You shall do me a great
pleasure, if you so entr^at him, that he may take notice of the profit and
assistance, that did accrue unto him, through my recommendation. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Seruilius his Colleague. Ep. 72.
BEfore you departed from Rome, I recommended unto you in your garden, as
effectually, as I could, the goods, moueables, reckonings, and possessions
that my necessary friend Caerellia has in Asia; and you, according to your
custom, and continual weighty courtesies, freely took upon you to do any
thing. Now, I hope, you are as mindful of the said business, as you were wont
to be of other matters. Notwithstanding, Caerellia's Solicitors, have written
to me, that it were good to give you often, remembrance thereof, being for the
greatness of your Province, and the multitude of affairs much employed. I
desire therefore that you would be mindful, how freely you promised me all
those favors, which your dignity might afford. I am fully of opinion, that
you have ample authority of satisfying Caerellia, out of that decre of the
Senate, which was enacted in that cause of the heirs to Caius Vennonius.
Wherein notwithstanding, I refer my self to your council, and judgment, as
being to e^terpret it in such sort, as shall appear best unto your wisdom.
For I know, that you have ever highly esteemed the authority of that order. It
only remains, for me to tell you, that wherein so ever you favor Caerellia,
you shall do me a singular pleasure. Farewell.

Cicero to Quintus Philippus Vice-consull. Ep. 73.
YOur government being expired, I congratulate your healthful, and safe
return, with the preservation of your own honor, and great satisfaction to
the Commonwealth. And if I had seen you in Rome, I would presentially have
given you thanks, for the love and favor you showed to my familiar friend
Lucius Egnatius, in his absence, and Lucius Oppius that was present. Antipater
Derbetes uses to entertain me, and I him; and besides, there passes great
familiarity betwixt us. I heard that you are very much displeased with him,
and it grie^'d me. I know not whither he deserved it: but sure I am, that such
a person as you are, would do nothing without just occasion. Howsoever it be:
I entreat you as effectually as possible I can, for our ancient, and true
friendship, that you would be pleased to pardon his sons, who are under your
power, especially, at my intercession. If you think it not prejudicial to
your own reputation; I^ which case I would not request it: for I should have a
respect of greater antiquity to your honor, then to Antipaters acquaintance.
But I verily believe, (yet I may be deceived) that by such an act you shall
rather get praise, then infamy. About this matter, what may be done, and what
you may do for my sake, (for I make no doubt of what you would do) I desire,
(so it be not troublesome unto you,) to be further certified. Farewell.

Cicero to Quintus Philippus, Vice-consull. Ep. 74.
THough I am assured, that out of the love you bear me, and for the familiar
friendship that is betwixt us, you are mindful of my recommendation; yet will
I not omit most effectually, to recommend again unto you my kind friend
Lucius Oppius present; and the affairs of my domestical acquaintance Lucius
Egnatius, absent. The frie^dship and familiarity I have with him, is so great,
as I could not be more careful, if it were mine own cause. Therefore I shall
take it as an extraordinary kindn^sse, if you give him cause to conc^iue, how
I am no less beloved of you, then I give my self to understand. You cannot
do me a greater favor then this, and I earnestly request you to perform it.
Farewell.

Cicero to Titus Titius, son to Titus, Legate. Ep. 75.
THough I am of constant belief, that my first recommendation prevailed much
with you: yet I am desirous to give contentment, to Caius Auianus Flaccus, my
familiar friend: whom, I am not only desirous, but bound, ^o favor wherein
possible I am able: of whom in presence, I spoke effectually to you, when you
kindly made me answer: and with great efficacy, I wrote unto you afterward
thereof. I request you to pardon me, if to give him satisfaction, I may seem
unmindful of your constancy. I desire therefore the same favor at your hands,
which is, that you will permit Auianus, that at all times of the year, he may
conueie his come, whither soever stands best with his commodity. Which
courtesy, in like manner, by my means, he obtained for three years, while
Pompeius had this charge. To conclude; that, wherein you may do me greatest
pleasure, is, to let Auianus know your love toward me, seeing he is assured
of mine to himself. This will be very acceptable to me. Farewell.

Cicero to the Quatuor-viri, and Decuriones. Epist. 76.
THe friendship I enterteine with Quintus Hippius, grows from so many
occasions, as there cannot be found a more absolute, then our conjunction. And
were it not for this, I would follow my accustomed manner; which is, to be
troublesome to you in nothing. For you can bear me sufficient testimony,
that, though I were certain to obtain whatsoever I desired; yet would I never
be burdensome unto you. I request you therefore as earnestly as I can, or am
able, that you will so far favor me, as to use Caius Valgius Hippianus, with
all courtesy, and make an end with him; by exempting, and making free that
possession, which sometimes he bought of you, in the Fregellan territory. If
you satis^ie me in this my request, I shall think, I have received a special
benefit. Farewell.

Cicero to Publius Sulpitius Imperator. Ep. 77.
I Went not often into the Senate, by reason of the conditions of the times:
but having received your letters, and understood, how your honor was herein
touched; I observed that it was my duty to go thither; and that doing
otherwise, I should have wronged our ancient amity, and have performed a
matter unworthy of our benefits, one to the other. Wherefore I went thither:
and willingly advised, that all the Temples of the gods, should publicly be
visited; and thanks rendered to them, for what you had effected in the behalf
of the Commonwealth. And upon every occasion, when either your profit, honor,
or dignity comes in question, I will never fail you, in those end^uours, and
offices, wherein I am engaged. And you shall do me a pleasure to write thereof
unto your friends, notifying unto them my affection, and the desire I have to
write unto you: that so they may securely build upon me, whenever it
occurres, that I may give you any assistance. Marcus Bollanu^ is a friend to
me, of many years standing, an honest man, valiant, and adorned with as many
good parts, as can be desired: I recommend him to you, wi^h all zeal, and
entreat you to let him understand, how this my recommendation, was with you to
his great fu^therance. Which I shall repute as a singular fauour^ and I assure
you, that in him you shall find infinite goodne^^e, and a thankful memory
for benefits received; so that, you will ever remain sa^isfied in his
friendship. Besides this, I would earnestly entreat you, for our frienships
sake, and for that love you have ^uer showed me, that you will t^ke upon you
some trouble in the matter I shall acquaint you with. Dionysius my servant, who
had under his custody, a Library of mine, of great value, having filcht away
many books, and fearing to be punished for it, is fled away: and he is within
your Province. Marcus ^ollanus my familiar friend, and diverse others have seen
him in Naron^: but he telling them, that I had made him free, they belef^ him.
I cannot expre^se how thank^ull ^ should be, if you could s^nd me him back
again. The matter is of no great importance, but the coffeehouse of my
mind is much^ Bollanus will inform you where he is, and what course is to be
taken. If by your means I can recover him, I shall think you have confe^'d
upon me a great benefit. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Allienus, Vice-Consull. Epist. 78.
DEmocritus Sicynius, has not only kindly entertained me, but is al^o my very
familiar friend: which happens not to many, especially Graecians. For in him,
there is naked integrity, worthy valor, noble courtesy, and due observance
toward his ghests: and me, he honors observes, and lou^s, above all others.
You shall perceive, that he is not only the best, amongst his own Citizens,
but also of all Achaia; I only open unto him, and make re^d^e his way to your
knowledge. When you once know him, of your self, (such is your disposition^)
you will repute him worth^e of your ^ri^nd^hi^, and entertainment: my desire
therefore is, that having read these letters, you will t^ke him in^o your
protect^on, and offer him the g^ea^est ki^dnesse you can for my sake. Last o^
all, if (as, I hope,) you shall find him worthy of you^ hospitality, and
f^i^ndship^ Let me request you to embr^ce, and love him, and esteem him in the
number of your acquaintance. Wherein you shall do me a singular pleasure.
Farewell.

Cicero to Caiu^ Allienus, Vice-Consull. Epist. 79.
I S^ppose you conceive, what account I made, of Caius Auianus Flaccus; and by
him I understood, who is a man, of tried sincerity, and mindful of benefits,
what great favor you have showed him. His sons, most w^rthie of such a
Father, and my good friends, whom I singularly love, I recommend unto you with
that zeal, as with greater I could not recommend any. Caius Auianu^ is in
Sicilia, Marcu^ is here with us. I pray vouchsafe to respect Caius, who is
present, and have a care of both their substances. You cannot in this Province,
show me a greater courtesy. This is my petition, which I beseech you, grant
me. Farewell.

THE FOVRTEENTH BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Cicero to his wife Terentia, and children Tulliola, and Cicero. Epist. 1.
MAny write, but every man reports unto me, yt you are virtuous, and valerous
beyond imagination: and that no labors either of mind, or body, are so great,
as they can weary you. How wretched a man am I, that you, who are endued with
so much virtue, trust, Integrity, and courtesy, should (for my sake) be
brought into so great misery. And that our daughter Tulliola should take such
thought for a father that was wont, to be unto her so delightful. But what
shall I say of my sonne^ Cicero? who no sooner began to taste of understanding,
but was implunged in insufferable griefs, and misfortunes. Had I thought, as
you write, that destiny had laid these crosses on me; I could have suffered
them with greater patience: but all proceeds from mine own defect; thinking I
had been loved, where I was envied; and neglecting those, that sought my
acquaintance. But if I had trusted unto my self, and had not so much relied on
the words of foolish, or dishonest friends; we had lived most happily: yet at
this present, seeing our friends comfort us with good hopes, I will strive to
free my self of passion, least I for want of health be not able to second
your endeauours in recalling me. I consider well how much power we have need
of, and how much more easy it had been to have staid at home, when I was
there, th^n to r^turne thither b^ing absent: yet^ if all the Tribunes of the
people before us, and Lentu^us sti^ke as close, (as he makes show) unto us; and
especially, if Pompeius, and Caesar do join wi^h us; we will be hopeful. As
for o^^ (...) should we will do as you inform me, and our friends counsel us.
Touching this place of my abode, the plague is now at length certainly gone
from it: and while it was here I h^d it not. Pla^^us a very kind man desires
me to stay with him; and as yet will not let me go. I was desirous to have
been in a place further out of the way, in Epirus, whereunto neither Hyspo
could come, nor the Soldiers. But Plancus hitherto retains me; hoping it may
so fall out, that we may return, together into Italy. If ever I live to see
that day, and that it be lawful for us to embrace one another; and mutually
regaine our selves, I shall think I have received fruit sufficient of our
interchanged affection. Piso shows so much humanity, virtue, and lou^ toward
all of us, that greater cannot be showed us; I wish, he may take as much
pleasure in it, as I see he will have honor by it. What I have written unto
you concerning my brother Quintus, was not done to reprehend you ^or any thing;
but my desire was, and especially because you were so few, that you should live
together in as friendly manner as was possibl^. I have thanked whom you bid me,
and have written that I had notice given me by you of their favors. Touching
that you write unto me about the sale of our street, my dear Teren^ia, tell
me, I pray you, alas! what will become of us? But if this adversity shall
continue with us, what shall become of our miserable boy? I must not write all,
tears do so abound; least I should set thee also a weeping. Yet thus much I
will write, if our friends be as they should be, we shall have no want of
money; if not, all the money thou can make, will be too little. If thou have
any care of our miserable fortunes, look that woes do not utterly cast away
our wretched son. Let him not want while there is any thing left: he needs
but some good quality, and a moderate estate to raise himself to the rest of
his fortunes. Look to your health, and let me hear from you, that I may know
wh^t is done, and what you are now about, I look hourly for news from you,
that cannot be long a coming. Commend me to Tulliola and Cicero. Fare ye all
well. From Dyrrhachium, the 26. of November.

I Am come to Dyrrhachium, because it is a free City, and kind to me, and
not far from Italy. But if the great concourse of people there, shall
dislike me, I will repair, to some other place, and give you notice.

Cicero to Terentia his wife, and to Tulliola, and Cicero his children. Epist.
2.
Do not suppose that I use to write very long Epistles to any man: except he
write at large to me. And I thereupon judge it reasonable, to make him alike
answer. For first, I know not what to write; and then, at this time, there is
nothing that I undergo more unwillingly. And if this happen to me when I write
to others, what may it do now think you, when I write to your selves: to whom
I cannot endite a letter, which is not accompanied with many tears: knowing
you to be fallen into extreme misery, whom I was ever desirous to behold in
great felicity; which I was bound to endeavor; and had I not been so tymerous
had effected. Piso by his courteous offices has procured, that whereas before I
loved him, now I deservedly stand bound unto him. I have withal possible
efficacy exhorted him by letters, to ^he enterprise which is begun for my
good; and, as I ought I thanked him. You write, how you conceive great ^opes,
in the new T^ibunes of the people. You may well hope, if Pompeius ^fford us his
assistance: but I doubt of Crassus: I perceive wi^h how great a spirit, and how
lovingly you undergo every thing: neither do I wonder at it; but
notwithstanding, it exceedingly greeu^s me, that we are reduced to such a
point, that my mise^ies cannot be e^sed, but wi^h yours. For, Publius Valerius
a very loving man wrote that unto me, which drew from me many tears in reading
it; how from the temple of the Goddess Vesta, you were led ^o ^he Valerian
Table. Alas! dear heart, and my only happin^s! is it then true, that you my
Terentia, to whom all others were wont in their necessities to h^u^ recourse
for help, should now b^e so molested, and put to so much weeping, and
miseries, and that this should p^oc^ed from my error, who have pres^rued
others, to reserve unto my self perpetual a^fl^ctions. Whe^eas you write unto
me about the house, that is, touching the plat of ground: I will ^hen only hold
that I am restored when that is res^ored. But what should I say? the^e things
are not in our power. I^ grieves me that you b^ing poor, and destitute, should
be urged to bear part of the charges, which of necessity we are to be at. Yet
if the matter obtain a wished end, we shall have good recompense for every
thing. But if Fortune no wai^s alt^r, will thou, poor soul, cast away that
little which thou have? Ah, dear heart^ leave the charge unto others, that are
betterable (if they will) to sustain it; do not, if ^ou love me, torment that
weak body of yours, as me thinks you do. For day and night, you present your
self unto my thoughts. I see you undergo the burden of all pains, I know not
how you are able to endure it; And I am afraid, least you ouercharge your self
so much, as you will be enforced to give over: bu^ I also observe, that all
hopes of my safety depend on you. Be therefore careful of your heal^h, to the
end we may attain to that which you desire, and on which you have bent all
your cogitations. I know not to whom I should write; whether to them that write
to me, or to them that you wish me to write unto. To content you, I will
de^erre it no longer. But I would have you send me letters as often as you can;
especially if there be the least certainetie of any hope. Farewell dear
hearts, farewell. From Th^ssalonica the 4. of October.

Cicero to Terentia his wife and to Tulliola, and Cicero, his children. Epist.
3.
I Received three letters from you, by Aristocritus, which I had almost blotted
out with weeping. For, my T^rentia, I am much afflicted, and so much, that I
scarcely live: yet feel I not more hart-greefe for mine own, then for your
miseries; and for those, which all of you have su^fered. Although in this
respect I am more miserable then thou, who art most miserable. For the
bitterness of this fortune is equal to us both, but the blame is only mine. I
should either have accepted of the embassies, by means whereof I might have
shunned the danger; or by my friends endeauours have constantly resisted the
injuries of mine enemies; or else have dyed with resolution. To a worser state,
then that wherein I now stand, I could never have been reduced. Which is the
cause, that I grieve not more for the evil, then for the repro^ch thereof:
being ashamed that my dear wife, and sweet children, by my cowarddize, and
negligence should lead a lif^ so miserable, and so lamentable. You^ unhappy
state hourly presents it self before mine eyes: and because I know how weak
you are of sex: the more am I sorrowful, considering that you cannot undergo
so many troubles without great danger. And besides, I perceive no hope of my
safety. There are two things, which oppose our desires: the hatred of many;
and the envy almost of all men. And as to preserve our former state, little
was requisi^e: so to recover it, infinite labor is required. Nevertheless,
while you are hopeful; I will also support, this my weary, and languishing
body with some hopefulnesse: that in being wanting both to you, and to my
self, as I have been hitherto, despair may not augment our evils. As for
that point, where you write, that I should be wary to remain in a place of
s^curitie: this I can easily perform, because mine enemies shall have small
reason to desire my death, in that they should thereby ease me o^ so many
miseries, which they desire that I should live in. And yet I will obey your
commands. I have thanked my friends, as you enioyn'd me in your letters, and
touching their friendly procurements about my safety, I have written, I was
thereof by you advertised. The conueyer of these letters was Dexippus. For our
Piso, I have heard by all men; and I plainly my self perceive it; that he
bears us wond^rfull affection; which with admirable eff^cts he does also
demonstrate. The gods grant, that together with your self, and our children,
we may long live in the soci^tie of such a son in law. The hope which now
remains is, wholly in the new Tribunes of the people: and only in the first
days of their entry into their office: for if the matter do grow sta^e, it is
no more to bethought of. And for this cause, I have suddenly returned you
Aristocritus, that you may presently write unto me, what beginning the matter
had, and in what state it stands: though I also enjoined D^xi^pus, that he^
should without delay re^urne unto me. And I have written to my brother,
r^questing him that he will not fail, as often as he can, to send me
messengers of purpose. And I remain for no other cause at this instant in
Dyrrhac^ium, but to receive the more speedy aduerti^ements, and to be resident
in a secure place, as I am, assuredly. For I alwai^s favored, and defended
this city. And when I understand that our enemies are coming, I will retire
into Epirus. Where as you write, that if it be my pleasure, you will come unto
me. I like it better you should remain there, considering the greatest part of
my occasions; depend upon your diligence. If you can compas^e any good end, of
that which now you have in hand, I must of nec^ssitie repair to you. But if,
etc. the rest it imports not to write. Upon your first, or at least your second
le^ters, we shall be able to resolve what course to taken write unto me of all
particularly. Though now, I should not attend letters, but an end of this
action. Regard your health. And be secure, that I have nothing in this world,
nor ever had, more dear unto me then your self. Farewell my dear Terentia;
whom in such sort me thinks I daily ^ehold, that with tears I am consumed.
Farewell. From Dyrrhachium the last of November.

Cicero to Terentia his wife, and to Tul^iola, and Cicero his children. Ep. 4.
I Write as seldom to you as I can; because, besides my being daily urged by a
thousand noisome cogitations: when I either write to you, or do but ^ead your
letters, tears flow from me in that abundance, as I am driven of nec^ssi^ie
to give over. Oh! how far better were it for me, not so much to love my li^e?
Questionless, we had made trial either of none at all, or of very little
evil. But who knows whither Fortune has not reserved me still alive, to
comfort me for a time, with hopes, of recovering some Commodity? And if this
fall out, we may in part reform the error we have committed. ^ut if my hard
and extreme lot have left no manner of comfort for me: what can I do more,
(sweet life) then desire to see thee as soon as is possible: And to die
between thy arms. Seeing neither the gods, whom thou have with a pure heart,
adored and worshipped: nor men whom I have ever sought to preserve, have
afforded us any recompense of our deseruings. We were thirteen days at
^rundusium, in the house of Marcus Lenius Flaccus. Observe a singular
integrity: he stuck not to hazard his goods, and his own life for my
safety; neither through fear to incur the penalty of the Law, no less
corrupt, then cruel; did he give over his resolution: but as if no such thing
were, he entertein'd me into his house, maintaining our ancient custom of
mutual hospitality; and performing what soever our amity required. God grant
me the favor, so to requite him with effects, as I will never be wanting to
him in affection. We departed from Brundusium the xxvii. of April, to go
toward Cyzicum: and we will take our way by Macedonia. Out alas! sorrowful
wretch that I am! behold, you are a woman, unhealthful, ouer-wearied, and
afflicted both in body, and mind. My heart will not suffer me, to entreat you
to come. What, can I peradventure refrain from entreating you? Shall I then
remain without you? I am resolved to dispose of my self, after this manner.
If there be any hope of our return, look to further, and reduce it to some
point; that there may be a certainty of what we hope after. But if all hope
leave us, come, I beseech thee, howsoever. And of this be assu^'d: if thou art
but with me, I shall esteem my unhappy banishment the less burdensome. But
what shall become of my Tulliola? I will leave this to your consideration: for
I know not how she should be disposed of. But let matters go well, or ill, a
way must be devised, that she, poor soul, may not loose her dowry, and
together with her dowry, her reputation, which must follow, when she shall
want means, requisite ^or her place, and calling. And what shall my Cicer^
(poor soul, what shall he) do? To speak truth, it were fitting I should
always have him within mine arms, and in my bosom Mort, at this present I
cannon write, so deep a melancholy surprizeth me. I at^^^d to be aduerti^ed,
what you have done: whether you possess any thing, or, (which I f^a^e,)
whither you be stripped of all things. As you write, so I hope, that Piso will
be very favorable. It boots not, to g^^eue at the setting of your slaves at
liberty. It suffices that promise is made to your friends that you shall be
enabled to recompense their service, as they deserved. Hitherto Orpheu^ shows
great fidelity; next to him, there is few, or none, that discharge their duties.
I have freed mine upon this condition; that if it so happen, that together
with our goods we are deprived of their service; they of slaves should become
free, if they can have the favor: But if they were left unto us, that they
should continue all in their former services, except some few. But this helps
nothing. Whereas you exhort me to be of great courage, and to live in good hope
of recovering my safety; I pray God our hopes prove not friuolu^. But
miserable man, when shall I receive your letters? Who will bring them to me? I
would have attended them at Brundusium, but that the Mariners having fair
wind and weather, would needs to sea. I will write no further: comfort thy
self, my Terentia, the best thou can. We once lived gloriously; we were of
high de^gree; it was not our vice, but our ver^ue, that afflicted us. Herein,
it cannot be perceived I any ways erred, but in that together with mine
honor, I lost not my life: yet if ou^ children be glad, that yet we live, what
remains, but with a resolved mind, we should sustain the c^uell assaults of
our adverse Fo^tu^e? I council thee, but not my self. Cl^dius P^il^taerus
se^ues me with great fidelity; but because he is troubl^d wi^h a ^h^um^ in his
eyes, I have sent him back. Salastius will bear himself better then all the
r^st: Pes^^nnius stands grea^ly affected to me. And I hope, he will eu^r be
ready at your commands. Si^a said he would stay and attend me, but he depar^ed
from me at Brundusium. Be as careful as you may of your health; and be
assured, that your misery does far more grieve me, then mine own. Terentia,
my most faithful, and loving Bedfellow; Tulliola my most d^are daughter; and
thou Cicero my last hopes, and comfort, fa^e you all well. From Brundusium, the
last of April.

Cicero to Terentia his wife, and to Tulliola his daughter. Epist. 5.
I Hope you and Tulliola (dear Soul;) are as well as I, and my sweetest
Ci^ero. We came to Athens the xiiij. of October, having had a very dangerous
Navigations, and very slow, through contrariety of Winds. At my landing,
Acastus came unto me with letters, one and twenty days after their date.
Questionless he came very speedily. I received yours; And I answer, that
whereas you doubted, that those you ^ormerly wrote, had never been delivered
me, you shall understand, I have received them all: and I take great
contentment, that you have so diligently aduertis'd me of every thing. The
last, which Acastus brought, are brief: neither do I wonder at it: for, it
may be you daily expect my coming; or to say better, that we shall come
together. And questionless, we are also very desirous, to see you with the
first opportunity. Although, hearing in what state the Commonwealth now
stands, I see too evidently, that we shall come in the midst of great troubles:
and by the letters of sundry friends, sent unto me by Acastus, me thinks, I
perceive, that this civil controversy must be ended with Arms. So that as
soon as ever I come, I shall be enforced to discover my affection. But, seeing
we are to come, we will use all diligence to come most speedily, to the end we
may have more time, to deliberate about this matter; and consequently to
resolve with greater wisdom. I desire, that you would come as far hitherward
as you can, to meet me; so you may do it, without your inconvenience.
Touching the Praetian inheritance, (which doubtless, is an occasion to me of
great grief, considering this benefit accrews unto me by the death, of a man
whom I heartily loved) Take order, in case the outcrie be made before my
arrival, that Pomponius may take into his hands the portion that belongs to
us: and if Pomponius cannot attend it, procure Camillus to take upon him the
charge thereof. What remains further to be done, we will perform at our
coming. And though peradventure at the receipt of these, you are upon the way
to meet us; yet forbear not to procure the performance of what I have
written. We by gods help hope to be in Italy about the midst of November.
You, my sweetest and most desired Terentia, and you Tulliola; if you love us,
endeavor to preserve your selves. From Athens, the xviij. of October. Farewell.

Cicero to his wife Terentia. Epist. 6.
WE neither meet with often mes^^ngers, n^r m^tters to ^rite of by your former
letters, I understood, that ^ou could not make ^ale, of any po^^es^i^^.
W^erefore I would have yo^ find so^e means to satisfy him, whom, you know, I
would not have unsatisfied. Whereas our friend thanks you; I wonder no^, that
you deserve thanks: and deserving it, I as little wonder that she thanks
you. If Pollex be not yet d^parted, by all means dispatch him, without delay.
And be careful of your health: the ^v. of July. Farewell.

Cicero to Terentia his wife. Epist. 7.
I Have put off, and abandoned all pen^^ue molestation, which, not without mine
intolerable coffeehouse, gave me to conceive, that you were in misery;
together with our Tulliola, dearer then my life unto me. And I knew the reason
of the evil, the day after I left you. In the night I vomited a quantity of
mere cho^er, and a^te^ it I began to feel my self so well, as I thought,
some God had cured me. And therefore in acknowledgement thereof, render you
unto the same God, condign thanks, with a religious, and pure heart, as you
are accustomed. I hope I have gotten a commodious ship: wherein being embarked,
I wrote these; which ended, I will write to many of our friends, and recommend
unto them with all possible care, both you, and Tu^^iola. I would exhort you,
to endure constantly the assaults of Fortune, were you not more resolved then
any man whatsoever. Besides, I hope matters are come to such a pass, that you
may remain there most commodiously, and that I once again may come thither,
to defend the Commonwealth, together with mine equals. If you would give me
contentment, first be careful of your health: then, if you think good,
con^inue in those villages, where there is no fear of the soldiers. If corn
grow dear, you may conveniently reside, with your City se^uants in Arpinas.
Our sweet Cice^o sends you a thousand salutations. And I, a double farewell.
The ^ij. of June.

Cicero to his wife Terentia. Epist. 8.
IF you have your health, as I have; all goes well. If you desire to gi^e me
content, be very chairie of your self. For it is written to me, and delivered
for certain, that a fever took you presently after my departure. In that you
certified me of Caesar's letters, you did me a pleasure. Likewise h^reafter if
need shall require, when there is any news, let me know it. Have a care of
your health. The xi. of June. Farewell.

Cicero to his wife Terentia. Epist. 9.
THe infirmities of Dolabella, and of Tullia, add new miseries to mine old
ones. I know not now, what course to take, nor what to do, I am so beleaguered
with molestations. Endeavor to preserve your health, together with our Tullia.
Farewell.

Cic^ro to his wife Terentia. Epist. 10.
I Wrote my mind to Pomponius, more lately then was requisite. Speaking with
him, you shall understand my will. I did not think good to write more
plainly, having to write to him. I pray you, about this present business, and
of other occurrents, let me forthwith be advertised. Look precisely to your
health. The 9. of Iulie. Farewell.

Cicero to his wife Terentia. Epist. 11.
IF you be, as I am, in health, it is well. Our Tu^^ia came hither the xiij. of
June, whose coming did not only not diminish my grief, but infinitely
increased it. Should I not lament, that so loving and constant a daughter, by
my negligence, is fallen into this misfortune: whereas, for the fervent love
she bears me, and for her rare qualities, she deserved a fortune much more
fortunate. I was in the mind, to send Cicero to Caesar, and C^eius Salus^ius
with him. If he go, I will give you notice. Be careful, with all d^l^gence,
to preserve your self. Farewell: The xv. of June.

Cicero to his wife Terentia. Epist. 12.
YOu rejoice at our being arrived safe in Italy, and I desire this your joy may
be perpetual. But daunted in part, with the grief of public ruins, and
partly by injuries, unworthily received, I have taken such a course, as I doubt
of the end. Wherefore, aid us as much as you can. But what can you do? For my
part, I know not. It is not material for you, at this time, to put your self
on the way; first, it is long, and dangerous: Besides, I see not what help
your coming will afford us. Farewell: Brun^usium, the iiij. of November.

Cicero to his wife Terentia. Epist. 13.
IT is true, that before, I wrote unto you about a diuo^ce; bu^, bec^u^^ I know
not wh^th^r this man may easily raise the people, or, whether the people have
any di^po^ion to an innovation, I aduertize you, disc^eetly to weigh the
action. For, as we may fear him, in case he should be provoked: so, on the
contrary, we may hope, that he may be the author of our quietness. Howsoever:
In this so lamentable a case, take that course which is least lamentable.
Farewell. The x. of Iulie.

Cicero to Ter^ntia his wife, and to Tulliola his young daughter. Epist. 14.
It Is well with us, if you be well. You must not hereafter expect, that I
should advise you, what course to take, in that ^ou may herein couns^ll your
selves. If he come to Rome, with an intention, to permit nothing to be done,
otherwis^ then what is b^sitting, it will not be much out of the way, for you
now, to keep still at home: but if he come enflamed with fury, and resolved
to sack the City; I believe in that case, Dolabella himself would hardly be
able to preserve you. And besides this, you must consider, that in delaying
your departure, the ways may be all so laid, that then you cannot go when
you would. Above all, you must observe, whether any wom^n of your quality
continue in Rome: which you may better inform your selves of then I. And if
none remain, for my part, I see not how you can stay there with your honor.
Howsoever the matter go: so the government of these quarters be left unto me,
this will be a very convenient residence for you, and you may either reside
together with me in the towns, or in your Granges. And besides the reasons
above mentioned, I must needs likewise acquaint you with this, that I fear
within few days, there will grow a great dearth within the City. Communicate
with Pomp^nius, and Camillus about all things, and by whom you think good, be
advised: but in any wise, be of a resolute mind: The coming of Labienus stood
us in great stead. Piso also here assists us; For, he attends not his son in
law, Caesar's coming into the City, but he terms him Impious, and leaves
Rome, because he would not see him. You, my dearest souls, write often unto
me, both what you do, and how matters pass there abouts. My brother, and his
son, and Rufus, salute you. Fare ye well: From Minturnae, the xxiiij. of June.

Cicero to his wife Terentia. Epist. 15.
SOme days since I wrote unto you, that I was determined to send Cicero to
meet Caesar: but since I changed my mind, having no certainty of his coming.
For other matters, though there be no news, neuer^helesse, from Si^^, you
shall understand my mind and advice, how we are to bear our selves at this
present. Tullia shall now remain with me. Preserve your health care^ully.
Farewell: The xx. of June.

Cicero to his wife Terentia. Epist. 16.
THough the times are such, as it is not material, that either I should ^xpect
your letters, or you mine. Nevertheless, I daily look for them, and
wh^nsoeuer I have opportunity, I likewi^e write unto you, and I know not why.
V^lu^^^a should have been more officious to y^u, then sh^^ has been: and
that little s^e has done, she might have p^r^or^'d it mo^e diligen^ly, and
w^^h gr^^te^ caution. But what imports this? there ^re other ma^ters of gre^ter
con^^q^^nce and grea^er mol^^tation: which procure ^e tha^ ^ffliction, which
they ar^ gla^ of, that have beaten me from m^^e own opinion^. Be care^ull of
you^ health: The iiij. of January.

Cicero to Terentia his wife. Epist. 17.
IF I had any thing to write, I would do it freely, and very often. You now
see, to what pass matte^s are brought. But how I am a^fected, yo^ may know of
Lept^ and Trebatius. ^ee you have a care of your own health, and Tullia's.
Farewell.

Cicero to Terentia his wife, and to Tu^^iola his daughter. Epist. 18.
I Beseech you, dear souls, to be we^l advised, what you mean to do,
whether to remain in Rome: or to come and live with me in some secure place.
It belongs not only to me, bu^ to you also, to take some course herein. Me
thinks you may continue secu^elie in R^me, by Dolabelia's protect^on: through
whose means, if any violence, or rapine should begin, you might have a way
to preserve your goods, and persons. But on the other side, I fear; seeing all
good men are out of Rome, and have their women wi^h them. So that it would not
b^e much amis^e, that you should come to m^e in the^e parts, which are under my
Government; where you might remain with me, during your pleasure; and when you
would depart, you may be secure in our Gu^ris^ns. In conclusion, I cannot
discern which is the better course. Observe you, what other G^ntle-women do;
and t^ke heed, that you be not enforced to stay, when ^ou would be gone.
Consider there^pon very adui^edly amongst your ^elues, and with our friends.
Cause Philotimus to make Bulwarks about the house, and place a Guard about it.
And I pray you take up Corrier's of purpos^: to the end, no day may pass,
without receiving letters from you. And above all things, as you desire our
healths, look to your own. From Formiae: The xx. of January.

Cicero to his wife Terentia. Epist. 19.
AMongst other exc^eding great sorrows, the sickness of our Tullia goes very
near me. Of whom it imports not, that I write any thing else unto you, being
assured, that you have as great a care of her, as I have. Whereas you desire,
that I would come nearer hand, I see it requisite, and had already done so,
but that I met with many impediments, which as yet a^e not removed But I
expect letters from Pomponius, which I pray you convey pres^ntlie unto me^.
Tender your health.

Cicero to his wife Terentia. Epist. 20.
WE think to be at Tusculanum, within ten, or eleven days. See every thing
be there provided: for it may so fal^ out, that we may bring many with us:
and I believe, we shall continue there sometime together. If there be not a
bathing ^ub within the stoue; let one be gotten: as also all other
necessaries, that belong eith^r to nourish, or preserve us. Farewell: The
xxviij. of September.

Cicero to his wife Terentia. Epist. 21.
I Should be glad you were in health as I was at the wri^^ng hereof. End^uor to
grow strong again. M^ke provision of things necess^rie. Let us have them
^cco^ding to the ^imes. And aduer^ise me of al^ occurren^s. Farewell.

Cicero to his wife Terentia. Epist. 22.
I Should be glad, etc. We daily expect your Corrier's: when they come, w^e
shall peraduen^ure conceive what we are to do, and will presently acquaint
you. Be very careful of your health. Farewell: The first of September.

Cicero to his wife Ter^ntia. Epist, 23.
IF you be, as I am, all is well. Hitherto I can hear no certainty, either of
Caesar's coming, or of the letters, which they say, Phil^timus has. When the
truth is known, I will forthwith advertise you. Be carefu^ly respective of
your health. The eleventh of August.

Cicero to his wife Ter^ntia. Epist. 24.
IF you be as I am, all is well I have at length received letters from Caesar,
full of love and courtesy: and it is reported, he will be here, sooner then is
imagined. When I have made my determination, You shall know, whether I mean to
meet him; or expect him. Dispatch the Corrier's with all expedition. And be
very careful of your health. F^rewell: The x^j. of August.

THE FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Cicero vice-Consull, to the Consulls, Praetors, Tribunes of the people;
Senate, and people of Rome. Epist. 1.
IF you be well, etc. But that I thought Marcus Bibulus vice-Consull, could
have given you cert^ine information, of the events succeeded in his Province: I
would not have omitted, so soon as the news was brought me, speedily to
advertise you, that the Parthians with almost their whole forces, had passed
over Euphrates. Though this were reported to me for a certain truth: yet I
thought it not my office, to write unto you of the particul^rs of another man's
Province. But perceiving the same news, every day more verified, and that it
was a matter of that consequence; and because we did not hear that Bibulus was
come into Syria; and besides all this, in that the managing of this war,
app^rt^ined as it were unto us both: I judge it requisite to give you
aduertisment the^^of. The Ambassadors of King Antiochus Commagenus, were the
first, that certefied me^ of a great Army of Parthians, passing over
Euphrates. Having heard this, some being of opinion, that credit should not be
so suddenly given to the foresaid King, I thought it expedient to attend a
while, till tidings might arrive of greater certainty. The xix. of September,
conducting mine Army into Cilicia, between the confines of Lycaonia, and
Cappadocia, letters were delivered me, from King Tarcondim^tus, who has report
to be as faith^ull an associate of the people of Rome, or more trusty, then
any beyond Mount Taurus. Wherein, he gave me to understand, how Pacorus, son
to Orodes, King of the Parthians, was passed Euphrates, with a mighty
Cauallerie, and encamp^ed himself under Ty^a. And that great tumults were
raised through all Syria. The selfe^same day, I rec^iued letters to the same
effect, from Iamblicus the- Arabians Phyla^^: Who is thought to be well
affected, and a friend to our Commonwealth. These news being heard; though I
had little security, of the doubtful valor of our associats, who would take
no notice thereof, expecting ^ome present innovation: yet I hoped that they
were become somewhat more friendly to the people of Rome, amongst whom I had
already been, and who by ^ryall, had found our integrity, and clemency: and
that Cilicia might the better be confirmed in loyalty, if it had but some
proof of our equity. And to this effect, and for the suppressing of those
Cili^ians who were in arms; and to make the enemy who was in Syria to
conceive, that the Roman^ Army, did not only not draw back, as daunted by
these rumors, but also aduanc^d, as resolved to vanquish, I began to march with
the Army toward Mount Taurus. It is not requisite to relate unto you, in what
state these Provinces are, in that you had other means to understand it. But
if my authority be of any esteem with you, in those things especially, which
you have heard, and whereof I am an eye witness. I would advise you to send
succors hither, which though they shall come later then was convenient, yet is
it good to s^nd them. You know that I came to the government of this Province,
with little strength, though so dangerous a war was feared, as now is
expected. And though I knew my self weakly provided, to defend it; yet for
mine honors sake, I would not refuse such a charge, preferring your authority,
before any disaster that might befall mee^ And now, seeing that to succeed,
which was feared, I inform you, that if you send not in defense of th^se
countries, as great an Army as you use to send to those places, that are
pestered with wars of gr^at^st consideration. You are in danger to loose
^he^e Provinces, which you well know to be of weighty consequence to the
R^mane people. Neither must you put any confidence in the soldiers that are
here, for they are but few; and these few, cannot look the en^mie in the
face. And they have g^uen so bad a trial of themselves, that Marcus Bibulus,
being in Asia, in great want of men, as a very prudent man, would not
ent^rtaine them, although he had your license to that effect. We can hope for
little from our f^iends, for, having been pillaged, and oppressed by our
governors, they are either so weak, that they can afford us no aid, or bear
us such an hatred, as it would be mere ^olly, to ^^ust to them in any
enterprise. King D^iota^us is with all his forces at our command. Cappadocia is
empty. The other Kings and Princes, cannot do much, neither are they will^ng.
I will not be discouraged, though I want soldiers. And I hope, I shall not
want direction. The Event is uncertain. God grant we may come off with safety;
for I make no doubt of honor. Farewell.

Cicero vice-Consull, to the Consuls, Praetors, Tribunes of the people: Senate
and people of Rome. Epist. 2.
I Could not arrive in my Province before the last of August; through the
difficulty of my iou^ney, as w^ll by sea, as by land. But being come thither,
I began p^e^ently to view the Arm^e, and to furnish it with what was
necessary. And though I had but weak means, yet h^uing respect to that which
you enjoined me, I wrought so, that by mine industry, and diligence, I
provided it of all things necessary. This being done, news, and letters
coming every hour, how the Parthians were come down into Syria, with all
their forces: I resolved to march by Lycaonia, by the Isaur^, and through
Cappadocia; fearing much, least the Parthians might get out of Syria, and fall
into my Province. Whereunto they had an open way, marching by Capadocia, which
is an open passage. And doing as I determined, I took my way through that part
of Cappad^cia, that confineth v^ on Cilicia. And coming with my Army to a
certain town called Cybistra, lying on the side of Mount Taurus, there ^
encamped; to the end that Artuasdes king of the Arme^^ans might know, howso^uer
he were affected, that the Roman Army was upon his confines. And besides
this, to have the supportation of King D^i^tarus, a loyal friend to our
Commonwealth, Who by his counsel, and force might greatly assi^t us. Here
therefore pitching our T^nts, for the speedy receiving of aduertisements out of
Syria, and sending my Cauall^rie into Cilicia, that the Cities there,
perceiving my ariuall; might the rather pers^uer in their fidelity; I staid
there for the space of three days: Which I spent in a very important, and
necessary office. Which was^ that I off^r'd my self to king Ariobarzanes, a
very just King, and friend to the Romans, promising him ^ll aid and succor,
for the defense of himself, and of his kingdom: and causing him to
understand, how affectionately you had recommended him unto me, and with how
great honor to himself, you seemed to hold him in high esteem: in that the
Roman Senate, never used so loving an action to any king, as they had done to
him, giving him no slender testimony of the affection you bear him, and of
his own worth, for which you reputed him worthy of your protection. The King
having heard this Embassy, he began, first, to thank you in the best manner
he could, and then my self; taking it for a great grace, and wonderful honor,
that the Senate, and people of Rome, should have so great a ca^e of his
sa^etie, and that I used so much diligence to let him know it. And so
proce^ding in his discourse, he told me to my great contentment, how he ^^ued
fre^ from all fear, and suspicion, as well of his life, as of his kingdom,
whereat re^oycing with him, and expressing the conten^ment of mind I felt
thereby^ I exhorted him to be minde^ull of the horrible accident of his father^
death, and carefully to look to himself, and by our advise to lay for his
own safet^e. After this, taking le^ue of me, he returned to Cybistr^. The day
after he came much disturbed, and lam^nting to me in my Tents, togeather^ with
Ariar^thes hi^ brother, and with his fathers ancientest f^iends, who l^mented
no less then himsel^e; and having pitti^ully demanded aid of me, I cast with
my self, what might be the meaning thereof. And ^e at larg^ laid open unto me
the occasion; inferring, how certain practices were di^couered, intended
against him. Which hith^rto had lain hid, in respect, that they who might have
revealed them, for fear had concealed them. And though they saw them^elues
freed of the danger, yet they f^ared to discover them; but being secu^ed in my
power, they boldly made them known. And amongst these was his loving, and
courteous bro^her: who also in my presence affirmed, how he had been provoked
to make a way to the kingdom, by his brothers death, in that he could not
reign while he lived: but for fear of worie, he never revealed it to him
before my arrival: which procured such security, that these treasons came to
be discovered. Understanding the matter, I entreated the king to be
circumspect, and to use all means and endeavor, for the preservation of his
life and State: And I exhorted those faithful friends and followers, who were
so beloved of his father, that bearing in mind, the disastrous accident
befallen the old King, with all care and vigilancie, they should intend the
preserving of this man present. Her^upon the King requesting me, to lend him a
part, of my horse, and infanterie, though I had not only ample license from
you, but also strict iniunction, that so I might, and should do: yet the
necessities of the Common^wealth enforcing me, to conduct my Army upon the
confines of Cilicia, without interposing any delay, for the bad news which
every day came out of Syria; and supposing the King able enough to defend
himself, without the succor of my Army, in that the trecheries were now made
known: I persuaded him, that the first demonstration of himself to be a king
was, to preseru^ his own life; then that he should be a severe persecutor of
whomsoever had committed any treason against his person; that he should punish
the heads of the conspiracy; and bear himself chearefully to others, for the
rooting of all suspicion out of their minds. And that he would rather make use
of mine Army, to daunt the courage of the delinquen^s, then any ways to
contest with them. Heereunto, adding, that your decree would be of so great
force; that no man d^^st innou^te any thing; they conceiving, that I had
express commission from you to aid him, and to cur^e their insolency, that
plotted against him. And after I had with lively reasons persuaded him to be
of good courage, I raised my Camp from the foresaid place, directing my march
toward Cilicia. And so I departed out of Capp^do^ia, having miraculously
preserved both the life, and state of Ariobarzanes. Whom, you had prudently
recommended unto me, granting him first, out of your own ^reewill, the tit^e
of a King, by decree's full of affection. Wherein you showed the great care you
took of his s^fetie; whereof I thought good to give you notice, that you might
vnde^stand, how you, by your circumspection prevented a great evil, which ere
long, would have produced wicked effects. And I write the more willingly to you
he^reof, because me thinks I discerned in king Ariobarzanes, so many, and such
like signs, of wit, fideliti^, and love, as it may be conceived, that not
without special reason, you took so principal a care of his well doing. Fare
you well.

Cicero to Marcus Cato. Epist. 3.
THE third of September, the Ambassadors of king Antiochus Commagenus came unto
me there, where I had pitched under Iconium, bringing news, how the son of
the Parthian king, kinsman to the king of the Armenians, with an innumerable
company of Paribians, and a great number also of other nations, was come to
the banks of Euphrates, and had already begun to transport his Soldiers.
H^reunto annexing, how it was reported, that the king of Armenia would make
some incursion into Cappadocia, whereof I was desirous to adue^tise you, for
our friendships sake, not being willing to write publicly thereof, for two
reasons; one because the Ambassadors informed me, that the foresaid king
Commagenus, presently dispatched messengers to the Senate with letters, wherein
he certified them of all: the other, because I made reckoning that Marcus
Bibulus, vice-Consull, being departed from Ephesus, ever since the amidst of
August, and having had fair winds, was now come into his Province, and so
consequently, with greater certainty, might write unto the Senate, of the
events of Syria. And because I see all other means excluded, of defending
these Countries; I labor to purchase the love, and good will of the people, and
to keep our Colleaga^es in fidelity. And nothing else occurring worthy of
in^ormation, I beseech you to love, and favor me, as you were won^ to do.
Farewell.

Cicero to Marcus Cato. Epist. 4.
BEing resolved, to make a suit unto the Senate, which questionless in it
self, is just and honest; neuer^helesse, I thought fit therein to use your
authority as an instrument: knowing what favor, and assi^tance, the rare
qu^lities of your mind may afford me: which have brought you into such
reputation with every man, that your means in obtaining any great matter of
moment, are exceeding powerful. And to this effect, I was d^sirous in this
present letter, fully to advertise you, of the course I took, to retain the
ami^ie of our associat's; and of the Justice, and Cha^itie, which I showed to
their Sub^ectes: hoping that by this way, I should more easily incline you, to
favor me. The last of July I was in my Province, and perceiving how it was a
season, to repair to the Army without any delaie: I stayed only in Laod^cea
three days, in Apameae four, three in Sinadis: and as many more in
Philomelum: and leaving in all these towns multitudes of soldiers. I
disburdened many other Cities, who were surcharged with intolerable
tributes, and heavy vsuries: and cleared them of infinite debts insufferable;
growing by taxations, which were imposed upon them, beyond all reason. And
because the Army, was disseuer'd, through a certain disorder, growing before
my arriual; upon which cause, five Cohorts of it, were withdrawn, under
Philomelum, without either Legate, or T^ibune; and finally, without so much as
a Centurion; the remainder of the Army lying in Lycaonia, I gave Commission to
Marcus Anneius the Legate, to reconduct the said cohorts thither, where the
others were: and so knitting together the whole Army, that he should encampe
himsel^e there in Lycaonia, under Iconium. After, he having performed all
things according to mine order given him, I came to the Camp, the xxvi. of
August: having first drawn together, a good number of the best foreign
soldiers I could take up, both foot, and horse, besides those, which were
voluntarily offered me, by the free Nations, and those Kings, who are in league
with us. In the mean while having mustred my men, I directed my m^rch toward
Cilicia. And the first of September being on my way, Ambassadors ouertooke m^,
from king Commagenus, which being all astonished, and fraught with fear,
related to me for a certain truth, how the Parthians were passed into Syria;
whereat my mind was wonderfully troubled, in respect of Syria, and mine own
Province, and bri^fly, in respect of all Asia. Wherefore I resolved too, to
hold on my way by that part of Cappad^cia, which confineth with Cilicia;
perceiving that if I should fall into Cilicia, I might easily de^end it,
through the natural si^uation of Mount Amanus, (for there are but only two
entries, out of Syria into Cilicia, and both of them are narrow, that with a
very few men, the enemies passage may be stopped, and on the part of Syria,
Cilicia could not be better fortified) but Cappadocia I feared: because it lay
open to Syria, and is exposed to the danger, that might accrue from bordering
kings. Who, though they be our friends, yet dare they not manifest themselves,
enemies to the Parthians. Therefore, in the furthest part of Cappad^cia, not
far from Mount Taurus, under the town of Cybistra, I encamped; both to
defend Cilicia, and to supplant the new disseignes o^ bord^ring Nations,
holding Cappadocia. And in the mean time, ^umors on all sides being sp^ead,
and a great war expected, king ^^^^tarus, a wise, and v^lian^ man, (of whom
b^^h you, and I, together with the whole S^^at^, had ever a singular good
conceit, ha^ing found him upon all occasions faithful, and w^ll aff^cted to
the people of R^me,) sent Ambassadors to me, info^ming me, that he would come
with all h^s Forces into my Camp. Wher^pon, I, being moved, through so loving
and cour^eous a demonstration, gave him thanks by letters, exhorting him to
hasten his coming as much as was possible^ and having stayed at Cybistra five
days, to furnish my self of things necessary for the war, I delivered king
Ario^a^z^nes from an imminent peril, which before he had not perceived. And,
being ^ecommended to me, at your requ^st by the Senate, I did not only procure
his safety, but so effected, that he might cause himself to be both obeyed,
and feared. Besides this, I pr^uailed so far with the same King, that he showed
favor to Metra, and that Athen^us, whom you so seriously recommended to me.
Who through the malice of Athenaides had been banished: so that he now
maintains them about him, in great, and honou^able fashion. And perceiving
what war, might e^sue, between king Ariobarzan^s, and the Priest, if the
Priest with Arms meant to defend himself: as the common opinion was he would
do, being a powe^^ull young man, and furnished with horse and foot, and which
imported most, with money, being favored by them, that affected innovation; I
caused ^im to depart out of the kingdom, and so accommoda^ed ^he Kings
affai^es, as without tumult, or Arms, he might bear^ himself as a King, and
live without any ^ealousie, keeping a royal guard within his Palace. In the
mean ^pace, by letters received from diverse; and by messengers arrived, I
understood, how a great Army of the Parthians, and Arabians, made approach to
Antiochia: and that a great troop of their horse, who were gotten into
Cilicia, were discomfited and hewn in pieces, by my Cauallerie, and Praetorian
Infant^rie, who we^e of the g^arison of Epiphanea. Whereupon, seeing that the
Parthia: Nation, giving over the enterprise of Cap^adocia, drew near to
Cilicia; with great days iourneyes, I conduct^d the Army toward Mount
Amanus: whither being come, I had advertisement, how the enemy was ris^n from
before An^iochi^, and Bibulus was (...) thereinto. And hearing that D^^^tarus
wa^ hasting tow^rds me, with a strong Cau^llerie, and Infant^rie, and mul^itude
of Forces: I sent him word, that I now saw no ne^d, why he should remove
himself so far from his ^ingdome: but upon any occurr^nt, I wou^d suddenly
give him notice. Af^^r these events, retaining a firm resolution, to pacify
the people of Mount Amanus, and to expel them, that ever were enemies, though
I came with an int^ntion, to ^uccour both the one, and other Province, if the
time permitted: nevertheless, I judging, that this would redound to the
benefit of both those Provinces; I thought it most expedient to bring my
determination ^o effect. And therefor making a show of departing from the said
Mountain, and removing about a days journey off: and pitching my tents under
Epiphan^a, the xij. o^ October, about the shutting in of the ^uening, I, with
the most active of my soldiers advanced: and so marching all night, at break
of day, we asc^nded the mountain; and d^^^ding the Army, part rem^ined under
mine, and my brothers command, part I committed to Caius P^ntinius, and the
rest I left to Lu^i^^ An^cius, and Lucius Tullius, who are all the Legates I
have: and so marching on in thi^ ^quipage, we ass^i^^d the enemies on a
sudden: of whom some were sl^ine, some taken, having no time left them for
flight. P^ntinius beleaguered Erana: Which being the Metropolitan of Amanu^^
may rather be termed a city, then a Borough; and moreover, Sepyra, and
Commoris. Which town^s were very strong, de^ending themselves resolutely. But
yet they were so oppressed, that in the end with great^ slaughter of the
enemies, they were taken. And this assault beginning before day light,
continued till two hours within the night. Besides ^his, we took six small
towns, and burnt diverse others. After these e^fects ensued, we pitched at the
foot of Amanus, called by the name of Al^xanders Altars; in which place,
staying some four days, we spent the time in extinguishing our enemies, and
in ^orraging, and wasting that part of Am^nus, which lies against my Province.
These things being performed, I conducted mine Army within sight of
Pindenissus, a Borough of privileged Cilicians. Which is seated upon a very
high mountain, a place inex^ugnable, and inhabi^ed by men, who always scorned
^o be governed by their own Kings, much less by others. And perc^iuing that
they gave receptacle to all that fl^d, making op^n defense, through hope they
had, that ^he Par^hian^ would arrive to their succor: me thought the honor of
the Roman sovereignty, spurred me forward, to suppress their insolency,
that others thereat might be astonished, who stood ou^ stiff against our
dominion. I therefore impaled, and entrenched them, and I beleaguered them,
with six Bulwares, and encamped about them, with as great an extent as I was
able. And I oppugn'd it with Countermures, shelters, and tourrets. And so,
battering it with diverse engines, and assailing it with Crosse-bow shot, with
great labor, and without any disturbance, or charge to our Associates, I took
it, within the space of less then two months. For they within, perceiving the
City burnt, and ruined on every side, out of necessity yielded themselves. A
little beyond, are the Tibarani, as wicked and audacious as the former. Who
hearing of the taking in of Pindenissus, sent me hostages. And then I dismissed
the Army, (winter being now come on,) to their several quarters. And gave
charge to Quintus my brother, that he should disperse the Army, in the taken,
and suspected Buroughs. Now be as^ured, I shall repute it for a great honor,
if, when these my actions are related to the Senate, you will but approve, that
a thankful demonstration may be made thereof. And, though I know it to be the
custom, o^ ma^ure, and qualified men, to employ one another in such like
cases, and to add their ^arnest entreaties: nevertheless, I think it may
suffice me, only to have given you information thereof. Calling to mind, how
many times, you have with your sentences, favored me, in how many places
exalted, and honored, and upon how many occasions benefitted me: your words I
ever est^emed of such power, that when soever you commended me, I was sure to
compass all my pretenses. And finally, I remember, when not minding to grant
the celebration of a public feast, unto a famous man, and endued with
singular integrity; you said you would grant it him, if it were demanded for
ma^ters effected by him, as Consul in the City. And the same honor you
yielded to me in my gown: not by virtue of Arms, as it was granted to many:
but, (as never any had it;) for my Countries preservation. I forbear to
allege, how for my sake, you cared not to excite against your self many
enemies, to expose your self to many perils, and to resist the violence of my
Fortunes. Which you were ready to oppose, even ^o the end, if I had been so
pleased. And last of all, that you reputed mine, your enemy; whose death you
also approved, defending Milo's cause, in the open Senate. So that I might
easily perc^iue, how worthily you este^med o^ me On my p^rt, I will not now
produce the good ^ffices, I ever performed for you; but only ^n affectionate
enclination toward you: Through which, I was enforced not alone, to reverence
you in heart, and imitate your example, and your virtues, (For, there is none
that does not so much) but in all my actions, in al^ my writings, as well
Greek, as Latin; and bre^fly in all those Sciences, wherein I exercised my
self, I could not, but prefer you before all men, as well those, whom we know
by sight, as those whom fame has given us notice of. You will, peradventure,
demand of me, what the reason is, I make so great an account, of receiving
this favor from the Senate? To which, I will freely answer, because I think I
can, and ought so to do; as well by reason of our studies, as for our inward
friendship, and also for the domestical familiarity, that has ^eene betwixt
our fathers. If ever there were a man, that by nature, (ney, (^f mine own
affection deceive me not) that out of judgment and learning) never relished
the vain praises, that are given by the vulg^r; I certainly am that man. And
thereof my Consulship can give testimony; wherein, as in all my life past, I
confess, I have practiced those courses, from whence a true glory might ari^e
unto me. Bu^ yet I was ever of this opinion, that glory should should not be
affected. And that this is true: refused I not, the Province assigned to me by
the Senate? Which, being munified, and secure, yielded me me undoubted hope^
of a Triumph. And when I might with little labor, have obtained the Augurall
dignity, as you cannot but conceive; did I not contemn it? but after I
r^ceiu'd that injury, which notwithstanding, turned to my great renown;
although you ever termed it the ruin of the Commonwealth; I applied all my
endeavor, that the Senate and people of Rome, might favor me, with all titles
of honor, for a sign, as it were, of mine innocence. Whereupon, afterward I
took upon me the Augureship, which at first I cared not for: and the same
honor, which the Senate is accustomed to grant those men, that by arms have
augmented the State of the Commonwealth, heretofore by me contemned; I now
seek, that with just title it may be also relucent in me. And to the end, my
mind may be herein satisfied, (and in this may b^e perceived a little spark
of desire, to cure the wound of my recei^ed injury;) Though before I told you,
I would not entreat you, to lend me your aid, and help; now, with my whole
heart, I request your furtherance. But not, unless my actions at this present
be such, as do not only not seem frivolous; but of that moment, that many
have for matters of less consequence, been with greatest honors, by the
Senate dignified. And surely, if I have truly observed your renowned virtues,
as in effect I have (for you know, with what vigilant attention, I use even to
collect your words) I conceive, amongst the rest, how you were wont, not only
to look into the actions of Captains valiantly atchiued, but also into their
customs, life, and institutions: and consequently, to honor them, according
as th^se qualities were in them, more, or less resplendant. Which, if you
please to consider in my actions, you shall discern, that to prevent the
rebelling of those people, who perceiving so great a war ready to ruin them,
would presently have revolted; I betook my self to the safeguard of equity
and moderation: And by these stratagems, I have compassed such designs, as by
no Army were ever atchiued: having drawn these Associates ^o our amity, who
were our capital enemies: and reunited those subjects with our dominion; who,
perceiving things in a commotion, were alien^ted; expecting to what part,
Fortune would be inclined. I know not what conceit has transported me
further then was requisite; especially with you, to whose ears, the complaints
of al those people come, which are our Associates. Of the aboue-mentioned
succes^es, they will plentifully inform you, who think themselves
re-established by mine ordinance. And omitting to allege, that there is not
any one man, who will not concur with me, in making a faithful relation of my
events; They of the Isle of Cyprus, and the Kingdom of Cappadocia, shall be
the men, who shall speak unto you, in my commendation. The like will be done,
as I suppose, by your especial friend, King Deiotarus. These put all together,
cannot peradventure, speak so far, that they can with words, add any thing
to the effects. But because in all ages, there was a lesser number of those
that could subdue their own appetites, then of those, that knew how to
vanquish an enemy; certainly, you ought to repute my operations the greater,
and more just, comparing with the excellency of arms, these parts which are
more rare, and found with greater difficulty. I will not proceed to more
^fficacious entreaties But, as it were, distrusting to be heard, I will call
Philosophy to mine aid, which is the dearest thing that I esteem in the
world, and the most worthy gi^t, that ever the Gods bestowed upon humane
generation. This communion therefore of studies, whereby (, both of us, having
from our childhood, applied all our thoughts and endeavors thereunto); we have
almost alone, brought that ancient and true Philosophy, (which some hold, to
taste of sloth and idleness,) into the Foru^, and Commonwealth, and almost
into the army; shall pre^ch my deserts unto you: which, I suppose, Cato cannot
(but unlawfully) deny. Wherefore assure your self; that if it so happen, that
the Senate, through your persuasion, grant me this honor; I shall repute, I
have a^tained to my intention, by the means I most desired, that is, by the
love you bear me, and your own authority. Farewell.

Marcus Cato to Cicero, Imperator. Epist. 5.
Having understood of the vigilant care you have taken of the people committed
to your charge, and the Justice you have executed in your government: and your
zeal, in procuring their happiness. I have found such contentment therein, as
our friendship, and the love I bear unto my Country, requires. Which,
notwithstanding, to me is no new thing, nor to any that have known the divine
form by you observed, in the Regiments of Rome. wherefore, not thinking it
fit, that your praises should be concealed, having with innocence, and good
counsels, defended the Province, preserved the Kingdom of Ariobarzanes, with
the King himself; and recalled to the obedience of our Empire the
Confederates; I spoke openly in the Senate, in testimony of your virtues,
which had produced so happy effects. The Senate vnd^rstanding your desire,
according to the ancient order, did del^berate, that all the Temples of the
City should be visited. And, if, for that which you have effected, not by
any favor of prosperous Fortune, but by means of your own moderation and
prudence, you had rather, the people of Rome should give thanks to the
immortal Gods, then acknowledge it from your self: I in like manner rejoice
thereat. But if you affect this honor, esteeming it an earnest of your
Triumph; And would for this, have us more bouud to Fortune, then to your self;
Know, that Triumph does not always second such honor. In my opinion, it is
far greater glory, when the Senate judges, that the Province was maintained
and preserved rather by the clemency and sincerity of the Captain, then
either by the force of Soldiers, or the Gods benignity. And about this point,
I have been longer then usual, to make you conceive the great desire I have,
to settle you in this opinion; that I have both procured that for you, which in
my judgment did accrue most unto your greatness: and that I rejoice, that you
have obtained, what you most desired. Farewell. Love us, and as you have begun,
prosecute the affairs of the Commonwealth, and our Associates, with
diligence, and severity.

Cicero to Marcus Cato. Ep. 6.
NAEVIUS, as I remember, by the mouth of Hector, says; I find, O Father,
inestimable contentment, in hearing my self commended by you, a commendable
person. The like may I say, who think I have gained wonderful glory, because
you congratulate with m^e, for my obtained honor, and much more, in that with
the testimony of your opinion, you have praised my actions. For that Fame,
which springs from the judgment of some grave man, and one of authority,
augmente^h a man's r^nowne and reputation; and eu^ry man presumes, that it
proceeeds from truest virtue. But what in this I take for a singular favor,
and yields me high contentment, is, that I conceive, how in respect of our
friendship, you have been most liberal to me of that, which you would
willingly have afforded any, for the t^uths sake. And if our City, in which,
it is a miracle to find one Cato, had not only that one, but did abound in
many Cato's, there is no Pomp, nor Triumph so magnificent, which I would not
esteem, as nothing in comparison of the praises which you have delivered of
me. For, according to my opinion, and in their judgment, who, with discree^
and sound understanding, respect the end of true glory: nothing in the world
could have add^d unto my good name so much, as by your speeches has been
added. In which, as I have been advertised from home, you exalted me to
heaven. I will not contend, in alleging the reasons, that made me not
ambitious; but desirous to purchase unto my self that gen^rall grace, which is
so much esteemed; having written thereof at large, in my last letters. And
though you infer, that a m^n should not bend to such like respects, this no
ways distas^s me, for ^'is true, that honors should not be so openly hunted
after; but when they are o^f^red by the Se^^te, they ought not to be re^used.
And because it pleases me to suppose, that the Senate, in recompense of my
labors sustained in the service of the commonwealth, reputes me not unworthy
of an ordinary favor. In such a case I desire no other from you, but after you
have granted me, what your own judgment implies; that you will also rejoice,
if I happen to attain to my desire, as you rejoiced at the honor, which not
long since was conferred on me. Whereof I know, you took that contentment
which was requisite; in that you were present, at the recording of the decree
thereupon passed; considering that such del^berations are usually registered, by
the dearest F^iends of that part, whom the Act concerns. I hope we shall
shortly see one another again, and God grant, in a better State, then I can
expect of the Commonwealth. Farewell.

Cicero Vice-consull, to Marcus Marcellus Consul. Ep. 7.
I Am wonderful glad that you obtained the end of your rea^onable desire. For
your piety toward your friend^, and love toward your country deserved the
reputation, which your sing^lar, and excellent virtues in your Consulship have
procured you: wherein, you have set up a ladder, as it were, for Caius
Marcellus, to mount unto the same degree of dignity. I am assured, there is
none in Rome, that will not show himself therewith, as contented as we do.
Who being sent by you, to the uttermost bounds of our Empire, do highly exalt
you, with just and true praises. For, though I have specially loved you from
your childe-hood; and you have not only satisfied me at all times, and upon
any occasion, but also reputed me worthy of all honor: Nevertheless,
observing the kind part, that you showed to your brother, and the singular
grace that the people of Rome have afforded you: the love I formerly bare you,
is manifoldly redoubled. And I will not conceal, how I find ample
satisfaction, when I hear from prudent persons, and those worthy of credit,
how in all opinions, actions, in all our endeavors and proceedings, we both
aim at one mark. Now, if to the other excellent operations of your
Consulship, you also add this, that a Successor may forthwith be s^nt me, or
that my time be not prorogued, which you limited me by decree, and by the Law,
I shall remain highly ^atisfied. Be careful of your health, and love, and
de^end me, as you were accustomed. Touching news of the Parthians, not
minding yet to advertise the Senate, I thought not good to write to you the^of:
for in writing to the Consul, I might seem, as it were, to write unto the
Senate. Farewell.

Cicero Vice-Consull, to Caius Marcus, Consul ^lected. Epist. 8.
TO my wonderful content, I understand you are created Consul; which dignity
the Gods felicitate unto you, and advance from good to better: that you may
administer it, with your own, and your fathers honor, giving such testimonies
of your valor, as I desire you should; both because I have found, in the great
instabilitie of my fortunes, how heartily you loved me, and also in that the
infinite benefits I have received from your ^ather, bind me to lou^ you; and
consequently to wish you all happiness: he never failing me of his aid and
favor, either in my misery or prospe^itie. Besides, your Mother a virtuous
Lady, and of great magnanimity, has manifested by ^uident effects the
inexplicable good will she bears unto me; having labored in my safety and
honor, with the greatest feru^ncie, that can be required in a wom^n. Whe^fore I
entreat you, to love and d^fend m^, while I remain in this government.
Farewell.

Cicero vice-Consull, to Marcus Marcellus his Colleague. Epist. 9.
I Am wondrous gl^d, that M^rcellus is made Consul, and that your wishes have
taken ef^ect. And no news could have come of greater ^oy unto me not only in
respect of himself, but also in judging that your virtue merite^h al felicity.
To this may be annexed, that not only when For^une favored my aff^ires, but
also when she frowned on me; I made infallible trial of the sincerity o^ that
affection which you bare me: and finally, I have always found your hou^e,
ready to procure my honor, and safet^e, at all times when need required.
Wherefore you shall do me a favor, to manifest this my contentment to your
wife Iunia, a most grave and worthy Lady. I beseech you, love, and defend me
according to your accustomed manner. Farewell.

Cicero Imperator, to Caius Marcellus Consul, son to Caius. Epist. 10.
BEhold, Fortune concurring with our desire; in hau^ng ministered an occasion,
whereby the family of the Marcelli, and Marcellini, who, in loving of me, were
always of one cons^nt, has found a means to certify me of the a^^ection
which they bare me; You are exalted to the Consulship, which I greatly desi^ed.
And in truth, neither could I have had greater hap, then to have a Consul to
mine own mind, no^ you meet wi^h fitter times, to make me c^pable of your
affection: For, I hau^ng performed some service in the behalf of the
Commonwealth, it lies in you to manifest, how far you love me, by intimating
to the Senate, how worthy I am of commendation; and by persuading them to
remunerate my dese^uings. I would therefore, if you find the S^nate thereunto
inclined, that when my letters are read, you would take the pains (as with
ease you may,) to procure, that the honorables^ decree may be thereupon made
that you are able. If the knot which fastens me together with your kindred,
were strong^r ^hen the chain, that binds me to your friendship, I would
choose them for my means. Whom you know, to with me very well, but it impo^ts
not. From your father I have received important benefits, and I may truly
auerre, that never any man s^ewed himself a greater friend to my safety, and
honor ^hen he did: your brother obser^es, and ^^^spects me, as is known to
^ll men. And to include many wo^d^ i^ on^, your whole family, was never
fl^cke, to attempt any enterp^^se, in my favor. And yet for all this, your
self was never inferior to any of yours in loving me. Whereupon with all
feruencie, I request you really to favor me, and to take upon you, the
protection of mine honor; ^^rst, in procuring those honors to be confer^ed upon
me, which fore-run a Triumph; and then, iu furthering me in any other respect,
that shall seem accrewing to my benefit. Farewell.

Cicero Imperator, to Caius Marcellus Consul. Epist. 11.
THough the effect it self relates, how dear my honor was unto you, and how
steadfastly you remain the same in your Consulship, that you always wear
amongst the rest of your house, and kindred: yet the letters also of all my
friends do ratify the same. Wherefore I find my self so much bound unto
you, as there is no travail so great, which I would not most readily, and
cheerfully put my self upon for your benefit. For the person to whom a man
stands bound, is a matter of great moment; and I was ever glad to reamaine
obliged unto you, to whom, both through the same profession of letters, and for
benefits received from your father, and your self I am much endeared. Besides,
that loving band, which ties us with a stronger knot; in that you have ever
discharged your place and dignity, to the benefit of the Commonwealth, is a
thing that I love above all other things. So that I refuse not to stand so
far bound unto you, as all good citizens are engaged. And I pray, Fortune to
send you that issue of your honor, which you deserve, and I hope will follow
you. I am in hope that shortly, we shall see one another, so we be not opposed
by the southern winds. Whereof I am in great fear, because now is their
proper season. Farewell.

Cicero Imperator, to Lucius Paullus elected Consul. Ep. 12.
THough I never doubted, but that the people of Rome in recompense of your
infinite deserts, and for the nobility of your blood, would with singular
favor, and general suf^rages, create you Consul: nevertheless, being at this
present certefied of so acceptable and pleasing news, it possesses my heart
with an incredible delightfulnes. And I pray the Gods to prosper you in such a
dignity, and vouchsafe you means to discharge it with that honor, as belongs
to your esteem, and the degree of your progenitors. I would I had been present
that happy day to have assisted you as I ever desired: and that with my
diligence, and endeavor, I might have wiped out some part, of that great
obligation, wherein I stand bound unto you. Which opportunity, being taken
from me, by this unexpected, and sudden accident, because I was to depart to
the government of my Province: I request at you^ hands as a special favor,
that you will effectually labor, and procure that no wrong may be done me;
which is, that the due time assigned for my Office be not prorogued; that I may
thereby arrive in such a time, as I may taste the contentment, of your
excellent government. And favoring me herein, I will annexe this benefit to
your many others. Farewell.

Cicero Imperator, to Lucius Paulus Consul. Epist. 13.
FOR diverse respects I could have wished, I had been in Rome with you; but
principally, that both in demanding and managing your Consulship, you might
have discerned the good affection, that deservedly I bear unto you. True it
is, that I was ever certain, that in your petition you would find no obstacle
at all: but yet I would have been glad upon such an occasion, to have
manifested some loving demonstration. And in your consulshippe, though it be my
desire, that you should not encounter with many troubles: yet do I much
distaste, that in exchange of so many favors, which being a young man I have
received from you, I at these years should not have the power, to return you
some such gratitude, as is befitting. But I think it was a certain influence
of the heavens which always opened the way to you, in oblieging me; and closed
it up when I should show my gratitude unto you, in that I ever had aprompt and
ready will thereto; but means that were slow, and unable to accomplish. You
assisted me to attain to the Consulship; and to return into my country, from
which I was unjustly banished. And now the happy times permits, that under
your consulship, it has be^ne my fortune, to compass some laudable effects.
Wherefore seeing you are placed in so high, and honorable a dignity, and
occasions are presented unto me, of being honored: on the one side I am
instigated humbly to entreat, and urge you to endeavor so, that the Senate
may establish a decree upon my Fortunate successes, with all the favor and
regard yt can be imagined: on the other; I dare not with you use ceremonies,
least I should make you conceive, that either I have forgotten the form which
you have heretofore used in doing me courtesy; or, that I might imagine you
are forgetful. Wherefore, laying aside (as I think you desire) all
circumstances of fair words, I will breefely demand a favor of him, whose
deserts toward me are known to all nations. If your self were not Consul (O
Paullus) I would use your means, that you might procure me their affection,
who had that dignity: but because this great honor and authority placed in
your self, and our intrinsicall amity, is hid from no man, I entreat you in
the best manner I am able, to procure, that with all favorable interpretation,
and possible expedition, my actions may be scanned and gratified. Whereof I
write to you that are Consulls, and to the Senate. You shall understand, that
they are worthy to be accounted of, and such, for which thanks are deservedly
to be rendered unto the gods. And not only in this, but in any other occasion,
wherein the interest of my honor represents it self, I request you to vouchsafe
your undertaking the defense thereof. And above all be careful to cut off
every design, which is intended for the prolongation of my government. I
desire to see you Consul, and to obtain from you being Consul, both absent
and present, the end of mine intentio^s. Farwell.

Cicero to Caius Cassius vice-Quaestor. Epist. 14.
YOu favor me, in recommending Mar^us Fabius as a friend unto me; wherein I
make no great gain, because already, for many years, I have been able to
dispose o^ him at my pleasure; and in that I love him, as far as the
nobility of his mind, and his respective obserua^ce toward me, deseru^ t^.
But neu^rth^les^e perceiving, how he loves you above any other, I am become a
greater friend unto him. Wherefore, though your letters have prevailed: ye^ the
certain knowledge I have had of his great af^ection toward^s you, has so much
the rather recommended him. In conclusion, I will labor hard for the dignity
of Fabius, as you entreat me. For diverse reasons, I would we could meet
together: first, to satisfy the longing I have had to see you, to whom these
many years, I have been well affected; and that in presence, I may rejoice
with you, as I have done in letters. Withal, that we communicate between our
selves, you, yours, I, mine occurrents: and finally, to weaue the web of our
friendship, which we have framed with sundry obligations: but, through
instabilitie of the times, could never arrive to it full perfection. Which
falling out so con^rarie, in stead thereof, we will use the help of letters,
whereby we may in ab^ence converse, as if we were together. It is most true,
that by writing, I shall not reap that fruit, which I should by your presence:
and that contentment which grows from congratulation, would be much the
greater, if I could face to face rejoice with you. But yet, I will not forbear
to discharge this office, as heretofore I have done; ^i^st to congratulate with
you, for the magnanimous eff^cts which you have produced; and then for the
oppor^u^itie of the time, in that by th^se ^r^sh success^s, you are departed
from your Province, attended with greatest glory, and infinite commendations;
and with the general ^atisfaction of the whole inhabitan^s. And thirdly, to
negotiate the same affairs afar of, which we would in presence have
discussed. Mine opinion is, that you should with all expedition go to Rome,
considering that at my departure from thence, your business went on
succesfully: and then, by reason of your late, and honorable victory, your
returning thith^r will undoubtedly augment your reputation. But if your kinsmen
discover themselves so malicious, as to put some injury upon you; If you know
your self to be of that power, that you can acquit your self; you cannot any
where get greater glory: If not, then be circumspect, le^t this return of y^urs
prove mischi^uous. You must rely on your own strength; and you know what you
are able to undergo. If you can go through; It will be laudable, and popular:
If not; the re^orts of men, in absence, are more tolerable. Touching my
occasions, again I request you, to appli^ all your power, that the office of
my Province may not be prorogued, which both by the Senate and people, was
committed to me, but for a year only: and I exact this of you, as that
whereon my whole fortunes are depending. You shall have herein the consent of
Paullus, my very good friend, and inclined to do me any pleasure. Curi^, and
Furnius labor in this matter most fervently, supposing, that all my
contentments depend thereon. Nothing now remains to be mentioned, but the
confirmation of our friendship, and herein it shall not be requisite to use
many words. You in your tender years affectionately sought my amity: and I was
ever of belief, that your conversation, was an ornament unto me. Afterward
you were the secure Port, in my terrible storms, and safe shield, against the
treachery of mine enemies. And after your departure, I contracted friendship
with Brutus your kinsman: so as I persuade my self, that from so noble a wit,
and absolute learning as yours is, in all times, great honor and contentment
will accrue unto me. And I request you as earnestly as I may, to work so, that
you confirm me in this belief, and aduer^ise me of all events that happen,
but especially when you come to Rome. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Cassiu^. Epist. 15.
THough each of us departed from the war upon like deliberations, with hope
of peace, and hatred of civil bloodshed. Yet, being the first, who retired, I
am peradventure the more bound to defend the course that we had taken: though
many times I call to mind, how being together, and consulting of sundry, and
great matters between our selves, to provide for our safeties, we held one
opinion, and made one conclusion. Which was; to attend what success the first
battle would have; after which, of necessity it was expedient, that either
the whole cause should be determined, or at least our iudgem^nt resolved. Which
resolution was never reprehended, but by those, who maintained, that it was
better for the Commonwealth to be absolutely dissolued^ then to remain
weakened, and dismembered. And I saw, that if she once perished, al hope of
reducing her to her due state, went with her. But if she were but languishing,
there would be yet some comfort. But things have happened, so far beyond all
men's opinion, as it is a greater miracle, that ^uer they could fall out, then
that we were not able to foresee, or being men to presage them. Questionless,
I confess, that I supposed, that after the fatal battle fought, the
victorious would provide for common safety, and the vanquished for themselves.
But I likewise judged, that these effects could not grow from any other root,
then from sudden victory, and humility of the vanquished: and had this
humility been; they who were in Africa, had found in him the same clemency,
which they that went into Asia, and Achaia had experienced. And that without
any other mediation, but his own. But the evil proceeded from this, that
times were carelessly let run on; which greatly imparts in civil wars. For a
year and an half running on in this manner, some conceived hope to overcome,
others without hope of victory, choose rather to die fighting; then to live,
by coming to their enemies for mercy. And of all these disasters, Fortune
bears the blame. For who would ever have thought, that the Alexandrian war,
would ever have drawn to such a length, the war civil? And that one
Pharnaces, could have stroke^ such a terror into all Asia? We concurred all in
one election, though with a diversity of Fortune; you went into a part, where
you might consult, and dis^erne the end of things a fa^re off; which greatly
rids ^he mind of cares: And I was desirous to meet with Caesar in Italy,
supposing he would have come thither, with that troop of renowned men, whom he
has preserved: and with an intention, to move him to peace, whereunto he
seemed ready, and very willing. But I could not do as I would, because he
pursued his enemy, and went far from these parts. Now, in what state I live,
conjecture you. I hear on every side, of the deep woes, and direful
lamentations of miserable Italy, and our distressed City. Whereunto both
you, and I, and every man, according to his Forces, might peradventure have
found some remedy, if the chief Commander had arrived. Wherefore I request
you by all the love that you have ever borne me, to write unto me what success
things have, what foundations you lay, what may be hoped for, and how we should
carry our selves. I will perform whatsoever your letters enjoin me. And I
would to God I had followed the council which you gave me in your first
unfortunate letters, which you sent me from Luceria: for then; I had without
any mol^station, preserved my dignity. Farewell.

Cicero vice-Consull to Caius Cassius. Epist. 16.
I Persuade my self, that you will be half ashamed to see your self
surprised with this third Epistle, before I can get so much as a line, or a
letter from you. But I write not these to urge you to so small a matter, for I
expect, nay, I challenge longer discourses from you. If I had opportunity, I
would send you every hour three letters. For in writing to you, methinkes I
have a kind of a representation of your own person ever before me; though I
allow not of these phantasticke apparitions of Catius, who approues of those
mental visions of Idols: on whose authority your new friends relying,
affirm, that the fantasy is able to frame in it self, the similitude of any
imagined body. And to the end you may understand, that Catius the Insubrian,
of the sect of Epicurus, lately dead, calls those Spectra, which Gargesius,
and before him D^mocritus, by another title terme^ Idols. And though it may be
that these Spectra, may be seen, because they represent thems^lues unto the
eye. Yet I would feign have any man tell me, how they can also penetrate the
mind. And how is it probable, that thought or cogitation should have this
privilege, that as soon as I think of you, your Spectrum should present it
self unto my mind? And not only of yours, who are seated, in the most secret
cell of my memory; but if a conceit should rise in my imagination, in what
form the Island of Britannia lies, should I believe that the Idol of it,
would be presented unto me? But I Will reserve this present subject till another
time. Now I mean^ to try you: and if I perceive, that you should grow
choleri^ke, or that you take it as an affront, I will go further: and I will
grieve for the v^olence has been offered you^ pr^ying that you may be
restored to that heresy, from whence you were by A^mes expelled. Neither will
it suf^ice to allege, that for these two, or three years, you have voluntarily
exiled your self from virtue, that you have been allured by the sweet bait of
pleasures, and delights; but with whom speak I? Marie, with a man of gravity
and maturi^ie: who since you dedicated your self to public negotiations,
have in all times governed your self with that prudence, that you have
replenished Rome, with honorable, and rare examples So that a doubt grows in
me, whether this sect sprung not out of a better Trunk then we imagine, seeing
you affected, to insert your self thereinto. But what new conceit leads thee,
O Cicero? Why I Will tell you the truth: It neither being secure, nor I being
willing, to write what I think, about the Commonwealth, I entered into these
fantasies, thinking it better to write of them then nothing. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Cassius. Epist. 17.
YOu have a company of prepo^terous Corrier's: when they go from hence they
demand my letters, when ^hey come hither they bring me none. Although in truth,
they herin offend me not, being so desirous to write unto you as I am. True it
is, they should do much more discreetly, if they gave me a little more time.
But they ever come to me, in their travailing atyre, making all have to be
gone, because their companio^s attend them at the gates. So that you must
pardon me, if at this time, I be also brief; But know you what? I will shortly
recompense the defect, to which I have by their have been enforced. Though I
know no reason why I should excuse my self: considering yours come hither
empty, and return with letters. We have it here for current, (somewhat I mu^t
write) that Publius Sylla the Father is dead, some say, murdered by thieves,
others affirm, by surfeit of meats. The people take no great care, now they
understand, that his body was burned. And no doubt but you also, who are wise,
will take it patiently enough: the evil is, that we have lost the form of the
Commonwealth. The general opinion was; that Caesar would have taken it very
heavily, as he that feared, least the sales which were made by public outery,
might have been abated. Mindius Marcellus, and A^ius, the complection-maker
rejoiced they had lost their adversary. There Is no news out of Spai^e, but a
wonderful expectation. There are certain reports, rather bad then otherwise,
but they are not creditted, by reason they come from no certain places. Our
Pansa departed from Rome, the thirtieth day of December, with honorable
employment: so that every one may m^nifestly discern the power of virtue;
which, as a loadstone Iron, draws others to follow her, se^king no other
reward then the posse^sion of her self. And though some other opinion, has
within ^his little while be gloomed your understanding; yet if you will but
look with a direct eye, she ever honors and rewards those spirits that
observe her: as we may see by Pansa, who, relieuing many out of miseries; and
leaving in these afflictions of the City, an example of his wonderful
integrity, and love, has won the hearts of every good man. I am glad you
continued hitherto in Brundusium; and I think it was the bent resolution: and
I assuredly believe, you shall also do very wisely, to keep your self
within your bounds, without entangling your self, in dangerous matters. You
may be well assured, that we who love you, shall receive therein great
satisfaction. And I pray you from this time forward, when you have any
occasion to write home, to be mindful of my busine^se. Every man that comes
unto you, shall, if I know thereof, bring letters from me. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Cassius. Epist. 18.
THe letter should have been longer, but that the messenger required it of me,
at the very instant of his departure: and yet longer, if I had delighted in
Fables: for matters of moment cannot be written of, without danger. You Will say,
we may be pleasant amongst our selves, and salute one another with letters of
recreation. In troth, very hardly. Why, what shall we then do? do we what we
will, there is no wandering for us out of the path of miseries. But you will ask me,
what is become then of Philosophy? Where is she? Yo^rs is amongst pleasures,
mine in perpetual molestations, out of shame to see my self hampered with the
chain of servitude. And therefore, I seem to do something else; not to
infringe the precepts of Plato. There Is nothing certain reported out of Spain,
neither is there any news at all. I am sorry in mine own behalf, you are so
far from us; I rejoice on yours. But this Corrier is very importunate.
Farewell therefore. And as you have loved me from your in fancy, so ever love
me. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Cassius. Epist. 19.
I Protest, I have no greater comfort in this my absence, then to write unto
you. For me thinks I talk, and toy with you, as if we were together. And yet
this proceeds not through the Spectra of Catius; in whose favor I will by my
next, produce you so many rusticall Stoics, that I will drive you to affirm,
that Catius was borne in Athens. I am much contented, that our Pansa, with the
wonderful satisfaction of all men, has obtained so honorable a charge. And I
vow to God, I do not rejoice for him alone, but for all of us. Hoping that it
will be discerned, how much every man naturally shuns, and abhorres tyrannie^
and on the contrary, how chearefully they embrace, and favor the just, and
merci^ull; and that those honors which wicked men, labor and desire to obtain,
are distributed to honest and good men. It Is a great matter, that it should be
so difficult to persuade men, that virtue of her self is amiable, and an
excellent rewarder of her followers: being truer, then truth it self, that
virtue, justice, and honesty, are those seeds which produce the true repose
and peace of mind: as Epicurus himself (from whom all the Catij, and Amasinij
his erroneous interpreters are derived:) bears wi^nesse, saying, That he
cannot live comfortabl^e, that lives not justly, honestly. Wherefore Pansa
pu^suing the ho^est d^lectations of life, pos^es^eth ve^tue: and those whom we
call lovers ^f delights and pleasures, are lovers likewise of honesty and
iust^ce: and such as endeavoring themselves in all virtues, do poss^sse them.
And therefore, Sylla, whose iudgemen^ we must needs a^proue; perceiving the
Ph^los^phe^s to be dissonant among ^hem^elues, without se^king out which was
the chief good; purcha^'d in a moment, all goods. Whose death certainly I
have borne with a constant mind; and so much the rather, being as^ured, that
Caesar will not suffer us long to look after it, having abundance of
condemned men, whom he may in his place restore unto us, tho^^h ^here is a
^onne of his, remaining, who is well able to discharge his Fathers office. Now,
to come unto the Commonwealth. I look for a relation of the war of Spain.
I would I were dead, if I, be not much perplexed; and I had rather live under
our usual, that is a merciful Lord; then to undergo a new yoke of one that is
full of cruelty. You know how presumptuous Cn^ius is, and arrogates every
great thing unto himself; you know, how he maintains, that cruelty is a kind
of virtue: you know how ridiculous he thought himself unto us. And therefore,
I am afraid, least in exchange, he ^ay, with his Sword, basely laugh at us. If
you love me, write unto me. Oh! how glad I would be, you did but as^ure me,
whither you read this letter, with a troubl^d mind, or a di^burdened. For a^
^he same ins^ant, I should come to know, what resolution to undertake in mine
own occurrents. To avoid prolixitie, I will bid you farewell: and as you love
me, love me. If Caesar vanquish, look for me presently. Farewell.

Cicero to Caius Trebonius. Epist. 20.
I Have commended my Orator, (for so I style him) to your Sabinus: whom I
should every way think well of, for his nations sake; had he not also usurped
their liberty, which hunt after honors, and thereby assumed that surname upon
himself, out of his own brain: but yet his modest countenance, and solid
discourse, show him to retain some thing, of those ancient customs. Thus much
of him. Now that which touches me more nearly. My Trebonius, if God prosper
you, to your hearts desire, seeing after your departure with new courte^ies,
you have a little kindled the flame of my love; to the end we may endure the
thirst of your absence, with lesser difficulty, afford us by your daily
letters some refreshing. But not unless we truly and unfeignedly do the like,
Though you should do it oftener then our selves for two reasons. First, because
they which remained in Rome were wont, to write unto their friends, that were
in the government of Provinces, the accidents of the Commonwealth; now it is
requisite you should write them unto us, the Commonwealth being there: and
then, because we may pleasure you by other offices; in that for any thing I
perceive, you can stand us in no other sted, then to send us letters. First,
therefore I would understand, what journey you have had: where you saw our
Brutus, and how long you were together. If you have proceeded further, I would
have you advertise us, how the war is managed, and upon what terms matters
stand: to the end we may apprehend, in what state we are. So much as your
letters inform me of, so much I shall hold myself to be certain of. Be
careful of your health; and love me with your accustomed sincere affection.

Cicero to Tr^bonius. Epist. 21.
I Read your letter and your^ book with great con^entment, but my pleasure was
mingled with the grief of your departure. For in the greatest desire of
perpetuating our conuer^ation, you have left us with this only comfort, that
with daily, and long let^ers, the ardent desire of each party may be
mittiga^ed. Which, as o^ mine own part I da^e promise it shall take effect; So
I am rea^ie to believe that it will not fail on yours; in that the love you
bear me, is mo^e then manifest. For to omit the favors, whereof the Cities
can g^ue undoubted testimony; when you ^hewed you^ self an enemy to my
enemies. When you defended me to the people; when being Quaestor^ you
discharged about my self, and the publ^ke office of a Consull^ and would not
obey the Tribune of the people, though your Colleague did crowch unto him. And
not to rip up these late matters, which shall remain pe^petually fixed in my
memory: what a trouble had you with me, when we were employed in arms? how
did you rejoice at my return? what grief, and discontent surpriz^d you, when
you heard of my dolors, and molestations? and finally, how ready were you to
come by all means unto me at Brundusium, had you not been sent into Spain^
unexpectedly? Laying therefore these things apart; which notwithstanding I so
highly esteem, as I do mine own life and sa^etie; tell me I pray you, what
greater notice of your love could you have given me, then what you have
afforded me in this book? First, because all my sayings, appear unto you
^ull of pleasing delightfulnes^e; which to othe^s peradu^nture seem otherwise.
Then, were they so, or but so so; they are as ^ou deliver them, most ingenuous:
and such, as in your grace^ull, and ha^pie ca^rying of them forestalle every
man's laughter, before they come to consider them to be my passages. But, if you
did, as of necessit^^ you must, think only on me; all the while you were
about this compo^ition; I were an Iron fellow if I should not love you. And in
that you could not write this subject, without a friendly, and loving
remembranc^ of me. I am readily persuaded, that the affection you bear unto
me is no less, then that which is borne by every man to his own person. To
which affection, would I had no less ability in deeds, then I have in love to
be answerable. Wherein notwithstanding I hope you shall remain well satisfied.
Now to your letter: Which pleased me exceedingly: for besides that, it was
ingenuou^, and copious: it was also in every part full of affection. I answer
thereof, first, I wrote that Epistle to Caluus, thinking it should no more have
come to light, then this which you now read: For a thing mnst be otherwise
written, which we determine should be only read of those, to whom 'twas sent;
then that which is to pass through the hands of many. Then, where as you
marvel that I exalted his wit with such great commendation, you supposing
that they exceeded the bounds of verity: I answer, that I thought fitting so
to do. He shows great promptitude in writing; he prosecutes a certain
method of his own, conducted by a kind of error in judgment; wherein
notwithstanding he does very well; he is full of learning, but does not lively
express his conceit: therefore I exhorted him thereunto. For if you would put
spirit into any man, or sharpen his understanding, there is no better way in
the world, then to commend him. This is my judgment, and counsel about
Caluus: Counsel; in that I praised him, to exhort him: Judgment; in that I
h^ld him to have a wit worthy to be esteemed. It remains that I pray, that
your journey may prove happy; that I expect your return with hope, that I
visit you oftener in my thoughts, and between writing to you, and reading your
letters that I mittigate the insatiable desire I have to see you. My desire is,
that you should often call to memory, your own officious endeauours for me.
Of which if it be lawful to be mindful; 'twere base in me to be forgetful.
For I would not only have you to esteem me for an honest man, but one, of
whom your self may have opinion, you are much beloved. Farewell.

THE SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE FAMILIAR EPISTLES OF M. T. CICERO.
Cicero to Quintus Tiro. Epist. 1.
SEE how pleasing your conversation is. We staid about two hours at Thyr^um;
where Xenomenes entertaining us, made show of as much love unto you, as if he
had always lived with you. He has promised to prou^de you, of all necessary
things, and I doubt not the^eof. I should be glad, if you find your self any
thing better, that you would remove to Leucas; that there you might wholly be
recovered. Take counsel of Curio; and Lyso, and the Physician. I thought to
send Mario back unto you. Whom you might have returned when you had found you^
better cheared. But I be thought me, that Mario could bring me but one letter:
and I expected many. You may therefore procure (and will do it you, if you
love me,) that Acastus may be every day about the Port^ Messengers will not be
wanting, that may faithfully, and willingly deliver me letters. And I will not
omit any opportunity of such as come to Patrae. I have confident hope in
Curio, that he will attend you, with all care. He is kindenes it self, and
loves us above all the world most unfeignedly. Therefore expect all courtesy
from him: and be not yo^ too hasty to follow me; for I had much rather see
you come late cured, then presently infirmed. Labor therefore only to
recover, and leave the rest, to my providence. Many times farewell. Upon my
departure from Leucas, the vij. of November.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 2.
WE have been seven days at Corcyra. But my brother Quintus, and his son,
are at Buthrotum. We were marvelous careful about your health, neither do I
wonder, that we receive no letters from you; For, with those winds that
should serve you hither, we should sail from hence; which if they had served,
we would not have lien waiting at Corcyra. Look therefore unto your self, and
get strength: and when conveniently, both for your health, and season of the
year, you can have passage, come unto us that love you dearly. None loves us,
that likes not you. Every man wishes you well, and looks for your coming.
Good Tiro, have a singular care of your health. Farewell. This xviij. of
October: From Corcyra.

Cicero to his friend Tiro. Epist. 3.
I Thought I should more easily have endured your absence; but I find I
cannot. And though it greatly concerns mi^e honor, to be with all possible
speed at Rome. Yet me think^s I sin in leaving you; But in tha^ I thought you
were firmly resolved, not to put your self upon the voyage, before you were
well recovered. I approved your determination, as now I do, if you be also of
the same opinion. But, after you have recovered your appetite, if you find
your self in state to follow me, do your pleasure. I have sent Mario to you,
that if you think good to come, he may bear you company. If not, I would
have him presen^ly turn back again. Be assured, I desire nothing else, but
that you should come with your own ease, if it be possible: but if you
perceive it requisite, to remain some days in Patrae, for your better
recovery; Know, that I desire nothing more, then to have you cured. If you
presently commit your self to sea, follow us by L^ucas. But if you mean to
attend, till you are absolutely well, be careful, of you^ company, of the
weather, and of getting good shipping. But, as you love me, Tiro, take heed,
that you let not Mario's coming, or these letters any way move you; for, in
doing that which shall be most auailable for your health, you shall do me
the greatest p^easure. Therefore look you unto it: for, I so desire you, as
you may find I love you. My love would see you here sound; my desire,
pre^ently: but the first especially. Therefore, above all, be care^ull to be
well: for, amongst the infinite courtesies, which you have done me, this will
prove the greatest. Farewell. The third of November.

Cicero ^o his Tiro. Epist. 4.
I Neither can, nor am willing to write unto you, how it troubles me, to be
without you. I only write, it will be an exceeding great content unto us both,
if we could presently come so together, that I might see you recovered. The
third day, after we departed from you, we arrived at Alyzia, a place on this
side Leucas, some fourteen miles. In Leucas, I hope, you will overtake me,
or at least, Mario with your letters. As you love me, or think I love you, so
look to ^our health. From Alyzia. This v. of November.

Cicero to his friend Tiro. Epist. 5.
WE stayed all yesterdaie at Alyzia, from whence I wrote before unto you;
Quintus not being yet arrived. To day, which is the fifth of November, I write
these before day being in a readiness to depar^. I entreat you, for the love
you bear to all of us, but especially to my self, your Master, endeavor to
recover. With a very unquiet mind, I expect, especially your self, and then
Mario with your letters. We long all, but I above the rest, to see you
presently, but in no case without your health, good Tiro. And therefore make no
haste, I shall think I have every day seen you, so you come lusty and
strong unto us. I can do, what is to be done, without your help, and
therefore suppose not, that mine own benefit drives me, to desire your
health, so much as the love I bear you. Farewell.

Cicero to his Tir^. Epist. 6.
I Have read your le^ter, with diverse agi^ations of mind; the first side much
disturbed me: but the other gave me some relaxation. Wherefore, now know
seriously, that you must not take any journey, either by land, or sea, till
you are perfectly ^u^ed. You write unto me, how you have a good opinion of the
Physician, and I hear no l^sse. But yet I commend not in any sort, his course
of dieting sick persons; for I took it not to be well done, that he made you
drink broth, having a distempered stomach. Notwithstanding, by a letter of
mine, I entreat him ef^ectually, that he would cure you with all diligence: and
in another, I likewise recommend you to Lyso. To Curious, being of so sweet a
d^sposition, full of integrity, and cou^tesie, I have written at large, about
your occasions: and among other things, if you so think good, that he should
conueigh you to his own house: because I put no confidence in Lyso's
diligence: first, because the Gre^kes ordinarily are very negligent; and then,
in that he returned me no answer to my letters which he received; but you
commend him, and therefore take what course shall best please your self. One
favor I require at your hands, my Tiro, that you will spare no charge, in
things ^equisite for your health. I write to Curious, that he should give the
Physician what you appoint; because it were good, to give him some thing, to
the end, he may attend you with the greater diligence. When, in what, or
wheresoever, it has been may hap to employ you, I have received good
satisfaction, and ever was highly contented with your endeavor: But you shall
exceed, whatsoever you have formerly done for me; if (as I hope) I may but see
you lusty. If you find your self strong in body, you may imbarque your
self with Messinius the Quaestor: for, I suppose, you shall have pleasing and
loving company of him. He is very aff^ble, and so far as I can perceive,
bears an affection to you. But, as I said, take counsel of your ability of
body, and then be careful, to sail commodiously, and in seasonable weather.
I desire no other, but that you may return in health and safety. And be
assured, my Tiro, that there is none, who loves m^e, but bear you singular
affection. And though it more imports us, then any other, that you were in
health, yet many besides; also, are desirous of the same. Hitherto, because
you would not leave me in any place, you could not recover your malady. Now,
there is nothing hinders you. Lay aside all cares, and attend wholly to your
recovery: for, if you be careful thereof, I shall think you make great
esteem of mine affection. Farewell, my Tiro: Be healthful, and merry. Lep^a,
and the rest, salute you: The vij, of November: From Leucas.

Cicero to his friend Tiro. Epist. 7.
I Will add this third unto the two letters I wrote this day unto you; more to
observe the usual custom, then for any thing I had to write. Once again let
me tell you, that I would have you, according to the love you bear me, use
all diligence for your recovery. Add this to the rest of the courtesies, I
have had from you; for it will, above all the rest, be most acceptable to me.
I am confident in your prudence, that you will not undertake any iourny,
except you find your self well. But when you come, seek to sail with the
best conueniencie. Let no messenger come into Italy, without your letters, as
I write to you, by eue^ie messenger that comes to Patrae. Recover, recover, my
Tiro; for, seeing Fortune would not permit us, to sail together in company,
it fits you not now to be too hasty: and think of nothing, but how you may
be restored. Be careful of your recovery. From Actium: The vij. of November
in the evening.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 8.
WE are very pensive about your sickness: for, though we understand, that
you are out of all danger: nevertheless, perceiving how ma^ters will require a
long time for effect, this comfort is accompanied with notable coffeehouse:
imagining what a while, I shall be deprived of your company: the sweetness
whereof, I measure by my desire of it. But though I heartily desire to see you;
nevertheless, I earnestly entreat you, that you will not expose your self
this winter, to so long a voyage, except you be strong; nor put your self to
sea, without good consideration. Scarcely under roofes, and within towns, can
men of weak complexions defend themselves from cold; much less by sea, or in
long voyages, is it easy to shun the injury of the seasons. And, C^ld is
very hurtful to tender bodies, as Euripides reports; to whom I know not
what credit you give: But I esteem ^uerie verse of his to be a testimony. If
you wish me well, solicit your health, and return lusty, and presently. Love
us, and Farewell: Quin^us the younger, commends him heartily unto you.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 9.
WE departed from you, as you know, ^he second of No^ember: the vj. we arrived
at Leucas, on the vij. at Actium. Where, through contrariety of winds, we
stayed all the next day. From thence, on the ninth, we sailed prosperously to
Corsyra. At Corsyra, by reason of a storm, we were staid all the xvij, and the
xviij. Leaving the Port of Corsyra, we came to Cassiope, xv. miles from
thence, where we were detained by the winds, till the xxv. And many
ouer-hastie, not willing to stay, while the raging of the sea was down, were
cast away. The foresaid day after dinner, we set sail, and having a pleasant
Souther^e gale, and fair weather, between that night, and the day following,
we came with pleasure to Hydrus in Italy: and with the same wind the next
day, (which was the xxvj.) between eleven and twelve a clock, we arrived at
^rundusium; and going a shore, Terentia met me, and entered with me into the
town, enquiring much after your self. On the xxviij, being in Brundusium,
extremely desiring your letters, at last came a servant of Cneius Plancius, who
presented me those of the xiij. which eased me of much sorrow: I would they had
wholly freed me. Though Asclapo the Physician assures me, that you shall in
short time be cured. Now I must a little exhort you, to be very careful, to
recover your forces. I know your prudence, I know your temperance, and the love
you bear me. I conceive, you will use all means, to be speedily with us,
which I excedingly desire, so you may take no hurt thereby. I would not have
you carried away with Lyso's harmony, lest you lie by it for a whole month. But
seeing you would needs rather satisfy his kindness, then observe your own
health, from this time forward take better heed. I have used means to Curious,
that he should satisfy the Physician, and that he should supply your wants:
And I will pay it here, to whomsoever he appoints. I have left an horse, and
a mule for you in Brundusium. I am much afraid, that in the beginning of
January, there will be great tumul^s in Rome; we will proceed in all things
very moderately. It remains, that I entreat you, that you will not rashly take
shipping. These Mariners, for gain, use to make haste, therefore be
circumspect, my Tiro. You have a great and difficult sea to pass. It would be
good (if you could) to associate your self with Messinius, for he was wont to
be wary in voyages. If not, then join with some honorable personage, whom
your Pilot may use respectively. If in this, you use all care, and comfort your
self in your health, you shall give me great satisfaction. I have written to
the Physician, to Curious, and Lyso, and recommended you. Farewell: And with
safety.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 10.
THough I desire every where the benefit of your endeavor; yet it greeues me,
not so much for mine own, as for your respect that you have not your health.
But seeing the violence of the infirmity is turned into a Qua^tane, as Curio
writes. Being circumspect, I hope, you shall easily be freed thereof. Now,
do me the pleasure, to mind nothing else, but your recovery. I know your
desire: but all things will succeed well, if you return in health. I would not
have you make overmuch haste, le^t being ill, besides offending your stomach,
your winter voyage might be dangerous. I came to Rome, the fourth of this
month, where I was received with the greatest honor, that could be imagined.
But I am fallen into the very flame of civil discord, or rather, civil
wa^re. Which I desiring, and in my opinion, being able to prevent, I was
hindered by some men's unbridled humou^s: for there are of each part, that long
to be together by the ^ares: and C^sar also our friend, has written to the
S^nate, threatening them much, and v^lifying them with insolent speeches: and
he is not ashamed, in the^r despite, to hold both his Army, and his Province:
and my Curio cease not, to put him forward. And withal, our Antonius, and
Q^intus Cassiu^, not being any ways urged the^eunto, a^e with Curio, fled to
Caesar; Upon the Senates charge given to the Consuls, Prae^ors, Tribunes of the
people, and to us, who are in the place of Consuls, that we should defend the
Commonwealth from ^ll succeeding detriment. The City was never in greater
danger: nor ever h^d bad Citizens so cruel a Ringleader. On our part also
due provisions are made; And herein the authority and care of our Pomp^ius is
employed: who now too late begins to doubt of Caes^rs power. Yet in all these
hurlie-burlies, the Senate forbe^res not to assemble, and to deliberate upon my
Triumph: but Len^ulus the Consul, being desirous that I should acknowledge the
whole benefit from himself, has promised presently to set it forward, so
soon as he has dispatched some urgent necessities of the Commonwealth. We
show our selves no ways ambicious thereof: Which augments our reputation. The
governments of Italy are distributed; and we have chosen that of Capu^. These
are all the adu^rtisements, which occur at this present. B^e careful of your
recou^rie, and when opportunity is o^fered, write unto me. The xii. of
January. Farewell.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 11.
INto what hazard my saf^tie, and that of all good men, and the whole
Commonwealth is brought; you may conceive by ^his, that we have abandoned our
proper habitations, and our country it self, l^auing her as a pray, to
whosoever will destroy, and set her in combustion. We are come to that point,
as if some God, or Fortune do not succor us, I see no means for our escape.
Since I came to Rome, I assure you, I have used all persuasions to compound
these discords: but I have found such obstinacy in the hearts, not only of
those wicked, but also in them that are reputed honest, as my Force is not able
to dissuade them. They will have ba^taile, and will not hear me, when I tell
them of the miseries, which a civil war draws after it. For having heard
how Caesar, in^aged with fury, and bearing no respect, either to his name, or
dignity, took into his hands, Ariminum, Pisaurum, Ancona, and Arr^tium; We
have left R^me wholly abandoned, with what wisdom, or courage it avails not
to argue. Now you s^e to what pass we are arriu^d. True it is, that he moves
Ar^icles of accord; that Pomp^ius go into Spaiae; that the soldiers levied in
our defense, be casheered: and in this case, he is content to assign Gallia
Transalpina, to D^mitius; and Cisalpina, to Considius Nonianu^, Who were
elected for those Gouernements: that he cares no more to have the favor, that
he may demand the Consulship in his absence, but that himself in person, will
come to demand it. We have accepted of his conditions, but so, that he will
remove the guarisons out of ^hese towns, that are in his hands, to the end,
that the Senate without fear, being resembled in Rome, may consult upon the
aboue-mentioned conditions. In performing this, there is some hope of peace;
but I acknowledge it to be scarce honorable, for we submit our selves to his
conditions: but it is better to be any thing, then what we are. And, if he
should not observe his propounded conditions, there is prepared so gri^uous a
war, as he cannot sustain it. I say if he do flinch from the conditions
himself has set down, we hope to be able to cut off his way from Rome, by
having many men in a readin^sse: and we suppose also he will not bend thither,
for fear of loosing the Galliae, who are his vt^er enemies, excepting only
the Transpadani^e especially if he perceive six Legions on his b^cke that are
in Spain, conducted by Afranius, and Petreiu^, with many succors: but if he
will needs be co^^umacious, it is thought, it will be no great ma^ter to suppress
him, so he make no approach to Rome. For he has had one shrewd cross, in that
Titus Labienu^, who was of great cred^t in his Army, not minding to be a
companion of his wickedness, has left him, and takes part with us: and they
say many are ready to do the like. I remain in the Government of the Sea
coast, about Formiae. I would not undertake a greater charge, that by my
l^tters, and exhortations, I might wo^ke the better effects with Caesar, about
quietness. But if the war go on. I see I shall have the government, and
command of a Camp, and c^rtaine Legions. I am wonderfully disturbed that our
Dolabella is with Caesar: I thought good to give you these informations; but as
you love your health, let them not trouble you. Aulus Varro is my great friend,
and bears you singular affection. I have recommended you unto him, en^reating
him to have a special care of you, as well in the occasions of your
infirmity, as of your voyage. He ha^h cou^teously pormis'd me, and I know he
will perform it. Seeing you could not be with me at that time, when I had
occasion to employ your fidelity, and endeavor; make no have in any wise to
come while you are thus weak, especially being the depth of Winter. Your
coming to me shall never be too late, so you come in ^afetie. Hith^rto I never
spoke with any man that saw you; but with Marcus Volusius, who delivered me
your letters: and no marvel; for, I do not think that mine have this bad
wether, had any speedy conueyance. Be care^ull to recover, and commit not your
self to Sea, till you may have a secure passage. My son is at Formianum;
Terentia, and Tullia are in Rome. The xxviij. of January, from C^p^a. Farewell.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 12.
I Long ^or your coming, but I fear ^he voyage; for you have bin grievously
si^ke; and what wi^h fasting, purging, and the anguish of your disease, you are
consumed. The least disorder a man can commit in these dangerous maladies, may
re^urne to the great damage of such as are infirmed. I will be in Cuman^m at
the end of this mon^th. There my Tiro, let me see you lusty, and he^lthfull.
My (rather our) studies, through the grief of your absence, are languished.
Yet by the letter, which Acastus brought, th^y^ have a little lifted up their
eyes. Pompeius was present at the writing of these, and being desirous to hear
some composition of ours, I merrily, and freely told him, that my wits grew
barraine, through your absence. Prepare your self to render your endeavors to
our Mus^s. For at the appointed day ours shall be in a readiness. For I have
hereto^ore taught you th^Etymologie of Faith. Look that you thoroughly recover
your health: in which we are very happy. Farewell.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 13.
AEGYPTA Arrived the xijth of April, and though he told me, the Fever had left
you, and that you were veri^ well: yet in that he said you could not write to
me, I remained unsatisfied: and so much the rather, because Hermia, who should
have been here the same day, was not yet come. I am troubled with doubtful
cogitations, out of the abundant love I bear to your life. Whereof if you
free me, I will make you free, and contented. I would write unto you more at
large, if I thought I should not annoy you. Apply the power of your own
vnd^rstanding, which I esteem to be most exquisite, for the preservation of
your self, to both our comforts. And let me yet again requ^st you to be
diligently careful of your self. Far^well. After the writing hereof, Hermia
came, and delivered me yours, and by the raggedness of the letters I
discerned the agony of your disease. I send Aegypta back agai^e unto you,
because I take him to be a loving and discreet fellow, and one that wishes
you well: and with him I send a Cook, to do you se^uice. Farewell.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 14.
I Have had an ill night, and full of distractions, by reason that Andricus
came not yesterday as I expected. This morning he came with your letters: from
which though I could conce^ue no further of your state and being, yet am I
somewhat recomforted. Ti^l I see you, I shall have no apprehension of delight,
neither can I betake my self to my usual studies. Provide that the Physician
may be promised the reward which he demands, as I gave order to Manius. I
hear you are oppressed with melancholy, and that the Physician perceiues as
much. Rowse up from sleep, your reading, and your humane studies, for which
you are so dear unto me. You must di^ourden your mind, that your body may
fare the better. And this I request you, both for your own benefit^ and for my
contentment. Reserve Acast^c^ for the attendance of your person, and preserve
your self for my consolation. Now comes the time of the promises, which I will
also exhibit at your coming. Farewell. The xiij. about eleven of the clock
in the forenoo^e. Farewell.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 15.
IF you should give me the whole world, you cannot do me a greater plea^ure,
then to let me see your self in health. Neither shall I be quiet in mind,
till Menander return, whom I ^e^t unto you. If you love me, be careful of
your recovery. And when you feel your self, in good plight, come unto us.
Farewell: the tenth of April.

Quintus to Marcus Cicero his brother. Epist. 16.
I Would I might never see your self, (my Cicero,) my Tulliola, or your son;
if you did not highly favor me when you made Tiro rather our companion then
our servant, finding him worthy of a better Fortune then he formerly lived
in. You would not imagine, with what joy, both his, and your letters, have
possessed me. And I thankefully congratulate with you. For if the fidelity of
Statius, please me so well: how much more esteem does the same property
deserve, being accompanied with knowledge, dis^ourse, and humanity? Which
virtues far exceed all other considerations. I love you for all; and most
worthy respects: as also for this, and for having written unto me in so
cheerful a style. For I read your very self in your letters: I will
perform what I promised to the servants of Sabinus. Farewell.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 17.
I Know your desire: you would have me put your Epistles in a volume also. But
hark you Sir; How comes it, that you, that were wont to be the corrector of my
writings, should be so improper in your speeches, as to say, Attending
^aithfully to my recovery: from whence comes faithfully to be placed here? the
proper place of this word, is in office: Though it may be m^nie other ways
applied, as when we say, faithful doctrine, a faithful house, a faithful
Art, and also a faithful field. So that the application thereof be made with
modesty, and according to the true meaning of Theophrastus: but this shall be
discussed, when we come together. Demetrius came unto me: you are sufficiently
informed, with what company; but I have rid him of them. But you will tell me,
you could not see him; To morrow he will be here again, and then you shall:
for the day following I Will be gone from hence. I am much perplexed, about your
recovery. But, attend unto it, and do every thing that is befitting; for so
you shall not only give me full satisfaction, but I shall imagine you are
present with me. I am glad you pleasured Cuspius: For I wish him all
contentment. Farewell.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 18.
WHat now? must it not be so? I know it must, and it is necessary, that To his
should be added. Yet if you have a desire unto it, let us, to shun that
envy you speak of, leave it out; though I always contemned such like envy.
I am very glad, your breathing did you so much good. And if the air of
Tusculanum would be also helpefull, O Gods! How it would content me. But if
you love me, (which surely you do, or at least after a cunning manner, you
dissemble: yet howsoever) attend your recovery. You know the best Physic to
be, light meats, moderate exercise, a cheerful mind, and a soluble body.
Labor to return, with your usual alacrity: I shall think the better, not
only of you, but even of our Tusculanum. Try underhand if you can get
Parhedrus to hire my garden; for, that is the way to make the gardener
desperate. See the fume of this glutton, that dares venture five and twenty
thousand Crowns, upon one possession; where neither Sun, nor water comes;
neither has it wall, or house for habitation: Shall this fellow laugh at us
with so great expenses? Put a trick upon him, as I intend upon Marcus Oth^:
Whereupon I neglect his presented garlands. I would feign know what is done
about the water of Crabra: though now we have water in abundance. When t^me
serves, I will send the horaloge, and the Books. But is it possible that you
should be in want of Books? Or are you about some composition in imitation of
Sophocles? Let the work be published. Aulu^ Ligurius, Caesar's familiar
acquaintance is dead. He was an honest man, and my very friend. Advertise me
of your coming. Farewell.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 19.
I Expect your letters in answer to many things, but much more your coming.
Purchase the love of Demetrius, and if you can do him any other kindenes, do
it. About my debt with Aufidius, I say nothing because I know you to be very
careful thereof; but dispatch it. If this stay you, I excuse you, if not come
flying. I greatly expect your letters. Farewell.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 20.
AS I live (my Tiro) your infirmity troubles me. But I hope, if you prosecute
with the same care you have begun, to see you shortly in perfect health. Set
you up the books, in good order: and let an Index of them be made when it
pleases Metrodorus: s^eing we must live according to his direction. Concerning
the Gardener, I refer my self to your discretion. The first of this mon^th,
you may stay to see the Fencers, and the next come away; for thus I think
good: but do as you will; If you wish me well be careful to preserve your
self. Farewell.

Cicero the son, to his sweetest Tiro. Epist. 21.
AFter a tedious and daily expectation for six whole weeks together after my
depa^ture from you, your welcome mes^engers came with letters. The Epistle of
my most sweet, and dear Father, gave me wondrous contentment; and your own
letter ouerioy'd me. Whereupon I repent no longer my silence, but am glad
thereof. In that it brought me wondrous increase of the fruit of your
humanity: Whereby you have made good my excuses. I am sure my sweet Tiro, that
the good reports, which according to your desire, were spread of me, did highly
please you. And I will employ all my endeavor, that this growing opinion of
me, may every day be more established. Therefore you may securely promise of
me, hereafter, a more reformed life, then that which is past, has at any time
been. Wherein, if I was drawn from the tru^ way, I grieve much more then I
make show of. Of which grief I know you have been partaker, in that you take
part also in my prosperities, wherein I ever desired to have a companion. I
will therefore restore with double joy, the affliction you have suffered for my
sake. Understand that I converse with Cratippus in an inward fashion, not as a
disciple, but as his child. He has a sweet manner of discourse, which
delights me greatly: Wherefore I am with him all the day, and often, part of
the night also. For he many times meals with me. And our familiarity has
proceeded so far, that many times on a sudden, he takes us before we have
half dyned: and laying aside philosophical conclusions, he entertaines us
with pl^asant discourses. Wherefore endeavor as soon as you can, to come and
enjoy the society of so noble, and so complete a man. But what shall I say of
Brutus? Whom I never suffer to be from me: so modest, and loyal he is. Whose
disposition though it be to be thriftie and grave, yet is he most pleasing
company; and always in matters of learning. Within the compass whereof we
lay the bounds of our contentments. I have rented a place for him near hand,
and according to my ability, I supply him. Besides this, I am resolved to
exercise oratorie in Greek with Cassius, and in Latin^ with Brutus. I live
daily with certain learned men, which came from Mi^ylene with Cratippus
Ep^orate: the cheifest of the Athenians, Leonides and other such like, spend
their time with me. I will deliver no further of my self. Whereas you write to
me of Gorgias: certainly he furthered me much in my pleading: but because I
would not oppose my fathers will, I put him from me: he having written
earnestly unto me, that I should dismiss him. I would not show my backwardnes
in obeying his will, because I would put no conceit of suspicion into him.
Besides I conceived, how 'twas not a thing fit, that I should oppose my fathers
judgment; notwithstanding, your office herein, and counsel, was acceptable
to me. I admit of your excuse, by reason of your penury of time, knowing that
yours, is a li^e much employed. I am very glad of the purch^se made of that
Fa^me. Wonder not though in the conclusion of my letter I rejoice with you: for
you also in the end of yours, give me advertisement thereof. You have means
now to lay apar^ your city customs, and to become a rusticke Roman. When
hourly I set before mine eyes your pleasing aspect, me thinks I see you
buying country commodities, reasoning with laborers, and to gather into the
lap of your garment, the seeds of fruits after meals. But to come to the
matter, I am sorry as well as you, that I could not assist you. But doubt not
my Tiro, that I will ever fail you, if Fortune ^aile not me, especially,
understanding, that this Farm is bought for common use: You did me a great
pleasure to dispatch wha^ I gave you in charge. I pray you send ^o me as soon
as you can a writer, but principally a Gr^cian. For I loo^e a world of time, in
writing out the Commentaries. Be careful of your h^alth, that we may once
discourse together. I recommend Antherus unto you. Farewell.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 22.
BY your letters I am in some hope of your amendment; I Will assure you, I wish
i^ Wherefore be careful thereof, and no wai^s suppose, that you do any thing
against my will in not being with me. You are with me, if you be careful of
your recovery. I would therefore rather have you observe your heal^h, ^hen
e^th^r mine eyes, o^ min^ ea^es^ For though I both hea^e, and see you
willingly, yet your life is ^arre more dear unto me. Here I do nothing; that
is, ^ write not; but I read most w^^l^^^ly. I^ the writers there ca^^o^ ^o well
rea^ my hand, teach them. T^ere is one intricate interlining, which I my self
scarcely understand, about Cato when he was four years old. Look to the
building of the refectorie, as you do. Tertia will be there, so that Publius
be not bespoken. This Demetri^s was never Phalareus, but now it plainly
appears that he is Billienus. So as you shall do me a good office to observe
him. You know his manner of phrase: Although: Neuerthel^s; Of those; etc. Yet
if you speak with him, give me advertisement, that I may have matter whereof
to write, and to write more at large. Look to your recovery, for you cannot
do me a greater pleasure.

Cicero to his Two. Epist. 23.
THough these moneys come not under account, nevertheless if you may, it will be
good to take an acknowledge thereof; Balbus writes to me, that he is troubled
with such a terrible flux of humors to his eyes as he can not tell me what
Antonius has done about the law. I hope they forbid us not to live in the
country. I have written to Bithinicus. See you, who contem^e not old age,
whither Seruiliu^ understand it. Though our Atticus, because he heard, how
heretofore I was dismayed at every false all'arme conceiues always the like;
and perceiues not, with what rampires of Philosophy I am now environed. And
certainly because himself is fearful, he seeks to possess others with
fear. Yet I will not break with Ant^nius, but preserve entire our ancient
friendship, and write unto him, so soon as I have spoken with you. But come
not before you have called in your deb^. For the knee is n^arer then the leg.
To morrow I look for Lep^a. I shall need the sweetness of your discourse, to
moderate hi^ bitterness. Farewell.

Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 24.
THough I had written to you, but this morning by Harpalus: notwithstanding
having, a fit messenger, I will no^ forbear to make a repetition of my ^ormer.
Not because I am distrustful of your diligence, but because respects of
importance urge me. Great necessity moved me to send you thither for dispatch
of our businesses. Procure in any wise, that Offili^s and Aurelius be
satisfied, If you cannot get all of Fla^m^, get at least some part; call for
the pension dew the Calends of January. See you sa^isfie our Creditors, before
your departure. Thus far of matters domestical. About public affairs I am
sufficiently informed. I see what be the ends and scopes, of Octauius and
Antonius. I know, what you and others may well imagine. I think the worse of
my self, that I come not with all speed unto you. But I forthwith expect your
letters. And know that Balbus, was in Aquinas, as was told ^ou, and the day
after Hirtius. I think they went both unto the Ba^hes. We shall hear, what
they have contrived. Give notice to Dolabella's agents, and call earnestly upon
Papia. Farewell.

Cicero the son to Tiro. Epist. 25.
ALthough you have v^ed a just and fit excuse, of not writing unto me; yet I
entreat you not to make a custom of it. For although I be both certified, by
messengers, concerning the rumors of the Commonwealth; and my father writes
continually, unto me touching his good will toward me: yet a letter wri^ten of
every least matter, from you to me, has been ever most acceptab^e; wherefore
seeing that above all things I desire your letters, deal not with me in such
sort, that you perform the the duty of writing, by excuse rather then by
daily sending. Fare you well.

Quintus Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 26.
Having received another Packet, without your letters, I silently complained of
you. You will not be able, to exempt your self from the penalty of this
offense. Mar^u^ must defend you, and study well too upon the matter: and yet I
cannot tell how he will prove, that you have not committed an error. When I was
a little one, I remember our mother, would cause even the empty butts to be
^^^led: because, if any of the full were by stealth drunk out, they might not
say, 'twas one of the empty ones; and I would have you do the like. Though
you have nothing whereof to write, yet write. Your letters carry always with
them, truth and contentment. Love us, and Farewell.

Quintus Cicero to his Tiro. Epist. 27.
IF my brother, either in modesty, or through have has lightly reprehended
me of my negligence; you have freely touched me even to the quick; and in
words no less significant, written to me of the Consulls assigned; Whom I know
to be more lustful, and languishing then any woman. And if by misfortune they
be not removed from the government, we^ are all in danger of a shipwreck. A
man would not believe the wicked prankes, which I know they performed in the
Galliae, when they lay in the face of the enemy that Summer that I was there;
and if it be not provided for, the vices of Antonius, being like their own,
he will be easily able to allure them. It is requisite, that the counsel
either of the Tribunes, or of some private person, should defend the
commonwealth. For these two are scarce worthy, that one of them should have
Cesena, or the other the Freehold of the foundations of the C^ss^tian Tauernes
committed to him. I love you as I told you, heartily. And about the end of this
month I will see you: and wheresoever I meet you, I will swee^ly kiss your
eyes, though it were in the amidst of the market place. Love me and Farewell.

FINIS.
Tityre, tu patulae: Cecinit molimine primo; Postera qui repetens: ARMA
VIRVMQVE CANit.
Faults escaped.
PAge 3. line pra: Hipsaeus. read Hyp: p. 15. line si: can without, read cann^t
without. p. 59. l sh: put out, for ^his. 68 t^: put out suddenly. p. 70 we: put
out, you might rather have foreseen then any of us. p. 8. l. ^i: which our. r.
which your. 109 he: told. r. could. p. 123. Mo: gave entertainment. r. kept
your Sessions. ^i: gave. r. kept. p. 150. me: not standing. r. notwithstanding.
p. 146. fr: her; r. it. p. 153. vi: us; both. r. us both; p. 165. the put out,
one of. 169. ne: neither. r. either. nor. r. or. 177. h^: service. r. survive.
p. 209. Lelius. r. Laelius. p. 214. fo: Dionisius. r. Dionysius. 219. me:
prosected. read prosecuted. 225. ma, the. r. their. 225. Gyminician. r.
Gymnician. 137. na: neit^er. r. either. 259. as: put ou^, he. 267. of:
unwilling. r. unwillingly. 299. si: rip the. r. rip up the. 302. do: this. r.
his. 314. Ki: kind beast. r. kind of beast. 318. en: soons. soon. 334. th.
school Epi. r. scho^le of Epi. 3^5. an: and of the. r. and ^he. 356. La: put
out, I. 364. all^ put out, not.


