THE Worthy Book of Old age otherwise entitled the elder Cato, containing a
learned defense and praise of Age, and Aged men: written in latin by that
father of eloquence Marcus Tullius Cicero, and now englished.

Whereunto is annexed a Recital of diverse men that lived long.

With a declaracion of sundry soortes of years, and the diversity between
the years in the old time, and our years now adays.

Anno, 1569

Imprinted at London by Thomas Marshe.

To the Right high and Honorable Lord, William Paulet, of the noble order of
the Garter Knight, Lord S. John, Earl of Wylshyre, Marquis of Winchester,
and Lord Treasurour of England.
WHen as (right Honorable) I had fynished this my rude translation of Marcus
Tullius Cicero his Book of old age, begone and ended by me this last year
having a quiet time of vacation among my friends in Chesshyre, thereby to
exclude and avoyde that loathsome and horrible Monster Idleness, which holy
Ambrose aptlye calls the Pillowe or Cussyon of Satan, I called my wits to
counsel and studied in my mind to whom my simple travail therein employed
might best be dedicated. Among all others, I could find none, unto whom the
whole process of the matter, and the excellencye of the Argument seemed better
to agree, then to your Lordshippe. Using therefore the grave advise of the
famous Philosopher and Christian Ethnike (for so doubtethe not Erasmus to call
him) Seneca, who wills every man that means to bestow any gift or
present upon any manner of person, not only to have a diligent eye and
respect, that his said gift be such, as to his estate and degree is meet and
agreeable, but also such as to the dignity and calling of the receauer is apt
and conuenable: I humblye offer this little Treatise of Old age unto your
honor, as unto him, in vvho^ Old age to the great rejoicing of al your
vvelvvillers most triu^phantly flourishes: trusting, yea rather not doubting,
but that your L. vvil as fauourablye accept it, as the noble king Artoxerxes
(surnamed Memor) did a Pomegranate which one of his subjects presented him
vvithal or as at an other time, he did a little fair river water, which a
poor Persian Peazaunte (seeinge many people thick and threefolde to bring
rewards to the king, and he having nothing, yet loath to come behind with
the signification of his poor loyal heart tovvarde his Sovereign) offerred
unto him in the holovvnesse of his two hands: or (to take an example nearer
home, and of a Prince of later days) as the politic and prudent Loys the
eleuenthe of that name king of France, did a Radishe root, presented unto
him by the hands of his poor vassal and Subject Conon the Burgonion. And
because beside a fruictful and learned discourse of age, there be herein also
enterlaced many proper conclusions and feactes contryued in the praise and
comendacion of Husbandry, vvherin not only mean gentlemen and honorable
Senators, but also mighty monarchs and puissau^t princes in old time took
great delight and pleasure, together with a chronology of diverse heroical and
worthy enterprises, achieved partly by martial provvesse, partly by wise do^
and policy: these al seemed most fit to be dedicated unto your excellencye,
who is and of long time has been the principal husband of this famous
Realm under our royal and sovereign Princess, and others her Graces noble
Predecessors: who also most honorably and faithfully have served her
highness and them in their manifold and vvaightye affairs booth at home and in
other foreign Realms in great favor and estimation. Whom God has blessed
with so prosperous a race of long life, to see the Children of your Childrens
Children: ympes for their tovvardnes not like to degenerate from the virtue of
their great Graundfather, neither to forsake the steps of their noble
Graundfather. Here will I vvade no farther, to speak any thing, of the virtuous
geftes incorporate in your noble breast, partly because it might peradventure
seem to smell of that ugly vice, which I do and ever have detested, (I
mean Adulation) and partly because they sufficiently commend themselves to the
eye of the world, in so much that in respect of them, my words might be but
as it were a candle lighted at high noone to help the shyning of the bright
Sun at midsomer. Wherefore in receiving this worthy Senatoure and his small
train, whom in this Dialogue he entroduceth reasoning and talking one with
an other of the commodities and discommodities of old age into your patrocinie
and protection (whose sugared se^tences and pregnau^t style, fraughted with a
legion of vvitty persuasions and eloquet arguments, Penned by that
incomparable Phoenix of al eloquence among all that ever vvrate either before or
since his days, I for lack of knowledge have racked from gorgeous Elegancie,
and out of Romayne govvnes more boldly I fear then vvyselye changed into
Englys he Liuerayes) you shall acquire and purchase great praise and glory.
Assuring your self, that in defending and shrovvdinge the^ against the poisoned
and slanderous infamyes of serpentine Sicophantes, and the cancard assaults
of malicious tongues, which seed on no other repast but spightful disdain
and hellishe rancoure, your L. shall do a thing (unless I be much deceived)
greatly sounding to the generositie of your noble heart and high estate. For
what greater praise can there be then to be a patron of virtue, and of them
that are virtuous? Again, vvherin is the honor of the Honorable so much
blemished, dymmed and Eclipsed, as in bolste ring vice, and supporting the
wicked? Accept therefore (Right noble Lord this poor earnest penye of my
unfeigned good vvil into your tuition, vvherby I shall be anymated and encouraged
hereafter perhaps to attempt some vvaightier matter.

In the mean season, humblye and willingly submittinge my self and all that I
can do, to your Censure and commaundmente, I surceasse any longer to trouble
you. Beseching God the Authoure and gyuer of al good things, so to infuse his
gracious gifts into you, that after the Epilogue and last Pageaunt of this
mortal and transitorye life (VVherin your L. with much vvorshippe, more
honor, and most authorytie these lxxxxvi. years has been a worthy and
honorable Actor) you may be tranflated into the joys celestial, and be made
partaker of his glorious kingdom Amen.

From Butleye the seventh of March. 1569. Your L. most humble Oratoure Thomas
Nevvton.

To the Reader.
IF I did not gentle Reader trust more to thy friendly courtesy then to mine
own skill and judgment, I would not with hazard of my fame have enterprysed
the diuulgacion of this my simple travail to the gazinge view of every
scrupulous and critical beholder. But because it pleased some to desire me
(who notwithstanding had authority to comaunde me, to take this small charge
in hand. I am bold upon their encouragemente and likinge to conceive semblable
hope of thy friendly and favorable acceptaunce. Albeit long it was, ere I would
willinglye relent to their requests, pleadinge in excuse of my unableness, and
aledging the incomparable sublymity and sappye eloquence of ye Authoure, whereby
my Conscience vpbrayded me of presumption, in that, I having but a small
sclender vessel would adventure into any such sea. Furthermore I was not
ignoraunte how this same was translated about xxx years agone: but of al
doubts, this was the least, for as much as that translation bears but the
countenance of one, being none in deed to any purpose, being taken of the
learned for noone at all, since never a page almost is answerable to the
latin text, I will not say, sca^tly any sentence. Take therefore well in worth
my good, will and aford me gentle report for my labor which is the sole
guerdon that I do expect at thy hands, and think not that the translatours
unskillfulness does any thing derogate from the Authors worthynes, weigh my
intent in the Balance of frendeshippe and indifferencye, who to counteruaile
the want of power, am stored with as much good will as the best to pleasure
the.

Farrwell. T. Newton.

The Presace of the Author unto Titus pomponius Atticus.
O Tytus, if I ease thee of that pain,
And heavy charg which does the sore annoy,
And makes thine heart full pensive to remain,
Shall I herein my labor well employe?

For in speaking unto the (friend Atticus) I may use the same verses and
words, which that ancient and worthy Pot, more fully fraughted with
honestye, and faithful dealing, than with vvorldly pelf and richesse, uses,
in coumforting the noble Flaminius: albeit I am well assured, that thou art
not so disquieted night and day, with pensiuenes, care, and sorrow, as
Flaminius was: for I know thy paeiente sufferaunce of all chances and
bruntes of Fortune, and the well stayed moderation of thy mind. And I do
right well understand how that thou haste brought hoome vvythe thee from
Athens, not only thy Surrename, to be called Atticus, but also gentle
behauioure, courtesy, and prudence. Yet can I not otherwise think, but
that, now and then as well as I, thou art sore vexed and troubled in mind,
for the tyrannous oppressions and grievous enormities now in our common
wealth perpetrated and committed. The consolation vvherof is so great, that it
can not in this little book be fully declared, and therefore I vvil defer it,
until an other time more convenient. At this present time, I thought it best
to writ some little Treatise unto the, concerning Old age: because I would
feign have both thee and my self, to be eased of this heavy burden, which is
commune and indifferent to me asvvell as to thee, (I mean Old age,) which
now already is either come upon us, or else ere it be long, (we may be
assured) will catch hold on us. Notwithstanding, I know well that thou do
and wilt take the same modestlye, and as it becomes a wise man to do,
patiently, even as thou art in all other things accustomed.

But vvhenne as I purposed vvythe my self to write somevvhat in praise and
commendacion of Old age, I deemed and judged the most worthy, unto whom my
labor and study in this behalf might be dedicated, which boothe of us,
might jointly and commonly use for our coumforte and contentacion. As for my
part, I promise thee, I took such singular pleasure and delectacion in the
compilinge of this Book, that it did not only utterly take away all the
encombraunces and discommodities of mine Old age from me: but rather made the
same unto me pleasant, joyful, and delectable. Therefore Philosophy can
never be sufficientlye praised, so much as the worthiness and dignity
thereof requires: whose precepts and rules who so ever obayeth, may pass
the whole time of his age, and run the full race of this life, without
any yrkesome grief or trouble. What other vtilities and commodities it
brings, I have already in many other of my Books at large declared and
mean hereafter many times and often thereof to make ample discourse and
mention. But this Book of Old age, I have sent unto thee: wherein the
preminence and superiority of the disputacion is not geeuen to old Tithonus
as Aristo Chius did in his Book, least in such a fained fable the whole
discourse should be the less esteemed among the Readers: but I attribute the
chyefe dignytie of it unto the Old grayheaded sage Marcus Cato, to the end the
Treatise should have moore estimation credit and authority. And I introduce
as speakers, Laelius and Scipio, frankly and familiarly talking with him, and
much meruailinge to see him, so pacientlie and easelie to tolerate his old
age, and what aunsvveares he made to them again. Whom if thou think more
learnedlye hear to dispute, then in his own works he was accustomed,
impute the cause to his skilfulnes in the Greek tongue, whereof it is well
known that in his Old age he was very studious. But to what purpose should
we make any further preamble? for all that we have to say concerning Old age,
the talk and disputacion of Cato himself shall manifestlye declare.

The Speakers names. Publius Scipio. Caius Laelius. Marcus Cato.

Scipio. OF tentymes boothe I and my freinde Caius Laelius also, are wont
greatly to have in an admiracion and to marvel at the excellent and absolute
wisdom O Cato, which thou use in all other matters and exploites what so
ever thou take in hand: but namely and specially, because we never yet
perceived thine old age to be burthenous and grievous unto thee, which to the
most part of old men is so odious and unwelcome, that they will say they carry
about with them a burden heautour then the great flaming Mountain Aetna.


Cato. A very slight and easy matter it is (dear friends Scipio and Laelius)
which you do seem so much to muse and marvel at: for they that have no
power, pith of wit help, way nor virtue in them selves, to conducte and
bring them to a good and blessed life, unto such as these be, all their age
is combersome and unpleasant. But unto such, as lead their lives vertuouslye,
measurynge all their actions by the squyre of reason, and have their minds with all good gifts of grace beautified and garnished, there is nothing thought ne
deemed evil, that comes by necessity of nature. Of the which sort, Old age
is principally to be considered, unto which all men wish to arrive, and yet
when they have their desire, they accuse it, as painful, sickly, unpleasant
and tedious, such is the brainelesse inconstancy, foolish sottage and
perverse ouerth wartnes of waywarde people.

They say, it crepeth and steals upon them, faster and sooner then they
thought it would. First, who causes them to ymagine and think such a false
and peuish untruth? for why should they think that after their youth and
adolescencie, Old age creeps faster upon them, rather then their
adolescencie and youth does after childhode? Seeing therefore they do not repine
nor complain any whitte, after that they have been children, to grow to be tall
Striplinges and lusty youngemen, why should they be aggreued or think them
selves discontented, after they have been Striplinges and young men, to be
Old and aged? Again, if they might reach to the age of eight hundredth years,
what greater pleasure and commodity is therein, or wherein should they think
it to be less trouble some, and tedious, then it is when they be of thage of
four score years? for the age that is once passed and gone, be it never so
long, can with no manner of pleasure or delectacion, comfort, recreat, nor
mytigate, the old age that is in such fond persons. And therefore if you be
wont to wonder at me, and to have my wisdom in admiration (which I would to
god were correspondent to your good opinion conceived of me, and also
answerable to my Surname) we are in this only poincte wise, because we follow
nature as a god, and taking her as a sure and infallible guide, direct and
leauel al our actions according to her prescript laws and ordinances. Of
whom, when all the other parts of age are well described and apoincted, it is
not like to be true, that the last act of al should be negligently played and
as it were of an unskillful and dreaming Poet, loyteringly handeled. But in age
there must needs be some extreme and last end, bending down, drowping, and
declyning from the lustines and nymble actiuitie that was in flourishing youth,
as it hapeneth and is plainly to be seen in the bearies of trees and other
fruicts of the earth, when they be com to their due ripenes and natural
maturitie: which every wise man will patiently and willingly tolerate. For what
other thing is meant, by ye temerarious and proud attempt of the Giants, warring
and obstinately fighting with the gods, but to resist and go against nature?


Laelius. But you shall do a singular great pleasure unto us both (for I dare
undertake for Scipio and speak for him in this poinct as well as for my self)
to give us some fruictfull premonition whereby we may aforehand be instructed
and also armed (because both desire and hope to live til we be old men) by
what means we may most easelie suffer and bear out our old crooked age, when
it comes.


Cato. I will (Laelie) fulfill your request and willingly rele^t to your
peticio^, and especially if I shall thereby do such pleasure unto both of you, as
you say I shall.


Scip. Right glad would we be, if it might please you, and be not to much pains
and trouble for you O Cato, sith you have as it were run a great race, and
gone a long iourneye, (which path also we must tread) to hear and understand
what kind of thing that is, whereunto you are already arrived.


Cato. I will do herein O Laelie what I am able: for I have oftentimes been in
company among my equalles and famyliers (for, like with like, according to
the old proverb, will keep company and best agree together) who have greatly
bewailed the disco^moditie of their old years, and thought them selves in an
ill case by reason of their age, and namely Caius Salinator and Spurius
Albinus, men that have been Consuls, and in manner of ye same age ye I my self
am, were wont greatly to murmr and repyne, sorowinge and lamentinge for their
old age: not only because they thought them selves to lack pleasures and
lascivious pastimes, and to be utterly bereft and debarred from al joys and
solaces, without whom they accounted their life to be as no life, but also
because they were contemned and despised of those, of whom they were wont to
be honored, and reverenced. But in my opinion, they blamed not that, which
was blame worthy. For if the cause and blame thereof, were to be imputed to old
age, then should the same discommodities, corasies and greeuaunces happen unto
me and al other old men, of whom I have known a great maignie, that have lived
in their old age without any whyning, complaint, or discontentacion: who were
well pleased to be vngiued, loosed and delivered out of the yoke of their
sensual lusts and voluptuous appetites, who also were never despised of their
friends and acquaintance. But the blame and fault of all this mutteringe and
co^pleyning is in the ouerth wartenes of men's wayward manners and not in age.
For discrete, sober, and temperate old men, being neither ill to please,
froward nor churlishe, do live in their old age tolerably and quietly enough,
both to them selves and al others. But unbridled insolency, and blunt
vncurtesie, is to al age unpleasant, tedious and yrksome.


Laelius. It is even so, as you say Cato, but there will some peradventure say
unto you, ye your old age, seems to you tolerable enough, because of your
great wealth, richesse and dignity, but there be a great number of others,
which can not have such ample possessions nor such extra ordinary helps to
alleuiate and condulcate ye asperitie and vnpleasauntenes of their decrepite
age.


Cato. In deed Laelie that whereof you have now talked is somewhat, but all
things do not rest nor consist in them: whereunto agrees the quick and nipping
sentence of Themistocles, unto whom, when as a certain rascal peasaunt of the
Isle of Scriphos tauntingly and spightfully said, that he had not gotten so
great fame and renown of him self, but rather through the noble and glorious
celebritie of his flourishinge country: Thou say truth (said he) for if I
had been a Scriphian berne, I should never have been enuobled nor my name by so
many triumphant victories blased abroad and eternized, neither if thou were an
Athenian borne, thou should never aspire to any honorable dignity. In like
manner may it be said of oldage, for in extreme penury, scarcity and indigence
it can not be easilye abyden, born, and tolerated, no not of a wise man:
neither it cannot be but cumbresome and grievous to him that is a fool,
although he have never so great plenty, and abu^da^ce of althings. The very
meetest weapons and fittest instruments for old age (O Scipio and Laelie) are
ye perfect knowledge and the active exercises of virtue, which when it has
been practiced all the time of man's age, which has lived a long time, does
bring and yield at length marvelous fruict and commodity, not only because it
never shrin keth nor starteth from us, nor yet forsakes us, no not in the
very last poinct of age (which truly is an excellent thing) but also because
ye conscience of our former life which we have led vertuouslye, and ye
remembrance of many good and pitiful deeds before time and of sundry noble
acts valiantlye achieved is very pleasant, comfortable, and delectable unto
us. Certes, I when I was a young stripling did so love Quintus Maximus, (the
same was he that recovered the City of Tarentine) being then an old man, as
though he had been mine equal and of like age as I was.

For in that noble and prudent man, there was to be seen a kind of severity
and magnificence mingled and powdered with clemency and a merciful generositie.

His old age never altered nor changed his wonted manners, albeit when I first
began to honor and reverence him, for the virtuous magnanymitie which I
espied to reign in him, he was not very old, but yet he was well stricken in
years. For I was borne one year after he had been the first time Consul, and
in his fourth Cousulate, I being a young man, was a Souldioure under him in his
expedition to Capua, the fifth year after that, I was made Treasurour and
general receiuor at Tarentine, then was I created Aedilis, and within four
years after, I was elected Praetor, which office I bare and executed when
Tuditanus and Cethegus were Consuls. At that time he being a very aged man, in
public audience counseled the Senate and people of Rome to revive the Law
called Lex Cincia, and to have it to stand in effect and to be duly executed.
And being a man far grown in years, he warred in the quarrel of his
Country, and to repulse foreign hoscilitie, was chosen Chieuetaine and
General of the wars, wherein he so manfullye acquitted himself with prowesses
and policy, and was so courageous and laborious, as though he had been a
lusty young Gallaunt in his flourishing and fresh years, yea and with his
lingering patience and procrastinacion, repressed and cooled the furious
attemptes and outrageous invasions of haultye Hanniball. In whose praise and
commendacion, Enninus writes these verses following.

One man by protracting the time with delay.
Has saved our weal public and restorde it again.
For he never forced, what poisoned tongues did say
So that his country in safety might remain.
Therefore his great glory, and illustrious name,
Is registered perpetually within the book of Fame.
What vigilancie and what wisdom used he, when Tarentine was delivered to
him? I my self at that same time, when Salinator (who had lost the town and
was sledde into the castle) made his auaunt and proudly said to Fabius these
words. By my means it is come to pass: and me only may thou thank O
Fabius, for the recovery and regaining of Tarentine, heard him whenne he
smyled and made this answer to him again: It is even true that thou sayste
(quod he) for if thou had not lost the Town, I should not have recovered
and won it. And unto these his valiant exploites and hardye acts in
Martial affairs most honorably by warlicke prowess and undaunted courage,
achieved his grave advise and wise counsel in time of peace concerning
civil ordinances and politic regiment, was in all poinctes correspondent,
for when he was the second time created Consul, and his fellow in office
Spurius Caruilius not intermedling with such waightye business as to his office
were incu^bent, neither doing any thing for the behoufe and honor of the
common wealth, yet he remembringe his charge and function resisted and with
stood Caius Flaminius the plebeian tribune, to the uttermost of his power, who
had contrary to the authority of the Senate presumed and taken upon him, to
distribute and deuyde to every one, man by man, all that piece of Italy that is
called Picenum, and also that part of France that lies from the mountains
called Alps to the river Rubicon. Also when he was Augur, he would not stick
to say, that al such things were fortunatly and with good luck enterprised and
taken in hand, which tended to ye profit and behoufe of the common wealth: and
contrariwise, those things ye were preiudicially attempted to endamage or
blemish the sovereign dignity thereof, were vnluckely and in an ill time
incepted. Many and sundry notable qualities have I known to be incorporate in
this noble sage, but none more to be marueiled at, then how worthily and
pacie^tly he took ye death of his son Marcus, who was a man greatly for his
deserts renowned and had been Consul In whose praise and commendacion he has
written a funeral Oracion, right pithie and learned, which when we read, we
are so ravished with the elegancie and concinne vehemency thereof, that we
cannot but say, that he surmounteth right famous Orators. Yea what
Philosopher do we think able to compare and match with him? And his noblenes
was not so much and so greatly blazed abroad in the open sight and hearing of
men, but his inculpable behauioure and virtuous dealinge was far greater, and
much more to be extolled, which he used priuatlye when he was at home and in
his own house. What profounde talk used he? what sappie sentences uttered
he? what wholesome precepts and rules to lead our life by, showed he? how
expert and conning was he in the monuments of Antiquity? how exactlie was he
seen in the art of diuinacion? yea: knowledge and skilfulnes was in him (as in
a studious Roman) great, exquisite, and manifold. He perfectly remembered and
by heart could recoumpte all the wars and exploites as well civil and
domestical, as foreign and external. Whose talk and conference so greatly
delighted my gredie and thirsty mind, as though I had already co^iected and
deuined by an inward presage, that which afterward chanced, that when he dyed,
I should have none nor find none, to resort unto, for counsel and learning.
But to what end do I speak so much of Maximus? Truly because thereby you may
se, how ye it is agret villainy, to say that such an old age as his was, is
wretched and miserable. But all men can not be Scipiones nor Maximi, to
abuccinate and recompt what Cities they have sacked, rased and expugnated, to
proclaim and tell abroad their Martial conflicktes both by Sea and land,
their wars victoriouslye maintained, their enterprices fortunately achieved,
nor their royal triumphs gloriously solemnyzed. For when a man has led his
former life, quietly, uprightly, godly and laudably, his old age is easy,
myld, pleasant and courteous, such as the old age of Plato was, Plato died as
he satte writing.
who in the.lxxxi. year of his age, died as he sat writing. And such was the
old age of Isocrates, who is said, that he wrate his work entitled
Panathenaicus, in the nynetye and fourth year of his age, and lived five years
after: whose Scholemayster Leontinus Gorgias, lived fullye a hundredth and seven
years, and never faynted, drowped, nor gave over his study and labor which
he had in hand. And when it was demanded of him, why he would wish to live so
long: I have (said he) no cause whereby to accuse or mislike mine old age.
Anotable answer and worthy to proceed out of the mouth of a famous and
learned man. For doltishe sottes, and beetleheaded fools do lay al their own
faults and blame upon old age: which the prudente Poet Ennius, (of whom we
lately made mention, and whom you may well remember) used not to do. For he
compares his old age to the old age of a courageous Courser or victorious
horse in these words: Even as a horse of courage stout
with comely port and grace
Which often has born the bell, and vvone
The price in open race:
When old age once with trembling pace
Has him at length possessed,
He ceasseth from such frolic feactes
And geeues him self to rest.


This Ennius I dare say, you do remember well, For these twain, T. Flaminius
and M. Attilius were created Consuls the nynetenthe year after his death, and
he died when Caepio and Philip were the second time Consuls, being lxx. years
old (for so long did he live) at which time I being lxv. years old, with all my
might and maine, and with an audible, and firm voice, exhorted the people,
that the Law called Lex Voconia might be adjudged good, and effectual and by
Autenticke authorytie irreuocablie established.

Thus Ennius sustained and carried two such burdens as are vulgarelie taken and
supposed to be the greatest that can be, that is to wit, Poverty and Old
age, yea and in such sort, that he seemed in a manner to be highly pleased,
and therein to take great objection. For in po^dering and debating in my mind, I
find that there be four principal causes, why Old age seems wretched and
miserable. One is, because thereby a man is impeached and hindered from taking
in hand any fu^ction or charge in the common wealth: an other is, because it
enfeebleth and weakneth ye body, the third is, because it does almost take away
al pleasure and lascivious voluptee, and the fourth is, because it is not far
of from death. Now iet us (if you please) sift and discuss the force and
validite of every one of these causes, and see how just the allegacions of
every of them are. It hinders and draws a man back, that he cannot do his
affairs and business, and from the administracion of diverse offices from
what business and offices? from such as are by lustines of youth and bodily
strength achieved? Are there no things appertainig to old men, which although
their bodies be weak and feeble, yet may by the vigoure of the mind, be done
and administered? Did Q. Fabius nothing? Did L. Paulus, who was thy father
Scipio, and the father in law of that worshipful man my Son, nothing? And a
great sort of old men more. The Fabritij, the Curij, the Coruncani, when they
maintained and defended the weal public with their grave cou^ sails and
authorities, did they nothing? Appius Claudius was not only old and crooked, but
blind also: yet when ye Senate with one accord, purposed to conclude a peace,
and to condiscende to a league with Pyrrhus, he was not afraid to speak those
words which Ennius in his verses recited.

Why do your wits,
and senses so rave?
What foolish conceipte,
does encombre your brain?
Where be the ripe judgments,
which wont you were to have?
To agree to your Countries,
ruin most plain?
And much more pursues he in his Poem, concerning the same matter, which
you know well enough: And yet the Oracion which Appius made, is to be seen,
which he made seuentine years after his second Consulship, and between his
two Consulates there were ten years, and he had borne the office of Tensor
before his first Consulate.

Whereby it may be well perceived and gathered, that when Pyrrhus inferred
war upon the Romans, he was a very aged man, and so have we heard our
fathers and Progenitors report. Therefore their argument is weak and of no
force, which say, that old age is not occupied in noble affairs and matters of
great importance. And they do much like, as if any man should say that the
Pylote and conductour of a ship does nothing, neither helps any thing in
sailing, when as some clymbe up and sit in the top of the Mastes, some walk
upon the hatches, some cleanse the pumpe, but he holdinge the helm and stirring
the rother, sirteth quietlye in the stern or Puppe, and although he do not the
same things, which young men do, yet is his service far better and greater
then theirs. For matters of great weight, are not done with bodily strength,
nimblenes, celeritie and deliuernesse, but with counsel, wisdom,
authority and policy, whereof old age accustomablye is not only not
depryued, but rather therewith the better increased, stored and furnished:
unless peradventure you thyncke, that I who have been both a Souldioure, a
Tribune, a Marshall of the fyelde, a Lieutenaunte of an army, an Ambass adoure
and a Consul, and throughlye tried in diverse bruntes and hazardes of wars,
do now abandon all my former valyaunce, and geeue my self to Idleness, and to
live vnprofytablye to the common wealth, because I have surceassed from
wars and feactes of arms. But I do prescribe ordres unto the Senate, and
show to them what things in mine opinion are most expedient to be done, and
geeue certain informacion to them beforehand, how they may make war upon
the spightful Carthaginians, whose cancard hearts have a great while wished and
contrived our confusion, whose malicious stomaks I shall never cease to fear,
until I know perfectlye, that their proud City is distroyed, ruynated and
utterly subverted. God grant Scipio, that thou may win the praise of
that glorious enterprise, and that it may be thy lotte, victoriouslye to
tryumphe over their insufferable insolencye, repressynge their treacherous
hawtynesse by fine force of arms and dente of Swearde, and that thou may
make a final end of that, which thy Graund-father made trybutarye: since whose
death there are passed.xxxiii. years, but his memoryall shall never be
forgotten, nor rased out of the minds of all posteritye. He dyed the year
before I was Censour, nine years after my Consulshyppe, whenne he had been
elected and created Cousull the second time, I thanne having the same office
of Consul. Think you that if he had lived till he had been a hundrethe
year old, he would have been wearye of his Old age? he would not use to
make roades and incursyons into his enemies terrytoryes and dominions, he
would not give himself to leaping, dancing and skipping, neither to cast
darts and toss pikes a far of, nor with sweards to fight and claspe with
his aduersirie hand to hand, but rather to envre himself with wisdom, reason,
consultacion and judgment. If these poinctes had not been in old men, our
Predecessors would not have called the supremedignitie of counsailours, by
the name of Senate. Among the Lacedaemonians they that bare the higheste
offices, as they be, so also are they called Ancients or Presbiters. And if
you be disposed, to hear and read foreign examples, you shall find that
noble and flourisshinge common wealths have been brought to ruin and
servitude by the unripe administracion of unskillful young men, and the same by
old and sage fathers to have been maintained, corroborated and recovered. Tell
me this, how lost you your mighty and populous common wealth in so short
space? for to one that moved this question and demand (as it is to be seen
in the Book of the Poet Naeuius which he entitled Ludus) many answers were
made and namely this: There stepped forth, nevve and strange Orators,
foolish and light headed young men, who bearing chief rule and authority,
with their unadvised counsels and peuishe rashness have brought our commune
wealth to a miserable state and desolation. Rashness and temeritie is
incidente to youth, but prudence and pollicye to old age. But the memory (you
will perhaps say) in old men fails and waxes daily worse and worse. I
believe it well, if a man do not use and exercise it, or if a man be of a dull
and blockishe nature. Themistocles knew every person in the City, and could
call every man by his proper name. Do you think, that in his old age, he used
to name one man in steed of another, and to salute Aristides instead of
Lisimachus. And I do not only know them that are yet alive but their fathers
and Graundfathers also which are dead. Neither do I fear, when I read the
Epitaphes and inscripcions of Tombs and graves, least I should thereby, (as the
common credulity of people is) lose my memory and remembrance: for in reading
of them I am brought into remembrance of those that are deceassed. Neither did
I ever hear of any old man ye had so weak a memory to forget in what place he
laid his purse and hid his Treasure. I warrant you, they remember al such
things as they esteem and set store by, they will not neglect nor forget their
Obligacions, and bills of debt, nor their days of apperaunce before any
Iusticiarie, unto whom they be indebted, and who to them. They forget not what
their counsailours in law do give the^ in charge, what their ordinaries and
Prelates eniogne to them, what ye Augurs do prognosticate, and what the
Philosophers do decide. Oh how many things do old me^ remember? Old men have
their senses and wits fresh and vigorous so that they envre themselves with
exercise and industry. Which thing is evidently and daily to be seen not only
in men of great calling and honorable parentage, but also in private persons
and haskerds of low degree, living quietly Sophocles compyled and made
Tragedies, til he came to extreme old age, who being earnestlye addicted to his
studies, was thought not to care or to take any thought for his household and
domestical provision, and therefore was he openly accused of his own sons,
and brought before the judges, that they might defeat him from the use and
possession of his goods and riches and that (as the custom and manner is also
among us, when any do negligently look to their business, suffringe their
patrimonye and liuelyhode to fall in ruin and decay) the judges might depose
and sequestre him from the claim and use of his goods, as an old doting
cockescom. But he understanding their subtle and unnatural dealinge, brought
with him to the judgment hal, under his gown a certain Tragedy which he then
had in hand and had lately written, entitled Oedipus Coloneus, and red the same
before the judges demau^dinge of them whether they thought that Poem to argue
any dotage in the writer? which when he had recited, he was by the sentence of
the Judges acquitted and discharged. Did old age cause this man, or Hisiodus or
Simonides, or Stesichorus, or Isocrates or Gorgias (of whom I spoke before) or
Homere, or the prince of Philosophers Pythagoras, Democritus, Plato, Socrates,
or of later days Zeno, Cleanthes, or Diogenes the Stoicke, whom you
personallye saw at Rome, to fainte and quail in their scudies, or to be driven
to such a narowe issue that they had not a word to say? was not the earnest and
infatigable agitacion of all these men's studies, equal to their life and
conversation? Go to, let us omit and speak no more of these divine and
abstruse studies. I can name diverse vplandishe husbandmen of the Sabines, my
neighbors, and friends, in whose abse^ece their work goes so slowly
forward, that nothing almost is dispatched about their husbandry, neither in
their tillage and sowing of their corn and fruictes, neither in the gathering
and bringing them into their Barnes: albe it in them this is not so much to be
meruailed at. For there is no man so old, but he thinks that he may live one
year longer: and they toil about such things, whereof they do well know, that
they shall not live to enjoy the profits. They plant and graffe trees which
shall yield fruicte, not to them, but to their succession and posterity, as
our Statius in his book called Synaephebis declares. And if any husbandma^
(be he never so old) be demanded and asked, to whose behoufe he graffeth and
sows, he will not stick to say: I sow for the immortal Gods, whose
pleasure was, that I should not receive profittes fruictes and emolumentes at
the hands of my Predecessors but respectiuelie and condicionally to leave,
surrendre and redeliuer the same or as much to my successors. The saying of
Caecilius which went before, touching old men that labored and provided for
their sequel and succession, is far better, then this followinge which he
also writes: Certes, although old age when it comes, had none other
inconvenience nor greuau^ce joined with it yet this one is grefe enough,
because by living long, a man sees many things? which he would not se. But I
say and replye to it, that peradventure he sees many things which he is right
glad and willing to se. And it oftentimes happens ye it is young men's lot, to
see such things, as they are loath to see. But this next saying of the same
Caecilius is as il, or rather worse the^ the absurd sentence ye wents before.
I judge and repute (says he) this in old age to be most miserable, because a
man perceives himself in that age, to be odious to them of yo^ger years. But I
say ye age is rather pleasant then odious. For even as old aged men, being
wise and virtuous, take great pleasure and delighte in the compaignie of toward
and godly nurtured yongmen, whereby their old age unto them seems the more
facile and tolerable, because they se themselves reverenced of youth: So
likewise yongmen have great comfort and contentacion in the wholesome lessons
and pithie precepts which they hear of old men, whereby their minds are
enflamed and stirred to follow virtue and embrace honesty. And I do not see the
contrary, but you for your parts take as much pleasure and are as glad of my
co^paignie, as I am of yours. Now you plainly see, that old age is not only
free from al slouthful drowsines, and faint fee blenes, but is rather occupied
and busied in lawdable exercises, doing ever some thing, devising and
excogitating such matters, as every one in the fresh years of his former lusty
age, was most envred withal. Yea they increase and augmente their knowledge,
and leerne still more and more, as we have seen by ye noble Lawmaker Solon, who
great lie rejoiced and in certain verses gloried, saying, yt he waxed every day
an old man, by increasing his knowledge and learning daily somewhat more, then
he knew before as I my self also did, for I learned the Greek tongue whenne I
was an old man. Which with such earnest sedulitie and inexpleble greedines I
learned or rather snatched unto me, (albeit in my youth I utterly contemned it)
as though it had been a man much desyringe to quench his long and dry
thriste. And this I did to the intent I might aspire and attaigne to the
understanding and skyll of those things, which you now see me to use for
examples. And when I heard say, that Socrates in his old days did the same in
Musical Instruments, I was also desirous to have done the like (for in old
time, men commonly learned to play on Instruments) but in humanity and
learning I trauayled diligently and took pains therein full studiously.

And now I do no more desire to have the strength of a youngma^, (for this was
the second dispraise and fault that was laid against old age) then I did when
I was young, desire to have had the force and strength of a Bull or an
Olyphant. For what soever is engraffed naturally in man, that is it fit and
decent to use, and in all things that he takes in hand to labor and to do his
diligente endeavor, according to his strength. For what words can there be
more contemptible, shameful, and abject, then those of Milo Crotoniata, Milo
dispraysed for bewayling his lack of strength in his old age.
who being old and saying sundry Champions and wrestlers exercising them
selves and tryinge their force in the running place or field of exercise, is
reported that he beheld his own arms, and said weeping. Alas, these arms of
mine that once were strong and musculous, are now dead? O thou vain and light
witted man, what a beast art thou to speak such foolish words? thy Arms are
not so much dead, as thou art thy self. For thou seek no fame, renown and
glory by thy self, but by thy bodily strength and the high bigness of thy
Arms and sides. Such fond and unadvised words never proceeded out of the
mouth of Sextus Aemilius, nor T. Coruncanus that was many years before, nor of
P. Crassus, since their days who were men of great authority and wisdom,
who also appoincted and prescribed laws and ordres for the Romans: whose
prudence perseuered and honorably continued til the very last hour of death.
But I am afraid, An objection.
least an Oratoure through impotencie and debylitie of old age, must be forced
to quail and stay from the practice of his profession, because his office and
function consists not only in wit and eloquence, but also in a loud
durablenesse, and strainable voice, with other circumstaunces belonging to
vtteraunce. This shril and audible tenor of speech and pronunciacion,
forsakes not an old man, no not in the extremetie of his age, but as a most
beautiful grace (I know not how) does accompaignie him to the end, Which I
have neither lost, neither do I think my self to be destitute of, and yet you
both dose my gray hears and my auncientie of years. Notwithstanding, a
courteous and mylde speech, and a gentle, quiet or temperate vtterau^ce
purchases the beneuole^t hearts of the multitude and much commends the
party in whom they are incorporate, yea a smoth and learned Oration spoken by
an eloquent old man, greatly deliteth the audience and makes them attentive.
And although a man can not do these things himself, yet may he instruct
Scipio and Laelius, and other toward young men. For what thing is so
pleasant, as old age, guarded and environed with honest and studious yongmen,
being pressed, ready, and desirous to show and do their loyal obedience and
dutiful reverence? Shall we debar old age from having authorite and power to
teach, enfourme, chastise and admonish youth to do their duties, and to train
or frame them in virtuous dread and godly knowledge? Thanne which office,
what can be more excellent or honorably? Verelye, me thought that Caius and
P. Scipio, and thy two Graunde fathers, L. Aemelius and P. Africanus were happy
and fortunate, by reason of the daily compaignie of young Gentlemen. And they
which are masters and professors of the liberal arts and sciences are to be
taken and accounted no other wise, but blessed and fortunate: yea although
their strength and firm lustines of their bodies be decayed and imbecilled:
albeit, this same decay and failing of the natural scrength does oftener
happen, through the default of adolescencie then of old age. For a libidinous
and incontinent life, lascyuiouslye and inordinatly lead in youth, ever
brings and delivers to old age, a feeble, weak and impotent body. But
king Cyrus, Goodlye examples of noble personages.
of whom Xenophon writes, among other his talk which he had, lying on his
death bed, being a very old man, says, that he never felt nor perceived
his old age any whitte weaker or feebler then his adolescency and youth was.
When I was a boy, I remember L. Metellus, who after he had been twyse Consul,
and four years after his second Consulate, was elected and created Archprelate
or high Priest, (which Prelacie and Priesthood he enjoyed xxii. years) had in
his old age such corporal strength, that he never seemed to desire or care
for his adolescencie. I need not here to speak any thing of my self,
although (if I should) it were but the property of us old men, and is by the
privilege and respect of our age to us permitted. Do you not see how
oftentimes Nestor does celebrate and extol his own virtues, blasing and
recordinge his own approved valiaunce, joined with prudence and policy, and
blusshed not, with his own mouth to make thereof a most honorable mention, as
in Homere it is most manyfestly to be seen? He lived three men's ages, and
neded not to fear, Nestor lived ccc. years.
least in displaying and soundinge out of his own praises, he should be
thought either arrogant or vainelie talkatiue For as Ho: mere writes and
testifies of him, there issued and proceeded out of his mouth most cloquente
speech, and sugared words, sweeter then Honye, to the vtteraunce and
declaracion of which his Pithye and pleasant counsayles, he needed not any
robusteous force of bedelye strength: Wisedo^ far excellethe strength.
and yet Agamemnon Prince of Graecia and chyefe general of all those warlyke
exploytes, never wisshed to have ten persons, like to Ajax, but he many
times wysshed that he had had ten such as Nestor was: Saying
furthermore, that if he had so many Nestors, he would not doubt but that
Troy should within a short space he utterly ruynated and destroyed. But
now to return and say somewhat of my self. I am now going on my lxxxiii.
year, and would to God, that I might make my vaunte, and glory in that, for
which Cyrus did in manner tryumphe and think him self happy: but yet this
can I say, that although I have not such strength as I had whenne I was
a Souldyoure at the first wars between the Romans and the Carthaginians,
or as I had, whenne I was in the same wars, in the office of Questor or
general receyuer, or as I had, whenne I was Consul in Spain, or as I had
four years after, whenne I was deputed Marshall, of the fyelde, and fought a
battle, wherein I dyscomfayted the populons army of proud Antiochus, and
others of our styffeneecked Enemies that had encamped theymselues in
Bastyles and Garrysons upon the top of the great Mountains and Strayctes
called Thermopylae: Marcus Attilius, and C. Labeo being at that time Consuls:
yet al these hazards and dangerous conflictes notwithstanding, old age has
not thoroughly afflicted neither altogether debilitated and exhausted me. For
neither the Senate, neither the Forum and Judgment Hall, neither my friends
and clientes, neither my Guestes and strangers (whom by the law of Hospitality
I am bound and ought to defend) do find them selves destitute of my help,
neither do epsy any default or lack of strength to be in me. And I never
condiscended nor agreed to this old approved proverb, of most men praised and
commended, which wills, that who so ever desires to be an old man long,
This proverb seems to be devised by some fresh water Souldyour a great deal
fitter for a Carpet then a Camp.
should begin to be an old man betime and quickly: as who would say, that he
should now in his flourishinge and fresh age desist from travail and labor
wherein youth delights, and altogether to provide for ease and conseruacion of
his health. But I had leifer not to be an old man long, then to be an old man
before I were old in deed. And therefore there was never man yet to this day,
that can say, that he ever came to speak with me, but he found me occupied and
doing somewhat. But I do confess, that I have not so much bodily strength as
either of you twain has: Again, neither of you, has the strength of T.
Pontius the Centurio^. What then? is he therefore nobler and better then you
are? Let there be a moderacio^ in strength and let every man attempt and assaie
so much as he is well able to compass, and he that does this, shall feel no
great want of strength, nor be agreued for the lack thereof. In the famous
games of Olympia, it is said that the strong Champion Milo came in, carrying on
his shoulders a huge and big bodied Bull alive, and bare him a furlong of:
now, if thou were put to thy choice, whether haddeste thou leifer have the
bodily strength of this Milo, or else the quickenes of wit and the inward
virtues of mind, which the noble Philosopher Pythagoras had? In fine, use and
take well in woorthe this gift of bodily strength, while thou have it, and
when it is gone, do not desire nor seek to have it again, unless peradventure
you will say, that young men ought to wyshe them selves in their infancye and
swathynge bands again, or when they be somewhat further stryken in years and
in the maturitie or best time of their age, to wish them selves again in
their adolesce^cy. The race and course of age is certain, and there is but one
way of nature and the same simple, and to every part of a man's life and age,
are geeuen his conuenyente times and propre tempestiuytyes. For even as
weakness and infirmytie is incident to young Children, a lustynes and bravery
to young men, and a grauitye when they come to ripe years: so likewise the
maturitye or rypenes of old age, has a certain special gift, geeuen and
attrybuted to it by nature, which ought not to be neglected, but to be taken
in his due time and season when it comes. I think Scipio, that you hear by
report, what your Host, the most faithful confederate to the Romayn people,
Masinissa king of Mauritania does now a days, being lxxxx. years old. A
worthy pattern of a valtaunt and fatherly prince.
For whenne he takes any voyage or iourneye, goinge at the first on foot,
he will not for that journey ride nor come on horseback: and contrariwise,
when he rydeth forth on horseback, he never vseeth to alyghte of from his
horse: no tempestuous weather, no storms, nor cold can make him to cover
his head, but ever goethe bareheade his body is so dry, that he is never
molested with any such corrupt humors as old men commonly are infected and
encombred withal, and therefore doothe he in his own person execute all the
offices and functions that to a royal and noble King do appertain. Therefore
exercise, moderate dyete and contine^cy are able to conserve somewhat of a man's
lustines and former strength, yea and that in old age. There is (some say) no
strength in old age: I answer that strength is not required of old age,
Therefore by the lawdable laws and. wholesome ordinances, which our
predecessors have for civil order and public utility enacted, our age is
dispensed withal, exempted and discharged from al such affairs as can not be
without bodily strength sustained and accomplisshed. Whereby we are not
compelled to do ye, which we are unable to perform, yea we are borne withal
and not required to do so much as we can do. But you will again object and
say: Many old men are so weak and feeble, that they are not able to execute
and discharge any office or function that belongs to man's life, and serves
for maintenance of virtue in human society. But truly the cause thereof is
not proprely to be imputed to the old age, but commonelye to lack of health.
What a weak and impotent man was the son of P. Africanus, even he, that
made thee his son by adoption? was not he so often assaulted and attained
with discrasies and sick nesse, that he was in a manner never healthful? which
if it had otherwise happened, undoubtedly he would have proved the second
Myrroure and the most precious Jewel or ornament of our City, next unto his
noble father. For to counteruaile the haute courage and incomarable prowess of
his said father, he was furnisshed with greater learning and more abundant
gifts of the mind. What marvel is it therefore in old me^, if now and then,
they be sick and diseased, since youngmen also are subject to the same, and can
not warrant them selves of health, no more then oldme^ can? We must (dear
friends Laelius and Scipio) resist old age, and the inconveniences and faults
thereof, must by diligence be recompensed and amended. And even as we must arm
our selves to fight against infirmities and sickness, so also must we
strive against old age. We must have a good eye and a diligent respect to our
health, and we must use moderate exercises of the body. We must not be to
ingluvious, Prcceptes to be Welwaighed and observed on al hands.
in taking our food and repaste, we must not pamper and gourmandise our
selves with excess of meat and drink, but so much and such competencie
thereof must be taken, as suffices to refreshe the vital powers and natural
strength, and not to empaire, hebetate, and utterly to extinguish them. And we
must not have regard to help the body only, but much more to maintain
and conserve the Memory and reasonable part of man, which is the mind. For
these are utterly defaced, extint and suffocated through to much gluttinge
fare, and ravenous ingurgitacion. And even as a Lamp, if to much oil be
infused into it, burnethe not brightly, but yeldeth a very dymme and darkishe
light, again, if it lack oil, it lacks also light: so likewise the mind
is a like dulled and blunted, when the body is either ouercharged with
superaboundance and surfette, or else restraigned from the suffciencie that
nature requires. In old age, natural strength either by defatigatyon, or
else by overmuch and vehement exercise drowpeth, and waxes lumpishe and
unwieldy: but the promptitude or readiness of the wit and mind, is by being
exercised, augmented, whetted and sharpened. For those old men whom the comical
Poet Caecilius calls foolish, he means to be such as are credulous and
light of belief, forgetful, remiss, dissolute and neglygent about their
business, which are not the propre vices and peculier faults of Old age it
self, but of such an Old age, as is slouthefull, sluggishe, drowsy, and
geeuen more to sleep and bellye theere, then to any good and lawdable
exercise. And as petulancy, malepertnes, and libidinous volupte be vices
sooner to be found in young men then in old men, (and yet al young men are not
surprised nor snared with those beastly baits, but only such, as are of
naughty disposition and unthrifty natures) so this folishnes that entangleth
and captiuateth the senses of old men (which is commonly called Dotage) is not
in all old me^, but in those only which are light witted, and keep not them
selves within the limittes of reason.

Appius being beside his extreme old age also blind, ruled and kept in awe his
four tall sons, five daughters, his familye and household (which was great)
and intended the Patronage of his suppliaunt clientes, For he had his mind
bent like a Bow, and never shronke for his years, neither suffered he Old age to
have the victory over him. He reserved and kept his authority over all them,
that were under his charge, and his family was ready at his beck and
commandment: his servant feared him, his children houored and reverenced
him, and al me^ entierly loved him. In his household the customs of his noble
pedagrew and Ancestors, and the disciplyne of his Country took place
effectuallye. For herein is Old age honest and honorable: in defendinge and
mayntayninge it self, in retayninge and keepinge his authorytie, in saving it
self free from bondage and servitude, and in exercisinge rule and authorytie
over them yt are under his charge, eue^ until the last hour of death. And as
we do commend a young man in whom appears any gravity and rypenes of wit,
which to elder age seems more incidente: so likewise do we praise that old
man, which has some of the qualyties and propreties of a young man of honest
and sobre demeanoure, which thing who so ever marketh and follows, may be
old in body, but he shall never be old in mind. I have now in hand the
seventh book of the Originalles, and first foundacions of all the rityes in
Italy, I do collecte and gather into one volume, all the notable monumentes of
antiquity, and now presently I am about the finisshinge of an other Book,
wherein shall be contained the Oracions of all such famous causes, as I have in
my time defended. I am a serious studiente and practyser of ye Augurs law, the
Canon, and the ciuyll Law. I geeue my self much to the Greek tongue, and to
exercise my memory wythall, A notable exercise for ye memory.
I do as Pythagoras Scholars were wont to do: for what so ever I have
hard, spoken or done the day before, I call to remembrance and debate the
same with myself in the evening. These are the exercises of the wit, these
are the feats wherein the mind is occupied, and these are the agitacions
whereby it is stirred to virtuous operacions. I geeuing my self to these
trades, and therein labouringe necessauntlye, do not greatly lack, neither
think my self destitute of bodily strength. When my friends stand in need
of my aid and help, I am preeste and ready to stand them in steed, I use
many times to come into the Senate, and unasked I allege and bring many
reasons which with long study I have before premeditated and the same do I
maintain, uphold, defend and supporte, not by strength of body but of
mind. Yea although I were not able in proper person to execute and put things
in practyse, yet should I lyinge in my bed, take great pleasure and delight,
by thynkyng and considering how to devise and compass things which I could
not do. But the life which heretofore I have led, has been and is such,
that I am able and can do them. For unto him that spends his time in such
labors and studies, old age is not perceived when and how it steals upon
him. Thus age waxes old, and by little and little declineth as it wear
insensiblye, and it is not suddenly amputated, or cut of, but by long
continnaunce and diuturnytie, is like a lamp, quenched and extinguisshed.

Now follows the third disprayse and fault which is laid in old age, because
(say they) it is without pleasure, and must forgo voluptuous appetites. O
noble and excellent gift, wherewith Old age is so blessed, if it take from us
that thing, which is in youth most vicious and detestable. But you (noble and
virtuous gentlemen Scipio and Laelius) hear what Architas ye famous
Philosopher of Taren to, was wont to say, whose Oration touching the same
matter was lent and delivered to me, when I was a young man and served under Q.
Maximus at the siege of Tarento. He said, that no plague was geeuen by nature
so great and pernicious unto men, as the bestiall pleasures, and voluptuousnes
of the body. Which pleasures, the dissolute and libidinous lusts of men do so
much affecte and desire, that with all licentious prophanacion and outrage,
their minds be incyted and stirred to pursue the same, thinking al things
lawful for their unbridled appetites, so that they may enjoy their beastly
desires and still wallow in the fylthie puddle of their hellish sensuality.
Hence (said he) as from a fountain do spring out al kinds of mischief, as
Treason, betraying of countraies, the ruin and subuersio^ of common wealths,
secret conuenticles and priuye conferences with the enemies: Pleasure is the
bayte of al mischief.
finally (he said) there was none so great a villainy, nor any so flagitious
and horrible an enormitye, which the inordinate desire of pleasure would not
egg and pricked forward men's froward wills to enterprise: furthermore that
whoredom, adultrie and all such like heinous factes of carnal concupiscencie
were by noone other lures or enticements proucked but by pleasure. And whereas
either nature or god has geeuen unto man nothing of so noble excellencye as
the mind or reasonable soul, there is nothing so great an enemy unto this
inestimable and deuyne gift, as pleasure, For where pleasure bears swaye and
rules the roste, there is no mansion nor dwelling place left for Temperaunce
and Sobrietye, and to be short, virtue can not remain where pleasure
reigns. Which thing, that it might the better be understood and more
euidentlye be perceived, he badde, that a man should ymagine and in bys mind
presuppose some manne to be captiuated, overwhelmed and altogether plunged in
as much of this beastly Pleasure as he could conceive: which being done,
he thought there would be no man whose senses were so much bound up in the
veil of ignorance, but be would easelye judge, that such a man, so long as
his mind was thus passionated, with such brutishe and filthye affections,
could not contryue or compass any honest action, nor rule him self by reason
and honesty. And therefore, there is nothing so pestilent, so execrable and
hurtful as pleasure. For if it should enter into man's heart and there long
bare dominacion, it would quighte mar, deface and extinguishe all the light of
the mind, which is reason and understanding. Nearchus in whose house I lodged
in Tarento, who also sheewed him self very friendlye to the Roman people,
said, that he had heard his ancestors and elders report, that Architas
spoke al these words, when the Romayne Consuls P. Posthumous and T. Veturius
were discomfited and overthrown by the Samnites, who had environed and
entrapped them like fishes in a net or Buckes in a Buckstall in the perilous
straytes and difficile entries of Caudium. C. Pontius the valiant Samnite and
his father being then the co^ductours and captains general of the Samnites
army. Plato also the noble A thenian Philosopher, was present and heard him
speak these words, whom I do in old histories find, that he came and arrived
at Tarento, when L. Aemilius and Appius Claudius were Consuls. But to what
purpose do al these circumstancies tend? Truly that you may understand, if we
cannot be persuaded by reason and wisdom, to abandonne our wantonness and
mortifye our pleasures, yet that we are much bounden and beholdinge to old
age, by whose means we are so temperately disposed, that we have no lust to
do any thing, which is vndere^t or uncomely to be done. For pleasure being a
deadly and mortal enemy to reason, hinders virtuous action and prudent
consultacion, and the eyes of the mind thereby are so iuggled and bewitched,
that it can have no fellowship nor compaignie with virtue. Sore against my will
was it, when I deposed and dysgraded L. Flaminius, (brother to the worthy and
hardy gentleman T. Flaminius) of his senatourship. seven years after he had
been Consul: but yet I well considered and with my self waighed, that it was
expedient and needful that his lawless and vicious deed should not escape
due punishment, because impunitie many times does animate men of semblable
disposition an other time to be the bolder to attempt further mischief by
giving the bridle to their own licentious will and sensual affections. For
when he was apoincted Consul in Lumbardie, he was at the city of Placence,
requested by a Curtisaine or common harlott at a banquet, Gallica Cisaiona
to cause some one of his captives whom he had taken and kept in prison and
adjudged to dye) to be presently in her sight beheaded, because the bloody
Strumpet (as she said) had never seen any executed: unto whose desire and
request he relented, and forthwith commanded one of them to be put to death.
And duringe the time yt his brother Titus was Censor, (which dignitye he
enjoyed next before me) he escaped, and was never therefore punished. But when
I and Flaccus were made Censors, we could not brook such enormytie nor wynke at
such a self willed exaumple, because he abused and blemisshed the honor of
our noble Empire, with his private lewdnes and shameful sensuality. I have
oftentimes heard our elders say, (which they also as they reported, had heard
of their fathers and old predecessors when they were boys) that C. Fabritius
was wont much to mernaile, because on a time when he was sent on an Ambassade
to Pyrrhus king of ye Epyrotes, he heard one Cyneas (who was borne in
Thassalia and was the kings Scholemaster) report and tell, how yt there was a
certain man of Athens, Epicures
which professed himself to be a wise man, and say, yt al our actions, thoughts
and deeds what so ever they were, ought to be referred only to pleasure, as to
the principal end, reposing therein our chiefest felicity. M. Curious and T.
Coruncanus, hearing this abominable assertion and deuilish opinion, which
Fabricius told, oftentimes wisshed that the Samnites, and Pyrrhus himself,
were resolved and persuaded to believe and credit the words of that profane
helhounde: because if they would enthral and addict them selves to disporte
daliaunce, vanity and pleasure, they might the sooner be conquered, and their
proud stomachs appaulled. This M. Curious lived with P. Decius, eue^ he that
in his fourth Consulshippe, five years before the Consulate of Curious,
voluntarily gave himself to death for the safegarde and preseruacion of his
Country. Fabricius knew him, and so did Coruncanus also, who as well by their
own life, as by this woorthye fact of Decius of whom I now spoke, judged
and thought that there was something naturallye good, fair, excellent, and
for it self only expetible, which every good and virtuous man should and ought
to love, honor and embrace, abandoning and vilipending al sensual pleasure and
loose dishonestie. But to what purpose do we speak so much of pleasure?
Verily, to the intent that hereby it may be seen and proved, how that it can not
only, not be objected to Old age for any vituperation and dispraise, but
rather for a siuguler praise and commendacion, because old age does not
esteem nor care for these pleasures. But some other will say: It lacks
sumptuous fare, costlye dishes, delicate viande, and drinks of all sorts:
Hereto I answer, that therefore, it lacks also dronkennes, cruditie or
indigestion, fantastical dreams and ridiculous apparitions. But if we must
any whitte yield to pleasure (because we cannot easily resist the blandiments
and allurementes thereof, (for the divine philosopher Plato calls pleasure the
bait of all mischief, Pleasure the bayte of al mischief.
because men therewithe are caught and snared even as fishes are with the
hook) I say, that although old age be not endaungered nor geeuen to
superfluous and immoderate banqueting and at unseasonable hours, yet in
temperate and moderate feasting it may be solaced and comfortablye recreated. I
my self when I was a boy, have oftentimes seen C. Duillius the Soune of
Marcus, (the same that first vanquished the Carthaginians in terrible fight
on the Sea) return home being an old man from the place where he had
supped: he would many times have a link or a toorche carried before him, and
a mynstrell also playinge on a shaulme, which no pryuate person before him
ever did: his warlicke exploites and tryumphant victoryes should (as he thought)
be to him for this licentious liberty and new begone custom, a sufficient
warrantise. But to what end do I recite so much of others? I will now speak
somewhat of my self: first I have always had some of my compaignions and
friends at my table, when I took my ordinary repaste. For the order of
fraternities and assemblies of honest and sobre personages, moderately to
ba^quet one with an other was instituted and made when I was Questor, and for
the more regal furniture and pompous solemnizacion of this Ceremony, the
image or picture of Cybele who is called the mother of the Gods, with all the
rites and obseruances thereto belonging was brought and co^uaighed to Rome out
of Phrygia. I therefore moderatlye banqueted and within the bonds of sobriety
I used to solace my self, and merylie to make good cheer with my Coequalls.
But I was then, in the lusty flowers of mine age, and there was in me a
certain heat of Iuuenilitie, which (as age grows and increases) is
qualefied, and al things brought to a conueniente and tractable decency.
Neither did I take delectacion in these banquettes and epulacions for bodily
pleasure and glutting gourmandyse, but rather for the compaignye and talk of
my friends and welwillers. Therefore our elders and predecessors did very
well, to term a banquet or feast, whereat friends do meat together, by the name
of Conuiuium: because it has a conjunction of living together one with an
other, and therein they termed it much better then the Greeks do, for the name
which they geeue it, signifies as much as a Compotacion, Symposium.
as though friends meet together purposely to quaffe and drink: And a
co^cenacio^ or a comessation, as though they assembled for the cheer or the
meats sake: wherein they seem to allow and comend that most, Synepnium
which is the lest part of the goodness that therein is to be taken. But I am
delyted in feasts and banquettes being made in seasonable and conueniente
times, for the solace and pleasure which I take in learned conference and
colloquyes of wisdom, and that not only with my equalles and them that are
of the same age that I am, (whereof the number is now very few and small) but
also wyche you twain, and other young gentlemen of fresher years, And I
heartily thank old age for this boon and good turn, because it has
increased in me an earnest desire of talk, and debatinge of serious matters
with men of approved learning and grauytie, but the greedy desire of meat and
drink it has taken away from me: Notwithstanding, if any old man be
delighted in these blandiments of pleasure (I mean good cheer and dainty
fare, (least I should seem to stand at open defiaunce and denounce war to
all pleasure, whereof peradventure there is some natural cause mean and reason)
I can not see, how old age either lacks or is destitute of sense and
feeling, no not in these kinds of pleasures, which serve for the palate and
toth, which we before declared. The superiority, which the chife ruler of the
feast has above others, by an order which our ancestors instituted, does
greatly content and please my mind: and the merry pleasant questions or
Cases, which he by an old lawdable custom proponeth to the compagnie to be
disputed upon, and reasoned at the table, and the Cups of drink not
ebriously swilled but moderatlye tasted, being also so clean rinsed and
washed, that the clear drops of pure water stand and cleave to the sides,
as it were the sweet drops of wholesome dew, much like to the compotation and
feast whereof Xenophon writes: and a place to cool our weary members in the
heat of Summer, and in the sturdy and nipping cold of winter, either the warm
Sun, or else a good fire, is unto me a singular contentation. These orders and
dietes am I wont to observe, when I seiourne in my Manours and houses of
Sabinum, and every day I se my table furnished with the apoincted number of my
neighbors near adjoining, and with talking of diverse matters we prolonge and
continewe our supper sometimes till it be far in the night, every man
layinge in for himself such reasons and arguments as he has for the
corroboration and confirmation of his cause and assertion. Sophocles being an
aged man, was asked of one, whether he gave himself to any venerous
daliaunce and coiture? Unto whom he answered and said: god forbid that I in
this age should give my self to such wanton lusts, for I have willingly
renounced and fled away from that kind of lasciuiousnes, as from a thing
which I know to be like to a Lordlye and imperious master, both beastly,
savage, and furions. But to them that are desirous thereof, it is a great
grief to lack and be without it: but to them which have satysfyed their
natural lusts, whose age fit for such wantonness is already expired, it
is more pleasure to lack then to use it. Albeit he that forces not for it, can
not be said to lack it, therefore not to care for it (I say) is more pleasure
then to have full fruition and sacietye of it. Now whereas adolescencye
delights more in these pleasures, the cause is because it is more willinge
and procliue to follow the things which are of small moment and importance, as
it is of it self rash and wavering: but afterward such things as old age
is delighted and given to, the which although it do not fully enjoy, yet
does it not altogether lack. Even as he that sits on the chyefeste benche
in a Theater or Listes where plays and Enterludes are exhibited, is more
delyted to see the excellent gesture of Ambiuius Turpio, and his incomparable
dexteritye in the express imitation and gesture of any person, yet he that
stands a farreof, lookynge over other men's shoulders has some delectation
as well as the others: so like wise youth and adolescencie being by reason of
their fresh age, more prone to pleasures than old age is, having and daily
seeing the allurements thereof more near to them, is perhaps more frolic:
but old age seeing them a loofe and a far of, is there in delited as much as
is requisite and expedient. But what a singular commodity is this, that ye
mind like an old worn Souldioure is by the means of old age raunsomed and
exempted from the ugly servitude and thraledome of sensuality, voluptuousnes,
ambition, strife, contention, quarelling, ennemitie, and finally from al
loathsome and fylthy affections, and in steed thereof to embrace mediocritie
and moderacion, and to be contented and to live (as the old saying is) with him
self? But if it be furnisshed with study and learning, (which are as it were
the nutriture and sustentacio^ of old age) truly nothing is more pleasant
then it is, being dismissed from all troublesome entermedlinge with public
affairs and wholly addict to quiet contemptation. Old men studious.
We saw C, Gallus the famous Astronomer and great friend to thy father O
Scipio, so intentiuelye addicted to his dimensions as well of heaven as of
earth, that he seemed to have none other delight, neither to have any respect
at al, for any other worldly business. How many nights did he bestow upon
study of that faculty, and never slepte? How often has the next morrow
appeared ere he had left his lucubrations, which he had begone over night? How
often did night come upon him, when he had incessauntly labored in his
Calculations Astronomicall all day before, without meat or drink? What a
singular pleasure was it to him, long beforehand to prognosticate and forshewe
the Eclipses boothe of the Sun and Moon? what painful labors sustained he
in the study of other matters not of so great momente and importannce as
these other, but yet very subtle, quick and witty? How greatly rejoiced
Naeuius in his comedye which he entitled the Punique war? How did Plautus
in his Comedye called Truculentus in manner leap and tryumphe for joy? with
what gladness was he surprysed wythal, whenne be had written an other
comodye named Pseudolus? I saw Liuius, who having set forth an Interlude
seven years before I was borne, when Cethegus and Tuditanus wear Consuls,
lived and flourished till I was a big stripling. What should I speak of the
worthy and expert Lawyer P. Licinius Crassus, and of his wouderful knowledge
both in the Canon and in the Civil Law? or of the industrious contemplation
and dyligence of this our P. Scipio, who was of late created high Priest? And
all these whom I have here named, we have seen being old men to geeue
theymselues to study. But as for M. Cethegus, whom Ennius does very proprely
call the very pythe and marowe of Suada the Goddess of eloquence and
pleasant speech, how studiously did we see him, bente to the art of
Rheiorike and Oratorie in his old age? what pleasures either of banquetyng, of
plays, or of brothelles and Curtisans are comporable to these virtuous and
lawdable pleasures? These are the studyes of doctrine and learning, which in
men of wisdom and good inclynation, do grow and increase, even as they
them selves do in age according to that golden saying of Solon, who in a
brief poosye or sentence said (as we before have showed) that he waxed every
day old, The saying of wise Solon.
by learning daily some knowledge whereof he was before ignorant: then which
pleasure of mind, there can none be greater, none more virtuous, none more
commendable. I will now speak of the goodlye pleasures, which Husbandmen
have, wherein I my self have great delighte, which are not hindered by old
age, I Insbandrye.
and in my opinion their life is most like to a blessed and happy man's life.
For their traphique and trade of merchandise is with the earth, which never
refuses to be under their rule and subjection, never is so disobediente nor
obstinate, but obedient and seruiciable, and repayeth with great increase of
usury (as who would say for the use and lone of their seeds and toil) that
which it received, but at sometime it does not render so much as it does at an
other time, albeit for the most part, it requires their travails with a
great surplusage and access of gain. But yet, I do not only take pleasure,
in the fruictes and grains which it yeldeth, but also in the strength, nature
and power of the earth it self, which receiving the seed in her lap, and
being by tillage and good husbandry plowed, mollified and well manured, does
for a time at the first keep and nourishe it, being covered within it by
harrowing, which is therefore called Occatio, then does it make it to appear
and peep out of the ground, through the warmth which it receives by the
vapourous humyditye, and amicable heat, and so chearissheth it, that in time
it brings forth a green stalk like at the first to grass or herbs, the
which being strengthened by the small shootes and stringes that grow out of the
root, does by little and little grow up to a big stem, and standing upright
upon a knottye straw full of joints, (when it now waxes and draws nere to
ripenes) is included in pods or husks. Out of the which, as out of a sheath or
hose, there comes forth corn or grain, which lay in the ear fensed,
fortifyed and armed against the pecking and eating of small birds with a
Rampire or wall of the awnes or beardes. What should I recite and declare the
plantinge and pruning of vynes, the increasing and proffites of them? I can not
sufficiently tell you, what incredible joy and pleasure I take therein, how my
mind is set therein, and this I say, to thentent, that you may thoroughly
under stand the quietness and recreation of mine old age. I omit to speak
of the virtues of al such things as the earth brings forth: how of one small
kernel of a fig, or one little corn or grain of a grape, and finally of
other little seeds of all other fruictes graynes and young shootes it brings
forth and procreateth such great boles and mighty bodies, and in frucites or
herbs such high stemmes. The small twigges that be cut of from the vynes to
be planted else where, the young ympes and griftes, the superfluous branches
that are pruned, the plantable vynes, the vaulted and arched herbours that are
made for pleasant walks, whereon the vynes may renew and spread abroad and
refreshe men with their cool vmbrage, the euttynge down of old vynes, that
young slyppes may thereon be set, would not all these allure a man to love
and have them in admiration? The vine is naturally stowping and falling
downewarde, and if it be not with shoores and forkes underpropped, it grows
toward the ground: but the same by the help and furtheraunce of his
tendrelles, which are to it in steed and lieu of hands, raises up it self,
catches, and lappeth it self fast, to what soever it comes near, the which
in contynuaunce of time wandering and rouing at randon vncomptrolled, and
entangling it self with many other parts, at length the vigilant care and
diligent hand of the husbandman does by pruning restrain, and with his vine
hooks so cutteth and keeps under, that it can not grow to luxuriously nor
wieldlye, neither be over grown with superfluous branches, and spread out to
far on every side with busshie ruggedness. And therefore in the beginning of
the Spring time, there comes out a young bourgen or budde in those twigges
that remained after the pruning, which do as it were grow out at the very
joints, where those superfluous branches were lopped and cut of: out of which
burgeins, the Cluster does proceed and appear, which taking increase and
growinge in bigness, what with the bumyditie and juice of the earth, and what
with the warmth and heat of the sun, is for a while at the first sower and
vitter in taste, but whenne it is ripe and mature, it is both sweet, and
tothsome, and being covered and cladde with leaves, it receives thereby such
comfort and help, that it neither lacks expedient and needful heat, and
also defends it self from the parching and ardent beams of the Sun. Now,
what can be either for profit more pleasant, or for the sight and delyting of
the eye more gorgious and beautiful, then these before named pleasures? Whose
profitable use, and gainful possession, does not only (as I said before)
meruailously content and please me, but also the manuring, the digging, and the
proper nature thereof, is unto me pleasure incredible. The order of the stays
or shores, whereby the vines are underpropped, the tyinge and plattinge of them
together whereby men have a pleasant and shadie galerie to walk in, the
byndinge of them down, their increase and spreadinge abroad, the prunyng of
the superfluous branches, and the new graffing of others in their places
(which I spoke of) replenishe my heart with joy unspeakable: To what purpose
should I here rehearse the watringe and irrigation of the plants, the trenches
and deluing of the ground, the repastination or new digging about the
roots, whereby the ground is made much more fartile and rank? whereto
should I speak of the profitte that comes by dunginge the ground? whereof I
have at large spoken in my book entitled Of Husbandry: al be it the
aunciente and learned Poet Hesiodus speaks never a word thereof, in his
work of Tyllage and Rusticall affairs. But Homere who (as far as I can
gather) was long before Hesiodus) in troduceth and brings in old Laertes,
(sore longing and languisshinge for the absence of his son Ulysses) after the
manner of a husbandmanne, tyllinge and dunginge his ground. And the trade of
Husbandrye is not only pleasant and plentiful, enriched and stored with
corn, grain, Meadows, Vineyeardes, hopyeardes, groves and other places where
Trees grow: but also with Orchardes, Gardens, feedyng of Cattal, Swarms of
Bees, and variety of al kind of sweet flowers. And not only ye ordrely setting
and standing of the Trees and plants. delight and please the eyeof the
beholder, but also the Insitions and graffinge of young Slyppes in an other
tree: which poinctes and feactes are as wittye and subtyle, as any are in
Husbandrye. Many oblectamentes of Husbandmen could I declare, but I well
perceive, that in these few commodities which I have already told, I have been
to prolixe and tedious. But you shall of your courtesye bear with my fervent
zeal, and pardon my earneste prosccution of my reasons and arguments therein.
For, the great good will and love, which I have and still do bear to
Husbandrye, has enforced me to speak and wade further in it, then at the
first I purposed: and also Old age is reported to be by nature talkatiue and
geeuen to loquacitie, (because I will not see me to auouche and say that it is
clear and free from al manner of vices and faults. And therefore the valiant
and invincible duke Manius Curious, when he had atchieue manys notable exploytes
and glorious vyctoryes against the rebellyous foes and Capytall Enemies of
the Romayne people, and had showed himself a Mirroure of prowess and
knightelye fortitude in sundry hazardes, after he had tryumphed over the
Samnites and Sabines, and had subdued the courageous and mighty Pyrrhus,
king of Epyrotes, and subiugated al his Territories, Husbandry used of noble
and valiant me^.
Seigniories and dominions by dent of sweard and stroke of battle, unto the
Roman nation, lived in his old age in this kind of life: whose poor mansion
as often as I do behold (for it adioyneth nere unto my sermes) I can not but
greatly marvel and be astonned, either to see the continency of this noble
man, or else the condition and discipline that was in those days. And when the
Samnites after their discomfiture, came to this Curious, offering him great
foyson and sums of gold, they found him in his own house, sittinge by the
fire, and seething Rape roots in an earthen pot or pipkin, who constantly
refused al their offers and rewards, telling them in flat words, that he
thought it not so great honor and glory to possess good, An ennemic to
bribes and rewards
as to bear rule and to be Lord over them, which had gold. How could this
noble and valiant heart otherwise choose, but lead an old age most
pleasant? But I will take hold where I left, and speak of husbandmen as I
did before, because I take my self as one of their order and fellowship.
Senators, that is to say, sage and old gray headed Counsailours, were in
those days Husba^dmen, for as Lucius Quintius Cineinnatus was holdinge the
ploughe and earnestlye toylinge in his tillage in the fyelde, news were
brought to him that he was elected Dictator: upon the hearing whereof he
straight ways left his plough and came to Rome, and was enstalled in the same
office of Dictator or high master of ye people, executing the same with all
singleness and synceritie, by whose commandment, his vicegerent or
Lieutenaunte Caius Seruilius Hala, Captain of the Horsemen, slew Spurius
Melius a miserable and ambitious man, traiterouslye aspiting to be king. Out
of their fermes and country houses, Curious, and many other old men were
choosen into the honorable society and orders of Senaours: whereupon, the
officers, or Purseuauntes which sommoned and called them to the Senate were
named Currours Posts, or special Messengers. Was therefore the old age of
these men miserable, which refresshed and solaced them selves in tillage and
Husbandry? Certes, in mine opynion, I judge that there can be no life more
blessed and fortunate then this is, and not only for the honest exercise
and needeful commodity which thereby to al mankind redoundeth (for if Tillage
were neglected all the sort of us would bewail the lack and feel the smarte
thereof) but also because of the delectation (as is before said) and the
plentyfulues or abundance of all things, which either to the conservation
of man, his food and nutriment, or else to the worship and adoration of the
gods are requysitie and conuenable. And because many do wish and desire
this, let us reconcile our selves, and make a firm peace and infringible
atonemente with Pleasure. For every good and substantial householder has
ever his Sellers for wine and oil, and other offices for provision of
household replenisshed and well stored, yea his whole house is with all needeful
vtensiles in all poincts furnisshed, it is neither destitute of Hog, Kidde,
Lamb, poultrie ware, Milk, Cheese nor honey. Now husbandmen them selves, find
their Gardeine so commodious unto them, (because it mynistreth and brings
forth plentye of good herbs, wherewith they make them Saleties and live well
contented with their golden mediocritye, and because it was ever ready at
hand and needed no fire to dreesse and seethe them) that they called it an
other Larder or flesh shambles: Hor^us^ altera succidia.
also these same gardeine herbs being their daily food and sustentation are
by hunting and hawking made more pleasant and tothsome, although these be
exercises, which do not necessarily belong to Husbandry, but are rather
superuacuous and vain. What may I now say of the green verdure and goodly
hew of the sweet Meadows, or the ordrely setting of Trees, or of the form
and beautye of vines, and places besette with direct rows of Olive Trees? I
will in few words show, what I think herein. There can nothing be either for use
more commodious, or for profitte more gainful, or for the gazing view of the
greedy eye more trymme and elegante, then a well tilled and manured field,
from the fruition of which so great and blessed a thing, Old age brings unto
man not only no hindraunce nor impedimente, but rather inuiteth and allureth
him unto it. For where may old age be so well warmed either by breathing and
sitting against the hoate sun, or by a good fire: or contrarywyse, as the
time and season of the year ferueth, be so holesomlye cooled in shadye
places, or be so aptlye bayned as in the countraye? Let us therefore bid adieu
to al such youthly prankes and exercises, as lustye and green headed Galantes
agitated and pricked with the fervent heat of unadvised adolescencye, do
envre them selves withal, god speed them well with their usual disportes and
daliaunce, let them take to theymselues their armoure, weapons, and Artillery,
let us permit and geeue them good leave to daunte fierce Horses, and with
spears in rest to mount on courageous coursers, let them handle the pike,
toss the Iaueline and Clubbe daily, and play at the Tenyse, exercise them
selves with runnynge, Swymminge, and such like deeds of actiuitie and
nymblenesse: to us old men among all their other games and pastimes, let
them leave the Tables, the Chance bone or dyce, and the Chesse, which
without any danger or sore strayning of the body may be practiced: and yet I
will not seem to ^owe these last named games, further then every man himself
is disposed, because they be not necessary, and old age may without them be
blessed and fortunate. The books of Xenophon are very expedient and profitable
for many purposes, the which I would wish, that you should read over and pervse
dyligentlye, as you do. How copiously does he extol and praise husbandry in his
book which he wrate of the right ordering and domestical provision for
householde? And because you shall well understand, that he thinks no thing
more princelyke then the manner of Tillage and Husbandry, he entroduceth
Socrates in that book reasoninge with Critobulus, King Cyrus much delighted
in Husbandrye.
and tellyng him, how the noble and puissaunt Cyrus the second of that name,
king of Persia, (a Prince not only conspicuous and renowned for his
incomparable wit and pollicye, but also such a one as had the regiment and
soueraignetie over many great Realms, and populous countries) delighted
excetingly therein. For when as upon a certain time a noble man of the
countraie. Lysander.
Lacedemonia, called Lysander came unto him, then seiourning at his fair city
of Sardis and brought to him from his fellows in arms and confederates,
diverse rich and honorable presents, he not only in most amicable wise received
and welcomed him, showing to him al poinctes of princely courtesy in all other
things generallye, but namelye in that, he showed him a certain goodly field,
hedged in and trimelye enclosed, set full of trees of all sorts, most
exquisitely planted. Which when Lysander had well viewed, and steadfastly a
good while with an admiracion beheld, and had considered both the height of the
Trees, and the exact order which was precisely observed in ye placing and
setting of them so equidistantly, that which way so ever a man cast his eyes
they stood in a most perfect form of a Quincu^cie, the ground so well
labored and so pure of it self withal, and the redolent smelles which the
sweet flowers yielded: he spoke unto the king and said: that he did not so
much muse and marvel at the diligence, handlyng and fine workemanshippe, as
he did at the promptitude of wit, the subtle art, and the politic
conuaighaunce of him that planted and set them in such perfect measure and
proporcion. Unto whom Cyrus made this answer: It is even I (O Lysander) and
none other man, that have made and by measure planted all these trees which
thou see, the order of the rows wherein they stand, is my only deuyse, this
platte and deseription I my self drew, and a great meignye of these trees were
graffed and planted with the labor of mine own hands. Then Lysander firing
his eyes upon the kings purple Robes and his rich attire, well noting the
propre feacture of his comely body, the beautiful lineamentes and Symmetrie
of his well and portely compacte personage, together with all the costlye
apparaile wherein he was after the Persian manner arrayed, his garments powdered
and fringed with much gold, precious stones, and Orient pearls whose value
was inestimable, spoke these words unto him: Truly O Cyrus now do I well se,
that it is not done without right good cause and consideracion, that thou art
bruyted abroad and reported in every place to be a happy and a fortunate
Prince, Virtuti fortuna comes.
for unto thy rare virtue and nobleness, fortune also is conjoined and
associated. Therefore old men may use and enjoy this fortune, neither is
their age any such let or obstacle for them, but that they may in all other
things do semblablye, but most chiefly let us embrace the husbandmans life,
and employ our selves to manure and til the ground even until the extreme and
last point of our age. We have heard say, that M. Valerius Coruinus lived
till he was an hundredth years old, and in the latter end of his old age, lived
in the Countraye, and gave himself to culture and husbandry, after he had been
six times Consul, and between his first and his sixte Cousulate there were
xlvi years. Therefore that space and time of years which our forefathers
appointed and meant to be the beginning of old age, he so vigorouslye sustained
and overcame, that he was thought worthy to bear the highest offices and
dygnityes in the Communs wealth. And his extreme old age was hearein more
fortunate and blessed then his myddle age, because it was decorated with a
great deal more honor and authorytie, and put to much less pains and
labor. Now the higheste title of praise that can be given to old age is
Authorytie. O what a noble magystrate was L. Cecilius Metellus? Authority the
greateste oruame^t, of old age
what a worthy authority was there in Attilius Collatinus, in whose praise
and commendacion many nations with one voice and consent gave this honorable
style, to be called ye noble protectoure, the sure Shield, the trusty leanyng
staff, and the strong botreaux of the Roman people and their libertyes. The
Epitaphe or Encomye yt was engraven upon his Tomb is well known. Worthily
therefore and by good right ought he to be surnamed a grave honorable
personage, of whom so good a report and fame, was generally blazed and
testified by the mouth of so many men, without disdaigne, envy,
heart-burning, or grudging of any. What a Jewel had we of late days of P.
Crassus when he was high priest? or of M. Lepidus who in ye same office
succeeded him? whereto should I speak of Paulus Aemilius, or Africanus or of
Quintus Maximus (of whom I spoke a little before) in who^, there was such a
portelye grace and Majesty, that not only in their wise and dyscreete
Counsayles, but also in their vysages and looks, yea and in their beckes there
was euidentlye to be seen and descryed the true and lively Image of perfect
Aucthorytie? Old age and specyallye such as is not contempned nor deryded,
but reverenced and honored, has in it so great aucthoritye, that it is much
more to be esteemed and is far moore woorthe, then all the vain pleasures
of headye and rash Adolescencye. What manner of old age is to be Praised.
But this I would require you to remember, that in all this my talk, I do
praise that old age, whose foundation was laid and grounded in the years of
youth, and took his first beginning at Adolescencie. Whereupon my old saying
(which in open audience I have so often used to speak, and whereunto al men
with one accord consented) is verifyed, which was, that that old age which had
no noble deeds to defend it self withal, but leaned only to vain iangling
words and prating vauntes, was wretched and miserable. It is not the hoare
head, and wrinkled face which by and by brings honor and purchases
estimation, but it is an honest and godly life that has ever been
conuersaunte and trained in virtue which gets dignity and high aucthority in
the end. For these things which seem to be very small, are in deed very
honorable: to be saluted, and desired into the compaignie of honest men, to
see many men to go aside and geeue the way where they shall pass, to be
reverenced, to be brought and conducted home, to have many wayters giving
attendaunce on them, when they go from home, to be sued unto for counsel,
and to be requested for their patronage and advise in weighty and difficulte
matters, which things both among us and in all other well governed and cyuile
ordered Cities are most diligently and precisely observed Lysander a prince of
Lacedemonia: (of whom I spoke erewhile) is reported, that he would commonly
say, that the most honest and fittest Mansion or Lodginge for old age to dwell
and live in, was in Lacedemonia: Great reverence among ye Heathen showed to
old age.
for in no place else is so much prerogative and reverence showed and geeuen to
old age as there, It is also consecrated to perpetual memory and left in
writing, that a certain elderly man came on a time into the Theater at Athens
where solemn Plays and pageauntes where exhibited to the people, where there
was not one man in the whole assemblye being his natural country men and fellow
Citesins that showed to him any courtesy neither gave to him any room to
sit in and repoose his weak and debilitated members: but when he came
among Lacedaemonians (who as it chanced were at that time there as Ambassadors
and had their places in respect of their Ambassade accordinglye apoincted them)
they al aroose and place to him, inuiting and receyuyng him among them to sit
in the easiest and honourablest seat. At which courteous vrbanitie of the
Lacedaemonians, when all the people in token of praise clapped their hands with
many acclamatio^s gratulatory, one of ye Ambassadors brake out in these words
and said, yt ye Athenians knew well what was honest and virtuous, but to do it
they would not. Many good orders are in our consistorye or College of
Senators, and namely this is one: for every one according to his senioritie
and eldershyp in years, does first pronounce his sentence and utter his mind.
And the ancient and aged Augurs are esteemed and preferred not only before
right honorable maiestrats which bear rule and office, but also before them,
that have the chief regiment and sovereign rule in the common wealth.
Therefore what corporal pleasures are comparable with these rewards and
aduauncements of authority? wherein whosoever gloriouslye have behaved
theymselues, they in mine opynion have most worthily and comendably played the
pageaunte of ye whole discourse of their age, These are the vices of manners and
not of old age.
and not like dranelike and idle stage players in the last act of al, given
over and quailed. But many old me^ be waiward, il to please, lowering,
comberous, fretting and chafing, whining and in exporable, and (if we thoroughly
sifte out the matter) miserable nygardes and penchpentes also: but al these are
not the faults peculier to old age, but incident to them whose naughty manners
be subfect and disposed thereunto. But their waywardnes and other faults (which
I before rehearced) may allege and pretend a small pretext of excusation,
which although it be not true, yet it is such as in apparaunce seems to be
probable. For they think theymselues to be contemned, flowted, unregarded and
deryded.

Furthermore in a weak and sore worn body. (such as old men have) every small
offense is odious and seems to them displeasunt: al which faults
nevertheless through good manners and discipline are condulcate, qualefied and
made sweet, which thing to be true, may well be perceived both by the common
course of men's living, and also by the Comedy of Terence entytuled Adelphi,
where he induces two brethren of contrary disposition, inclinacion and
manners, and the one his nature in all poinctes varyinge and swaruinge from the
others. What rustical behauioure and cloynishe bluntnes is in the one? Again,
what courteous vrbanitie, what honest demeanoure, what civil fasshions, what
affability and what lenity is in the other? So stands the matter, and so by
daily experience is it to be seen. For even as every wine being old and
standing long is not converted into vineigre: so likewise is not every age,
sower, eigre and unpleasant. Measurable severity all owable in an old man.
Severity and sternenesse in old age I well allow and commend, so that a
moderate mean therein (as in all other things) be observed, but bitterness and
rigorous dealinge I can in no wise brook nor away withal. Nothing stands
more against reason, then for an old ma to be couctous.
But as for the avarice and covetousness of old men, I am not acquainted
therewith, neither do I know what it means. For what can be more absurd or
repugnaunt to al reason, the^ for a wayfaring man when his journey is now
almost dispatched and brought to an end and has but little way to go, to
provide and furnishe him self with the more victualles, and the shorter that
his iourneye is, the more to seek and purueigh for costage?

The fourth cause, which most of all greueth and disquieteth old men,
remains yet behind undiscussed, which is the approaching of death, and the
neerenesse thereof, which truly can not be far of from old age. O miserable
and wretched old caitife, if in see long a time as he has lived, he has
not perceived and learned, that death is utterly to be contemned and not at
all to be feared: Death not to be feared.
which were either flatlye to be despised if it did utterly kill and slay
the mind, that nothing afterward should remain: or else is greatly to be
desired if it be the instrumente and gate whereby the same mind or soul
passes and is carried into bliss, for evermore with immortal and everlasting
felycitye to be eternized. Certes there can no no third or mean be found.
Therefore what should I fear, if after death I shall be either not miserable,
or else blessed? notwithst andynge who is he that has so small reason and
wit, to auouche and awarraunt himself (although he were never so lusty)
that he shall live till the next eueninge? Youth more subject to sickness
then age.
Yea I say this further, young men are subject to more occasyons of death,
(because of the humors and blood which do abound in them, and are the
nourisshers of the matter of Maladyes and dyseases. They fall sooner into
sickness, and infirmityes, their dyseases are more peryllous and vehemente,
their recouerye and cure more dyfficile. And therefore there are but feewe that
live till they come to Old age, which if it wear not so, but that there
might be a great number of old men, they would live a great deal more
pleasauntlye and wisely.

For wit, reason and good counsel rests in old men, and therefore if
there were no old men, Common weelthes and cities besie governed by auncicient
me^.
there would consequently be no Cities. But I will leave these digressions or
byreckenings, and convert my talk to speak of imminent death. Is this any
evil or fault that can be laid to old age, since you daily see the same to
belong and be commune as well to Adolescencie? Death sparethe no age.
I my self have had good proof and felt the heavy experience, not only by the
immature death of my worthy and loving Son, but also of thy brethren,
Scipio, (of whom the Romans for their noble towardness, had conceived a
great hope to see them advanced to most ample and high dignityes) that death
is common to all age, both young and old indifferently. But a young man hops
to live long, which an old man may not look to do. He truly feeds him self
with a vain and a foolish hope. For what meerer folly can there be, then to
account and repute things which be doubtful and uncertain, for infallible and
certain, and things that are false, for true? An old man has nothing to hope
for: but he is therefore in far better state and case, The old man is in
better state the^ the young man is.
then is a young man, for he has already enjoyed and obtained that, which the
young man does but hope for. The one desires to live long, the other has
already lived long: albeit (O Lord) what is in man's life, that may be said to
be long and of any diuturnitye. Admit we live til extreme old age: let us
hope and think that we shall live as long as ever did the king of Tartessians.
Argantonius lived. 120. yeyeares.
His name (as I find in historyes) was Argantonius, who in the Isles called
Gades in ye furthest parts of Spain rayned lxxx. years and lived a hundredth
and twentye. But to me there seems nothing long, wherein any extreme or end
is: for when that end or extreme is once come, then al which is already past,
is quight gone, and nothing remains but only that which a man has by virtue
achieved, and by good deeds and works perpetrated. For hours go away
apace, so do dayees, months and years, and the time which is once slipte
by, and gone, never retourneth, neither can the times and things which are to
come, be preciselye known. Therefore every one ought to be contented with the
space and time, which god grants him to live. For he that is a Stageplaier
needs not of necessitye to be an Actor in the Interlude or Comody till the
last end thereof, (to delyghte the beholders) but in what act of the same so
ever he plays or chances to be, he must so expresselye handle and play
his part, that he may win praise and commendacion: neither should a
wyseman live till the Plaudite be stryken up. For a short space and time of
life, is long enough to live well and honestly, and in whatsoever age we be
in, it is sufficyente to have lived therein godly and vertuouslye. But if you
proceed further, and live to extremytye of age, you must not be discontented
nor aggreeued there with, no more then Husbandemen do, to see after a
pleasant and temperate Spring seasonne, Summer and Autumn to succeed. For
the Spring time resembles and is like to Adolescencye, dysplayinge and
plainly showing what fruyctes will grow: all the other times and seasons
serve to reap, mow, cut down, gather, gleane, and receive them into the
barnes. The fruictes of old age.
Now, the fruicte of Old age (as I said before) is a pure and vpryghte
Conscience, and the good testimonye or witness that a man's own mind bears,
of the virtuous and irrepreh eusible life, decentlye and inculpable led.

For all things which come by course of Nature are to be reckened and
accounted among good things: and what is sooe much according to natural
course, as for an Old aged manne to dye? Which doothe happen to young men, as
it were Maugre Natures good will. Therefore young men in mine opinion seem so
to dye, Youngme^ struggle for bitterness of pain in dying but old men die,
like the going our of a Candle.
as when a raging and violente flame of fire isquenched, with a great
quantytye or effusion of water: but old men dye, as it were, fire, which lacking
wood and combustible matter to nourishe it, goes out quietly, and is
quenched, as though it were of his own accord, not forciblye. And as Apples
which are green and vuripe, are not plucked from the Tree but by a certain
violent plucking, but if they be ripe and mellow, they fall voluntarily down
from the Tree: So like wise, yongemen depart out of their life by violent force
and painful struggelyng, but old men dye by a certain rypenes and maturitye.
And as often as I think thereon, I am rapt with such joy and coumfort, that
the nearer I draw and approach to death, the sooner me think, I see the dry
land, and (as it were after a long Nauigacion and Seafaring voyage) shall at
length arrive at the quiet haven and Port of all rest and securitye. All other
ages have a certain number of years appointed, how long every one continues,
but unto old age there are no determinate and certain times limited and
prefixed, and therefore thou lyuest there in well and laudablye, as long as thou
can execute thy office, dyscharge thy duty, and defend thine aucthoritye,
and yet nevertheless to contempne death. And for this cause, it happens,
that old age is endued with greater courage and animositie, then Adoleslencie
and youth is. And this is the cause, that when the Tyrant Pylistratus
demanded of Solon how he durst be so bold, or wherein he reposed his trust, so
wilfully and boldly to again say and disobaie his Procedings: Solon Answered
him that he trusted to his Old age, and that was it, that made him full of
Courage, and gave him boldness to resist him: for as much as he with lawless
force and monstruons tyranny had attempted to oppress the Common wealth,
myserably frusshed through his unbridled and tyrannycall invasions.

But the best end of life is this: when nature which compacted and framed the
body, does like wise dissolve and bring to death the same, being in good and
perfect remembrance, the use of the wits and senses in no part appayred
nor dimininisshed. For even as ye Shipwrighte, which made the Ship, knows
best how to undo and pulle the same asundre again, and as none has better
skill to vnioynte or take down a house, then the Carpe^ter that made it: even
so nature, which fasshioned ye feacture of the body and set the same in a most
decent Symmetrie, does best dissolve and end it by natural death. For every
conglutinacion when it is fresh and newly glewed together, will not easily be
pulled a sundre but by violent haling and forcible rupture, but when it is
inueterate and old, it may easilye be diuelled and severed. Thus you see, that
the small remanent and time of our race and life which is behind vnrunne, is
neither affectuously to be desired, nor without cause to be left and
forsaken. And the famous Philosopher Pythagoras, This life is but a warfare.
geeueth us a sore charge, that we should not depart out of the garrison and
wardehouse of this life, unless we have commission and commandment from our
general captain which is GOD. Solon his wise saying is very notable and
praise worthy, for he would not that his death should be vnbewayled and
unlamented of his friends. His meaning (I think) was, because he would not
seem to be forgotten, but rather entierly to be beloved and remembered of his
friends, which thing their dolourous plaintes and inward griefs at his last
end and funeral obsequies should bewray and evidently witness. But yet Ennius
his opinion in like case, may in my judgment be better allowed, for he would
not have his friends to moan and lamente for him after his death, and these
are his words.

Surceasse from tears, when I am dead,
And let not them for me be sheadde.
When death shall with his deadly darte,
My Corpse and Soul asundre part.
And why? the clanging trumpe of fame
Shall ever sound abroad my name.
This noble Poet would not have the death of them to be lamented and with
feminine blubbering and schrietches to be bewailed, whose praise and virtue is
immortalized and enrolled in the book of fame, and their worthy deeds
registered in the scroll of eternity. As touching the bitter panges and extreme
agonyes which they suffer that lie in dyinge, (if there may any such be)
truly it continues but for a small while, specially in an old man: and after
death, the sense is either such as is blessed and optable, or else it is none at
al. But al young men ought to imprint this in their minds, and meditate the
same, that they be not in any seruyle and dastardlye fear of death, but to
stand at defiaunce and contempne it. He that standethe in fear of death,
cannot be quiet in mind.
For whosoever envreth not him self with this meditation, ca^ not have a quiet
mind. We are most sure that we must dye, and we know not whether our hour
will come even that same very day. Therefore he that every hour stands in
fear of death, Nothing more certain then death, nothing more uncertain then
the hour of death.
how can his mind be in any rest or tranquilitye. Where of there needs no very
long disputacion to be had, since I do well remember not only L. Brutus, who
in the quarrel of his Country which was despoyled and with tyranny
oppressed, Valiau^te knights which dyed for sauegard of the country.
most manfully was slain: the two Decij, who being armed at al pieces and
mounted on horseback galloped and gave them selves willingly to death for their
Country sake: M. Regulus, who (rather then he would forswear him self, and
break promise with his most deadly and bloody Enemies) went wyllyngly to his
most certain torment and punishment (where he well knew that he should suffer
death after a strange and terreble manner) and would not in any wise by his
kinsfolks and friends be altered and removed from his determinacion: The twoe
Scipioes, who with their own bodies choice rather to stop the passage of the
fresh succors (which under the conducte of Hasdrubal, came to aid Hanniball
and the proud Carthaginians, sore infesting and afflicting Italye with sweard,
famine, and fire) then to suffer and permit them, to set any foot within the
territories and Precinctes of the Roman dition: your Graundfather L. Paulus,
who through the temeritie and folly of his fellow in office Terentius Varro,
was in that ignominious overthrow and shameful dyscomfiture, in the conflict
and battle of Cannas, slain and brought to confusion: and M. Marcellus,
whose valiaunce and magnanimity was so great and so weil tried, that his and
our most cruel enemy Hannibal, when he had slain him in the field, caused
his dead corse with all funeral pomp and solemnity of sepulture to be
enterred: but also how our legions and Armies, courageously adventured to take
such voyages, and venturous expeditions into such dangerous places, from
whence they looked to return alive again, whereof I have wryte^ in my book of
Originalles. Shall therefore old men which have great knowledge and experience
fear that, which young striplings and the same not only unskillful but also
blu^t and rustical do contemn and care not for? But me think, society of al
things, can seth so ciety of life. Every age has his peculier delight and
study.
There are some fantastical and childyshe plays whereat youge children in
their childhode delight to play: shall therefore young men and tall fellows
addicte them selves to the same semblably? There are some exercises and
affections wherein youthly years do envre them selves: shall the ripe and
constant age (which is called ye myddle age of man) look to play at the
same? And of this myddle age, there are some studyes, wills and appetites,
which old age cares not for. And there be some studies and exercises belonging
and appropriate to old age. And therefore as the pleasure and delight of the
studies and exercises in fressher and lustier ages does in time were away and
come to an end, so does the studyes of old age in continuance and tract of
time also dye and vanish. And when this pleasure and delightful contentacions
begin in old men once to decrease, then does sacietye of life bring to them
a conuenable and mature time to dye. For verily I cannot se, why I should not
be bold to utter and declare to you twain, the very entier cogitacions of my
heart, and the opinion which I have of death: and the rather, because I suppose
that I do better know and see it, as one, that now am near the pittes
brinke, having one of my feet already in the grave. And I am in this belief
(O P. Scipio and C. Laelie) that your noble fathers, men for their virtuous
manners and worthy demerites immortalized, who also wear my most dear and
loving friends, do yet live, yea and such a life, as is worthy only to be
called a life, which is immortal and not transitory. For so long as we dwell
and be included within this lumpish body proportioned with joints, synewes,
flesh, bone, and other parts, The body is the prison or case of ye soul.
which may be called the pryso^ or case of our Soul, we are driven and by a
necessity enforced to do some actions (will we or nill we) as to sleep, eat,
drink etc: and to do some cumbresome works which are inevitable. But the
mind or soul which is divine and celestial, sent down from god out of
Heaven and infused into man, is depressed and as it were, forciblye dejected or
thruste down to the earth, being a place quighte contrary to divine nature
and e^ternitye, because it is mortal and visible whereof ye other is immortal
and invisible. Note the opinion of a Heathen.
But I do think, that the immortal Gods inspired minds into human bodies,
because there should be some to inhabit ye earth, who beholding and considering
the orders of ye celestial bodies, and waighing how duly they observe their
courses and motions, might imitate and follow the same right order in the trades
of their life and constancy. And not only reason and frequent disputacion
moves me thus to believe, but also the profou^de doctrine and authorities of
most noble and approved Philosophers. For I have been in place, where I hard
that Pythagoras and his disciples which inhabiied within our country and were
in manner free Denizons within our precinct and dominion (for they were once
named Italian Philosophers) affirmed and said, that they wear never otherwise
persuaded nor never held opinion to the contrary, but that our minds were
fourmed and derived from the universal divinity of god. Furthermore it was
told me, what Socrates disputed and spoke concerning the immortalitye of the
soul, and what he openly said being an ancient philosopher and one, whom
Apollo his Oracle judged the wisest man in ye whole world, even the last day of
his life, a little before his death. What needs many words? I am so firmelye
persuaded and on this poinct so whollye resolved, saying there is so great
celeritie of the mind, so good remembrance of things paste, and so great
forcast and prudeuce in things to come, so many Arts, so many Sciences, so
many inventions and ingenious devises, that the nature which understands and
contains ye knowledge of al these things is not mortal. The immortality of
the soul proved.
And since ye mind is ever moved, having no beginning of mocion because it
moves it self, and shall never have any end of mocion, because it is eternal,
and shall never leave it self: and since the nature of the mind is simple, having
nothing mixed to it which is unlike and discrepant to it, I thereby know, that
it is indivisible, whereupon it consequentlye followethe, that for as much as
it is diuisible, it can never do and perish utterly. And these reasons following
make much for the probacion thereof, that men know many things before they be
borne, that Children (notwithstanding the abstruse and painful difficulty of
Arts) do so quicklye learn and as who would say, snatchingly conceive
innumerable things, that they seem, not than at the first to learn them, but
rather repete and call them again to memory. These be for the most part the
arguments and reasons which the dyuine philosopher Plato alleges and
brings for his proof of the immortalitye of the souls. Also Xenephon
writethe, that King Cyrus the elder lyinge on his death bed, spoke these
words following to his children: Lib. 8. de paed. Cy.
I would not (my children) that you should think, when I am departed out of
this life and goone from you, that I shall be no where or brought to nothing.
For you never saw with your bodilye eyes, my mind, duringe all this while
that I lived here with you: but as long as I dwelled in this body, you well
perceived and knew by my valyaunte exploytes and acts, that I had a mind.
Therefore think you not otherwise, but that I am the very same still, and my
said mind shall still remain as before, although you see it not visiblie.
For neither should the noble memorial and honorable Monumentes of Princes
and worthy Personages remain after their death, if in their life time, by the
policy and prowess of their minds, they did not atchieue some worthy
enterpises, whereby their fame and honor might be remembered and magnifyed of
their posterity. Truly it would never sincke in my brain that the minds or
souls did live only while they remained in mortal bodies, and being
departed out of them utterly to die, that no more of them should remain. Nor
that the soul and mind of sottes and fools is doltish and blockishe whenne it
is set at liberty and departed out of their foolyshe Bodies: but whenne it
is puryfyed from the filthy admixtion and drossie impurytye of the same
body, and fined from imperfection and beginning to be sound, perfect and
clear, then is it wise, sapiente and incorrupte.

And Man's nature being by death dissolved, it is apparaunte and well enough
to all men known, to what place all the other parts do go: for they do
all return to that matter, whereof they had their first and Oryginall
beginning: but the mind only is never with any bodylye eyes seen nor
perceived, neither when it is in the Body nor whenne it goes and departs
out of the body.

Now, you see that nothing is so like to death as Sleep. And yet the
minds of them that are a sleep do greatly declare their divinity: for whenne
they be at quietness and rest and with no careful cogitations overwhelmed,
they do forsee mannye things to come, wheareby it may plainly be perceived,
how and in what happy state they shall be, when they be dismissed and
discharged out of their dungeon or jail of their mortal Bodies. If therefore
these things be true, then reverence and honor me as a Godde, for the
participacion of the dyuyne Nature which is in my mind. But if the Soul do
dye together with the body (as some asseheaded Philosophers, flattering
them selves in their bestyall living and wallowynge like Swyne in the filthy
puddle of their Epycuriall sensualyty have affyrmed) yet you ever dreadynge the
Gods, being the Protectours, dysposers, and governors of all the beautyfull
ornamente and furnyture of this wydde woorlde shall not mysse but Godly and
inuyolablye solemnyze and kepethe memorial of me. These aduertisementes and
exhortacions Cyrus gave to his sons lyinge on his death bed. Now let us (if
you think good) take a suruay of our own selves, and see wheather the same
opynion and belief be not to be found in us and in other of our countraimen.
I will be plain which thee, Scipio: no man in the world shall ever be able to
persuade me, that either thy father Paulus Aemilius, or thy two Graund fathers
Paulus and Africanus, or P. Scipio the brother of Aphricanus, or C. Scipio his
uncle, or many more famous and worthy men, which here need not to be
rehearsed, would ever have attempted such perilous adventures (only to leave
a noble and worthy memorial of their fame and valiaunce to their sequel,
who^ they wisshed should take example of their fortitude, and tread in the
footesteppes of their laudable virtues whereby they might atchieue like
success in their glorious affairs and not fear to dye in the quarrel of
their country when foraine hostility inuadeth it) if with the quick
understanding of their minds they had not well seen and considered that their
posteritye appertayned and belonged to them, Do you think that I (for I may
I trust, somewhat vaunt and boast of my self as old men are wont to do)
would ever have undertaken so many labors and painful travails night and
day, both in the time of peace and also of war, if I had had this opinion
fixed and rooted in my mind, that my glory and fame should extend no further
then my natural life, and that when the one ceased the other should dye also?
for if that were so, were it not (I pray you) a great deal better to lead a
quiet life sequestered and exempt from all hurlye burly and toylinge business,
and never to entermedle with contentious matters, and the laborious affairs
of the weal public? But the mind of noble personages (I know not how it
chau^ceth) erecting it self and taking courage, had ever such a careful
respect to their succession, as though when they were departed out of this
life, they should then at length and never till then live and flourish, their
incomparable gestes triu^phing over cancard oblivion and their virtuous lives
over mortal death. For if it were not so, that ye souls should be immortal, the
mind of every good and virtuous man would not so earnestly with al his study
and deuoireseke to attain and aspire to immortal glory and perpetual renown
Furthermore, The godly desire death but the ungodly sear it.
every good and wise man dies willingly, and rejoices therein excedingly,
taking death to be a joyful messenger to somon him to endless felicity: on
the other side, every foolyshe man dies unwillingly. Do you not think, that
that mind which sees better and further of, does well perceive and know that
he goes to a far better state then in this world is to be found? Again,
the mind of the foolish sort whose sight is dimmer and duller doothe not see
nor understand so much? But verily I have a great desire to see and behold
your fathers, whom I entyrelye loved and had for their singular virtues in
great admiracion. And not them only am I so earnestlye affected to see, with
whom I was very familierly acquainted, but others also, of who^ I have both
hard, This place is translated according to two sundry Latin textes of
diverse printes.
read and also written. And when I am in my journey to them (which I so greatly
desire) there should no man bring me back again, though he would and also cold:
neither to make me to retire to the place from whence I came, like to a bal,
which Tenyseplayers toss and strike to their counterplayers, and they again to
ye otherside, yea though he would vndertade to run my youth again, as we
read that Pelias was in his old age. I will say more, if god wouldgrau^t me now
in this age to return again to my infancy and to be as young as a child that
lies crying in his cradle I would refuse and forsake the offer with all my
might: neither would I when I have already in a manner run the whole race
and won the gole, be again revoked from the end marks, to the Listes or
place where I took my course at the first setting out. For who would be
contented, when he has gotten the best game to be forced to run again for
the same? What pleasure and commoditye has life? yea rather, what pain,
toil and labor has it not? But let us admit that it had great commodyty, yet
undoubtedly, it has either an end or else sacietye. For I mean not to lament
and deplore the lack of the pleasant and fresh time of my youth, as diverse
and the same right well learned men have done, neither do I repent, that I
have lived, because I have so lived and led my life, that I may judge of my
self, that I was not borne in vain, This life is but a Pilgrimage.
but rather for great vtilitye and special consideracion. And I depart out
of this life, as out of an Inn and not out of a dwelling house. For nature
has geeuen to us a lodginge to remain and seiourne in for a time, and not to
dwell in continually. O lucky and blessed day, wherein I shall take my iourneye
to appear before that blisful troop and convocation of happy minds, and
leave this troublesome world, being the veil of al misery and the filthy sinck
of al myschiefe. For I shall not only go to those worthy men (of who^ I
spoke a little before) but also to my dear son Cato; who was a man of such
sanctity and goodness, as none more, of such sincere and unstained honestye, as
none better, whose body was with funeral rites put into the fire and
bourned to ashes by me his father, whereas it had been more meet and more
agree able to the course of nature, that my Body should have been with
semblable obsequeys and Ceremonies first burnte and intumulate by him. But his
mind and Soul not utterly forsakyng me, but ever lookynge and expectinge my
coming, is gone before into those places of joy, whither he perceived that I
my self (ere. it be long) must also come. Which brunt of calamytie and heavy
chance of sorrow, I seemed patiently to sustain: not because I did take the
matter so patiently in deed, but I comforted my self, thinking and deeminge
that we should not be long a sundre, but after a time again to have a joyful
meeting. These are the causes and the very reasons Scipio, (because you and
Laelius said you much meruayled thereat) which make my old age to me easy and
tolerable, and not only without al greuaunce and disturbation, but also
replenished wythall expediente pleasures. And if I do err, because I think
that the souls of men be immortal, verilye I am well contented in the same
error still to continue, and as long as I live, I will never renounce nor
recante the same, wherein I take such singular pleasure and coumfort: and if
it were so, that after death I should feel nothing nor have no sense at
all, (as certain Petyfoggers and bastard Philosophers hold opinion) I fear
not a whitte, least these lippelabourers and Idioticall Philosophers whenne
they them selves be dead, should skoffe and make a mocking stock at this
mine assertion and belief, because they them selves shall also be without
sense and like to bruit beasts. But admit, that after death we should not
be immortal, yet is it boothe conuenyente and also optable for a man,
whenne he has honestly played his part in the pageaunt of this life to dye
and pay his debte to Nature. For Nature as she has an end of all other
things, so also of lyuinge. And old age is as it wear the peroration or
final end of a man's time in this world, much like to the Epilogue or
Cathastrophe of an Interlude: the wearisome repeticion or desatigatio^ whereof
we ought to avoid and eschew, and especially when we are fullye cloyed with
sacietye. Thus much at your request I had to say concerning Old age: unto
the which, God grant you may arryue, that the things which you have
heard of me by mouth, you may prove true by certain trial and actual
experiment.


FINIS.
A brief abstract of years.
I Thought I might very well in this place annexe this Catalogue or Recital of
such Sages and honorable personages as lived long: as well for the similitude
and affinitye of the Argument, as for the admiration and coumfortable readinge
with pleasure of the thing it self: sythence in these our days being in
the last age of the world, not one among ten thousand lives the tenth
part of their flourisshing time and auncientie: unless peradventure there be
some that will say (whose words I can not deny have some couloure of
probability) that the years in old time were not so long, as our years now a
days are, and that every Nation reckened after their countrayes familier
computacion. For whose satisfaction, I will show the difference of diverse
years, first of these sundry years that yet are allowed, and then of certain
particular years appropriate to sundry countraies and cities, and lastly the
authorities and minds of some learned men, concerning the comparison of our
year and theirs together. First it is to be considered, that there be iii.
manner of years. One is named Annus Magnus, Annus Mundanus, or Annus
Platonicus, containing of our years (as not only Plato, but also Macrobius
and Ioannes de sacro Busto do affirm) fiftene Thousand years: in which time
and space, the Sun with all the other planetes and fixed stars of the
firmament, return to the very same poynctes and places, that they had at the
first beginning. Josephus in the eyghte chapter of his first book of
Antiquities says it contains but six hundredth years. The second is called
Annus Solaris, which is the space wherein the Sun completely finisheth his
course through every sign of the Zodiac, and retourneth again to the same
poincte whence it set out, which is in 365. days, vi. hours and 8. minutes of
an hour. These vi. hours collected and set together do in four year amounte
to xxiiii. hours, yt space of an natural day. And this is the cause, why
every fourth year (to keep the year at a certain stay) we have leap year,
and that year, Februarye has xxix. days and the year three hundredth sixty
and six days. The odd eight minutes must be also diligently looked unto, for
else in process and tract of time it will cause great error and confusion.
For in 120. years they do amount to a natural day: Which being not observed,
causes the two Solstitia, ye Aestiuall and the Hyemal, that is to say in
playner words, when the days are at the longest, and when they be at the
shortest, and also the two Aequinoctia, that is, when they day and night are
of one length to go one day back, which would in time, if it be not
amended, make Christmas (which is already gone from his just time at the
beginning almost xv days) to be in the Spring, and Midsomer to be in Autumn,
and all the feasts and times of the year to a preposterous order. The third is
Annus Lunaris which contains the space of a mouth. Furthermore, Romulus the
first king of Rome, who lived seven hundredth and thirtye years before christ,
of whom the city of Rome was both builded and named devised a year that
contained but ten months, where of March was the first in honor of his
father Mars, then April, then May, then June, then Quintilis, so named of the
order that it had, because it was the fyfte, then Sextilis because it was the
sixte, which two names were afterward altered, and called, the one Iulye and
the other Auguste in honor of Julius Caesar, and Octauius Augustus the first
Emperors of Rome, then September, and so forth to October-Nouember, and last
of al December being the tenth. After the death of Romulus, Numa Pompilius
surceeded in the kingedome, whoo added Ianuarye and Februarye to make the year
of xii. months, and after the imitation of the Aegiptians, allotted to one
monthe xxx. days, and to an other xxix, so that his year had but three
hundredth, fiftye, and four days, which number agrees not to the course of
the Sun. Last of all came Julius Caesar who espyinge the incouneniences, and
erroures aforesaid, added xi. days and six hours, so that then the year
contained three hundredth sixty five days and six hours, which year we ever
since have and do observe. Thus the other shot at the mark, but this Julius
by help of one Sosigenes, hytte the prick wythein very little, as before I
noted. Some countrayes rekened the year by noone of these ways, but used an
other pryuate manner. The Carians and the Acarnanians fynished their year in vi.
months as Macrobius affyrmeth lib. 1 Saturnall. The Arcadians (as Plutarch
says) made their year to be iii. months. The rest of the Greeks ended the
year in 354 days. The Aegiptians as Solinus writes) had iiii. months to
their year, but the oldest and auncientest year among them (as Censorinus
says) was but two months. Notwithstanding the Authorityes of these two famous
writers, Macrobius and Herodotus affirm, that the certain order and stay of
the year always was among them only. Some countrayes accounted the Summer
for one year, and the winter for an other.

And as in years, so likewise in the computation of days like diversity is to
be found. For the Babilonians reckened a day, the space between the two Sun
risinges. The Vmbrians from none till none. The Athenians between the two Sun
settings, Among the commune people a day is taken for the space beetwene
morning and night. Some kind of days are called natural, and some
Artificial. The natural day is the space of xxiiii. hours, reckening the
night and the day together. An Artificall day is from the Sun risinge, till
the Sun going down. The Clergy and Romanistes, the Aegiptians, Hipparchus
the Philosopher, apoinct a day, from mydnight to mydnighte. The Astronomers
from none to noone. Now to answer such as can uneath beeleue that Mathusalem
and others lived so many of such years as now we use, truth it is, that the
years then, were neither of a monthe nor yet of three months long, which,
hereby we may manifestly perceive, for as much as we read that Solom had a
Soune when he was twelve years of age. Therefore it is credible, that either
they were equal or else not much less then our years are. Also we read in
the first and fourth Book of Josephus de Antiquit. Iudaic, that the
Hebrews devised the year in Egipte before Noye his flood or the universal
Cataclisme, which year contained. xii months, and the same is also avouched by
Polydor Virgilius, and Paulus Eberus late writers. Thus have I compendiously
and briefly (although not precisely collected these sundry computacions,
whereunto I have added for conclusion what the worthy Josephus writes
concerning the same, wherein if any thing be through ouersighte or otherwise
by me mysconstrued, I crave thy frendeshyppe gentlye to amend it.

The names and age of sundry long lyuers.
ADam lived ix hundredth and thirty years Eve as many. Seth ix hundredth and
twelve. Enos the son of Seth ix hundredth and five. Kenam the son of
Enos.ix. hundredth and ten. Malalehel the son of Kenam eight hundredth,
nintye and five. Iared the son Malalehel ix. hundredth syxtye and two. Enoch
the Son of Iared three hundredth sixty and five. Mathusalem the son of
Enoch, nine hundredth sixty and nine. Lamech the son of Mathusalem seven
hundredth, seventy and seven. Noe ix hundredth and fifty. Sem the son of Noe
six hundredth. Arphaxat the son of Sem, four hundredth thirtye and eight.
Salah ye son of Arphaxat, four hundredth thirtye and three. Heber the son
of Selath four hundredth sixty and four, Peleg two hundredth thirty and nine.
Regu the son of Peleg C Cxxxix. Serug the Son of Regu twoe hundredth and
thirtye. Nahor the Sun of Serug Cxiviii. Terah the son of Nahor CCv. Haran
Lothes father CCv. Isaac the Son of Abraham Clxxx. Jacob the Son of Isaac a
hundredth fortye and seven. Joseph Jacob his son Cx. Aaran the brother of
Moses Cxxiii. Joshua Cx. Heli the judge, lxxxxviii Solomon lxxxxiiii. Job
Clxxxiii. Abraham Clxxv. Old Tobias Cii. Young Tobias lxxxxix. Sara Abraham's
wife, Cxxvii. Judith Cv. Moses Cxx. Out of Pliny. Arganthon King of the
Tartessians Cl. Sillius writes that he lived CCC. years, as it appears in
his third book de bell. Po. Cyniras king of Cyprus Clx. Agimius CC. Epimenides
Gnosius Clvii, Pictoreus Aetolus CCC. kings of Arcadie CCC. Dando the
Sclauonoies Dlxxxx. Impetris king of the Isle Pulutine DCCC. His Son DC.
Perpenna lxxxxviii. Marcus Valerius Coruinus C. Metellus bishop C. Liuia
Rutilius his wie lxxxxvii. Statilia lxxxxix. Terentia Cicero his wife Cvii.
Clodia Ophelus his wife Cxv. Luceia Mima had a good vtteraunce and pronounced
upon the Stage C. years. Emoliaria lived Ciiii. years. Sammulla Cx, Stephanio
above a hundredth. Hiero king of Sicilie lxxx. Masinissa king of Numidia above
a hundredth. Gorgias Leontinus cvii. Xenophilus of Chalcedon Cv. Herodotus
writes that the Aetheopians live above Cxxx years. Hippocrates the noble
Physician borne in the Isle Coa. Ciiii. Isocrates C. Orbilius of Beneuente C.
Plato lxxxi. Sybilla of Cume a very long age. Ovid writes lib 4. de Trist,
that his father lived lxxxx years. Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem Cxvi. Nestor
ccc. Antonie Abbote.cv. Alexander bishop of Alexandria.lxxxxiiii. Alexander
bishop of Constantinople lxxxxiiii. Agilus, Abbot C. Titus Saint Paul's
disciple Ci. Democritus CCCix. Paul the first Heremite Cxiii. Paconius Abbot
Cx. Prosdocimus bishop Cxiiii. Vandegisillus countee Palatine lxxxxii.
Florentinus bishop Cxxiiii. Guarinus bishop of Bononie Cx. Viuentius Cxx,
Homere the Poet Cviii. Hierome lxxxxviii. Helias Abbot Ci. Heroinus ccciiii,
Ioannes de temporibus CCClxi. Maurus Abbot lxxxxii. Maurilius bishop lxxxx.
Romualdus Heremite Cxx. Antonius Castor C. Syrus bishop Cxxxii. Zaucles of
Samothracia Ciiii. Pollio Romulus C. Saturnius Volucius Cxxxvi. Titus Fullonius
Clvii. Artoxerxes lxxxxiiii. Caelius writes that one Maris lived Cxxiii.
years whose body on the foreparte was like a man, and behind like a horse.
The people Hyperborei, who live under the north Pole called Polus Arcticus,
have always holesom winds, and know neither sickness, nor unquietness,
wherefore Strabo writes that they live a M. years. Galene lived Cxl years.
Dorotheus bishop of Antioche Cxix. Tiro the servant of Tullius Cicero C.
Theremon. Heremite c. Carneades the philosopher C. Cirnae people of Iudia Cxl.
Marsilius Ficinus Cxvi. Terence of Bonomie C. L. Tertulia of Arimyne Cxxxvii.
Simon Cleophae bishop of Jerusalem Cxx. Crouius Anachoreta Clv. Apolonius
Thyaneus Clxxx. Seneca borne at Corduba in Spain Cxiiii. Patricius the second
bishop of Niuerne Cxxii. Gartius Aretinus Ciiii. One Richard, in the time of
Carolus Magnus CCCC. Helias Anochoreta Cxx. Hugh, who succeeded S. Barnard
Cxvii. Many others might here have been recited, very not^rious and famous
for their longeuitie, but I thought these few for this time and purpose to be
sufficient.

Tho. Nevvton.

FINIS.

