THE BOOK OF Marcus Tullius Cicero entitled Paradoxa Stoicorum.

Contayninge a precise discourse of diverse poinctes and conclusions of virtue
and Phylosophie according the Traditions and opinions of those Philosophers,
which were called Stoikes.

Whereunto is also annexed a Philosophical Treatise of the same Authoure called
Scipio his Dream.

Anno. 1569.

Jmprinted at London in Fletestreate near unto Saint Dunstones Church by T.
Marshe.

To the Right Honorable Sir Walter Myldmay Knight one of the Queens Majesty's
most honorable Privy Counsel.
PEscenninus Niger (right honorable being newly elected to the Empire of Rome,
so little cared ^or praise and gratulacion, that on a ^ime, a certain learned
man, having in ^is praise and commendacion penned a ^olemne Oracion and
offering himself ^ecite you same before him in a great As^e^blie: he half
displeased with the Au^houre for employing his study to such ^ vain purpose,
reproved him with a ^retie and wise quippe saying: Good fe^lowe, I would have
had better opinion in thee, if thou had written the worthy acts either of
Marius or of Hanniball or else of some other noble and valiant Captain that is
dead, whose prowess and magnanymitie we might follow and set before our eyes as
paternes to imitate. For so long as we be alive, we had more need to be
taught, how to rule our Dominions and to discharge our duties with justice
and equity, that we may be thought worthy ye advancement unto us allotted,
then with painted gloses of flattering terms to beextolled above the condition
of a humain creature, Doing us thereby to understand that the usual fashion
of praysinge Princes and Magistrates to their faces, may rather betaken for a
plain mockery, then for any sincere affection sithence at their hands, hope
of preferment is expected, fear of displeasure if they should do otherwise,
loss of life, proscription of goods with such like, debated and pondered in
that heathen Breast, not swaruinge in that poinct from diverse textes of the
sacred scripture, the infallible Touchstone of al truth and Christianity:
affirminge as well the displeasure of the prince to be death, as also the
festuringe Canker of feigned flaterie to be most contagious. Nothing is
sopestiferous to Princes and maiestrats as to listen and give ear to the
fauning flattery of Cosening claubackes, and the rank rabble of pieuish
parasites, whose nature (hunting after lucre and Bellichere) is under the
cou^trefect visure of their sugared spech and diabolical dissimulacion to feed
the humor of those, who^ it has pleased god and good fortune to decorat with
worldly dignity and temporal regiment, above the commune sort of other people.
The hurt that thereof arises, is by infinite examples more apparaunt then that
it needs here to be declared. This causes me (Right Honorable) to leave you
large camp of deserved praise, justly due unto your Honor for the manifold
and singular virtues of approved wisdom and exquisite learning,
harboroughinge within the sanctuary of your noble mind, to others that shall
hereafter with more dexterity blaze abroad and display the same to posteritye.
Only my humble suit and request is unto your Honor, that you would vouchsafe
to accept the first fructes of this my simple travail into your patronage, the
work of a man long since dead, vowed and due unto none so fit as to you, who
have been a serious studient of Tullian eloquence, and a diligent peruser of
all his works, and that under the safeconducte of your worthy name it may have
freer passage into the hands of many. Which although it be not so exactly
don, that it may seem to smell of Demosthenes or Cleanthes his Ca^dle, nor
every jot and syllable to be preciselye waighed in Critolaus his Balaunce,
yet I trust the sense of the Authoris in no place altered, nor my Translation
in any point to swerue from the office of a faithful Interpretoure. Finallye
that it may please you to waighe the nakedness of my goodwil, more then th,
value of this my Scolasticall exercisee by the example of our savior Christ,
who accepted the two mytes, which a pore woman offered in the Temple in as good
part as the great gifts and oblations of the wealthy: calling further to your
remembrance that God at the buildings of his Tabernacle, accepted as well such
as to the erection and beautifiinge thereof brought stuff of small importance
and account as Brass, iron, Goats hear, candlestickes, oil and such like,
as he did those that brought costlier and more precious ware as Gold, silver,
purple, Scarlet, Bysse, pearls, precious stones and odoriferous perfumes.
Which labor of mine if I may understand to be not altogether misliked of
you, I will think not only my travail well bestowed, but also much encouraged
to proceed in works of greater volume and pain, already begone and in part
performed byme, if my glassie health may be at any reasonable truce with his
feuerous maladies and continual Atrophies. From which and al other infirmities
I beseech Allmighty God long to preserve you, to the common vtility of this
Realm, and after your pilgrimage here ended, make you Coheire with his son
Christ in his glorious Hierarchy

From Greenwich the Kalendes of June. 1569. Your honors most humble to
command Thomas Newton

The Preface of the Author unto Marcus Brutus.
I Have oftentimes marked and considered O Brutus, how your uncle Marcus
Cato at such times as he uttered his mind and opynion in the Senate about the
vvaightye matters of the common wealth, used to fetch his reasons and
Arguments out of Moral Philosophy, and by witty exposition made them to
serve his turn and purpose: but the manner of his reasoninge differed much
from that absolute order which is publicly used in Forum, where all judicial
matters depe^dinge in suit and controversy are pleaded and decyded.
Notvvithsta^ding he prevailed so much with the common people by his grave
sentences and discret counsayles that they adjudged all that he said to be
effectual and probable. Which was a thing far harder for him to
compass, then it is either for thee, or for us, because we are better envred
and have a further skill in that kind of Philosophy which enricheth a man
with a fine vtteraunce and flowing eloquence, and vvherin such things are
declared, as do not much disagree from the minds of the people. But Cato being
(in my opinion) a right and perfect Stoike, doothe both think those things
which the vulgar people allow not, and is also of that sect of
Philosophers, which care not for elegancie of speech and flowers of
eloquence: neither dilate and amplify their arguments, but with breafe
questions and Interrogatories (as it were with certain pricks or points)
prosecute their reasons and dispatch their purposed intentes. But there is
nothing so incredible, but the same by artific^al handling may be made
credible, there is nothing so rude and barbarous, but by eloquence it may be
polished, and scoured clean Consideringe and reuoluing these things in my
mind, I adventured further then this Cato, of whom I speak. For the Orations
that Cato commonly made, were after the Stoikes guyse, of Magnanimity,
Continency, death, the whole praise of virtue, of the immortal Gods, of
the love that we ought to bear to our Country, without any pointed gloses or
gorgeous ornaments of Rhetoric. But I (as it were to exercise my self and
to make a proof of my wit) have co^prysed and recueled such high and
abstruse points of Philosophy, into common places, which the Stoikes do
scantly permit and allow in their schools of exercise and private studies.
And because they be meruaylous sentences, and such as are contrary to the
opynion of all men, they are by the^ termed Paradoxa, which signifies,
things merueilous and inopinable: whereupon I thought with my self to
assaye whether they might be published abroad, and allowed as disputable in
the Forum, or place of common plees, and so eloquently handled, that credit
might be given unto the^ by the ^udients, or whether I might entreat of the^
after a learned sort for the^ that be skilful, or ^ls frame my talk and manner
of reasonyng according to the capacity of the unlearned people. And the more
vvillinge was I to write, because these conclusions (which they have thus
named Paradoxa) seem in my opinion to be most true, and socratical, that is to
vvitte, agreeable to the sound and infallible doctrine of Socrates. You shall
therefore take this small work well in vvorth, by me compiled by
Candlelighte these short nights, because under the protection of your name,
my other work of more paynfull study, was set forth and divulged. Tuscula^s
questions.
And herein shall you have a taste of those kinds of excercises, that I used and
yet do accustom my self to use, when I select and excerpe such sayings as
among the Philosophers in their schools are called their positive and
peculier arguments, and interlace the same into the Rhetorical trade that we
use in pleadynge and trauersinge causes and matters Judicial.
Notwithstanding, I do not greatly desire, that you should publishe and set
forth this work to the gazinge vievve of all men, for it ^ not of such
excellencye, that it deserves t^ be set up in the topp of an high Turret for
men to behold and have in admiracion, as the incomparable Statue or Image of
Minerua was, which Phidias made: but only that it may appear and be
intimated to you that the same person which made and dedicated the other
greater works unto you, is also the Authoure of this.

The first conclusion or Paradoxe, vvherin is proved that nothing is good and
laudable but only that which is honest and virtuous.
I Fear some of you will deem and think, that this my talk and discourse is
not devised and invented by me of mine own brain, but borrowed and fetched out
of the disputacions of the Stoykes.

Yet nevertheless I will franckly say what I think, and in fewer words then so
great a thing can well be declared. Truly I never judged nor thought that
richesse, wealth, sumptuous buildings, Revenues, Territories, Dominions, and
bodily pleasures (wherein folish worldlinges set their chief delighte) were
worthy to be reckened among such things as are good and expetible. For I do
see, that although they have great plenty and foyson of such tra^sitory
things, yet be they ever coveting and hu^ting after more, lacking as well that
which they have, as that which they have not, because their greedy desire and
thirste of money and covetousness is never stenched nor satisfied. And they have
not only an inward vexacion and disquietnes of mind by reason of the
insatiable desire and lust that they have to increase and augment that
Substance which they already possess, but also ever stand in dread and
fear to loose the same by one casualtie or other. And in this poinct, I
oftentimes find a lack of discretion, in our Auncestoures and predecessors,
which were men of living most virtuous and continente, who by the bare and
only name, demed and called these uncertain and transitory goods and wares
(which are commutable between man and man in their bargains and traffic) to
be good: whereas in very deed, they thought far otherwise, then their
words outwardly purported. Can a thing that is simply good, be in an evil
man? Or can any man that is endewed and garnished with those things that be
good in deed, be any other then a good and virtuous man? But all these and
such like we see to be such, that both naughty men may possess them, and good
men by them may be hurt and damnifyed. Therefore if any be so peeuishly
disposed to reprehende and mock me for so saying, let him not spare, I force
not. For truth and sound reason shall with me be ever preferred before the
rash judgments and waueringe opinions of the foolish multitude. Neither will
I say, that any man has lost his good things, when he has lost his Cattle
or household stuff. Neither can I chose, but oftentimes to praise and greatly
commend the wise man Bias (as I think) who was rekoned and accounted one of
the seven wise Sages of Greece. For when his city Priene was by the Enemy
taken and ransacked, all the Inhabitaunts shifting for them selves, and
conuaighinge them selves out at a Posterne gate, with bag and baggage, as
much as they could carry, he was advised and counsayled by one of his friends
to do semblably: I do (quoth he) eue^ as well as they. For I carye away with
me, all such goods and possessions as are mine: meaning his virtue, wisdom
and learning. But as for worldly pelf and transitory goods which are
subject to the variable chance and hazard of blind dalying fortune, he
thought were not to be called his own proper goods, which we do call and
term good. What is good then (will some say) or what is meant thereby. If what
soever is done rightlye, honestly, and according to virtue, be said to be
done well and laudablie, then it follows, yt whatsoever is right, honest and
according to virtue is (as I think) only good. But these things may seem to
be somewhat obscure and not able to be understood of every weak capacity,
for as much as they are but coldly and superficially handled and disputed
without any examples. Therefore to illustrate and beautify the same with more
grace and pleasauntnes, we must introduce and bring in the lives and worthy
acts of noble personages and men for the virtues renowned, sith they seem
to be disputed more subtillye with words then effectually with deeds. Well,
I demand of you, whether you think that those noble and excellent men which
were the first founders of our common wealth, and established the same with
good and commendable Laws, did cast all their study and whole mind upon the
greedy and insaciable desire of Gold and Silver which tended only to avarice,
or upon pleasures devised to content the phantasy, or upon new fangled tricks
of household stuff being instruments of nycenes, or upon sumptuous fare and
belly chere being the ministers and occasions of voluptuousnes? Set before your
eyes every one of the kings. Will you begin with Romulus? Or else with those
valiaunte Gentlemen which delivered our city from miserable thraldom and
slavery? By what degrees (I pray you) did Romulus ascend and attain to be
deified and associated to the number of the Gods? by such vain pleasures
which these gross Beetleheades call good? or else by his valiant acts and
woorthye virtues? What say we to Numa Pompilius? Do we not think that the gods
were as well pleased with his homely pots and earthen pitchers wherein he offered
up his sacrifice, as they were with the rich goblets and delicate Cups of
others that succeeded him? I omit the rest: for they were all egall in virtue
and prowess, one with an other, except Tarquinius superbus. But if a man
should ask Brutus, what he intended or whereaboute he went, when he expelled
the kings and restored his country to liberty, or what mark he and his
fellows and confederates shot at in enterprising and aduenturing the same, ca^
it be thought, that any of them did it for pleasure sake, or for Richesse, or
for any other purpose, otherwise then became men of approved fortitude and
magnanimity? what caused Quintus Mutius Sceuola to hazard his life without
all hope ever to escape or return in sauety, when he conuaighed himself into
king Porsenna his camp, meaning to have dispatched and slain the king in his
own pauilion? What manhood and valiaunce remained in Horatius Cocles? What
notable exploites did he when he alone defended the Bridge or passage over the
river Tiber against the armed route of all his enemies? What violence enforced
or compelled Decius the father voluntarily to vow and obiecte himself to
death, by pressing into the middle of his enemies hosts? What caused Decius
the younger, Son to him aforesaid, to do semblably? What pretended the
continency of C, Fabritius? What meant the homelye fare and slender cheer of M.
Curious? What say we to the two sure pillars and invincible Buttresses of the
Roman nation the two Scipioes, what worthy service did they to their country
in the Punique wars? Who chose and were willing even with their own bodies as
it had been with a wall or Rampiere to stop the passage of the army that came
to aid and succor the Carthaginians? What intended the younger Africanus?
What desired the elder? What coueted Cato, who lived between these two men's
times and innumerable others? For we have store of domestical examples in our
own country. Do we think that any of these were ever in that opinion, to
desire or seek for any thing in their life, but only that which they
supposed and deemed to be good, virtuous and laudable? Therefore let all such
as mock and deride this opinion step forth and show their faces, and let them
flatly confess and judge themselves, whether they had leifer be like to any of
these rich and fat Chuffes, whose gorgeous houses and buildings are
garnished with the finest marble stones, enameled and beset with yuory and
Gold* beautified and adorned with pictures and Imagery, Tables, store of plate
both of Gold and silver curiously chased and engraven and other precious and
artificial Corinthian works: or else be like to C. Fabritius, who never had
neither would ever have any of all these? Notwithstanding they are not so
obstinately wedded to their own fond reasons and self wills, but they will
sone be persuaded to relent and confess that these mutable and uncertain
goods and wares which serve for mutual bargayning one man with an other, are
not worthy to be rekoned among those things that are good. But this point
they do stiffely maintain and earnestly defend, that pleasure is the greatest
goodness and the highest felicity. Which saying in my opinion seems rather to
proceed out of the mouths of brute beasts then of men.

Will thou therefore so much abase and cast away thy self, seeing that god or
nature (being the common mother of all things) has given to thee a mind,
then which there is nothing more excellent and divine that thou should
think no difference to be between thee, and a dum beast? Is any thing good,
that does not make him that possesses it to be better? For as every man is
most endued and garnished with virtue, so is he worthy of most praise. And
there is nothing that is good, but he that is therewith decorated, may
honestlye rejoice and glory in himself for it. But is any of all these in
pleasure? Does it make a man either better or more praiseable? Is there any so
shameless to extol his own lewednesse, or to attribute any honest praise to
himself, for yelding and enthralling himself to voluptuousnes, and
lasciuiouslye living after his own inordinate Sensuality? Seeing therefore that
pleasure (in defense whereof very many do stiffely stand) is not to be
accounted among good things, but the more that it is used, the more it does
alienate the mind from the state wherein it was before: Certes to live well and
happily is nothing else, but to live vprightlye and honestly.

The second Paradoxe, wherein is deciphered that in whomesoeuer virtue is,
there lacks nothing else to bring him to lead an happy life.
Neither did I ever think Marcus Regulus to be miserable unhappy or wretched,
for his magnanimity and hauty courage was not tormented of the Carthaginians,
neither his gravity, neither his faythfulnes, neither his constancy neither
any other virtue incorporated in his noble breast, nether finally his worthy
mind, which being guarded and fortifyed with a garrison of so many virtues, and
on every side environed and accompanied with such singular qualities could not
be vanquished and conquered, although his body was punished and by a most
terrible kind of tormente manquelled. As touching C. Marius, we saw in him
such a care pattern of noble patience that when he was aflote in his highest
prosperitye he seemed to me to be one of the happiest and fortunatest men in
the world, and when blind fortune turned her wheel up side down deiecting
him from his high estate and sovereignty unto careful adversity, yet seemed he
never to change countenance but to be as one of the noblest and stoutest
hearted men that ever was, then which there can nothing happen unto a mortal
man more blessed or fortunate. Thou little know (thou folish and brainsick
man) what power and efficacy virtue has: thou do usurp the bare name of
virtue, but thou know not the excellency, force and validity of it. That man
cannot be but most happy whose mind is well settled and accustomed to virtue,
and which puts and reposeth all things in himself alone. But he that
puts all his hope, confidence, reason, and cogitacion in fickle fortune, and
altogether depends upon uncertain hazard, can have no certainty of any
thing, neither can he assure himself that he shall have the fruition of his
posterity not so much as the space of one day. Terrifye and affray such
Asseheades, if thou canste catch any such in thy danger, with thy threatening
menaces either of death, or else banishmente: but for my part, what chance
soever betideth me in so churlish and ingrate city, I will patiently suffer it,
and am fully resolved not to refuse it, much less not to repugne and resist
it. For to what end and purpose have I employed and bestowed all my travail,
to what effect are all my deeds, or for what consideration have I exhausted my
self with so many studies and careful affairs, if I have not armed my self
and learned thereby to lead my life in such sort, that neither the spightfull
temerity and rashness of variable fortune, nor the envious heart burning and in
iurious hatred of mine enemies should be able once to damnify me or to dash me
out of countenance? Is it death that thou do threaten me withal, by whose
means I shall depart out of this miserable world altogether from among men,
or else is it banishment, whereby I shall be rid out of the company of naughty
packes and villains? Death is terrible to those, whose life and conversation
has been so sinful and wicked, that when they dye: all other things dye and
take an end with them also: but not to them, whose praise and renown can never
dye nor be forgotten. As touching banishment, it is terrible and dreadful to
them, which think themselves to be enclosed and hedged within a certain limite
and place of dwelling, not to the^ which think the whole world to be nothing
else, but as one city, for all men to dwell in. Thou art overwhelmed in
miseries, thou art plunged in calamities, thou art enveigled and led in a
fools Paradise, supposing thy self to be a man happy and in fortunes good
grace: thine own libidinous lusts do vex and trouble thy unquiet conscience,
thy mind is night and day horribly battered with remorse of thy naughty life,
thou neither art contented with the lot and state which thou art in presently,
thinking it not to be enough, and also thou stand in continual fear least
that which thou haste, will not continue long with thee. The punctions of thy
flagitious deeds is ever gnawing and pricking thy sinful and gilty
conscience, thou stand in fear of Sessio^s and judgments for transgressing
the laws, which way soever thou do glaunce thine eye, thy wrongful
dealinges like hellishe furies do occur and resort into thy remembrance,
which do so torment thee inwardlye that thou never canste take thy rest.
Wherefore even as a naughty, folish and dissolute person can not be happy: so a
good, wise and valiant man can not be miserable. Neither can his life be
otherwise then good and prayseable, whose virtuous manners and honest
conditions are godly and comendable: neither furthermore is his life to be
detested and eschued which deserves praise, which were utterly to be avoided
and fled, if it were wretched and miserable. And therefore I conclude that
whatsoever is laudable, the same also ought to seem blessed, flourishing and
expetible.

The third Paradoxe vvherin according to the opinion of the Stoikes, he proves
all faults to be equal.
THe thing (will some man say) is small and of little value: but ye offense is
great. For offenses and faults must be waighed and considered, not according
to the chance and hap of the deeds, but according to the vicious intent
and naughtye disposition of the parties offendinge. One offense (I grant) may
be greater or less in value, then an other is: but as touching the nature of
the offenses and respecting them simply which way soever thou shiftest and
turnest thy self, they are all one. A Pylote or chief Mariner which
negligentlye drowneth a ship, whether the same be fraighted with Gold or with
chafe, is as much to be reprehended and disalowed for the one as for the other.
For although there be some odds and difference in the worth and valewe of yt
things, yet his ignorance and unskillfulness is all one. If a man to staunch
his inordinate and filthy lust, do defloure a woman that is both a Stranger and
also of pore estate and degree, the grief of yt villain does not appertain to
so many, as if he had lasciuiouslye constuprated a noble Damosel, descended of
some honorable house and pedagrew. But the offense was of it self never a
whitte the less. For sin or offense is nothing else but a transgressing and
passinge of the lymittes and bounds of virtue. Which when thou have once
done, the fault or trespass is committed, and thou nedest not to aggrauate ye
same with heaping on any more, for thou have deserved blame by comitting even
one. And whatsoever is unlawful to be done, is in this one poinct contained,
and expressly proved, in saying that it is not lawful: Which can neither be
made more or less. For if it be not lawful, it is sin, which is always one
and the same: and therefore the vices that spring and proceed out of them,
must needs be equal. Also if virtues be equal one with an other, vices also
must be equal. But it may most plainly and easelie be perceived and
understood that virtues are all equal one with an other, forasmuch as there
can not be any man better then a good man, nor any more temperate, then he
that is temperate, neither any stowter and valianter then he that is stout
and valiant, nor wyser then he that is wise, will thou call him a good man,
that whereas he might gain clearly and detain to himself ten pounds of
gold being committed to his keepinge and custody in secreate without any
witness, yet faithfully and truly redeliuereth the same to ye owner thereof, if
he would not do semblablye in ten thousand pounds? Or would you repute and
take him to be a temperate man, which can brydel his affections and refrain
from some one licencious lust, and lettethe go the Reins of al disordered
outerage in an other? Only virtue is agreeable with all reason and perpetual
constancy. Nothing can be added thereunto, to make it to be more a virtue:
nothing can be taken away from it, but the name of virtue shall straight
ways, be taken away and cease. For if things that be well done, be rightly
and virtuously don, and nothing ca^ be righter then right, verily neither can
anything be found that is better then good. It follows therefore, that vices
are equal. For the naughtynesse of the mind are aptlye termed vices. But sith
virtues are equal, virtuous deeds also, (because they proceed and come of
virtue) ought to be equal Semblably sins because they spring and arise out
of vices, must needs be equal. Yea Sir, (will some say) you take and ground
this opinyon upon the Philosophers doctrine. I was afraid, least you would have
said, I had be rowed and gathered it of Ribauo and verletts. Socrates his use
and manner was to dispute after such a sort. I am well apayde thereof: for
ancient and autenticke hystoryes do record and witness that he was a
profoundly learned and also a right wise man. But yet I demand this question
of you (seeing we do quietlye reason the matter with gentle words and not with
sturdye buffettes) whether when we dispute of good things, we ought rather to
seek ye mind and opynion of rude and ignorant Tankerd bearers and drudging
laborers, or else of the approved learned and famous Philosophers? especially
since there is no sentence and opinion either truer or more availeable to man's
life then this. What power or force does more terrefye men from committing any
kind of sinful acts, then when they know that there is no difference in
offenses, and that they do offend as much and as heynously in laying violent
hands upon private persons, as they should if they did the same to Magistrates
and the^ that be set in high authorytie? And what house soever they do polute
with baudry and whoredom, that the dyshonestie and shame of the lecherous fact
is equal and al one. What? is there no difference (will some say) whether a
man kill his own father, or else some common Servant? If you mean these twoe
comparisons barely and symplye, not addyng the cause or the kyllers intent, it
is hard to be judged of what sort they be. For if it be a horrible offense of
it self and simply for one to kyl his father, yt Saguntines, who had leifer
that their Parents should dye being free and vnuanquyshed, then to live in
servitude and slauerye, were Parricides. Therefore in some case the son may
berefe his father of his life without offense, and many times a poor drudge
or slave may be brought to his death, without great wrong and iniurye, And
therefore the dyfference is in the cause, and not in the nature of the deed.
Which being not sought for of the party actyue, but upon urgent consideration
and respect of the other party done, it is done more redely and prope^siuely:
but if the cause be a like and all one in both, the faults also must needs
be equal. Notwithstanding herein they do differ, that in killinge a Slave. if
it be done injuriously, there is but one single offense committed, but in
killing and taking away the life of a father, there are many fautes. for
therein is an unnatural dealinge showed to him that begat thee, that fostered
and brought thee up, that in structed and taught thee, that placed thee in good
state to live in the common wealth, and furnished thee with houses and
necessaries. He is notorious for his offenses, which takes away from his
father, that which he himself received of him, and therefore deserves a great
deal more punishmente. But in the race and course of our life we ought not to
weigh and consider what punishment is mete and due for every fault, but to
look and perpend what is lawful and permitted for every man to do. To do that
which behooves not to be done we ought to think to be an offense: but to do
any thing which is prohibited and unlawful, we ought to judge and account a
detestable and cursed deed. Is this to be so precisely taken for every light
matter and small trespass? Yea truly, for we cannot imagine a mean of the
things, but we may bridle our affections and keep our minds in a modest
measure. If a Stage player do never so little in his gesture miss and
transgress the notes of mesure or err in pronouncing one syllable in a verse
long which should be short or contrariwise that short which should be long,
he is hissed at, derided, and with clapping of hands driven away: and will thou say, that thou should err and offend somuche as in one syllable, in
thy life which ought to be more moderat the^ any gesture and more inculpable
then any verse? I cannot abide to hear a Poet make a fault in his verse though
it be but in a trifeling matter, and shall I hear a citizen skanne upon his
fingers his faults which in the societye of his life he has committed? Which
if they seem to be shorter, yet how can they seem to be lighter since every
offense and sin comes by the perturbation of reason and order? For reason
and order being once broken and perturbed, there can nothing be added,
wherebye it may seem that the offense may any whitte more be increased.

The fourth Paradoxe, vvherin is proved that all fools and brainsickes persons
be distraught and alienated from their right minds: covertly meaning Clodius,
and by him all others of like manners and conditions.
But I will by necessary arguments prove thee not a fool as thou art often,
not a wicked villayne as thou art always, but a fra^tike sotte and stark
mad Idiot. Shall the mind of a wise man being guarded and on every side
fenced and hedged in with grave counsel, valiaunce, pacient bearing and
suffering al such chances as are incident to man, contempt of fortune and
finally with all the other virtues as it were with a Rampire or wall, be
vanquished and overthrown, which cannot be so much as exiled and banished out
of the city? For what call you a city? is it an assembly and convent of
savage and brutish livers? Or is it a multitude of Rennagates, cutthrotes and
thieues congregated into one place? Certes you will say no. Then Rome was not
to be called a city, when good laws were disanulled, abrogated and stood in
none effect, when Judgments were laid aside and contemned, when the
auncyente customs of the City were ceased and extinguisshed, when the
Magistrates were with sweard and strong hand deposed and disfraunchised, and
the honorable name of Senate no more used in the weal public. Was that
flockyng route and hellishe rabble of thieves and Ruffians, and the swarm of
Robbers and murderers which under thy conduct were brought and set in the
Forum, and the remnaunt of the conspiratoures which (escaping punishment after
yt the sedicious furyes and traiterous vprores of Catiline were repressed)
turned and confourmed theymselues to thy ungracious villainye and madness any
city? Therefore I was not banished out of the City, which was then none, but I
was revoked and restored into the City, when there was a common wealth a
Consul, which during the time of thy usurped rule and Consulshippe was none at
all, and when the Senate bare his wonted authority which while thou ruledst
the roste and bare the swaye was contemned, and when the people might francklye
and freelye give their voices and consentes, and final: ly when the execution
of justice, law and equity (which be the linkes and bonds of the City) were
revived and had in remembrance. But behold how little I set by the bloody
weapons wherewith thou maintayneste thy murtherous and thieueshe lewdnes. I ever
made account that thou did mean great injury to me, but I never
thought that it ever taught or came near to me. Unless peradventure whenne
thou diddeste beat down ye walls of my house, or when thou did most
wyckedlye set my Mansion on fire, thou thought that some of such things as are
mine, were spoiled ransacked and burned in the City. But I do reckon nothing to
be mine, neither can any man else call any thing his own, which may be taken
away or stolen or by any other means lost. If thou had taken away from
me my constantnes of mind that I have used a long time, my cares, my laborious
and watchful pains, and my sage counsel, whereby the State of this public
weal has been honorably conserved and maintained, or if thou had
abolisshed and blotted out the immortal fame that shall redound to me for
these worthy benefits eternally, or (which is more) if thou had bereft me
of that mind, out of which all these cou^sayles proceeded, then would I confess
that I had receiurd a wrong at thine hands. But forasmuch as thou neither
dyddeste neither yet couldeste do this, thy injurious dealing toward me,
has made this my return ioyefull and glorious, and not my departure wretched
and miserable.

Therefore I was ever a Citizen, and then especially, when the Senate did
writ to foraine Countries and prouincies for my sauegarde, preseruacion and
gentle intertaynmente, as for one that was both a noble and virtuous Citizen.
But thou (although thou seem now to be in thy ruff and to rule al things
at thy pleasure) art no Citizen, unless peradventure it be possible for one
and the same person both to be a deadlye enemy and a freindlye Cytyzen.

Doeste thou make any diffirence between a Cytizen and an Enemy by nature and
distaunce of place, and not by inward will, and plain deeds of the minds?
Thou haste committed Murder in the Forum, thou haste intruded into the Temples
and foreciblye kept the possessions of them by means of thy armed Cutthrotes.
Thou haste fiered the houses of pryuate men, and holy Churches consecrated
to the Gods. Why is Spartacus proclaimed a Rebel and Traytoure, if thou be
a Cytizen? Canste thou be a Citezen, sythence through the lewednes the City
was, once no City? And doeste thou call me (by thine own name) a banyshed
man, sithe there is no good manne but he thought that at my departure the
Common wealth was banyshed and departed also.

O thou foolyshe and srantike dolte will thou never be reclaimed to goodness?
wylt thou never look about the? wylt thou never consider what thou do and
speak? Do thou not know that Exile is the punishmente of wicked and
scelerous dealing? and that this my iournaie was taken in hand for the most
politic and noble acts before by me achieved? All mischeuous and naughty
persons (of whom thou do profess thy self to be Captain and Ringleader)
whom the Laws do apoinct to be ba^ished men, are vagarauntes and banished me
in deed, although they never stir their foot out of their native
countraye. And seeing by all order of the Laws thou art denounced an outlawed
and banyshed person, will thou not be a banyshed man? Shall he be called an
Enemy that bears weapon about him before the Senate, and not thou, whose
falchion was taken even in ye Senate? Shall he that sleaeth a man be punished
and thou escape, which haste murdered a great meignie? Shall he that sets
fire on the City be adjudged an enemy, and thou winked at which with thine
one hand haste burned Cloisters and Churches dedicated to the Nymphs. What is
to be laid to him which forcibly keeps the Temples of the Gods? But thou
haste pitched thy Tents, and marshalled thy dissordered Host in the Forum. But
what mean I to recoumpte and declare the common laws, which are al by the so
violated and transgressed, that thou art thereby made a bannished man? Thy
very familier friend Cornificius made a private and special law for thee, that
if thou dyddest presume to come into ye Temple of Bona Dea, thou should be
sent into exile. But thou art accustomed to make thy vaunte, that thou have
done it. Therefore seeing thou art an offendoure of so many laws, and by the
order and tenoure of them art awarded to exile, how can thou choose but
tremble and fear this odious name of a bannished man? But I am here in Rome
(thou wylt say) and therefore how cast thou prove me to be a banished man? I
say thou art there as thou have been in a Haven, wherein thou have layne for a
time in Harborough, for thy safeguard, and yet not obedient to the Laws of the
Country. Therefore every man is not inheritable to ye customs and laws of the
place where he is resiaunt, unless he be subject and obedient to ye laws
which there be used.

The fifth Paradoxe, wherein he inuaigheth against the insolencye and
voluptuous lyuinge of Marcus Antonius, and proves all wise men to be free,
and all fools to be Slaves and bondemen.
Deserves this worthy captain to be praised, or to be named and thought
worthy to have such an honorable name? How? or what honest freeman can he be
a ruler over, which cannot rule his own affections? Let him first bridle his
sensual lusts, let him renounce and abandon pleasures, let him qualefie his
furious fumishe passion of beastly raginge anger, let him detest covetousness,
let him utterly expel and drive out of his mind all corrupt and naughty
vices: and then let him begin to exercise his rule and authority over others,
when he himself has ceased to be enthralled as a bo^d slave to two most vile
masters, yt is to wit ugly shame and lose dishonesty, for so long as he is the
bond slave of those two, he shall not only be accounted no Emperor, but rather
not so much as a fre man. And this is most excelle^tly used of the most learned
philosophers whose authority I would not use and allege, if my case so lay
that I should make this Oracio^ before an audience of blunte and ignorant
persons. But seeing that I do speak unto the^ that are most wise and
dyscrete, unto whose hearing these things are not straung, why should I
dissimule and faigne that I have lost all the pains and labor which I have
bestowed in these studies? Therefore right learned men do say, that no man is
free, but only a wise man. For what is liberty? Leave and power to live as a
man lust. And who lives as he lust, but he which embraces and follows
honestye, and delights in the action of virtue, who does not live rashlye
and dissolutelye, but choseth and prescribes to himself a trade of lyuinge
advisedly and forseeth the end thereof, who is obedient to the Laws, not for
fear, but because he thinks it to be a thing expedient, and wholesome: who
does neither say, do nor think any thing but volu^tarily and freely, from
whom al his counsels and affairs that he takes in hand do proceed, and to
the same are referred: neither is any thing of so great force with him, as his
own will and judgment: unto whom fortune herself yeldeth and geeueth place,
and has no power or jurisdiction over him, which is reported to have a
mervaylous great power and to bear a great sway in all things wherein the
sentence of the wise Poet is verifyed which says thus: Every man is
fashioned after his own manners: Therefore only a wise man has this
preminence and good chance, that he does nothing against his will, nothing
grudgingly, nothing by compulsion. Which thing to be true, although we must
be feign to discuss and declare it in many words, yet this in few words
must we of necessity confess, that no man is free but he which is thus
disposed and affected: and therefore all naughty persons are slaves and bondmen.
Neither is this so strange inopinable and merueilous in deed, as is it in
words. For the Philosophers do not term and call them such Slaves as serve
for drudgerye and vile service being bound to their Masters by Indentures
and Couenauntes obligatorye or by some order of Ciuyle Law: but if the vile
obedience of an effeminate and abject mind, carried away with every vain puff
of foolish affection, and lackinge any sure stay or judgment of himself,
by a bondage, who will deny all light fellows, covetous persons, and
finallye all naughtye folks to be slaves and bondmen? Shall I think him to be
a fre man, which is under the rule of a woman, submittinge himself to her
beck and pleasure, living as a suppliaunte vassell under her laws, ready at
an ynche when she either commands or countrecommaundeth? If she command
any service to be done, he dare none otherwise do, but go about it, if she
ask and require any thing, he dare not to deny it her, if she call he must
come, if she cast him out of the doors, there is no remedy but to pack and
trudge away, if she storm and threaten he must tremble and quake for awe and
fear. Verily I judge the man that is in this case not only a Slave and
bondsman, but a most wicked peazaunt and drudge, yea although he were descended
of an honorable stock and lignage. And as in a great householde of fools,
some of the servants think themselves in their own conceypte brayuer and
nycer then their other fellows, by aprerogatiue of service as being Porters
and ushers of the Hall, whereas (notwithstanding) they be but slaves and
servants, doltishe and fool shaken as well as thou art: so likewise are
they more fools and Sottes, which set al their delight in Pictures, Tables,
Plate curiouslye engraven, Corinthian works, and sumptuous buildinges. But we
are (will they say) the heads of the City, and therefore how are we Slaves.
Truly you are in no better case, neither are you to be preferred before your
own servants. But as in a great family, they which handle and go about
vile offices of drudgerie, as scouring, greasing, wiping, brusshing, sweping,
strawinge Rushes and flowers, have not the honestest place of service, but
rather the vilest function: so in a City those which have enthralled and
addicted themselves to the desires and lusts of these things, have almost
the lowest and basest rowme of al in the same City. But thou will say again:
I have valiauntly behaved my self in battle and exployed worthy adventures
in Martial affairs, and I have had the governance and chief rule over great
Empieres and provinces. Then if thou seek thereby to be praised, let thy mind
be garnished with such virtues and qualities as be praise worthy. But thou
art bewitched with some excellent table of the handie work of ye famous
paincter Echion, or else with some picture of Policletus. I omit to speak
whence thou haste gotten them, or what places thou haste spoiled and robbed to
come by them. But when I see and behold the so ravished with desire to gaze
and tote upon them still, to marvel and muse at them, and to make exclamacions
for wonder of them, truly I must needs judge thee to be the slave and bondsman
of all dotage and foolishnes. But are not these Tables pretty and trymme? Let
them be so, for we are not so blunt and groose of understanding, but we ca^
dyscerne between a good piece of work and a badde. But I pray thee, repute
and think them fair and beautiful in such sort, yt they be not made as
gyeues and fetters to shakle and bind men. But be taken as the toys and
pastymes of Children. For what do you think if L. Mummius should have seen
any of these men greatly enamoured and very desirouslye delighted to handle
the fine pottes and vrynalles of Corinthian work, whereas he himself cared
not for the whole City of Corinthe, whether would he think him to be an
excellent Citizen or else a dyligente servant and careful ouerseer of
vessels? Let Marcus Curious be called to remembrance, let the worthy fame
of his noblenes be revived, or some of those honorable personages, which lived
well contented in their simple fermes and Countray houses: having therein
nothing gorgeously decked, glittering and beautiful but themselves. And if he
should se any man that has borne high office in the common wealth by the
election and favor of the people to catch Barbilles and Mullettes out of a
fishponde, or nycelye handle them or to rejoice in hymselues because he has a
bonda^ce of La^prayes would not he judge this man to be such a slave that in
his householde, he woule not think him worthy to intermeddle with any greater
charge? Doothe any man doubt but that they are in most beastlye state of
servitude, which for covetousness of monye refuse no manner of slauerye no
drudgerye no bondage? What unreasonable bondage are the well contented to
suffer, which do gape for the goods of an other manne and hope to enjoy his
enheritaunce after his decease? when does the old rich cobbe which has no
issue beck or nodde, but they be pressed and ready at his elbow to do his will
and pleasure? They flatter and faune upon him, they know the right bent of his
bow, they speak nothing but that which they know will please him, what he
wills to be done, they do it: they hold him up with yea and nay, when he is
a little sick or discrased they sit by him. What poincte of a free man is in
these? Yea rather what poinct of a servile and drousie drudge is not herein?
Now, the ambicion and covetous desire of honor, principality and prouincies
(which seems to have a great show of Liberality, what a hard and rigorous
Maistresse is it, how imperious, how stately and vehement it it? This was it,
that caused the worshipful persons of the City and those which were counted
the best and most substantitiall men in Rome, to become suitors, to crowch and
to kneel to the wicked and ambitious Cethegus, to flatter and serve him, to
send him gifts, to come to his house in the night, to desire him to be good to
them, and finallye suppliauntly to prostrate themselves before him and beseech
his favor. What call you servitude and thraldom, if this may be thought to be
liberty and freedom? What shall we say? whenne the rule and dominacion of
affections is ceased, there enters in to their hearts an other heavy master
and cruel Landlorde, which is fear and remorse of conscience for ye crimes
before committed. What a miserable and hard servitude is this? They must obaye
and follow the fancies of prating youngelinges. Al they that seem to have any
shadow of knowledge and feared as though they were Lords. As for the Judge,
in what subjection has he his Clientes? how do they which know themselves
gyltie of any offense fear and dread him. Is not al kind of fear, bondage and
slavery? Therefore to what purpose is the Oracion of the most eloquent
Crassus, wherein he bestowed more eloquence then wit? Diliuer and rid us out
of servitude. What servitude is this to such an excellent and noble man? For
all fear of a faint, discouraged and abject mind is servitude. Let us not be
in bondage to any man. Desires he to be restored to liberty? Noe. For what
does he add afterward? To none but only to you all, unto whom we may and
ought to owe our alegiaunce and do homage. He would but change his landlord,
he desires not to be free. But we, if we be endewed with a lostye and
valiant mind, garnished and freight with virtues, neither ought neither may be
in servile subjection. But say thou O Crassus, yt thou can, for why thou
can do it, and be as good as thy word: but say not that thou ought so to
do, because no man owes any thing but that which were a dishonesty not to
pay. But of this hitherto. Let him take the view and suruay of himself and
well examine his own conscience, how he can be an Emperor, sith reasonne
and truth do plainly argue and prove that he is not so much as a free man,

The syxt and last paradoxe, vvherin he proves that noone are rich, but
only wise and virtuous men, priuaylye nippynge Marcus Crassus who said
that none was to be named rich, unless with his revenues he were able to
furnishe and mayntaine an army.
What an insolent bragging and arrogante ostentacion is this yt thou make
about the telling of thy money and riches? Art thou alone rich? Oh immortal
Gods, may not I rejoice in my self that I have heard and learned that
knowledge, whereby I can show and prove thee not to be as thy outward pride and
painted glory pretends? Art thou alone rich? what will thou say, if I can
prove the not to be rich at al? Yea what wylt thou say, if I prove thee to be
poor and beggerlye? for what is he, whom we call rich, or how do we
understand this word rich, to what manner of man may it best agree? I do think
that is best agrees, and may fitliest be applied to him, who possesses so
much: that he thinks himself sufficiently stored and to have enough
wherwithal to live virtuously and honestlye, being contented with his present
lot and estate, seeking and prowling after nothing, coveting and wisshing
nothing more then he has. For it is thy mind that must examine a judge it
self whether it be rich or no, and not the rumoure and talk of people,
neither thy richesse and possessions. He which thinks him self to lack
nothing, and cares not for heaping and hordyng up of more, but is satysfyed
and well contented with his wealth (I grant) he is rich. But if for filthye
lucre and insaciable greediness of money, thou think no manner of gain to be
dishoneste and reproachful, and carest nor which way and how thou gettest thy
goods, so that thou may fyl thy bags, (whereas no gain at all can be
honest and commendable in one of that order whereof thou art a member) if thou
daily defraude and undermine thy neighbors deceive and circumuent them, exact
and demand unreasonable taskes and customs at their hands, entangle and
lap them in prejudicial bargaynes and couenauntes, polle and pill them,
spoil and undo them, steal from thy fellows, rob the common Treasury,
gape and look every hour when thy friends will dye that they in their last
Testamentes might institute and ordain the their Heir, or else peradventure
do not so well as to tarry and stand to their courtesies, but falsefyest and
forgettes some subtyle convaighaunce in writing, by puttinge thy name in the
steed and place of him that is the true and right heir: whether be these the
tokens and pra^kes of a wealthye rich man which abounds, or of a needye
poor person that lacks? It is the mind of man that is wont to be called
rich, and not his Coffers. Although thy Chestes and Coffers be stuffed full of
money and worldly pelf, yet so long as I see the empty and void of virtue
(which is true treasure) I will never think thee to be rich. For men do esteem
and reckon the measure of riches to consiste in a sufficiency. Has a man a
daughter? Then has he need to have monaye for her dower. Has he two? he has
need of more monaye. Has he more the^ two? He has need of greater store
then before. If he have fiftye daughters (as the Poets do say that King Danaus
had) he must provide so many dowers to give with them in marriage, which will ask
a great mass of monaye. For accordinglye as every one has need, the
measure of riches must (as I said before) thereto be accommodated. Therefore
that man which has not many daughters, but nathelesse has innumerable
affectyons and an infinite sort of bestial cupidities (which are able in a
short space to consume great wealth and foysonne of richesse) how shall I
call him rich, sithence he feleth and perceaueth him self to lack? Many have
heard thee say, that none was rych, unless he were able with his rentes and
revenues to maintain and furnyshe a whole Host of Men: which thing the Roman
nation has of long time been skarcelye able with all their tributes and
rentes to do. Therefore by thine own reason and argument, thou shalt never
be rich, until thy possessions be so augmented and increased, that therewith
thou may be able with Municions, ^egion ^ay^
victualles, and habilimentes of war to maintain six Legions of soldiers
beside a great number of horsemen and footemenne which come to succoure and
aid. ^
Now thou can not chose, but confess thy self not to be rich, seeinge
that thou lackest so much that thou can not, accomplish and fulfill thy
wysshed desire. Therefore thou dyddeste never dissemble and hyde this thy
poverty or rather needinesse and beggerye. For as we well understand and know
that those which by honest means do seek to get riches by their entrecourse
and traffic of Merchandise, helping and having help again one of an other
and by other like public matters, have need of the things, which they
seek for: so he that sees at thy house great companyes of accusers,
complaynaunts and Judges al at once, he that marketh the defendauntes and
giltye persons being full of money, going about and practysing with brybes and
rewards (which they learned of thee) to prevent and adnichlate the due
process of Law, Justice and judgment, he that notes thy Legierdemayne and
craftye bargaynes that thou make with thy Clients, and what reward thou
shalt have for thy patrocinie and counsel in their causes, and for what
sums of money thou do indent with those that be Competitours or Suitors
for any office and promocion in the general Assemblies, he that calls to
memory how thou let out thy slaves and servant for hire to shave and
exact unmeasurable gains by usury of the provinces, he that marketh how thou
threatneste thy poor fermers and Tenauntes out of their houses and fermes,
he that perpendeth the to privy slaughters and Robberies in the fields, he
that calls to mind how thou use to be a Copertener with pore slaves,
Liberties and clyntes for gain, he that beholds the houses and possessions
left void and vnhabitied by reasonne that the right owners were expulsed, the
proscriptions, and attendoure of wealthy personages, the ransackinge of
incorporate Cities and yt merciless murders of the inhabitauntes, the
lamentable havoc of Sylla his time of usurped principality, the forged
Charters and Testamentes, so many persons cast away and manquelled, the
portsale of al things, the excessive gain that thou made by mustering and
leuinge of soldiers, the degrees of the Senate ever turning to thy profitte,
the selling not only of thine own voice but of other men's also, the Forum,
thy house, thy goodworde to further any suter, thy silence not to speak
against thy clyent, who is he but will think that this man must confess that
he has need of those things which he seeks? And whosoever has need of
that thing which he toyleth to get and gain, who can ever truly call him a
rych man? For the fructe of richesse is in plenty, which plenty the society
of things and abundance of wealth brings: the which forasmuch as thou
shalt never attain unto, thou shall never be rich. And because thou do
contempne my substance and wealth, and will too, (for it is after the vulgar
peoples opinion, mean and indifferente, in thy opinion in manner nothing, in
mine own judgment, co^petent and measurable) I will say nothing of my self,
but speak of thee. If we shall weigh and consider ye thing throughlye as it is,
whether shall we more esteem the money which King Pyrrhus sent to Fabritius, or
else the co^tinencye of Fabritius which would not receive the same being frelye
offered unto him? Whether shall we more waighe the great mass and sum of
Gold of the Samnites or else the answer of M. Curious to the messengers that
brought the same to him? the inheritance of L. Paulus or else the liberality
of Africanus who gave his part and portion of liuelyhode to his brother Quintus
Maximus? Verilye these notable examples being the chief and principal members
of most excelent virtues are more to be esteemed, then those that are the
members of wealth and money. What man therefore (seeing yt he is always to be
reckened most rich which possesses most store of yt which is best and most
to be esteemed) doubts but that the true richesse do consiste only in virtue?
for no possession, no heaps and Su^mes of gold and silver are to be preferred
or so much to be esteemed as virtue. Oh immortal Gods: Men do not perceive
and understand what a great revenue and rent, moderate expenses and parsimonie
is. But now I will leave to speak of this beggarly lick-penye that prowleth
all for gain, and speak a little of prodigal spenders and unmeasurable
wasters. There is some one that may dispend yearly in lands six hundredth
Sestertia, whereas I can skantly dispend one hundredth, the rofes and sielings of
his Mansions and Countrayhouses are gylte, Every Sestertia is in v^^lue 25.
french^ crown
and the floores are paued with Marble: to him therefore taking this way, and
still desyring Pictures, Tables, furniture and implementes of householde and
costly apparaile, all that Sum of monay will not only be to little to
discharge the same, but also will sca^tly suffice to pay the annual usury for
the loan thereof.

I do so bridle my affections under the Reins of moderate expenses yt out of
my small yearly living, somewhat remains at the years end. Whether is rich
therefore? He that lacks, or else he that has more then he spends? He that
is needy or he that has plenty? he whose possessions the greater they be, the
more is required to the maintainaunce of his port and state, or else he that
paiseth his expenses and charges according to the rate of his ability. But
what mean I to speak of my self, who peradventure being a little seduced by
reason of the iniquity and corruption of times and manners, am not clear from
the infection of this error? Marcus Manilius who lived of late years even in
our fathers days and remembrance (because I will not always speak of such
precyse fellows as the Curij and the Lucinij were) was a very poor man, for
he dwelte in a small Cotage in the streat called Carinde, and had a plotte of
ground in Licopum. Are we therefore richer though we have greater possessions?
would god we were. But the measure of money and riches is not in the estimacion
and value of the wealth, but in the orderly kind of living and yt virtues use
and occupation thereof. It is a great fee and pencion, not to be greedye and
covetous of monaye, not to be a buyer and seller or a common Chapman. But to
be contented with a man's lotte and vocacion, and to live, quietly and well in
his calling, be the greatest and sureste richesse in the world. For if these
craftye Pricesetters of things do set a high price upon their Meadows and
certain rooms, because such kind of possessions can not lightly take any
harm by such accidental means as other wares might: how mutch more is virtue
to be esteemed, which can neither be forciblye taken nor privily stolen away
from a man, which also can neither be lost by shipwreck nor yet by casualitye
of fire, and is never changed by any alteracion of tempests or times? Wherewith
whosoever be endued, are only rich. For they only do possess the things that
are both fructuous, perpetual and permanent, and they alone (which is the
infallible property of richesse) are contented with their substance and state
whereunto they be called. They think that which they presently enjoy to be
sufficient, they covet nothing, they lack nothing, they feel not themselves
nedy of any thing, they crave and require nothing. But wicked persons and
covetous pinchepenyes, because their possessions are uncertain and casual,
and ever are desirous to gather and scrape more, in so much that there was never
yet any of them found, that thought himself contented and pleased with his
present store, are not only to be reckened wealthy and rych, but rather very
poor and beggarly.

FINIS.
SCIPIO HIS Dream.
AFTER my coming into Aphrique being Marshal or Tribune to the.iiii. Legio^
of Souldioures) as you know) Anitius Mannilius being then Consul, I was
desirous to do nothing so much as to visit king Masinissa, one that for
good causes and just respects bears most unfeigned goodwill to our house
and family. Before whose presence when I came, the old king louinglye
embracinge me in his arms wept, and with in a while after looked up toward
Heaven and said: I render thanks unto the O sovereign Sun, and unto all
you other celestial Bodies, that before I depart out of this life, I do see
within mine own Territory and kyngedome yea and under the roof of my house
my most beloved P. Cornelius Scipio, with whose only name I am refreshed and
comforted. For the remembrance of that most noble and inuyncible manne, never
departs out of my mind. Then began I to question with him concerning the
state of his kingedome, and he me of our common wealth, and so with mutche
talk to and froe had, we spente that day.

But afterward being entertained with Princelye furniture and courtesy, we
continued our talk till far in the night, the old king speaking of
nothing else but of Africanus, and having in fresh memory not only his
valiant acts, but also his wise and pithy sayings. Then after we were gone to
bed, I being both weary with my iournaye, and having over watched my self
before, slept more soundly then I was wo^te and accustomed to do. Here me
thought (I think verily it was because we had talked of him before, for it is
commonly seen that our cogitacions and talk do represent and cause some such
thing in our sleep as Aennius writes of Homere, that is to say such as the
mind wakinge used oftenest to think on) Africanus appeared and showed
himself unto me in such a manner of shape, whereby he was better known of
me, then he could have been by his own person. Whom after that I knew,
truly I shiueried and was sore afraid. But (quoth he unto me) be of good
chere, and lay aside all fear O Scipio, and commit well to memory such things
as I shall tell thee. Do thou not se yonder City, which having been once
hertofore compelled by me to yeald obeysaunce to the Roman people, renueth
^lde grudges, seeks new wars and cannot be quiet? And sheewed Carthage unto
me from an high and stelliferous, clear and lightsome place: to the besieginge
and conquest whereof thou now come, being now in manner but a private
Souldioure, this same shall thou being Consul subuerte and destroy within
these two years, and shall thereby purchasse and win a Surname to thy self,
which thou have as yet of us by descente of enheritaunce. And when thou have
spoiled and overthrown Carthage, made a solemn Triumph of victory, borne yt
office of Consul, and have been Ambassador into Aegipt, Syria, Asia and
Greece: thou shall being absent, be chosen and elected the second time Consul,
and shalt be the victoryous General of a mighty battle, and shalt
atchieue a most noble enterprise in sacking and utterly ruynating Numantia But
when thou shall at thy retourn enter into the Capital, riding in a Chariot,
thou shalt, find the Commune wealth merueilouslye frusshed and disquieted
through the ruffling stir and procurement of my Nephew.

Herein O Africanus it shall be very expedient and needeful, that thou set to thy
helping hand, and show forth for thy Countraies sake and behoufe, the haulte
courage and undaunted prowess of thy mind, wit and counsel. But of that
time. I do se as it were the way of fate and destinye to be very doubtful. For
when thou come to be seven times eight winters and so^mers old, and that
these two numbers, whereof both are accounted full, the one for several cause
from the other, shall accomplish and make the fatal term of the years thou
shall live with a natural circuit, upon thee only and thy name shall the
whole city lean and repose her trust. Thee shall the honorable Senate
reverence, thee will all good men honor, thee will all fellows and
confederates of the Roman people regard, thee will the Latins adore and trust
to: in thee only shall the save guard and preseruacion of the City consist. And
to be short, thou being enstalled in ye office of Dictator, must redress the
abuses of the Common wealth and set ye same in good order, if thou may escape
the cursed hands of thine own kinrede and lignage. At this last talk, Laelius
with pitiful scritches cryinge out and all the residue greatelye sorowynge,
Scipio myldlye smiling said: I pray you not awake me out of my sleep, be
quiet and hear the rest.

But to the end Africane, yt thou should have the more will and animosytie to
defend the weal public, make thy sure account of this: that unto all
those, which have been mayntayners, ayders and encreasers of their Countray, a
certain and difinite place is hear in Heaven apoincted, where they in blessed
state shall live everlastingly. For there is nothing that can be done on earth,
which pleases god the most high and mighty prince of all, the protectoure and
Gouernoure of this whole world, then mutual counsayles and Assemblies of
men lynked and combined together with faithful society and brotherly
fellowship, which are called by the name of Cities. The upright Magistrates
and mayntayners whereof, departing hence, shall hither return. Here albeit I
was sore afraid, not so much for dread and fear of death, as for the
treacherous conspiracy and unnatural dealinge of some of mine own
kinsefolke, yet demanded of him, whether he were living, and my father Paul,
and others more, Whom we supposed and thought to be dead. Yea undoubtedly (quoth
he) they are alive, which are delivered out of the bonds of their mortal bodies
as out of a prison. But that which you call life, is death. Yea, behold where
thy father Paul comes toward thee. Whom when I saw, certes I shed great
abondance of tears. But he embracinge and kissinge me, badde me surceasse
from weepinge, as soon as I had left weeping and was able to speak. I beseech
you most holy and worthy father (quoth I) seeing this is the true life (as I
hear Africane say) why do I linger and tarry on earth, and not hasten and make
speed to come hither to you? Not so, (quoth he) for unless god, who is the
owner of all this Temple which thou see, dismiss and loose the from the
custody of thy body, there can not be any entry or passage open for yt to
com hither. For me^ be created to this end and condition, yt they should Manure
and inhabit yt round Globe or Ball, which thou see in the middle of this
Temple, called the earth. And to them is infused and given a mind out from
these everlasting Lights, which you call Planetes, and sterres, which being
perfect round and Bowlewise, inspired with divine and heavenly power do finishe
and execute their Reuolucions, Circles and Orbs with marvelous celeritie and
quicknes. And therefore Publie, it behooves both the and al other godly
persons to keep still your minds within the custody of your bodies and not to
depart out of your mortal life, without the commandment of him that first
gave and inspired the same into you, least in so doing, you should seem to
refuse and start from ye function and office that is unto you apoincted and
assigned by god But Scipio, see that thou embrace and maintain justice and
piety as thy grau^dfather here before thee, and I thy father which begot
thee, have done. Which albeit it be great toward our parents, and kinsfolks,
yet namely and especially it is greatest and most to be required to our native
countray: and yt life is the right way into heaven, and into this fellowship and
company of the^ which have now already finished their natural race on earth,
and being dismissed out of their bodies do inhabit this place of joy which
thou sest. The place was a very whit and shining circle, resplendant among
flames which you borrowing and taking a name from the greeks) do term and
call the mylkie circle. Mil^ way, ^led ne^ of son^ Mati^ streat^ of so^ way t^
Iame^
Whereupon I perusing al things, all the residue seemed excellent and wonderful.
And there were those sterres which we never saw from the place and they were al
such a great bigness, as we never thought they had been. Among who^ that was the
leest, which being furthest of from heaven and nearest to the earth, The ^one
^he no ^t but ^he ^nne. ^e least ^d ster^ ^fectly ^e, is big ^the ^ole ^the.
^raga^.
shyned with borrowed light: and the globes of the Stars were a great deal
bigger then the whole Earth. Now ye earth it self seemed so small to me, that
I was even ashamed of our Empire and Seigniorye, being so small, that we did
enjoy and occupye but as it were a small prick or poinct of it. Which when I
beheld and looked on more stedfastlye, I pray the (quod Africane) how long
will thy mind be bound and fixed to the groundward? Markest and considerest
thou not into what Temples thou art come and arrived? behold, all things are
compacted and framed with nine Orbs or rather Globes, whereof one is the
uttermost Heaven, which compasses and contains all the others within it: the
most Sovereign and omnipotente God holding and contaynynge the others, in
whom are fyxed those sterres, which roll about, and are carried with
perpetual Reuolucions. Under who^ are seven, Sat^ ye hi^ and wes^ vii ^nets^
shet^ cour^ 30. y^ Iu^^ pers^ met^ cour^ 12. y^ Mar^ death cour^ 2. ye^ The^e
nes c^e is inar^ year. ^ Ven^h Merna^ ^rye i^c^on^^ like t^ Sun^
which make their course backward, with contrary motion to the Heaven. Of
whom, that possesses one Globe, which on earth is named Saturn. Then next
unto it, is that prosperous and luckie brightness to mankind which has to name
Jupiter. Next is he, that is ruddie and dreadful to the earth whom you call
Mars. Then almost under the myddle region, the Sun reigns as chief, the
guide the Prince and the gouernoure of the residue of the Lights, the life
giver, the mind and temperature of the world, being so great and so big in
quantity, that it pearceth and fills all things with his shyninge. Him as
waiters do follow one course of Venus and an other of Mercury. And in the lowes
circle, A^ mone^ death cour^ 28 d^
the moon lightened with the raines of ye sun has her course. Beneath the
Globe of the moon, there is nothing but mortal, transitory and corruptible,
saving only the Souls which almightye god has given and inspired into
mankind. Above the moon all is eternal and incorruptible. For the earth which
is myddle and the nynth, is not moved, and is lowest of all others, and unto it
are al ponderous and heavy things carried with their own swaye and mocion.
Which when I as one greatly astonned, much mused and meruailed to se, after I
was come to my self again: what sweet noise and melodious harmony is this
(quoth I) yt thus delights and fills mine ears? This is (quod he) a tune
and note compacte with uneven distaunces, but yet according their rated
proporcion distinct and different, which is caused and made through the swift
moving and sway of these same Orbs: which temperinge sharpes with flattes
equally makes diverse tunes of harmony: for truly such great and swifte
motions cannot be moved and incited with silence: and it is according to natural
course and order, that the extremes on the one side should give a flat sound
and on the other a sharp For which cause, the highest course of the starry
Sky, whose whirling about is vehementer and quicker, is moved with a sharp and
a shril sound, but this lowest course of the moon is moved with a very base and
flat sound. For the earth being the ninth, is lumpish and immovable, and
sticks fast always in the lowest seat, Venu^ and Me^curie The teuar^ numb^
has ^ it man and mi^^ call c^ clusi^
compassing and beclipping the middle place of ye world. And those viii.
courses, in which is one self same strength and force of twain, do make seven
notes distinct with distaunces, which number is in a manner ye knot of al
things. Which learned men perceiving and imitating with strings and songs have
opened away to themselves to have access into this place: as there has been
some others, who being men of most pregnaunt and excellent wits, in their
life time, honored and applied divine studies.

This sound so filled their ears that they became therewith dunch and deaf.
Neither is any sense in you blunter or duller, as it is in them which dwell
near where the river Nilus at the place called Catadupa, falls down from
very high and steape mountains with a most violent and hedlong fall, in such
sort, that the people which dwell and inhabit nere therabout, for the
incredible greatness of the noise and sound are generally al deaf. And this
noise of the whole world by reason of his most vehemente and quick conversion
and moving is so great, that the ears of me^ are not able to convey and
comprehe^d it: like as you are not able to look stedfastlye upon the sun
dyrect against you with your eyes, but with the rays and beams thereof your sight
dazeleth and your sense is overcome. Although I greatly wondered hereat, yet
did I now and then cast mine eyes toward the ground. Then spoke Africane unto
me saying: I perceive yt thou yet beholdest the seat and habitacion of me^:
which if it seem unto thee (as in is it deed) very little and small, cast thine
eyes always toward these heavenly things, and contemn those mortal and
human matters. For what celebritie of fame can thou obtain by the talk
and report of men, or what glory can thou there win, that is to be
desired? Thou see ye habitable places that me^ have on earth to be in shyre
places and narowe corners, yea and in the same also which are but as it were
certain spots or pricks where they do inhabit, thou see great desertest and
wast wilderness to be laid between and interiected. And also thou see them
which dwell upon the earth to be not only so interrupted and disseuered in
situacio^, yt nothing between them can pass from one to an other: but partly
they dwell a wry from you, partly overthwart to you, and some directly against
you, at whose hands you can not look to receive any glorious fame and renown.
^is is ^auie ^he ^nde^ and ^o^ of ^eth.
Thou see also the same Earth environed and compassed about, as it were with
certain gyrdles, whereof thou see two most diverse and contrariouslye
distante, one from the other, lyinge under the Poles of heaven on both sides,
to be never with out extreme chilling and frost. That which is in the middle and
is the greatest, is broyled with continual and excessive heat of yt parching
sun. Two are habitable, whereof the one is southward, and they that dwell
therein, do set their feet against yours and belong no thing to your kind. The
other which lies toward the North wherein you dwell, mark how slender a share
and portion comes to your part thereof. For all the earth which is inhabited of
you, narow at the Poles, broader at ye sides, is a little small Island compassed
about with that Sea which on earth call the Atlantic, the great and the maine
Ocean Sea. Which notwithstanding these his glorious names and great titles)
how small it is thou see: from these inhabited and known lands, was either
thy name or the name of any of us, able to reach either beyond this hill
Caucasus which thou see, or else to swymme over yo^der River Ganges? who in
the rest of the uttermost parts of the East or West, North or South shall
hear tell of thy name? These being amputated and cut of, (...)
certes thou well seeste in what narrow straictes your glory is able to
extend it self. As for them that shall speak of you, alas how long shall they
speak? Furthermore if your sequel and posterity were desirous and wylling to
blaze abroad and leave to their posterity the worthy praises of every one
of us, which they have heard of their fathers, yet by reasonne of the deluges
and invndacions of waters, and the burnings of lands which of necessity must
happen at a certain time, our glory which we may attain, shall be not only not
eternal, but also not of any continuance. And what skilleth it to be talked
of and remembered of them, which shall be borne hereafter, sythens there was none
of the^ which were borne before: who doubtless were neither fewer in nu^bre, and
certes were better me^ a great deal? Especially since among them unto whom the
report of our fame may be heard, no man is able to bear any thing in memory,
ye space of one year. For como^ly men do reckon a year only by the course and
race of the sun, that is to wit, of one Planet. But when all the signs and
stars of firmamente are come again to the same poinct, from whence they once
set out, and begin again to renew their former description of the whole
Heaven, after long space and tract of time: then may that be truly named the
Turning year, This in 1500 years
wherein how many me^sages are contained, I dare scarcely tell. For as the sun
seemed to be Eclipsed and dimmed at that time, when the Soul of Romulus
ascended into these Temples, so when soever the sun in the same part and in
ye same time shall again be obscured and darkened, then (all the sterres and
signs being revoked back to their self same first beginning) account thou
and recke^ it for a full a complete and a perfect year. And this know further,
that the twenteth part of this year is not yet expyred and ouerrunne.
Therefore if thou despair of thy retourn into this place, wherein al things
are for noble and worthy personages, how much worth then is this fadinge glory
of men, which ca^ scarcely last and reach to a little part of one year?
Therefore if thou will lift up thine eyes on high and view this habitacion and
eternal mansion, thou shall neither be affectioned to give thy self to the
talk of the vulgar people, neither repose thy hope and confidence in wordlye
promotions and advancement. For it behooves that virtue her self must with her
allurementes draw thee to the true honor and renown. What others do speak
and talk of thee, let the^ look to it themselves, but yet talk they will. But
al their talk is both enclosed within the straycts of those regions which
thou seeste, neither has their talk been of any man perpetual: it both dies
when the men dye, and is utterly quenched with ye oblivion of posterity. When
he had thus said, certes (que I) O Africane if to the well deseruers of their
country, there lies as it were a path open to the entry of Heaven, albeit
from my childhode I walking in my fathers stepps and yours, was nothing behind,
to aspyre and further your renown, yet now seeing so great a reward set out
and propounded, I wyllendeuor my self far more diligently. Do so (quod he,
and make thy sure account of this, that it is not thou, which art mortal, but
it is this body of thine, neither art thou yt which thy outward form and
shape declares, but the mind and soul of every man is he, and not that figure
and shape which may be poyncted and showed with the finger. Therefore know this
yt thou art a god, if forsooth a God be that, which lives, which feleth, with
remembers, with forseeth, which does so rule, govern and move that body whereunto
it is appointed, as yt most high prince god does this world. And as god being
himself eternal, does move this world being in some part mortal: so the mind
being sempiternal does move the body being frail and tra^sitory: for yt which
is ever moved is eternal. But that with brings mocio^ to an other, which shame
is moved from else where, when the moving has an end, it must needs have an end
of living also. Therefore that only which moves it self, because it never
forsakes nor leaves it self, never truly ceasseth it not to be moved.
Moreover this is ye fountain and beginning of mouinge to other things that are
moved, And the beginning has no original: For all things proceed and spring
from a beginning but it self ca^ be made of nothing. For that which should have
generation elsewhere, could not be a beginning: so therefore if it never spring
and begin, neither does it ever dye. For the beginning being extinct, neither,
shall it self ever grow again of an other, neither shall it create any other
of it self. For of necessity all things do spring from a beginning. And so
it comes to pass that the beginning of moving is, because it is moved of it
self, and it can neither bread not die: or else the whole heaven would fall
down, and all nature of necessity would cease and not obtain any force
and power whereby it may be moved with his first impulse and mocion. Since
therefore it plainly appears, that what soever is moved of it self is
eternal, who is he yt dare to deny this nature to be given to minds? for
that is without life, which is moved with external force and motion: but yt
which is a soul, is moved with internal mocion, for this is the nature and
power that is peculier to a soul. Which if it be one alone of al, which
moves it self, certes it was neither borne, and also it is eternal. This see
that thou exercise in the best things. And the best cares that a man ca^ take,
are such as te^d to ye avail and profit of out country. In which cares the
mind being enured and practiced, shall have speedier access and arriual into
this habitacion and ma^sion place: and the soever shall it do so, if then when
it is enclosed in the body, it surmount abroad, and beholding those things
that are outwardly, shall greatly wythdrawe it self as much as is possible
from the body. For the minds of them that have enthralled and given
theymselues to bodilye pleasures. and have made themselves as it were the bond
slaves and mynisters thereof, and by the egging and procurement of sensual lust
and appetite obeying Pleasures, have profaned and violated the Laws both of
God and man, when they be dismissed and delivered out of their bodies, they are
tumbled and tossed about the earth, and do not return into this place, till
they have been pursued and turmoyled many hundredth years, He departed: and I
immediatlye a wooke out of my sleep.

FINIS.
Tho. Nevvton

Jmprinted at London in Fletestreate near to S. Dunstones Church by Thomas
Marshe.


