AN Epistle or letter of EXHORTATION Written in Latyne by Marcus Tullius
Cicero, to his brother Quintus the Proconsull or Deputy of Asia, wherein the
office of a Magistrate is connyngly and wisely described.

Translated into english by G. G.

Set forth and authorized according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

PRYNTED AT LONDON BY Rouland Hall, dwelling in Golding lane at the sign of
the three arrows. 1561.

GODDRED GYLBY TO THE READER.
WHERE AS MEN are now a days here in England glutted as it were with gods word,
and therefore almost ready to vomit up again ye which they have received,
lothing ye sermons and despising the preachers, some turning to curious arts,
and some co^temning al arts and sciences, some Epicures, some Atheistes, and few
or none do standforth as fathers to us yonglings to bid us follow their
fotesteppes in virtues and godliness: We the youth of this realm are drawn
into diverse and sundry doubtful ways and wandering bypathes, and many of us
by poverty and other calamities are oppressed at our first breathing and either
know not which way to direct our studies or else want help to go forward and
are cut of in the first herb according to the Proverb. This is one thing
also that greueth us: we see them that are wise and learned altogether
contemned and despised, and they often times are compelled to go and seek to
the rich and noble men's houses, but the rich will not come to their houses nor
greatly delight in their companies. And though this be some cause that Petrus
Crinitus lib. 7. 14. de honesta disciplina.
Aristippus answered to Dionisius why the learned do haunte the houses of the
rich and the wise many times go and seek to the wealthy and not they to the
contrary: for that the wise do know what the rich do want and the welthy
worldlings can not se their want, as he says. Yet in these our times we may
find other matters that co^pelleth the^ to seek to such as be in power and
authority. For iniquity does abound in these latter days and the pore ar
oppressed by the mighty. And as I do here mine elders talk. The laws are
good to right the wrongs, but lawyars do not their duties. Justice is good,
but the Justices care not for poor men's causes. Officers are enowe and well
provided for in all places but these officers understand not their office and
duty or if they do understand it, they will not do it, and which is the worste
of all, when they do it not, they may not be told of it, especially by a man
that is learned in gods word. For what ca^ he skyl of civil offices say these
politic officers. Thus is the rule of all equity openly contemned. Therefore
not seeing whereunto in this my youth I could direct my studies yet neither
wheri I cold be better occupied both for mine own learning, and for the
instruction of such politic men as will vochsafe to read heathen writters,
though they regard not the scriptures: I have translated as I could into our
native language, the notable epistle of that famous wise and politic man M.
Tullius Cicero unto his brother Quintus, wherein justice and the right use of
an office is so well and politikely described that the politic heads may
learn thereby to put good things in practice and need nether to be ashamed of
the author who was a man of singular wisdom and great experience, nor of the
matter which is an instruction of the Magistrate meet for all ages: if God
grant me any ability to express it. Take these first fruits of mine infa^cie
in good part, so and you shall encourage me to farther trauails. My father
co^ma^deth me to follow labor and to suffer others to seek for honors. Fare
you well in the Lord. At London the vii. of July, the year of our Lord. 1561.

The exhortacion OF MARCUS TVLLIVS Cicero unto his brother Quintus.
ALTHOUGH I DID not dout but that both many messengers and also fame it self
should by her swyftnes preuente my letters, and that thou should sooner here
tell of others that the third year was added to our desire and to thy labor:
yet I thought it necessary that I should also send thee a message of this
travail. For as for the former letters not in one but in many, when as now
other men had despered of yt matter, yet I did put thee in hope that you should
shortly depart, not only that I might comfort thee as long as it might be,
with a pleasant opinion and persuasion: but also because I did not mistrust but
that the matter might be brought to pass, for so much as both I my self and
also the pretors were so earnest in the cause. But now because it is so come to
pass that neither the Pretors with their riches nor we with our diligence can
do any good, it is a very hard matter not to be grieved therewith: but yet it
is not meet that our courage which is exercised in doing and suffering great
things should be broken or cast down with sorrow. Me^ should be most sorry for
that which comes by their own fault.
And because men oght to be most sorrowful for those things which are come by
their own faut: there is good cause why it should more grieve me then the, for it
came to pass by my fault otherwise then you thought, both when thou tokest thy
journey and afterward where by letters thou did go about yt a succsessor
should not be detained to thee the first year. The which matter whiles I look
to ye sauegard of our co^federates whiles I resist yt impudency of certain
mercha^ts and whiles I desire yt our glory should be augme^ted by thy virtue I
wrought nothing wisely, and specially seeing ye I have committed this fault that
the second year should also bring ye third. Tyhe which thing because I confess
it to have been my faut, it belongs to thy wisdom and humanity to provide and
to bring to pass that this which was unwisely done of, me should by thy
diligence be corrected. Now if thou do raze up, thy self more earnestli and
diligently of all sides to get a good name so that you do not now strive we
others but we thy self and if thou do stir up thy whole mind care thought and
Desire of glory over comes al.
desire of glory which ouercometh all things sureli this one year which is
added to thy travel shall both bring us ye joy of many years and also make
our posterity glorious where fore first I desire this of the yt you be not
dyscoraged nor discomforted and that thou suffer not thy self to be over
whelmed with over great business as it were with a floode but contrariwise that
thou raise up thy self and resist it and also that thou wyllyngly set thy
shulders against the weight of thine affairs: For thou do not rule that
part of the common wealth wherein fortune has much power but yt part which
may be governed chiefelye by reason and diligence. And if I did see that thy
dominion and authority had been prolonged to thee whilst you wast occupied by
some great and dangerous war my heart would quake: to consider that the
power of Fortune at the same time also should be prolonged against us. But
now since yt part of the common wealth is committed to thy charge in the
which Fortune either has small oir else no part of rule at all: even that
which seems unto me wholly to consist in thy virtue and moderation of mind. I
thyncke we need not fear any privy traynes of enemies, any open war, any
rebellion and falling away of our fellows and confederates, any lack of wages
or provision for corn, nor finally any sedicion of the army, which have often
chanced to most wise men: that as The Magistrate is compared to a shipmaister.
shypmasters be they never so connyng can not resist the force of ye tempest so
they cold not withstand the violence of fortune But to thee is given the
greatest peace and tranquillity taht can be, so that it is of force enough to
ouerwhelme a shypmaister that slepeth but a wakyng governor would be delited
therewith. For first the province does consist of such co^federates as are of
al kind of men most gentle: and secondly of such kind of citezins as either
because they are publicans ar joined unto us by very great frendshyp, or else
because they ocupy merchandise are very rich and judge that by the means of
our consulshippe their riches are in safety. (But it may be said) that even
amongst this kind of men there are great controversies many wrongs are done
and weighty contentious a rise. As though I should think that thou had
nothing to do. Yes I know that there is great matters to do and such as need
great aduisement. But remember that I do attribute some thing more in this
busies to aduiseme^t then to fortune for what bysynes shall it be to bridle them
which are under thy governance if thou ca^bridle thy self? But let that be a
great and hard matter unto others as it is very hard: yet to thee both it has
been allwaies very easy yea and in deed oght to have been so seeing yt thy
nature is such as seem yt it would have been moderat without learning: but now
such learning is joined with the good nature as were able to bring into order
and beautify the worst disposition that ever man had. Thou truly thy self
shall withstand the greedy desire of money of pleasure and of all other things
as in deed thou do: and then shall thou have any great to fear lest thou be
not able to repress a wicked merchant or a covetous publicane?

As for the Grecians when they sethee so they will have the in such admiration
as they are wont to have some noble man mentioned in their chronicles or else
thy will think that thou so divine a man, art come down from heaven into the
province.

Which things I write not as though I exhorted thee to do them but that
thou should reioise that thou do, and have done them already:

For it is an honorable thing to have had great power in Asia for the space
of three years and so to have behaved thy self that no old monument, no
painted table no precious vessel, no rich apparel, no notable bondsman, no
beauty of any person and finally no barge^ of money of which things there is
great store in this province could ever bring thee from the pathe of exact
integrity and continence. And surely what can be more notable or more to be
desired then that this virtue this temperaunce and moderation of mind, should
not be hid in the dark but be set forth in the broad light of Asia and in the
eyes of a most noble province and in the ears of al people and nations: The
presence of a good officer oght not to be terrible but comfortable.
in so much as they are not made affraide by they iourneys: they men art not
burdened with charges nor troubled with receiving thee: but rather where so
ever thou come there is incomparable joy both publikly and privately. for so
much as ye city where thou entrest does seem to have received a defender and
not a tyrant: the house were thou lodgest, a gest and not a robber? But as for
these motters, use it self has taught that it is not in ough that thou thy
self should have these virtues but that thou ought to look about diligently
yt in ye preservation of this province not only thou but also all the
ministers of thy dominion should be have them selves after the same sort both
toward our fellows and citizens and also to all the common wealth. Howbeit
thou have such embasadours as will have regard of their own worship: of whom
Tubero is the chief both in honor dignity and age: who I think (chifely
because he writes an history) may choose many men out of his own chronicles
which both he will and also may follow. But halenius is our own both in
heart and good will and also in following our kind of lif. And what need I
speak of Gratidius? Whom I know of a suerty so to care for his own estimacion
that for the brotherly love toward us he cares also for ours. Thou haste also
a questor which was not chosen by thine own judgment but such a one as was
given by lot. Who^ it behooves both of his own accord to be moderate: and also
to obey to thy will and commandment. Of whom if paraduenture any were some
what covetous thou should bear so long with him until he of his own head did
violat those laws to the which he is bound not permitting yt he should abuse
to lucre and gayn yt power which thou had committed to him for honor: for
surely it pleases me not (chiefly seeing that the manners of this time are so
much declined unto so great lightness and ambition) that thou should search
out all filthiness and examine every one to the uttermost but to commit so much
to every one of them as he may be trusted wythal. And amongst those whom the
commonwelth it self has appointed to be as fellows and helpers with thee thou
shall be above the^ only in those poi^ts which I have That is to give every man
that which he may be trusted vvithal
heretofore prescribed. As for the^ whom thou have with thee either of thy
householde or of the necessary messengers whom men use to call as it were of the
pretors band both the deds and also the words of these men The magistrate must
answer both for the words and deeds of their families and train which they
choose to have aout them.
must be performed by us. But thou haste those men with thee whom thou shall
have occasion to love doing well, or else if they have not respect to thy honor
thou may easily correct. Of whom because thou wast vnexpart it seemed that
thy good nature might easily have been deceived: The berter a man is the sooner
is he begyled
for the better a man is, the less he suspecteth another to be evil But now
this third year has as much integrity as the two former, yes and by
experience is made more ware and diligent.

The cares of a magistrate.
Let thine ears be such as may be taught to hear those things which they
hear in deed, not such as men may whisper in salfely and faynedly for lucre
sake.

The ring and signets
Let not thy ring be an instrument not regarded but as thou thy self: Not a
minister of another man's pleasure but a witness of thy will.

the sergeant and purseuant.
Let the Purseuant also be in that degree in which our aunceters would have him
which did give ye office not as a benefit but as a labor and charge and did
not rashly commit it to any, but to them whom they had brought to liberty,
over whom yet they had authority little less then over their servant.

Let the Sergeant be a mesenger not of his but of thy gentleness: the mases.
and let them bear those mases and pollaxes rather for a sign of dignity the^
of power. The love of subjects
Finally let it be known to al ye province yt ye sauegard of ye families good
name and substance of al men over who^ thou bear rule are most dear unto
thee. Yea and let them think on this, that Bribe giuers and bribe takers.
thou will not only be an enemy to them which take bribes, but also to them
that give bribes if thou know it. And surely no man will give bribes when he
does once perceive that nothing can be obtained of thee by their means which
make a show as though they could do much with thee. Neither do my words tend to
this end that I would have thee either to rigorous or suspicious against thy
officers: Of trusty officers.
For if there be any which for the space of two year were never suspected of
thee to be covetous (as I hear of Cesius Cherippus and Labeo, and because I
know them I believe it) there is nothing which I think thou may not be bold
to commit to them or any other of like fidelity. But if there be any in whom
thou have spied or of whom thou have perceived any thing: trust him with
nothing nether commit to him any part of thine honor. Of new friends.
And if you have found any man in the province it self, which is all together
become thy familier friend which was before unknown unto us: look diligent how
much thou may trust him: not but ye there may be many good men in the province:
but this may be hoped for to judge it, it is dangerous. For the disposition of
the nature of every man is cloked with many foldes of dissemblyng and covered
as it were with certain veales: the forehead the eyes and countenance will
deceive a man often, The tongue of man.
but the tongue oftnest of al. wherefore how can you find such me^ as being drawn
with the lust of many would lack all those things from ye which we cannot be
severed and that should heartily love thee being a strunger and would not rather
seem to bear the good will for there own profit sake? It seems to me a great
matter specially since those men do allmoste love no private men yet that they
should love all they pretors. Of which sort if thou haste known any which
loved thee more then the time (for so it might be) reken him gladly amongst
thy friends. But if thou shall not be sure of yt thee is no kind of men whose
familiarity thou oght more to Beware of money men.
beware of because they know all the shifts of money and do all things for money
yea and care not for his estimation with whom they intend not to lead their
life. yea and amongst the Grecians some familiarities must be avoided except of
few men which follow ye manners of old Grecia. But many of the^ are so
deceitful and unconstant and by their long bondage have learned to much
flattery. Whom I would all to be liberally enterteined but a few of the best
must be chosen for hospitality and frendshippe. Their great familiarity is
not to be trusted (for they dare not be against our wills) yet they envy both
our contry men and their own. But now since I will be so ware and so dilligent
in such things wherein I am afraid lest I be to hard: how think thou I would
have servants ordered? Whom as in all places so chiefly in the provinces we oght
well to govern. Of which kind many things may be spoken: but this is both
shortest and may easily be kept in memory that they do so behave them selves
in these iourneis in Aslya as though they were travailing in the hye way called
Appia And let them think ye there is no difference whither they com to Tralles
or to Formie. And if there be any of thy servants very faithful the charg of
servants
let him have ye oversight of thy house hold and private business. But as for
such things as do apperteine to thy office and authority or to any part of the
commonwealth let him not once meddle therewith. For many things wherewith
faithful servants may be trusted yet for aduoiding of ye speech of people and
ill report oght not to be committed to them. But I cannot tell how my folk is
fallen to a kind of instruction where as in ye beginning I did purpose no such
thing. For what should I instruct him who^ I know in this matter to be as wise
as mi self and by reason of use mroe wise? But I though yt if ye authority of
my counsel were joined to those things which thou do thy self they should
be more pleasant to thee.

The foundation of true honor and dignity
Wherefore let these be the foundation of thy dignity first thy co^tinence and
integrite secondly ye sham fastnes of all them that are with thee (yea and look
thou very wearly and diligently have choice of familiarities as well of men of
the province as of the Grecians) and last of all a grave and constant order of
thy house. Which things seeing they are comely in these our private and daily
orders: in so large a dominion which has so corrupt manners and in a province
that so easily corrupts others thy must needs seem divine and heavenly. This
government and order may uphold ye severity in making statutes and decrees
which thou haste used in those things by ye which we have purchased certain
privy grudges whereof I am very glad: Unless you think that I am moved with the
complaints of one Paconius who^ I know not what he is who is not so good as a
Grecian but rather a Mysian or Phrygian or else with ye words of Tuscenius a
vile and mad man out of whose filthy mouth thou have gotten with great equity a
most shameful lust. But we cannot snsteine these and other things which thou
have decreed in this province full of severity with out great te^perance of
life. Wherefore look ye there be great severity in judgments Let not favor
pervert judgment.
so yt it be not changed for favor but yt it be kept equal and upright. But
surely it shall little preuil if you do justice uprightly and diligently unless the
same be done of thy compartners to whom thou have granted some part of yt
office. And surely me think there is no great diversity of business in
governing Asia but yt it does only consist in giving just sentence in the which
the fashion how to govern a province is evident. Consta^cy Gravity.
Constancy also and gravity must be added which may resist not only favor but
also suspicion.

Love. Humanity Diligence.
Whereunto must be joined promptnes to hear gentilnes in discerning and
finally diligence both in making and giving answer and also in reasoning. For
these things friend was not lightly wont neither without a cause to lay out of
his hands for there is no deinty of a diligent and moderat government in them
omitted. If Cyrus who knew he should never be a private man so diligently
observed these things with what care oght they to keep and observe them which
bear rule with this condition that they must depart from it again and return
under obedience of those laws by order of ye which the goueruaunce was
committed vntothe^? The felicity of the subjects is the end of government.
And surely me thinks yt this oght to be ye end of all things that the rulers
should do. Namely that they which be under their dominion may be as happy as is
possible: which thing is greatly commended both by true report and also by all
men's talk ye thou do chiefly esteem it and have so ever sense you came first
i^to Asia. And it is surely yt office not only of them which bears rule over
ye confederates and citizens of Rome but also of him which has ye charge of
servants yea and of dome beasts to care for ye profit and utility of them
over whom he bears rule. And I perceive ye all men do agree yt in such kind
of things thou art as diligent as may be and that ye cities are charged with no
new debte nor impost but yt many towns ar by thee discharged of their old
debte which was both great and grievous yea ye many which were fallen in decay
and almost desolat are by thee restored of who^ there is one most city of
Ienia and an other of Caria Samus and Halicarnassus: and yt there is no
dissension nor discord in the cities: and that you do provide that ye cities
be ruled by ye counsel of the nobles: that ye robberies of Mysia are taken away
and murders in many places are stopped and caused to cease and that peace is
established i^ the whole province and not only ye those theftes which were
committed by ye way side and in the fields arceased and put away but also many
mo and greater theftes and murders which were committed in cities: and that
false accusation which is the most cruel servant of the pretors covetousness is
taken away and removed from ye same and from goods and from ye welthy quietness
of rich men: yt the costs and tributs of the cities are equally susteimed of
all which inhabut ye borders of ye said cities: ye one may easily have acces to
thee yt thy ears are open to ye complaints of all men ye no man's poverty or
misery is not only not shut out from ye common assemblies and from thy
judgment but not so much as from thy house and privy chamber: and finally ye
in thy hole dominion there is nothing grievous nothing cruel and that all things
are full of cleme^cy meknes and humanity. And surely how great a benefit is it
ye thou haste delivered Asia (though we sustain great grudge) from ye iniust
and grievous tribut for and public buildings? for if one noble man do complain
openly yt thou had taken from him two hundred.M. pence because you had
commanded yt money should not be appointed for common places: how much money then
should be paid if money should be laid out for all them which make plays at Rome
ye which thing was also ordained? How be it we have suppressed these
complaints of our citizens moved we this counsel which I cannot tell how it is
praised in Asia but at Rome it is had in no small reverence: because yt where
as ye cities had decreed money for our church and monument which thing they had
done of their own accord both because of my great deserts and also for thy
great benefytes: The magistrate may take money of the subjects for the building
of temples and monumentes.
yea and ye law did specially except that it should be lawful to take for a
church or a monument and because that which was given should not perish but
should remain in ye ornaments of ye church so yt it should have seemed to have
been given not so much to me as to the people of Rome and to the immortal
Gods? yet I thought that that in ye which the dignity yt law yea and the will
the^ which did it, did consist, ought not to be received both for other causes
and also that they to whom it was not dew nor lawful might bear it more
willi^gly. The governor must be careful both for religion and justice to make
the people blessed.
Wherefore labor with all thy mind and diligence to kep ye trade which thou
haste as yet used that thou live and by all means defend them and study that
they be as blessed as may be whom the senate and the people of Rome have
committed to thy power and fidelity and of whom they have given thee charge.
And if so be yt by lot thou had ben made ruler of Africa or of Spain or of
france which are fearce and barbarous people: yet it were a part of thy
humanity to provide for their commodity and to look to their health and profit.
But since we bear rule over yt kind of men in whom not only humanity to self
is but also from who^ it is thought to have proceeded to others we oght
specially to show humanity to them of whom we received it for I will not be
ashamed to say this (chiefly in that manner of life and in those noble acts in
which there can no suspicion of sluggishenes or of lightness remain) yt we have
obtained these things which we have gotten by those arts and studies which
were given us by moniments and doctrines of Grecia. Practice humanity to
wards the^ of vvho^ we learn it.
Wherefore besides ye common loyalty and fidelity which is due to al me^ we
seem to owe it chiefly to these men yt by whose precepts we have been taught
among them we should set forth those things which we have learned of them.
And surely Plato the prince both of wit and learnng thought When shall realms
be blessed and happy.
that then common welthes should be happy when either learned and wise men
begin to govern them or else when they which did govern the^ did bestow all
their study in learning and in wisdom. For he thought ye this ioining to
gether of auctoriti and wisdom was the preservation of cities which thing
perchance happened to all our common welthe but now surely it is chaunsed to
this thy province that he should bear chief rule therein, who had bestowed
much time and diligence even from his youth in learning virtue and humanity.
Wherefore see that this year which is added to thy labor may also seem to have been added to the welthe of Asia: for Asia was more happy in reteining thee the^
we were in leading thee of thy journey from us but bring thou to pass that
our earnest desire may be mitigated with the joyful remembrance of ye
province: for sei^g thou have ben more diligent then any man in deserving that
so great honors should be given thee, as I know not whither they were given to
any besides, thou must needs be a great deele more diligent in mainteining
these hounours. Howbeit I wrote to thee heretofore what I did judge of this
kind of hounors. The right judgment of honors.
I thought them allwais if they were common to be vile: if they were rodeined
by necessity of time light: but if they were given for thy deserts (as it is
come to pass) I thought that thou oghtest to be very diligent in mainteining
of them: wherefore seeing in those cities thou have ye chief rule and power in
ye which thou see the virtues consecrated and set in the number of the gods
thou must remember in all things which thou do ordeine, which thou do
decree, and what soever you do what thou owe to so great hope which men have
conceived of the, likewise tot he judgments of me^ and finally to so great
honors. The which office is such yt thou mist care for all men that you give
remedies for the discommodities of men and provide for their well th, as thou
would both be called and counted the parente of Asta. But to this thy will
and diligence the publicanes are a great hindrance: whom if we resist we shall
separate from our friendship that company which has done very much for us
and which by us is joined to the common welthe and not only from our
friendship but from the common welthe also: but if we do in all points suffer
them we shall suffer them utterly to perish for whose sauegard not only, but
also for their profit we oght to care. This is the only difficulty, if we
will wey it a right that is in all thy dominion: for a man to be continent to
bridle all his lusts to keep under his own household and to observe equity
in judgment to show himself ready to consider suits to hear men and to admit
to his speech is more glorious then hard. For it consists not in any labor
but in that a man can find in heart to do it. The publicans and toll
gatherers are commonly extorcioners.
As for that business of the Publicans how grievous it is to our fellows we
understand of the citizens which in pleding that ye tole should be taken out
of Italy did not so much complayn of the tole as of certain injuries done by
the tole gatherers. Wherefore I am not ignorant what does chance to our
fellows in those far countries, since I have heard in Italy the complayntes of
our citizens. In this case so to behave thy self yt thou may both satisfy
ye publicans (specially seeing the things of the common wealth are but lately
recovered) and not suffer our fellows and confederates to perish requires a
divine virtue which is thine. And first of al as for that which is most
grievous to the Grecians yt they are tributaries ought not to seem so grievous
for so much as before they were subject to the people of Rome by their own
ordinances they were so. As for the name of a publican they can not reject it
seeing that without a publican they cold not pay ye tribute which Silla did equaly
apoint the^. Yea and it may be well known yt ye grecia^s are no ge^tler in
gatheri^g of their tributs the^ our publica^s by this ye al ye Caunia^s now of
late fled out ye isles, which were assigned of Silla to ye Rodia^s, to ask help
of ye senate desiring rather to pay tribute to us then to ye Rodia^s: wherefore
nether oght they to abhor ye name of publica^s which were alwais tributaries:
nor they reject it which cold not of them selves pay tribute: nor they refuse
it which did require it. Yea and let Asia remember this thing yt if it were not
holde^ up with this government yt it should lack no misery which ca^ com either
by war with farren nations or yt comethby inward discordes. wherefore tribute is
given.
But seeing that this government ca^ not be retained without tribut let her
willi^gly be content for a little part of her fruts to redeem perpetual peace
and quietness. And if so be yt they ca^ willingly abide ye name and company of
publica^s all other things which you do by counsel and wisdom shall seem more
easy to the^: yea and they may in making often their berges have respect not to
ye law of ye Censors but rather to ye commodity of doing their: business and to
ye deliverance from grief, yea and you may do yt which you also have done very
well and at this time do, to wit, that you tell the^ what dignity is in ye
publicans and how much we are dou^d to that company that setting aside
authority and force of power and scepter you may join the grecians and
publicans together in favor and authority. Yea and desire this of the^for
who^ tho haste done so much, and which are bound to thee in all things that
they byt their gentleness would suffer us to keep and preserve yt friendship
which we have with the publica^s: but what do I exhort to thee these things
which you canste not only of thine own accord do without any man's teaching but
also have for the most part already done the^? For most honest and the greatest
felowships do not cease daily to thank us: the which thing was therefore more
pleasant to me because that ye grecians do it. But it is a hard matter to join
those things together in one accord which are diverse in commodities in profit
and almost by nature. And surely I have written those things which are written
above not to teach thee (for thy wisdom needs no instruction of any man) but
the rehearsal of thy vertew when I wrote did delight me: Although I have longer
in these letters then I would or then I thought I should have been There is one
thing which I would not cease to command thee nor will suffer thee so much as
in me lies A praise with an. exceptation.
to be praised with an acception: for all that come out of thy province do so
report of thy virtue integrity and humanity ye in thy greatest praises they
except, only wrath: the which vice as it seems Wrath the sign of a light
mind.
to be ye point of a light and unstable mind in a customable and private kind
of life: Nothing is more uncomely the^ to join bitterness of nature to
authority.
so nothing is more uncomely then to join bitterness of nature to hie
authority: wherefore I will not now undertake this to declare unto thee those
things which are spoken of most wise men concerning wrath both because I will
not be ouerlonge and also because you may easly know it by many men's writings.
Neither think I yt we ought to let pass that which is ye property of a
letter, to wit, yt we let him to whom we write know those things whereof he is
ignorant. Yea and al bring us word of this that there is none more pleasant
then you when anger is absent: wrath. banisheth all humanrte.
but if any man's wickedness and perverse manners do move thee then you art so
angry yt all men find lack of humanity in thee: wherefore seeing we are com into
this kind of living not so much for desire of glory as by ye thing it self and
by ye course of fortune that ye posterity should alwais talk of us: let us
beware as much as in us lies and as much as we ca^ do yt no notable vice be
reported to have been in us. Neither yet go I about this (which as in all ages so
especially in our age it is a hard matter) to change ye mind and if any thing
be thoroughly grown in our manners sudde^ly to pluck it away: A remeady against
wrath.
but I do admonish thee here of yt if you can not altogether avoid this vice
because anger does take place in thy mind before ye reason ca^ provide for it:
that you should before prepare for thy self and ever more remember that you must
resist wrath: and when as it does most move thee then you oghtest most
diligently to Rule thy tongue.
bridle thy tongue: which seems sometimes to be no les virtue then not to be
angry at al, for to be angry is not only a point of gravity but sometime also
of ge^tlenes: but to te^per ye mide and talk when a man is angry or les to
keep silence and to hold in thine own power ye mocio^ of thy mi^d and grief,
although it is not yt point of perfect wisdom it is a point of no final wit: and
herin they bring word you art much more easly and gentle: nether do we hear of
any more grievous mocio^s of yt minds or despitful words which are both far
dista^t from lerning and humanity and also contrary to authority and dignity
for if the wrath can by no means be appeased it is to great bitterness: but if
it may be easily entreated it is great lightness Of two evils the less is to be
chosen.
which for all ye (as choice may be in evil things) It is better to be to
gentle then to cruel.
ought to be chosen before bitterness. But because in the first year there was
much talk of this I think because that ye iniueries of men their covetousness
and pride did chance contrary to thine opinion and did seem intolerable: and
the second was much more gentle because yt both custom and reason and (as I
think even my letters) did make thee pacient and gentle: An old officer must
so grow in virtue that he must be altogether fauteles.
as for ye third year it oght so to be amended yt no man may have occasion to
rebuke the least thing yt may be. But now I do not handle the matter with thee by
ye way of exhortacio^ and precepts and teaching but by brotherly prayers that
you would set thy whole mind care and thought to gather and win ye praise
and commendation of all men on every side. Now if so be yt our matters stood i^
any mean state of talk and commendation: I would require no notable thing
norani thing of thee above the common custom. But now because of the dignity
and greatness of those things in ye which we have been occupied unless we get
wonderful great praise of this province I ca^ not se how we ca^ avoid
wonderful great rebuke and shame, for such is our state that al good men do
both favor it and also require and look for all diligence and virtue at our
hands: but al wicked men because we have taken in hand a perpetual battle
against them would be content upon very small occasion to put us to rebuke.
Wherefore since yt this stage whereupon we stand is filled with the celebrity of
al Asia, and in quantity is ye greatest in judgment, the best learned, and by
nature so far sou^dyng that the voices and signs ar brought to rome I beseech
thee labor and do thy diligence that you may not only seem to have been worthy
those things but also to have ouercom al things by thy cunning. And because
that I among other kind of officers have obtained ye administration of the
common wealth in the city, and thou the governance in a province, although my
part do give place to no man, yet look that thy part overcome all other:
remember that we do not strive of ye glory that remains and is looked for, but
for that that is gotten already which was not so necessary to have been desired
as it is mete it should now of us be maintained. And if so be that I might be
separate from thee in any thing I wol desire no more then this state which I
have already obtained. But now the matter goes so that unless all thy words
and deeds do agree with the things which we do. Here I shall think my self
to have gotten nothing by my so great labors and so great dangers of all the
which thou haste been partaker. But seeing thou above all others have helped us
to get great renown: surely thou ought to labor above all others to preserve
the same. For thou must not only have the estimacio^s and judgments of those
men which are now living, but also of the^ which shall be hereafter. We judge more
equally of them that are departed because toward the^ envy cease.
How be it their judgment shall be more right seeing it is fre from slander and
il will. Finaly you ought to think thus yt thou do seek glory not only for
thy self: ye which thing though thou did yet thou would not contemn
it, especially seeing that thou have consecrated the memory of thy name
amongst wonderful great monuments. But this thy glory must be communicate with
me, yea and delivered to our children. Wherein thou must beware lest if thou be
negligent thou do not only seem to have cared little for thy self, but also to
have envied thy friends and kinsfolk. Nether do I say this yt my words should
seem to awake thee which before did sleep but rather to have pricked thee
forward which before did run for you will always do that which thou haste
done, that al men may praise thy justice, temperancie, severity and integrity.

But an infinite desire of glory does wholly possess me for the singular love
which I bear to thee. Howbeit I think thus yt Asia is now as well known to
thee as every man knows his own house, and since yt to thy great wisdom so
good experience is joined I think there is nothing which does appertain to
praise which thou do not well se and which thou do not daily very well
remember without any man's exhortacion. Love causes long letters.
But I because yt when I read thy letters me think I speak with thee, am most
delited we thy longest letters and I am often times very long my self in
writing. Now last of al I desire and exhort thee to this that Good officers
must be like good poets.
as good poets and as cunning plaiers do so that thou in the last part and
co^clusio^ of thine office and business be as diligent as may be that this
third year of thy government may seem to have been most perfect and most
adorned as though it were the third act in a comodie, the which thing you
shall easly bring to pas if you think yt I (whom alone you rather do please
then al others) am al wais with thee and present in all things which either thou
do or say. Now it remains to desire thee that if thou love me and
would have al thine to do well thou have regard to thine own health and
welfare.

FINIS.

