THE FIRST Book of Tullies Offices translated Grammatically, and also according
to the propriety of our English Tongue;

For the more speedy and certain attaining of the singular Learning contained
in the same, to further to a pure Latin style, and to express the mind more
easily, both in English and Latin.

Done chiefly for the good of Schools; to be used according to the directions
in the Admonition to the Reader, and more fully in Ludus lit. or
Grammar-Schoole.

At LONDON, Printed by H. Lownes, for Thomas Man, dwelling in
Pater-noster-rowe, at the Sign of the Talbot.

1616.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Master Doctor Hunton, D. of Physic, and his most
reverend and worthily respected friend, I. B. wishes all true happiness in
Christ both now and evermore.
COnsidering with my self (right worshipful) to who^ I should dedicate this
small part of my school endeavors, I could bethink me of none to whom it
might be more justly due, then to you; since I owe unto you even mine own self
and all my later travels: for I must needs acknowledge your unfeigned love and
tender care for me, to the glory and praise of our blessed God, and to bind
my self still more unto his heavenly Majesty, and even unto your own self
to testify my thankfulness, all my days. Because, besides all your regard
which you have ever had of my health, when as through long affliction by
sundry most heavy trials, and by ouer-toyling both mind and body (in lack
of all meet helps and means, to perform that service which I had entered into,
and so much desired for the good both of Church and common weal) my life was
become most miserable and a burden unto me, by changing the best humors of my
body into lumpish melancholy, it pleased him, to make you his principal
instrument for my recovery and restoring. Whereby in stead of that heavy
dumpishnesse, by which I was made unfit for my calling, and almost utterly
overwhelmed, as you well know; that our holy and most gracious God, to be
praised for evermore, has caused me to find even heaven upon the earth, so
that I can again rejoice in all my labors, and especially in my calling: by
which, my joy in him, is unto me indeed a continual feast, yea my strength
and health, and such a portion, as in regard whereof I can account basely of
all earthly things. And secondly, for that love and favor, which you have
continually showed to all my poor labors, so encouraging me therein. And
moreover also, for that you are able to judge of the hope of this Work, for
the perpetual benefit of Schools, by the more speedy and certain attayning
both of the singular matter and latin contained in that book of Offices,
which I have thus far proceeded in. For the book it self I cannot but admire,
according to the high commendations given unto it, by the most learned: who
prefer it before all others of this kind, which have been written by the
light of nature alone; for that it does so divinely point out the true pathway
to all virtue, and guide unto a right course of life, as if it had received
direction from the sacred Scriptures themselves. So that it i^ graced, as a
mirror of wisdom, a fortress of Justice, the teacher of valor, a school of
temperance, the jewel of co^linesse, containing in so few leaves, so many
excellent instructions, as no other the like. Whence, Erasmus wonders tha^ a
heathen man should write so much to heathens; admireth the equity in it,
holiness, verity, sincerity, agreement of every part with right nature and
amongst themselves, as also the conscience he requires especially in
governors, the amiable beauty of virtue which he sets before the faces of
all. Yea, he thinks it strange, that he should write so religiously and so
like a Divine, of helping and rele^uing one another, of procuring and
maintaining friendship, of the contempt of those vanities which the common sort
of Christians do so doat after. And finally judges it most worthy and meet
for schoolmasters to teach, and scholars to learn; and not only for all
young men, but even old men themselves again and again both to use and
peruse. Inregard of all which, so many learned men have not disdained to bear
it in their bosom, lay it under their pillows, make it their companion, which
way soever they have gone. Now what I have done herein, that all who are
truly studious of good learning, though children in years, may more easily
behold and be more fully partakers of these rich treasures, for which the
Learned have had this Work in so high estimation, I refer to all who are
truly learned to judge, and chiefly to your self who are better acquainted
with my endeavors in it. For my self, my hope is, that whereas it has formerly
seemed to sundry so obscure, as that they have read with very little fruit or
delight, because they have not understood it; that they may now at the first
view, liuelilie behold the true luster thereof, and receive most sweet
content, to cause them ever to delight therein. Which if the Lord shall
vouchsafe, as I undoubtedly trust, I shall receive the end of my desires, and
be encouraged to proceed to the accomplishing of the rest of it, and ever to
be employed for the common good, until I have spent my last breath for the
same. In which unfeigned desire, I rest and ever shall

Yours in the Lord most beholden, John Brinsley.

An Admonition to the loving Reader.
Understand, first, the matter contained in each Chapter, by reading over and
observing well the inmost column. Then, try so far as need is, for the true
construing and resolving thereof out of the Author it self, both for Grammar
and phrase; and also to read it into a good english style, by the help of the
second column and the margents. And lastly (which is the principal) practice,
out of the same ( viz. the second column and margents alone) to read daily
some part of it, out of the translation into the Latin of the Author, studying
it out of the English alone; trying by it, and a little help of the latin
book, where need requires (as I have advised chiefly for Corderius) how near
you can come to express Tully liuelily for Latin, phrase, composition, and
whatsoever elegancy besides. After each sentence, reading the Author, to see
how near you came, marking where you failed, with the reason of it. So in a
School, causeeuery one in a Form, or so many as you would have to practice
this together, thus first to construe extempore daily every one a piece out of
the Latin books alone, without the English; only one of them by the English
to ask and direct, where any one fails. Afterward, or every other day, let
every one read his piece out of the English book alone, none having any Latin
book, but only some one to be in the place of the Master, to observe, and
where they fail to direct; first, by asking of him who reads, and then of
others, after helping; so posing for sense phrase, latinisme, both out of the
Latin, and English, as is directed in the Grammarschoole. And then, I hope, you
will in time seal with me upon experience, what^oeeuer I have written,
concerning the benefit of such Grammatical translations in this behalf. For
the worth of the books of Offices themselves, I refer thee to the Epistle
Dedicatory. For the slips which thou shall meet with herein, which I know to
be very many (as in all the rest of my labors, chiefly through want of meet
helps of books and conference, and also time to peruse in the midst of my
continual employments in my Calling, wherein I am still laboring as God
vouchsafes mercy, not only for the private, but for thine and the public
good, as also through my absence from the Press) let me entreat thy courteous
advice and direction to the Printer, that he may convey it unto me, as some
lovingly have done: future Editions may reform it. So shall I be both more
encouraged, and furthered for performing my promise in finishing my intended
labor, for the general good; and the blessing thereof shall return into
thine own bosom. And thus desiring ever the assistance of thy prayer for me,
to his heavenly Majesty vvhos^ all my travels are, I commend thee to hi^ grace;
and rest

Thine wherein his goodness shall enable I. B.

The letter q, prefixed to words, directs to the Grammar order, in such places
where the Grammar order would not stand wel^ with our tongue; the Star *, to
variet^ of phrase, the better to express the matter,

The first Book of Marcus Tullius Cicero, [Written or de^icated] to [his]
son Marcus, of Duties.
concerning Duties, to Marcus [his] Son.
CHAPTER 1.
The sum.
Argument [of thi^ first chapter] [gathered or set downe] by D. Erasmus.
by Desiderius Erasmus of Roterdame.
TVlly] exhorts Cicero, his son.
his son^e Cicero by his own example, that he give not himself wholly unto.
addict not himself to any simple study [or any one kind of ^earning].
one studi^ alone; but that he ^oyne together Greek [studies] with Latin
[studies].
join Greek with Latin, and the virtues of speech.
eloquence of speech with the science or skill.
knowledge of Philosophy. And then.
Afterward science or skill.
to the * to the intent that he may make him etc
end to make him to m^ke it better.
more attentive, he commends [vnto him] thi^ part of Philosophy, which is
concerning Duties; ch^fly by two names or co^mendations lays open most
largely [or most w^de] to every respect [viz. part or purpose] of life.
for two causes especially; either for that the use o^ it, ch^fly by two names
or co^mendations lays open most largely [or most w^de] to every respect [viz.
part or purpose] of life.
extends it self most largely to every condition of life: or because this
one is comm^n to ^ll philosophers amongst themselves.
this alone is common to all sorts of Philosophers. Lastly, he witnesses
himself to follow the Sto^ks chiefly in this disputa^io^.
he affirms, that he chiefly follows the Stoiks in this discourse, because
these have appointed the very b^st, the end or limit of etc.
determined the very best of the end of goodness, unto which ^ end.
whereunto al Duties are referred: whereas Epicurus measuring the chief good
by pleasure, and Aristo, Pyrrho and Herillus taking away [all] election or
difference.
choice of things, have ouerturned also.
subverted the very nature of duty.
even the nature of duty.

1 Albeit
ALthough (son Marc.) ^t behooves or is meet for you
concerns you, hearing.
having heard Cratippus now a year, and that at Athens a famous City and
university in Greece*
Athens, to abound or flow.
to be throughl^ furnished with rules and instructions or lessons.
precepts and institutio^s of Philosophy, for that chief.
singular authority both of your reader Cratippus, viz. your teacher.
teacher and also of the City; of which the one*
the one whereof may increase or furnish you.
store you with knowledge, the other viz. the City may store you with, etc.
the other with examples; 2 yet as I my self have joined together. always
Latin to Greek for my profit.
have ever for my benefit joined Latin studies with greek q exercise of
speaking [eloquently] or practice of pleading.
neither have I do^e that only in Philo sophy, but also in the exercise of
speaking [eloquently] or practice of pleading.
practice of oratory; I think the same to be don of you.
so I think you ought to do the same that you may be equal.
alike in the skill or knowledge.
faculty of both kinds of speech: to which thing indeed.
unto which purpose we (as we do seem or are thought.
suppose) have brought great furtherance.
help to our men.
countriemen; that not only [they who are] rude or unskillful of Greek letters
or learning.
ignorant of the Greek tongue, but also the learned, may think that they
themselves have gotten something,
themselves to have attained somewhat, both to speak [(...)] and also to judge.
both to further their eloquence, and also their judgments. 3 Wherefore you
shall learn indeed, of the prince.
chief of the Philosophers of this time.
age: and you shall learn as long as you please.
will; yea and you shall owe to will or be willing.
ought to be willing, ^o long as it shall not repent you how much you increase
in learning.
profit. But yet you reading
reading our works [or writings.]
my books greatly.
not much diss^ting from the q disagreeing.
Philosophers of Aristotle's ^ect.
P^ipateticks (because we both desire.
we desire to be both followers both of Socrates and Plato, who was Aristotle's
schoolmaster and Socrates scholar.
Socratians and Platonians) do as you think good.
use your own judgment* concerning the mat^ers themselves. (For I hinder
nothing.
I do not hinder you) but you.
but surely you shall make [your] Latin speech.
tongue more full or copious.
flowing by reading our writings.
my works. Neither verily.
yet would I have this to be thought [or deemed] spoken proudly or vauntingly.
thought to be spoken arrogantly [of me] for granting [or giving place] to
many the skill of playing the Philosopher.
yielding unto many the knowledge of Philosophy, if I take upon me that.
assume that unto my self, which is the property of an Orator.
properly belongs unto an Orator, [that is] to speak fitly or properly.
aptly, distinctly and finely.
eloque^^ly, because I have consumed. [my] age.
spent [my] time in that study, I seem to challenge it as by mine own right,
in some manner.
I seem after a sort to challenge it [as] by my own right. 4 wh^refore.
For which cause (son Cice^o) I Exhort you very greatly.
I earnestly exhort you, that q studio^sly or diligen^ly.
you read my Cicero.
carefully not only my orations, but also these books [which I have (...)] of
Philosophy, which have equalized themselves almost o^ wel-n^ere unto those.
viz. are become so many as the other.
have now almost made themselves equal unto those: for there is a greater
power of speech.
force of eloquence in those [orations.]
in those, yet this equal of one ^ort.
even and temperate or mean, viz. not too lofty nor too base.
middle kind of style is also to be ado^ned or practiced.
regarded. And truly I see that to have happened as yet to none of the ^recians
the rather because I do not see, that it has happened as yet to any of the
Grecians, that the same man trauel^ed in either kind
in both those kinds [of speech] and followed both that kind of speaking
belonging to the pleading place or the bar.
that lawyerlike manner of pleading, and this quiet.
m^lde kind of disputing or reasoning.
discoursing: except peradventure Demetrius Phalerius may be had or reckoned.
accounted in this nu^^er; [who was indeede] a sharp disputant.
a subtle disputer, an orator smally [or nothing] vehement.
but no great Orator, yet pleasant.
sweet, that you may know [him to have been] Theophrastushis scholar.
the scholar of Theophrastus. But how much we have profited in both [kinds]
let it be the judgment of others.
let others judge: certainly we have followed both.

I truly do judge also Plato to have been able to speak most grau^ly and most
copiously, if he would have ^ndled [or followed] that lawyer like kind of
speaking.
And I think verily, that Pla. also (if he would have practiced that Lawyerlike
kind of pleading) could have spoken most gravely and with great variety of
words.
most copiously: and Demosthenes t^ have been able to do ^rimly and
glitteringly [or notably].
that Demosthe. could have don elegantly and finely, if he had ^ept those
things which he learned of Plato, and had been willing to pronounce them.
would have pronounced the^. Also I judge after the same manner.
So I judge likewise of Aristotle and Isocrates, both of whom.
either of which being delighted with his own course.
study, despised the other.

5 But when as.
whereas I had decreed or appointed.
determined to write somewhat unto you at this time, and many things hereafter,
I have been most willing.
desired to make my entrance from that.
to begin with that especially, which was both most apt.
fit for your age, and most weighty, or of most importance, or most beseeming.
grave for authority; For whereas many things in philosophy both weighty, and
profitable, are disputed.
For whereas there are many things in philosophy both weighty and profitable,
disputed of accurrately, or very curiously
very exactly and at large.
copiously by the Philosophers, those which have been delivered by them and
given in precepts.
delivered and prescribed by them concerning Duties, do seem to lie open [or
reach the furthest]
to extend most large ly. For no part of [our] life, neither in common matters.
public [affaires] nor belonging to a man's self, or some few.
in private, nor [in matters] common pleas where matters are pleaded for all
sorts, or the Judgment Hall.
pertaining to the common pleas where matters are pleaded for all sorts, or the
Judgment Hall.
pleading place, nor in common pleas where matters are pleaded for all sorts,
or the Judgment Hall.
domestical businesses nor if you do matters at home
ought alone, nei there if you my thing with or by your self.
have dealing with another, may contract [or make bargaine].
be without Duty. Also all honesty of life is set.
does (...) in practicing or exercising it.
regarding it, and [all] filthiness or ^hame.
dishonestie in neglecting it. 3 And indeed this question is common of.
to all the Philosophers. For who is he, that in no precepts of duty to be
given, or being delivered.
giving no precepts of Duty, dare name himself a Philosopher? 6 But there are
some disciplines [viz. Sects of Philosophers].
sects, which ouerturne.
pervert all duty, having determi ned the ends [or limits] of good things and
evil.
bounds of good and evil. For he that so determines the sovereign good,
that it has nothing agreeable to
con^oined with virtue, and measures the same by his own com modities and not
by honesty, it comes to pass, that this man if he be very like himself.
consent unto himself, and be not ouercomne sometimes.
not sometimes ouercomne by the goodness of his nature.
of nature, can neither love, use or exercise.
practice friendship, nor justice, nor bounty.
liberality. And certainly he can by no means be a valiant [man] judging.
who judges grief to be the greatest evil, or temperate determining or
setting down.
who determines plea sure to be the chief good: which things, although they
are so in readiness, or evident.
apparent, that the matter needs not further debating.
no disputation, yet they are debated.
disputed of us.
by us in another place.

These Disciplines.
Sects therefore, unless they will (...) from, themselves.
if they will be agreeable to themselves, can say nothing concerning Duty.
neither any precepts of duty can be ^et down [as] firm, stable, etc.
Neither can any precepts of Duty [which are] sure.
firm, stable, and conjoined or coupled.
agreeable to nature, be set down but either of them.
by the^ who [affirm] only [honesty] [to be desire^] or by them who say.
hold honesty to be most earnestly desired for it self.
that honesty is especially to be desired for it self. And therefore that
doctrine [or the right of giving precepts] of duty, does p^oly belong.
the giving precepts thereof, is proper of.
peculiar to the Stoiks, and Academiks. and Peripatetiks, because the opinion
of Aristo, Pyrrho and H^rellus, has been hissed out of the schools.
hissed out long ago; who neuertheless should have.
might have had their right or due.
lawful liberty, of disputing.
discoursing concerning Duty, if they had left any choice of matters.
things, that there might be.
have bin an entrance to the finding out of duty. 7 Therefore truly we do
follow chiefly the Stoiks at this time, and in this question.
We therefore at this time, and in this question, do chiefly follow the
Stoiks: not as expounders or translaters.
Interpreters, but as we are accustomed.
wont, we will draw out of their fountains, so much as shall seem good by any
means.
by any means shall seem good, in our judgment and arbitrament [or opinion]
according to our mind and judgment.

This first chapter co^^ineth the exordium or entrance into the whole work:
and in it T^ully directing all his speech to his ^onne,

1.
Puts him in mind what knowledge in Philosophy might be looked for at his
hands; to wit, that he should be fully furnished with the grounds thereof.

1. Because of the excellenci^ of his reader, viz Cratippus.

2. In regard of the time wherein he had heard him* viz. ^ whole year.

3. For the place where, viz. at Athens a famous Vniuersi^ie. And that because
as his rea der might store him with precepts, so the place with examples;

2
He exhorts him to join the study Greek and Latin together;

1. For that he himse^ had done so, both i^ the stndie of Philosophy and
Rhetoric;

2. To the end that he might be equal in both tongues, viz. both Greek and
Latin;

3. That thereby he might benefit his countri^men; not only the rud^r sort,
but even the l^arned also, as he himself had done before, both for speech and
judgment*

3
He wills him that (though he was a hearer of Cratippus the chief
Philosopher of that age, and do encourage him thereunto that he should he^re
him as long as he would, and as he perceived himself ^o profit by him, yet) ^ee
would ^ade his writings also: and that 1. Because his writing^ did not much
diff^r from the philosophy of the Pe^ipatetiks, which his son followed* (^ith
they desired to be both followers of Socrates and Plato) though concerning that
sect, he leave him to his own judgment.

2. For that reading his writings he should make his latin tongue more copious.

3. Because howsoever he yielded unto others the superiority in the knowledge
of Philosophy, yet he challenged unto himself a pre-eminence amongst
Orators; for that he had spent his whole time therein.

4
To this purpose he persuades him further, to the diligen reading not only o^
his orations, but also of these his three books of Offices, which were now
equa^ in number ^o those three volumes of Orations: and this likewise,

1. Because though his Orations were more lofty, having more power of eloquence
in them; yet this middle kind of style, which he uses here in his Offices is
also to be regarded.

2. for that he observed that none of the Gretians had attained heereunto, to
excel in both these kinds of style.

Except peradventure Demetrius Phalerius, who was no great Orator, though a
subtle disputer, and yet of sweet speech, that he might be known one of
Theophrastus scholars.

But for his own skill in both kinds, he refers it to the judge meant of
others.

Also he thinks that Plato could have don excelle^tly, if he would have
followed that kind of style.

And in like manner Demosthenes, if he would h^u pronounced those things which
he had learned of Plato.

So likewise Aristotle and Isocrates, if they had not despised one another,
being either of them too much conceited in his own study.

5
He shows why he purposing to write many things unto him, began with these
books of Offices.

1 For that this work was most meet for them, both for the age of the one of
the^, and the gravity of the other.

2 Because although there are many other things in philosophy very profitable,
yet none so profitable as this concerning duty; nor any that extends it self
^o largely;

Since no part of our life can be without duty, in what matters soever, or
howsoever we are to deal in private or in public.

And moreover for that all honesty of life is in regarding duty, all
dishonesty in the neglect of it;

3 Because this question of Duty belongs to all Philosophers,

Neither dare any assume the name of a Philosopher, unless he have given some
precepts of Duty;

6
He gives him warning of some sects of Philosophers (...) pervert al duty in
setting down (...) the limits of good and evil.

Because ^e that determines the chief good to be in any thing but in virtue,
or in that which is agreeable thereunto, cannot be virtuous, nor so much as put
any virtue in ure, unless he be ouercomne by the goodness of nature.

Neither he that judges the chief evil to be in a^y thing but in vice, or
that which belongs thereunto, or follows thereupon.

These things he omitteth; as both apparent* and handled by him in another
place.

And moreover he shows, that these Sects can say nothing concerning Duty;

Nor that any can set down any right precepts of Duty, but Nor that any can
se^ down any right pre cepts of duty, but o^ ly they who hold (...) tue to be
the chief good.

And therefore the only the Stoiks, Ac^demiks, and Peripa^cians can give
p^cepts of duty;

for that the opinion of other Philosophe as of Aristo, (...) and Herillus,
(...) been hissed out o^ t^ schools long befo^

7
He therefore professes that he chiefly followed the Stoiks in these books
so far as he thought ^t, for his purpose, to set down the truth; and so
drew out of their fountains, what so ever seemed necessary hereunto.

Chap. 2.
q It pleases [or liketh] therefore.
* I think it therefore meet, since all my disputation [or the whole dispute
following]
all my discourse shall be concerning duty.
of Duty, to describe or set down.
define before.
first what duty is: 2 which I wonder.
marvel to have been omitted of Panetius.
that Panetius pretermitted. 3 For every institution or book of giving
precepts.
treatise of any.
concerning any matter, which is taken in hand.
undertaken from reason. viz by an orderly course.
according to reason, ought to come or proceed from a definition.
begin with a definition, that it may be understood, what it is concerning
which the discourse is.
whereof it is disputed or entreated.
discoursed.

Chap. 2.
In this chapter T^ly first declares h^ purpose to began w^ the definition of
D^tie, as most meet; ^r the whole disputatie is to be of Duty.

2. Reproves Pan^tius for omitting it.

3. Teaches that eu^ry treatise ought to ^gin of a definition, ^ the end that
the who discourse may be b^ter understood.

Chap. 3.
The Argument.
BEcause the word, term denomination.
name of Duty is not simple: v^z. of one kind only.
of one sort, neither could be fitly defined in the general, or according to
the general.
in general* he expreseth it by a division, which being twofold in deed.
in truth is double in word, but the same indeed or in effect.
in substance. He makes also two kinds of Duties, of.
according to the sentence.
opinion of the Stoiks. The one kind.
The one, which they call a perfect duty, and is joined with the end of
goodness, neither does it agreee to or belong.
appertain to any man except or save only.
but only to a wise man. The other is a middle Duty or begun.
The other is of a middle kind, or only begun, which is neither good of it
self nor evil, but is taken or done to to some necessary purpose.
undertaken for some use of life: as for example, to restore aright.
Rightly to restore that which has been committed to our trust to keep, is
of a perfect Duty, or a property or part of etc.
is a work of perfect Duty: to restore, but not aright.
[onely] to restore that which has been committed to us in trust, [is] of.
of (...) (...) perfect [Duty].
an imperfect; si^h that.
whenas no man save only a wise man can restore as right and honesty requires.
aright, but.
though eu^ fools also may restore. And Saint Ambrose thinks, those Duties
which are done.
performed according to counsels or advice, viz. of our selves, without command
or inforcement.
counsel, to be of the former kind; those [duties.]
those which are done only according to the commandment of others or laws.
according to precepts, [to be] of etc.
of the latter: as for example* to ^mploy, govern or order
husband our substance well, may belong to.
appertains to the Duty begun.
imperfect Duty; to bestow upon the poor appertains to the perfect.
to the perfect.

All the question.
EVery question concerning Duty, is double [or of two sorts.
belongs to one of these two kinds* One kind is which appertains to the
determinat, one of good.
end of good things: the other [kinde] is.
the other which is placed.
consists in precepts; by which the use of life may be confirmed into all
parts.
the course of [man^] life may be framed for every condition thereof: Examples
of the former kind are of this sort* or there are such like examples of, etc.
Of the former kind, there are such like examples* as these following. ^hether
all Duties be perfect? Whether one Duty be not greater then another? and
which are of the same kind.
and such as are of the same kind. But of What Duties precepts are delivered
those Duties whereof precepts are given, although they appertain to the
attaining of the greatest good.
the end of good, yet that does less appear, because they seem rather to
belong rather to ^e institution [or orderin^] of the common life.
to belong to the framing of the common kind of life: concerning which it is to
be expressed of us.
we are entreat.
to show our minds in these books.

And also there is another division of Duty.
There is moreover another division of Duty. For there is said [to bee] a
certain mean.
middle and a perfect Duty. I suppose we may call [that] the right.
perfect Duty which the Grecians mame (...): but they call this common office
(...).
but this [we may call] a mean or common.
middle [Dutie] which they call (...). And they define those [Duties] thus:
that they define that which is right, to be a perfect Du-Dutie. But they say,
that that is a middle Duty.
to be a middle Duty, which wherefore it is done, etc.
for which a probable reason may be rendered, wherefore it is done.

Before he defines Duty, he declares that there are two sorts of questions
concerning it.

One sort of them about the end of good things:

The other, concerning precepts of Duty for framing the whole course of life.

And first he sette^ down precepts (...) the former kinde^ 1. whether all D^
ties be perfect, and

And in the seco^ place, he shewe^ his purpose to ha^ dle in this boo^ the
later sort of the former question viz. concerning pr^ cepts of Duty f^ ordering
and fr^ ming the life (...) man.

Afterward he propounds an other division of Duty, to wit, that Duty is
either meant* viz. of a middle nature, or else perfect.

The perfect he thinks to be that which the Grecians call (...); and the
middle, that which they name (...).

Then shows how they define both of them, viz that they define the perfect
Duty to be a right Duty.

The mean to be that, for which a probable reason may be rend^ why it is
done.

Chap. 4.
What way of deliberaliberating [or aduising] in choosing things.
manner of delibe^on [ought to be] in the choice of things.

Therefore there is a triple [or threefold] aduise^ent [or manner of aduising]
in taking counsel, as it seems to Panetius.
THe deliberation then of taking counsel is of three sorts, as Panetius
thinks. For first [men] do doubt, whether that which falls into
deliberation, or comes to be considered of [or to be weighed.]
comes to be consulted of, be honest to be done or dishonest. In
considering whereof, their minds are often distracted into contrary sentences.
opinions. And then or in the next place.
Secondly, they search out or advise.
inquire or consult, whether the thing whereof they take advice, may farther
[them] for the commodity and pleasantness of life, for riches and store or
abundance.
ability and plenty of [all] things, for wealth and power, by which things.
whereby they may both help themselves and their friends.
theirs; all which deliberation falls into the respect.
under the consideration of profit.

3 The third kind of doubting is, whenas that thing which seems profitable,
is thought to be contrary to honesty.
fight with honesty. For whenas profit does seem to snatch to it self, [and]
of the other side,
contrarily honesty, to recall.
call back again unto it self* it comes to pass, that the mind is haled
to and fro.
distracted in deliberating or aduising.
deliberation, and brings a doubtful.
perplexed study.
care of thinking or deliberating.
imagination. 2 Whereas, to pass by.
omit any thing in dividing, is a very great fault, two things are ouer^lipped.
pretermitted in this division: for neither are wont to deliberate only, etc.
for men are not only wont to deliberate whether the matter be honest or
dishonest; 1 but also two honest things being propounded.
of two honest things propounded, whether is the honester; 2 and also of two
profitable things laid before [vs] whether is more profitable. So what reason
[or manner of aduising] he thought to be etc.
that consideration, which he thought to be three foulde, is found to owe, or
that ^t ought.
meet to be diui ded into five parts* First, then we must dispute.
we are to entreat of honesty; but, two manner of ways: then by a like
reason, or as many ways.
in like sort of profit; afterward.
lastly, of the comparison of them.
comparing of them together.

Chap. 4
In this chap^ Tullie in the fi^ place sets dow^ three question which are
usual taking counsel, a^cording to Pane^ us.

1. whether the m^ ter to be consult^ of be honest or d^ honest: in wh^
consideration h^ shows that the are many difficu^ties.

2. whether it be profitable or no, viz. whether it may further our commodities
or pleasures; or more enable us to help our selves and others.

3. when profit seems to fight with honest^; whether is to be chosen.

Because when our profit draws us one way, and honesty another, o^ minds
come to (...) exceedingly d^cted and perplex^*

2
In the second pla^ reproving Pane* (...) omitting (...) in this division,
(...) adds other (...) questions where men are wont deliberate also,

1. Of two ho^ things whether more honest.

2. of two profit^ble things wheth^ is more profitab^

So that he makes five general questions in each deliberation*

The two first concerning honesty.

The two next concerning profit.

The fifth of comparing them both together.

Of the two first he disputes in the first book; of the two next concerning
profit in the second; of comparing them both in the third.

Chap. 5.
The Argument.
Tully does teach in this chapter according to the sentence of etc.
In this Chapter [ Tully] according to the opinion of the aucient Academy, and
of the Storks (who think the chief good to come from Nature, and do mention
this only to be to live blessedly.
affirm, this to be the very thing to live blessedly, [ viz.] to live
according to Nature) does teach, what seeds Nature has sown in us, and what
helps it has added.
given, wherl^ by which, industry and use coming thereunto.
through dili^nce and practice w^e may attain to felicity, whereunto.
whither all things are referred. For, first.
in the first place it has given.
put into every living creature an study or earnest desire.
endeavor of defending it self; which is common to men with beasts by the law
of Nature, and it is called (...), that is.
that is to say, the first according to Nature; an appetite is following.
then follows a^ earnest desire of those things, which are friendly to safety.
furtherers of safety* [^nd] an avoiding.
a flying of those which are hurtful. But moreover nature has added
it has given to man (because he consists not only of body but also of soul.
mind) a force or ability.
power of reasoning, that he may be whole or all.
wholly safe; from whence all arts or sciences.
disciplines, and those moral virtues do go or come.
proceed.

IT is given to * every kind of living creatures by Nature in the beginning or
first of all
from the beginning, each creature should save it self.
to defend it self, life and body, and avoid or fly from.
to shun those things which seem hurtful; and also to seek out and prepare
all things whatsoever are necessary to preserve life.
to living: as, feeding, as dens or hiding places.
dens, and other.
other things of the same kind.

2 An appetite.
earnest desire also of conjunction, copulation or ingendering.
coming together for the cause of breeding.
procreation is common thing of all.
common to all living creatures, and also a certain love.
care of those creatures.
things which are pro^reated or brought forth.
bred.

Buth this does differ chiefly
is the special difference between man and beast. 1 because this.
For that the beast applies.
bends it self so much as it is moved by sense, unto that thing only which
is at hand, and which is present, very little perceiving that which is past.
what is past or to come: but man because he is endued with reason o^
understanding.
partaker of reason, whereby he sees things that follow, or consequents or
sequels.
what will follow, he.
perceives the beginnings and causes of things, also he is not ignorant.
neither is ignorant of the progresses.
proceedings of them, and as it were foregoings or forerunners.
things going before them, he compares similitudes or semblances.
things that are like, and adioyneth and knits together things to come to.
with things present, considers or observes.
sees easily the course of [his] whole life, and prepares thin^s necessary to
rule or govern it.
to the leading thereof.

2 to the living of it.
Moreover the q And.
same Nature does reconcile or gain.
win man to man by the power.
force of reason, to both to a fellowship of speech and a fellowship of life.
a society both of speech and of life, and does breed first of all.
(...) a certain chief.
special love toward them which are procreated.
begotten; and inforceth that a company.
companies of men are willing to be celebrated or gathered by many together.
assembled amongst themselves, and obey themselves.
be also serviceable unto* one another: and for those causes [inforceth them]
to study to provide those things, which may minister sufficiently.
furnish them both to clothing and food or living.
for apparel and also for sustenance; and that not for themselves alone, but
for their wife.
wives, children and others, whom it has dear and ought to defend
who are dear unto them, and whom they ought to defend: which care also does
stir up the minds.
does also stir up men's spirits, and does make them greater to manage their
affairs.
more courageous to do their business. 3 Also the the inquiry and searching
out of the truth is a special or chief property of man.
is especially proper of man.
unto man. Therefore when we are * void of necessary
free from necessary businesses and cares, then we covet.
desire to see, hear and learn somewhat.
something; and we account Al. cogitation.
the Al knowledge of things either secret.
hidden or wondrous.
admirable [to be] necessary to a blessed life.
to live well and blessedly. of which it i^ gathered, that what is true. etc.
Whereupon it is understood, what thing [soeuer] is true, simple, and pure.
sincere, that to be.
that is the fittest to the nature of man.

4 There is adjoined to this.
There is a certain earnest longing for.
desire of soueraintie adjoined to this covetous desire.
love of espying or finding out.
seeing the truth, that a mind well framed of nature.
informed by Nature, is willing to obey no man, but one instructing.
commanding q [a man]
or teaching, or commanding.
governing justly and lawfully for the cause of [his] commodity, wherein
stands.
for [his] commodity sake: whereof arises.
appears [that] greatness of courage and the contempt of humane things.
worldly vanities. 5 Neither indeed is that.
this a small force.
power of Nature and Reason, that this one living creature does perceive what
Order is, what becomes.
is seemly in deeds and in words, what measure [is to be obserued] in de^ds
and words.
what a measure is. And therefore no other living creature perceives the
beauty, grace.
fairness, comeliness and conuenience or agreement.
proportion of the parts of those same things which are perceived by sight.

Which similitude or proportion.
resemblance, Nature and Reason transporting.
conueying from the eyes unto the mind, does think fairness or beauty.
comeliness, steadfastnesse.
constancy [and] order also to be kept.
to be also observed, much more in counsels and in deeds; and bewareth or
takes heed.
is heedfull lest (...) do any thing.
that it does not any thing vncomlily or womanishly.
ffeminately; also that it do not nor think any thing.
neither do not imagine.
think any thing sensually.
wantonly, both in all opinions and.
or deeds. Of which things, that honest thing.
honesty which we seek is framed.
forged and made: which although it be not made noble.
honored, yet let it be honorable: que for enim.
for we say truly, though it be praised of no man, yet it to be laudable.
it is prayseworthie by Nature. you see indeed.
You see doubtless (son Mark) the very form and as it were the face of
honesty: which if it could be beholden with the eyes, it would stir up (as
Plato says) admirable loves.
a marvelous love of wisdom.

Chap. 5.
In this fifth chapter Tully teaches first what is common to all living
creatures by nature: as namely,

1. To defend them selves, lives and bodies, to shun what appears hurtful,
to follow after that which seems good for them.

2. An earnest desire of going together for procreatio^, with a care of their
young.

In the second place he declares the special difference between man and
beast.

1. That the beast follows only that which is present, and whereunto it is
moved by sense, little perceiving what is past or to come.

But man carried by reason, in considering circumstances and comparing things
together, fol loweth what he takes best for the life, and prepares things
necessary for the leading thereof.

2. That men by the means (...) reason ar^ ^ore sociable and desirous to live
in assemblies together, having a special care of their progeny.

And that they a^ also more serviceable one to another studying to provide all
necessaries for themselves, and theirs, and so for all other whom they love,
and ought to defend, as their wives and children and all others who are near
and dear unto them.

Hereby their spirits are stirred up, and they are made more cheerful to
their businesses.

3. A third difference is, that man only searches out the truth, whence he
(...) by all means desirous to learn; and accounts the knowledge of all
secret and admirable things necessary to a blessed life.

The consequen^ hereof.

4. That there is i^ man a certain desire of soueranti^ (...) bearing rule and
(...) obey none but (...) that governs for his benefit.

Hence springs in man that greatness of courage and contempt of humane things.

5. A fifth difference i^, that man only observes order measure and com^nesse
in words and deeds: and taking a proportion from the fairness (...) things
that are seen it co^ueieth it to the mind for framing all speeches and actions
accordingly that it do all thing comelily, no thing vnseemlily.

Hence arises that honesty which is here sought out: which though it were not
seen nor praised of any, yet is praise worthy by nature.

And this he teaches to be the very form of honesty, which seen with ^he
eyes would stir ^p in us a marue^us love of virtue.

Chap. 6.
The Argument.
Of the four chief or cardinal virtues.
Virtues, from whence all the Duties of the common life, or belonging to life.
of the common course of life do flow abroad or proceed.
spring: [as] wisdom, justice, fortitude.
valor and temperance, and of the matter of every one of them.

But All which is honest.
every part or duty of honesty.
whatsouer thing is honest, arises out of some [part] of the four parts.
springs out of some one of [these] four branches or heads
fountains. 1 For it is occupied or conversant.
exercised either in the full perceiving or in^ght, o^ searching out.
wise perceiving of the truth and cunning or policy.
skilfulnesse: or in preserving the fellowship.
society of men, and giving to every body his right.
every one that which is his own; and in the faithfulness of things
contracted; viz faithful dealing in all manner of covenants.
faithful keeping of contracts; or in the strength or worth
greatness and power of a high and inconquerable mind.
hauty and invincible courage; or else in the order and measure of all things
which are done and which are spoken.
and spoken, in which is in.
wherein consists moderation or discretion.
modesty and tempetance. 2 Which four although they be tied or linked, knit
wrapped and folden one within another.
entangled together amongst themselves, yet certain kinds
certain several kinds of Duties spring or proceed.
do grow out of every one of them: as, out of that part which was described
first, wherein we place wisdom and prudence, is in, viz. issues out.
there is the searand invention.
finding out of the truth; and this is the proper office or work.
function of that virtue. For as eueone perceives most of all or especially.
most clearly, what is truest in every matter, and he that can.
can both se^ and express or render
give a reason most wittily and most readily, q he is wont to be reputed
worthily.
to be rightly accounted the most prudent and wise. 3 Wherefore truth is the
subject thereof.
is subject to his, as the matter which it handles, and in which it is
conversant or occupied.
exercised. But necessities are assigned or are the subject.
propounded to the other three virtues, to get and keep those things, in which
the action of life is contained.
whereby the trade of [mans] life is maintained; that both the society of men
and conjunction.
neighborhood may be preserved, and his excellency and greatness of courage
may appear.
shine abroad, both in increasing of riches or wealth
substance, and getting commodities both to himself and his [friends]
his, and also much more in despising these same things. Also order, and
constancy, and moderation, q stead fastness, keeping of a measure.
and those things which are like unto these, are exercised in that kind, unto
which a certain action is to be added.
adjoined, not only an tossing or exercising.
occupying of the mind. For we adding or keeping measure.
applying a certain mean and order to these things which are handled or
meddled with.
practiced in [our] life, shall keep.
observe both honesty and comeliness.

In this sixth chapter Tullie teachete that there are some chief and cardin^
virtues, out (...) which all other d^ ties do proceed: (...) wit, Prudence, I^
stice, Fortitud^ Temperance. Of every of which he first sets dow^ the
definition, the the subjects abo^ which they are conversant.

1. As, that prudence is a virtue, exercised in spying out the truth, and in
cunning.

2. Justice, is in preserving the society of men, and giving every one their
own.

3. Fortitude, in the greatness of an in^cible courage.

4. Temperance, in keeping order and measure in all speeches and actions.

Secondly, he shows how certain several duties issue out of each of these:
as, out of prudence the finding out of the truth.

Because as every one best sees the truth, and can best give a reason
thereof, so he is accounted the most prudent.

3. Thirdly, declares the subjects of these virtues; that truth is the
subject, about which prudence is chiefly exercised.

But certain necessities are the subjects of the other three virtues. As for
example;

To get and keep these things whereby man's life may he maintained, society
and neighborhood preserved, the excellency and greatness of his courage may
be seen, by increasing substance, getting commodities for himself and his,
and in disposing these humane things; are the subjects about which both Justice
and Fortitude are exercised. And fourthly that Temperance is exercised in
keeping order, constancy, and moderation: whence do chiefly proceed both
honesty and comeliness.

Lastly, he notes a difference between Prudence and the other three duties.
That Prudence is only in the exercise of the mind, the other three are chiefly
seen in outward actions.

Chap. 7.
Of Prudence the princess or principal.
chief of all virtues, and what is to be avoided in it, also what is to be
followed.
embraced.

And or but.
NOw of the four chief heads or common places.
places into which we have divided the nature and force or strength
power of honesty; that first which consists in the knowledge of the truth,
does touch chiefly.
especially concern the humane nature or man's nature
mankind. For we all are drawn
we are all drawn and led to a desire of knowledge and science.
skill. In which to excel we account it, etc.
Wherein we think it a goodly thing to pass others.
excel. But we account it both evil and dishonest, etc.
But to ship, to err, to be ignorant, [and] to de deceived, we account it
both an evil thing.
evil and dishonest. In this kind [of vertue] both natural.
being both natural and honest, two vices.
faults must be shunned.
are to be avoided: the one, that we have not or account not.
take not things which we know not, as though we knew them.
unknown for known, and assent unto them rashly.
rashly assent unto them. Which fault he who will fly from.
escape ( and.
as all ought to desire.
to be willing) shall add.
must bestow both leisure.
time and diligence to the matters to be considered.
considering of matters. There is another fault.
The other fault is, that some [men] confer, or bestow.
employ ouergreat study, and much diligence.
too much travel upon things obscure, etc. viz. in dark and hand matters.
upon obscure and difficult matters, and the same [things.]
same nothing necessary, or needless.
not necessary* Which faults being shunned or eschewed.
avoided, what, etc.
whatsoever diligence and care shall be put.
spen^ in things honest and worthy of knowledge, it, the (...).
shall be pra^led by right.
rightly commended: as we have heard ^. Sulpit^s [to have trauel^ed much o^
been very excellent] in Astrology.
as, in Astrology, we have heard of Ca^us Sulpitius; in Geometry, we our
selves have known Sextus Pompeyus, many in Logic, more in the Civil Law; all
which q conversant or occupied.
Arts are exercised in the tracing or finding out.
searching out of the truth: through the.
by the study whereof, to be drawn away from doing things, or following
necessary business.
necessary imploiments, it is against Duty. For the all the commendation.
whole praise of virtue does consist in doing or performing good duties.
in action: from which yet oftentimes an intermission is made, or may be.
there is an intermission, and many returns are given.
there are granted many returns are given.
many recourses unto the former studies.
unto studies: and also the tossing.
yea and the stirring of the mind which never cease.
rests, may keep us.
continue us in the studies of thinking or contemplation.
meditation, even without our labor.
travel. But eve* thought and moving.
cogitation and motion of the mind is conversant.
ought to be occupied either in consulting.
taking advice concerning honest things.
about honest matters, and pertaining to the good and blessed life.
to live well and blessedly, or in the studies of science and knowledge. And
indeed.
And thus have we spoken of the first fountain of Duty.

In this chapter Tullie speaks of Prudence: which consists in the knowledge
of the truth.

1. showing it to be the chief of all the four virtues, and to concern
mankind especially:

And that, because we are all drawn to a desire of knowledge, thinking it a
goodly thing to excel therein, and contra^ily as dishonest to be ignorant or
deceived.

2. He teaches, that in prudence two faults, contrary thereunto, are to be
avoided.

1. That we take not things which we know not, as though we knew them, and
so assent rashly unto them: and to this end, to bestow both time and diligence
to consider of matters.

The second is, that we bestow not too much study and travel in matters both
obscure and difficult, and also needless.

And these two falts being e^chewed, that all care and diligence bestowed in
searching out things honest and worthy of our knowledge, shall deserve due
commendation:

As, Caius Sulpitius is commended for his knowledge and pains in Astrology,
Sextus Pompeius in Geometry many in Logic and the Civil law, and so in other
good studies.

Yet here gives another C^ueat, viz. That by such ^udies we suffer not our
selves to be drawn away from more necessary employments. And that because
all the praise of virtue consists in action o^ performing Duties, from which
yet there may be intermissions and returning to study.

And also for that the very meditation of the mind is a kind of study;
though without any great travel.

Lastly, he concludes this point with one other caution. To wit, that all our
thought^ be employed either in aduising about honest matters and which app^tain
to a blesse^ life or in the studies of science and knowledge.

Chap. 8.
Of Justice.

But of three other virtues.
the other three [virtues] remaining, that reason [or consideration] does
extend it self most largely.
that part extends it self the farthest, wherein there is conta^ned the
society, etc.
wherein the society of men amongst themselves and (as it were) the community
of life is contained; whereof there are two parts: Justice, in which.
wherein is the greatest splendor.
brightness of virtue; whereof.
which good men ^re named.
have their name, and bountifulness.
Beneficence joined to this.
hereunto, which some it is lawful to call.
we may call either gentleness.
bounty or liberality. But the first.
principal duty of Justice is, that not any man hurt any one.
no man hurt another, unless [he bee] provoked by an wrong.
injury: The next, or secondly.
And then that he use common [things] as common, and private [things] as his
own, peculiar for himself, or private.
his own. But no.
Howbeit no things are private by nature, but either by ancient possession or
tenure.
occupation, as [of them] who in time past came into waste grounds or places
without inhabitant.
empty [places:] or by victory, a^ [of them] who obtained in war.
got [things] by war: or by law, covenant, condition, lot.

of which it is don.
Whereupon it is come to pass that the field called Arpinas.
ground Arpinas is accounted the Arpinatians [field] Thusculan, of the
Thusculanes.
said* to be of the Arpinatians, the field called Arpinas.
Thusculan [ground] of the Thusculanians. And the setting out.
description of private possessions is like.
of this sort. like.
Whereupon, since that
because part of those things which had bin.
were common by Nature, the own of every one.
is becomne proper to every one; let every one enjoy.
hold that, which has chanced.
befallen to every one or to himself.
to each. If any man will covet greedily * befallen him.
unto himself more then that, he shall break.
violate the law of fellowship amongst men.
of humane society. But because (as it is notably written of Plato.
by Plato) we are born not for our selves only.
alone, que for enim.
but our Country does claim.
challenge a part of our birth, our parents [clayme] a part.
our parents a part, our friends a part, and ( as the Stoiks hlode.
as it pleases the Stoiks) that all.
all things which are bred in the earth, are created.
to be created for the use of men, and men to be begotten.
borne for man's cause.
for the cause of men, that some may profit others.
they amongst themselves may benefit or help.
profit one another: In this.
Herein we are bound.
we ought to follow nature [as] a leader.
a guide, and to bring into the midst.
to bring abroad common commodities, by exchange of Duties, in giving and
receiving.
taking, [and] to knit.
bind together the fellowship of men amongst men.
society of man with man, both by arts and by travel, and also by riches.

In this chapter Tullie 1. sets out the nature of ^ustict that by it al
humane society is preserved, and how it extends it self most largely of all
the other three virtues.

2. He shows that there are two parts of it, viz Justice properly to called,
wherein is the greatest glory of virtue, and whereof good men are specially
named: and Beneficence* which we m^ call bounty or liberaliue.

3. He declares some special functions of Justice: as, That no man hurt
another but upon just c^use. That men use common things as common, private as
their own*

4. He teaches hereupon, how by nature all things were common, but made
private by these means following, or the like: as* By ancient tenur^ or
ocupation, by victory, law, covenant, condition, lot, etc.

Hence also he show eth how things have had their names of their owners, as the
field Arpinas, of the Arpinatians, etc.

Hereupon also he gathers these rules;

1. That every one should content him self with his own so gotten: and that
whosoever coueteth more then his own, violateth the law of humane society.

2. That for so much as we are not borne for our selves alone (as Plato writes
notably) but partly for our country, partly for our parents, partly for our
friends* and each for the good of others; like as all creatures are bred for the
good of man, so men especially for the benefit of men to profit one another;
that we should herein follow Nature as guide, in communicating our commodities
to one another And so by excha^ging of kindnesses, by giving and taking, by our
cunning, help, and riches to bind all sorts unto us in society and good will.

Chap. 9.
fidelity or faithful dealing.
Faithfulness [is] the foundation of Justice, from the Etymology of the word.

Al But the foundation Al And faithfulness is the foundation of Justice.
of Justice is faithfulness: that is to say, a constancy and truth of words
and all agreements.
covenants: Whereupon, although this peradventure shall seem more difficult.
hard to some man, yet we may be bold to imitate the Stoiks, who search out
studiously.
diligently from whence words are derived, and we may believe.
think that faithfulness is named thereof.
faithfulness to be called, because that which was said is done.
that is performed.
done which was promised.

In this 9. chapter Tully 1. teaches what is the foundation of all Justice,
viz. faithfulness.

2. He defines faithfulness, that it is constancy and truth in all our
speeches and agreements.

3. In imitation of the Stoiks, who search out diligently the deriuation of
words, he shows whence fides is named, viz. a fio and dico, because that is
performed which was promised, so to show the nature of it.

Chap. 10.
[Tullie teaches that there are] two kinds of, etc.
[ There are] two kinds of injustice, as [there are] two kinds of.
of justice: and from whence they may arise or be derived.
come.

1 But there are two kinds of injustice. The one [ belongs.
is] of those men who bring in or do injury.
offer [iniury:] The other of those who do not put or drive away
beat back an injury from them to whom it is offered, if they be able.

2 For he that makes an assault upon any man unjustly, being stirred up
either by choler.
anger or any * perturbation.
q passion, he seems as it were to bring violent hands to his fellow.
to lay violent hands upon his fellow: and he who does not defend no^ (...)
injury to be don to others
defends not nor resists injury if he can, is as well in fault, as if he
should forsake [his] parents or friends, or country. 3 And indeed those
injuries which are done of set purpose for the cause of h^rting.
to hurt, do often times come or proceed.
arise from fear: whenas he who thinks.
intends to hurt another, fears that except.
lest unless he do that to another, himself shall incur some damage.
should be affected or touched.
anno^ed with some disco^modity. And [for] the most part, some.
many men attempt.
take occasion to do injury.
wrong, that they may obtain those things which they have coueted or earnestly
desired.
do earnestly desire: in which vice.
which kind of vice, covetousness does lie open or extend it self most
largely.
show it self most evidently. Riches also, are earnestly desired, both for
necessary uses of life, and also to enjoy pleasures. But in those in whom
there is a greater courage or stomach.
more lofty mind, the coveting of money belongs or has a respect.
has an eye unto gratifying.
power, and ability of riches.
p^easuring [others:] as of late M. Crassus denied that any money or any sum
of money was sufficient, etc.
any substance to be sufficient for him, who desired to be a Prince in the
common wealth, with the fruits [or increase] whereof.
if he were not able to maintain an ar^ie with his reuenew.
with whose revenues he could not nourish.
maintain an army. Also.
Moreover, sumptuous preparations.
furnitures do delight, and the tricking or adorning.
bravery of life with finenesse.
elegancie and plenty; by which means.
things it is effected.
it comes to pass, that the desire of money should be.
is infinite.

4 Neither indeed the amplifying or inc^rease of the goods of a man's family.
enlargement of a man's private estate hurting no body, is to be dispraised:
but injury is evermore to be fled or shunned.
avoided.

5 And very many.
most men are brought especially.
exceedingly brought that a forgetfulness of Justice should take them.
to forget justice, whenas they have or shall fall.
fall into a desire of rule, honors.
honor, or of glory. For that which is in Ennius (There is no sacred
fellowship.
holy society, nor fidelity of a kingdom) reaches further.
does extend it self more largely. For whatsoever is of that sort.
of such sort, in which more cannot be chief.
excel, therein falls out for most part so great contention.
so great contention is made or happens.
comes to pass for most part therein, that it is a very hard thing to keep a
holy society. The storm raised of late by Caius Caesar, etc.
rashness of Caius Caesar declared that of late, who perverted or turned
topsie turuie.
ouerturned the laws of God and man.
all divine and humane laws, for the cause of that principality
for that soueraintie which he had imagined to himself by the error of [his]
opinion.
conceit.

And it is a grievous thing in this kind, that the desires of honor, rule,
power, and glory, are for the most part in the stoutest stomachs or brauest
minds.
greatest courages* and goodliest wits. By how much more it is to be looked to.
we are to take heed, lest it be any thing offended in that kind or behalf.
that we offend not at all in that kind.

Tully in this chapter teaches 1. that there are two kinds of injustice, as
there are of justice.

The one is of such as do injury.

The other of such who do not save others from wrong when they may.

2. He declares the greatness of these faults by comparison. For the first:
That he who assaults another upon anger or any like passion, does, as it were,
lay violent hands on his fellow.

For the second: That he that saves not another from wrong if he can, is
as well in fault, as if he should forsake his parents, friends or country.

3. He notes the usual causes of wrongs: as of those done rashly; anger or
some sudden passion.

Others done of set purpose, arise from fear of some evil to themselves
unless they hurt others. Or from covetousness of getting riches, or a greedy
desire of pleasures.

Or else from ambition: as when men desire riches, either to be come great
thereby, or to pleasure others.

As in M. Crassus: who thought no man meet to be a prince or chief man in the
commonweal, unless he were able with his reueneues to maintain an army*

Moreover, he shows that wrongs are committed for stately buildings,
maintaining sumptuous furniture, for gorgeousness and plenty of all things:
for which ends and the like, the desire of money is infinite.

4. He gives a Caveat, that the increase of a man's pri uate estate is not to
be dispraised* but only the wronging of others by it.

5. He teaches that the principal cause of injustice is ambition, when men
fall into a vehement desire of honor and glory, and chiefly of bearing rule.

This he proves 1. By the testimony of Ennius; That there is no holy
society nor fidelity in seeking or ruling a kingdom.

2. By reason.

Because in things wherein more cannot excel together, such contentions fall
out, as it is hard to keep a holy society.

This point he also further illustrateth by the example of Caius Caesar, who
had very lately before ouerturned all laws both of God and men, for obtaining
that rule which he had formerly conceited.

Lastly, he gives another Caveat in regard hereof, that since these ambitious
desires of rule and honor are for the most part in the greatest courages and
goodliest wits, therefore all noble minds and excellent wits should chiefly
take heed hereof.

Chap. 11.
One injury [is] lighter then another.

But it very much concerns.
it is especially to be considered in all injustice, whether the wrong.
injury be don with any perturbation, or upon a hot blood as it is called.
some passion of the mind, which for most part is short and to a time.
for the present time, or else of set purpose or consultation.
of purpose and advisedly. For those things.
wrongs are easier.
less, which *happen q befall.
upon some sudden motion or passion.
mood, then such as are done devised and thought of before.
being premeditated and p^epared for.
prepared. And thus enough has bin spoken.
have we spoken of bringing in or offering injury.
doing injury.

In this chapter

1. he teaches that the nature and kind of the wrong is to be wisely
considered: whether the injury was don upon some sudden passion, or mature
deliberation and advise.

2. He gives the reason of the necessity of this consideration, viz. Because
those injuries which are done upon any such sudden passion are lighter and to
be accounted less, the those which are done upon deliberation and as it were
of set purpose.

Chap. 12.
He rehearses the causes from whence the second kind of injustice may spring
or grow.
arise.

1 And.
Moreover there are wont to be more.
many causes of ^termitting.
omitting * to defend one another.
[our] defense, and of forsaking.
leaving [our] Duty.

2 For either they will not.
men are unwilling to take upon them or undergo.
to undertake enmities or ill will.
displeasure, or travel, or cost.
charges: or else they be so hindered with negligence, sloth, slugg^shnesse*
ignorance or cowa^d linesse.
idleness, or else by their own private studies, or by certain occupations.
bu^nesses, that they suffer them to be helpless.
forsaken, whom they ought to save harmeless.
to defend.

3 Therefore we must look.
We must therefore take heed* that we do not think, lest it be not
sufficient.
that to be sufficient, which is spoken in Plato concerning the Philosophers.
of Plato in behalf of the Philosophers; [them] to be just therefore.
that they are therefore just, because they are conversant or exercised.
employed in tracing or searching out of the truth.
finding out the truth, and because they depise.
contemn and account for nothing or make no reckning of.
set at naught those things which most part of men
most men do greedily seek after.
vehemently desire, [and] concerning which*
for which they are wont to fight with swords, contend or braul^.
to be at daggers drawing amongst the^^elues. For whilst they attain the one
kind of justice, that they hurt no man in offering injury.
doing of wrong, they fall into the other: for being let by a desire of
getting learning
hindered by the study of learning, they forsake [the^] whom they ought to
defend. Therefore in truth he thinks.
he indeed thinks, them not about to come to the commonweal, or to
intermeddle in.
that they would not enter into the affairs of the common weal, but compelled
or enforced, or were they not compeld.
unless they were compelled. But it were more reason that it should be done.
more equal to be done with good will, without constraint.
voluntarily. For whatsoever is well done.
rightly done, that same is just to* if it be done voluntarily.
the same is thereby just, if it be voluntary. There be also, who either for a
love.
desire of looking to their household affairs.
saving their substance, or by a certain hate or some grudge.
for some hatred to men, do say, themselves to do, or to follow.
that they themselves to do, or to follow.
look unto their own business; lest they may be thought.
should seem to do wrong to any man: who whilst they are free from the one
kind of injustice, do run into the other. For they forsake the fellowship.
society of life, because they bestow nothing of study, nothing of labor,
nothing of substance.
no study upon it, no labor, nor substance. Because therefore after we have
declared the two kinds of injustice.
Seeing then that two kinds of injustice being propounded, we have adjoined
the causes of either kind.
both kinds, and have set down those things before, in which justice is
contained* we shall be able to judge easily.
easily to judge (unless we will exceedingly love or flatter our selves too
much.
favor our selves) what is the duty of every season. For it is hard to take
care of other men's matters.
the care of other men's matters is difficult, although that Terentian Chremes.
Chremes in Terence thinks nothing to be strange to him of that which
appertains to man.
accounts nothing appertaining to man, to be estranged from.
strange to him. But yet.
Nevertheless, because we perceive and feel those things more, which happen
unto our selves, evther prosperous or cross.
either luckily, or unfortunately, then those things [wch befall
happen] to others, which we behold, as ye would say.
as it were, a great way off; we judge otherwise of them, then of our selves.
Wherefore they command or teach well.
give a good precept, who forbid to do any thing, which you doubt of, whether
it be right or wrong. For, equity it self.
the rig^t it is apparent.
shines by it self.
of it self: but doubting declares.
signifies a cogitation of in^urie.
an imagination of wrong.

Tully declares in this chapter.

1. That there may be sundry causes of the second kind o^ injustice, viz. of
omitting the just defense of our neighbor.

2. He sets down diverse of those causes: as, for auoi^ing either the ill
will of others, or of their travel or charges. Or else for that they are
hindered by neg^gence sloth or by their own private studies or businesses.

3. He warns that men do not therefore think themselves just, and that they
have done their duties (as some philosophers do) because they are employed in
the study of learning, or for that they contemn the world, which most men so
dote upon, and so leave the defense of others.

And the^ gives the reason hereof; Because heerby, whilst that they avoid the
one kind of i^iustice, that they hurt no man, they fall into the other, viz.
to forsake them whom they ought to defend.

And that there-vpon they cannot be drawn to any service in the co^monweale,
but by constraint; Whereas of the contrary, he teaches, that all such
service for the good of others, especially for the commonwealth, ought to be
voluntary, and that then only it is just.

After, he rehearses some other causes why men use to leave the defense or
helping of other^: as for saving their substance* or upon some hatred, grudge or
the like.

And yet, that they to this end pretend their own business, orlest they should
seem to do wrong to others.

So that heerby they forsake the society of life, whilst they will neither
bestow any of their study, travel or substance for the helping of others.

By these things rightly considered, ^e teaches that men may be able easily
to judge, what duty is required at every time and season; unless they be too
partial and over much love them selves.

Yet heerin he shows that it is a very hand matter, to take care of other
men's business as we ought: howsoever Chremes in Terence thinks otherwise;
and after gives the reason hereof which is this; for that we have more feeling
of those things which happen to ^ur selves, the^ of those which befall others:
because we behold other men's estates as it were a great way of, but our own
more nearly.

Lastly, for a conclusion, he commends that precept of such wise men, as, who
forbid a man to do any thing whereof he doubts, whether it be right or
wrong. Because the right is apparent of it self, but the very doubting
intimates an imagination of a wrong.

Chap. 13.
Tully teaches that duties are.
Duties to be carried for circumstances
in regard of circumstances; and that which was officious.
agreeable to Duty, to be made against duty two ways especially: if either it
be departed.
there be a departing from profit, or the less profitable be preferred before
the more profitable; moreover to be sometimes basides Duty to stick too much
in Apex is taken for the highest top of any thing; here for ^ice quiddities or
extremities of law.
the strict words of law.

But the seasons.
time does fall out often.
fall out, when those things which seem most worthy of.
meet for a just man^ and him whom we call a good man, are changed and become
clean otherwise.
made contrary: as, it may be just, etc.
as, not to restore a thing committed to us to keep; also not to perform a
promise made to a furious.
mad man; and sometimes to deny and not keep those things which appertain to
truth and unto fidelity, may be just. For it becomes.
it is meet [them] to be referred.
that they be referred to those foundatitions of justice* which I laid down in
the beginning:

1 First that hurt be done to no man.
that no man be hurt* next.
and then that it be served to the common profit, viz. that the common
commodity be preferred.
there be a respect had to the common commodity. duty is changed when as etc.
When these things are changed by the time, Duty is changed, that remains not.
it is not always the same
alike.

for some promise may fall out and covenant.
For there may fall out some promise and covenant, that it may be unprofitable
to be effected.
which to be performed, may be unprofitable either to him to whom it is
promised, or else to him that.
who promised it. For if (as it reported in stories.
is in the Fables) Neptune had not performed.
done that, which he had promised to See the marginall note in the latin
books.
Theseus, These. had not been deprived.
bereft of his son Hippolitus. For of [his] three boones.
wishes (as it is written) this was the third, which he being angry.
in his fury he asked.
wished for the death.
concerning the death of Hippolitus: which being obtained he fell into the
greatest mourning.
most grievous lamentation.

Therefore neither those promises are.
neither are those promises to be fulfilled.
kept, which are unprofitable to them, to whom you have promised.
made them; nor if they hurt you more, then they profit.
benefit him to whom you have made the promises.
promised. It is against Duty, that the greater loss should be.
the greater harm.
damage to be put before or preferred to the less.
rather admitted then the less: as, if you shall appoint or promise.
have appointed that you will come to be an advocate or counselor to speak
for another in his matter which is in hand.
your self to come as an advocate to any man upon a present occasion, and in
the mean time your son shall begin to be grievously sick, it cannot be
against Duty, not to do.
perform that which you promised.
said; and he to whom the it was promised.
pro mise was made, should more depart.
swerue from Duty, if he complain himself to be left destitue.
should complain that he was disappointed.

Now who sees not not to be stood to, or that we are not to stand to, or that
it is not meet to etc.
that it is not necessary to stand to those promises, which any man.
a man has promised, being either constrained by fear, or deceived by guile?
most of which things.
which things indeed, most of them are freed.
for most part, most of them are freed.
are discharged by the Chancery or Court of conscience.
Pretors Court, and many of them by Laws, or statutelawes.
statutes.

In this chapter he teaches, 1. That Duty may be altered in regard of
circumstances; and that which seems meet for a just and good man, may become
clean contrary: as for example;

That it may sometimes be lawful and meet, not to restore a thing committed
to us in trust: as also, not to perform a promise made to mad men: and
sometimes to deny those things, which other wise truth and faithful dealing
would require.

And then gives the reason hereof.

Because it is meet that all such matters be limited by tho* two foundations
of justice laid down before; viz.

1. That no man be hurt. 2. That there be a respect had to the general good,
or commonweal. And that so, duties may be altered according to times and
occasions a^ these fall out.

2. He shows what promises and covenants a man is not bound to keep.

As first, such promises as the performance-of proves hurtful either to him
to whom they are promised, or to him that has promised them.

This he illustrateth by the evil that came upon the performance of that
promise which Neptune made to Theseus for granting him three wishes. The last
whereof was the death of his own son Hippolitus, which in his fury he had
desired: which promise being performed accordingly, he fell into most grievous
lamentation.

Hence he concludes, that neither such promises are to be kept; nor such as
may more hurt him who promised, the^ then they can benefit him to whom they are
promised. And then gives a reason of both.

For that it is against Duty, to admit ^ather of the greate^ evil then the
less; and also gives an instance of the later kind.

As, if an advocate should promise his client that he would plead his cause at
such a time; and in the mean while his son falls grievously sick that he
cannot be for him; that it is not against Duty for the advocate to be abse^t in
th^s case: and that the client should more swerve from Duty, if he should
complain that he was disappointed, then the other by his abse^ce. So likewise
he teaches that men are not bound to such promises as they made, enforced by
fear, or drawn into by deceit.

Lastly, he shows that for such promi ses men are discharged of them either
by the court of conscience, or some statute law.

Chap. 14.
Equity is to be looked to in law matters.
In Duties belonging to the law, we are not to stick in the Offices or
matters.
words [of the lawe] [but] equity is to be looked unto.

Also wrongs are often times.
Moreover, there do often times injuries arise by a certain cauillation, and too
crafty but.
and naughty or wrested misconstruing.
subtle interpretation of the law.

1 Whereupon that [saying] viz. The chiefest or utmost, or the vigor of law.
Extremity of law is the chief.
extremest injury, is now made.
becomne a worn.
common proverb in [our] speech or communication.
talk. 2 In which kind many things are done amiss, even in the commonweal.
in the commonweal matters: as he who when league of peace.
truce was q truce of a hundredth and thirty days were couena^ted with the
enemy
taken with the emie for a hundredth and thirty days, destroyed, wasted or
ouer^anne.
spoiled his fields by night.
land in the night, because the truce of days and not of nights were couenanted
the truce was taken for days, and not for nights. neither truly.
No nor yet indeed ou^s.
our countrieman is to be allowed of.
approved of, if it be true, Quintus Fabius
that Quintus Fabius Labeo or any other (for I have nothing but by hearesay)
being given.
appointed by the Senate to be an vmpire or daiesman.
arbitratour to the Nolanes.
between the Nolanes and them of Naples.
and Neapolitanes about.
concerning the bounds of their Land, when he came to the place, to have
spoken with either of them severally.
did commune with them both apart, that they should not do nor desire any thing
greedily.
couetously, and that they would rather set back or retire
go back then encroche one upon another.
go forward. which when either of them had done.
When Al both of them had done it, there was a parcel of ground, etc. set out
or bounded.
some ground Al on both sides.
was left in the midst. Therefore he so q limited their bounds, as they had
yielded.
said; [and] adjudged that which was left in the midst, unto the people of
Rome.

This verily is to deceive, not to judge. Wherefore such subtilty is to be
eschewed.
avoided in every thing, or case.
matter.

There be also certain Duties to be observed even toward them, of whom you
have received wrong.

For there is a measure both in revenge and chastisement.
of revenge and punishing. And [indeed] I wot not.
know not whether it be sufficient him who began to repent of his injury.
that he who provoked.
began should [onely] repent of his injury, but [that he be] punished, that
he commit not any like thing.
the like offense after, and other also may be the slower to do wrong.

Tully in this chapter declares, how injuries ofttimes are committed by
cauilling and subtle misconstruing or wresting of the law.

This he proves, 1. By that common proverb: That the extremity of law is
the extremest ini^rie.

2. By usual experience in the commonwealth, whereof he gives two notable
examples of crafty dealers.

One of which (whose name he omitteth) having made truce with the enemy for
thirty days, spoiled his land in the nights; pretending that the truce was
taken only for the days, and not for the nights.

The other example is of Quintus Fabius Labeo: who (as the report went) being
appointed by the Senate of Rome, for an arbitratour between the Nolanes and the
Neapolitanes about the setting out of the bounds of their lands, communed with
both sides apart, persuading them to do nothing couetously, and that either
side would rather give back then forward, in regard of peace, and that they
might not seem to incroche upon one another. Which when both sides had yielded
unto, there was a piece of ground left in the midst between them: which he
adjudged from both to the people of Rome.

But this dealing he accounts to be rather* to deceive then to arbitrate;
and so admonishes all to beware of it.

Lastly, he teaches that there are Duties of Justice to be executed upon the^
who do such wro^gs and gives the reason thereof;

That it is not always sufficient that he who ^ath done the wrong be sorry
for it, but that he be punished also sometimes; and that for two causes.

1. That he may not do the like after. 2. That others also may be terrified
from doing wrong by his example.

Chap. 15.
Hitherto [ Tullie has spoken] of civil Justice: now [he discourseth] of
warlike Duties; And makes two kinds of war, to both of which these things
are common; that the wars.
they be not undertaken but upon just causes; that they be not entered into, but
matters required or challenged, viz. the things which they who begin, would
require.
their demaundes first made, [nor] unless [they bee] solemnly proclaimed: that
they may be rightly achieved, that we use no cruelty
we be not cruel above measure against them who are ouercom^. Also that
they who yield themselves be received more courteously; that fidelibee
performed to an enemy even privately, not only in solemn covenants.
agreements. But these things are proper; that we deal more mercifully or
courteously.
^ildely with this kind of enemies who strive for sovereignty; more severely
with them who seek our life.

1 Also.
Moreover the laws of war.
arms are to be preserved in any wise.
specially kept in a common weal.

2 For whereas there are two kind^ of contention, one by disputing or debating
the matter.
reasoning, another by violence.
force; and whereas that is proper.
the property of man, this of beasts; we must fly to the later, is.
when we cannot use the former.

3 Wherefore truly.
in very deed, wars are to be undertaken.
taken in hand to this end and purpose.
for that.
this, that it may lived [of us.]
we may live in peace without injury.

4 And the victory being gotten, they ought to be saved.
they are to be preserved who have not bin cruel in war.
been cruel nor fierce, savage or outrageous.
unmerciful in fight: as our ancestors received even into [their] City, the
Thusculans, Equies.
Equians, Volscians, Sabines, [and] Hernicks; but they took away [or spoiled]
utterly.
utterly razed Carthage and Numance. I would not Co^inth.
I would they had not so razed Corinth: but I believe them to have followed the
opportunity of the place especially.
I take it, that they chiefly respected the situation of the place, lest the
very place might at any time provoke them to make war.
encourage them to move war. Truly in my opinion.
Certainly in my mind, we are alwaie to consult for peace.
we ought always to advise for peace, which shall have no deceit.
which may be free from fear of treachery. Wherein if it had been obeyed unto
me, or if I had bin obeyed.
if they would have yielded unto me, we should have had, although not the best
[commonweale.]
best, yet some Common weal, which now is none. But whereas it is to be
provided for them.
you are to provide for their safety whom you have ouercomne.
shall subdue by force; then they who their weapons being laid away fly to the
fidelity of the Emperors.
the^ they especially, who yielding up their weapons, fly unto the mercy of the
governors, are to be received, although Aries, is an engine called a ram:
which served in war to beat down walls.
the ram has smitton down.
battered the wall. in which thing.
In which point, Justice has been so very greatly.
so much regarded at or with ours
amongst our men, that they who had received unto their fidelity.
to [their] mercy Cities or Nations overcome, subdued.
conquered in war, should be patrones of them, viz. of those cities and
nations.
of the same, after the manner.
by the custom of [our] ancestors. And truly.
in very truth the equity.
justice of war is set down.
described most sincerely.
holily in the law of the heralds who were to proclaim war.
feciall law of the people of Rome. of which.
Whereby it may be understood, no war to be just.
that no war is just, but which either is done.
moved, things being first claymed.
demands being first made; or which is proclaimed before, and denounced
solemly or published.
bidden by defiance. Pompilius the Emperor.
the General [of the Romanes] kept a Province, in whose army the son of
Cato, a nouice.
Catoes son, being a young soldier, did play the soldier.
did serve. But.
And whenas it seemed good to.
pleased Pompilius to send away or discharge.
dismiss one legion of soldiers.
band, he dismissed also Catoes son, who served in the same band. But whenas
he remained still in the army, for the love of fighting.
of the wars, Cato writ unto Pompilius that if he should suffer.
suffered him to tarry.
remain in the army, he should bind him by a second oath of warfare.
swear him again; because the former [oath] being lost, he might not fight by
right etc.
he being discharged of his former oath, might not lawfully fight with the
enemies. So chief observation they had.
great regard there was in moving or managing their war.
making war. There is an epistle [extant]
a Letter of Marcus Cato being an old man.
the elder, to Marcus his son; wherein he wrote himself to have heard.
that he had heard, him to have bin dismissed.
that he was dis charged by the Consul, whenas he was a soldier.
being a soldier in Macedonia in the Persian war. He therefore admonishes
him to.
warns him that he take heed.
beware, that he enter not into the battle.
the battle: for he denies that it was lawful.
it to be lawful [for him] who is not a sworn soldier.
a soldier to fight with the enemy.

2 And in good truth do observe.
certainly I note that.
this, that he who was a stubborn enemy by a proper name or by a propriety
of speech.
who by his proper name was perduellis [id est] an open enemy.
a stubborn enemy, was called hostis [meaning] a soldier or man of war.
a stranger; the mildness of the words asswaging the sorowfulnesse.
haynousness of the matter.
thing. For he was called hostis amongst.
with our ancestors, whom now we name peregrinus, [a stranger.] The twelve
tables declare [the same] in these words, Aut, etc.
Aut status dies cum host; and again, Aduersus hostem aeterna authoritas.
What may be added to this gentleness or moderation.
mildness, to call him by so soft or mild.
fair a name, with whom you wage war.
make war?

Although long continuance
process of time has now made that name more odious.
hard: for it has.
is departed from the name of Peregrinus, [that is to say, a stranger] and
stands.
remained properly
remains properly in him, viz. stands for etc.
for him who (...) armor of the contrary part.
bears arms against any one.

3 But.
Also when it is contended, viz. the conte^tion is
there is fighting concerning empire, viz. about governing or ruling, who shall
rule.
for sovereignty, and glory is sought by war; yet it behooves always, the
causes to be the same altogether which I said a little before, to be the just
causes of war.
that there be the very same just causes of war, which I spoke of a little
before. But those wars to which.
in which the glory of empire or bearing rule.
sovereignty is propounded, are to be made less bitterly.
with less cruelty. For as when we contend ciuilly.
in civil matters, we do one way if it be against an enemy: otherwise if
against a competi^.
if he be an enemy [^ith whom we contend]: otherwise if a ^uter against us.
a competitour: [for] the strife of honor and dignity is with the one.
with the one the strife [is] for honor and dignity, with the other of the
head.
for life and honesty. Thus war was waged.
holden with the Celtibers, and with the Cimbrians as with enenemies, whether
should be.
live, not whether should ^eare rule: but war was holden with the ^atines.
with the Latins, Samites, Samnites, Pe^os.
Carthagineans, [and] with Pirrhus, it was foughten.
the fight was about the (...), viz. who should beat rule.
Empire. The Penes.
Carthaginenans [were] trucebreakers. Anniball [was] cruel, the rest [were]
more just. That indeed is, etc.
That is doubtless a worthy sentence or speech.
a noble saying of Pirrhus, concerning captives to be restored.
about restoring of prisoners.

Neither require I gold to my self.
for my self, neither shall he give me any sum of money or hire.
price;

Neither playing the hu^sters with war.
[are we such as] making war.
make a gain of war, but making war.
warriors.

Let both of us try out or fight for our life.
make trial for our life, with the iron.
sword, not with gold.

Whether the mistress will have it, etc.
Lady Fortune will have you or me to reign, or what fortune may bring.
or what may betide;

Let us try by virtue.
valor, and withal take this speech.
answer;

the virtue of whom.
Whose manhood the fortune of war shall be spared.
shall spare, Account it for a gift.
I have determined to spare their freedom.

It is determined, me to spare.
Accept it: and I give it, with the great Gods willing.
for I give it, with the good liking of the great gods.

Truly a rega^l [or kingly] sentence, and worthy the stock of the Eacidanes.
A Princely saying indeed, and well beseeming All the lineage of See the margent
Latin.
the Eacidanes.

4 And also if every one by themselves.
Likewise also if And also if every one by themselves.
private men, led or drawn by the times, viz. upon such extremities.
enforced by occasions, shall promise any thing to the enemy, fidelity is to
be kept in the same very thing.
they must keep their promise therein: as Regulus, being taken by the
Carthagineans in the first war of Carthage
Punick-war: [who] when he had bin sent.
was sent to Rome concerning the interchanging.
about the excha^ging of prisoners, and had sworn himself to return.
that he would return; first, as he came.
as soon as he came, he thought not in the Senate, the prisoners to be
restored.
his advice was in the Senate Senate house, that the prisoners should not be
restored: afterward, when he should have bin retained or stopped of his.
he was stayed by his kinsfolks and friends, chused rather.
he was more willing to return to punishment, then to deceive or frustrate
his fidelity.
break his promise given to the enemy. And in the second Punike war, after
the Cannas battle or field, viz. battle fought the^e.
the field at Canes, left in the common treasure, or to pay to the common
treasure, or disfranchiled and put from their freedom to pay as strangers.
verb. which ten Annibal sent to Rome bound with an oath themselves to return,
except they had obtained concerning the redeeming of those which were taken;
the Censor^ left them all in fines [or to pay yearly fines] who had fors^orne,
so long as any of them lived.
verb. the Censors left in the common treasure, or to pay to the common
treasure, or disfranchiled and put from their freedom to pay as strangers.
verb. which ten Annibal sent to Rome bound with an oath themselves to return,
except they had obtained concerning the redeeming of those which were taken;
the Censor^ left them all in fines [or to pay yearly fines] who had fors^orne,
so long as any of them lived.
sessed all those ten at a yearly fine so long as any of them lived, who
had forsworn themselves: which Anniball sent to Rome bound by oath, that they
should return, except they obtained the ransoming of those that were prisoners
[at Rome:] nor less [or and no lesse] him who had found a fault by the
decerning of his oath.
and him likewise who had found an excuse by deluding his oath: For when as
he had gone out by Annibals license.
gotout of the Camp by the permission of Annibal, within a little while after.
hereturned a little after, b for that he said, q because.
himself to have forgotten.
he had forgotten I know not what. And then being gone [again] out of the
camp, he thought himself discharged of his oath.
freed from his oath; and [^o] he was in words, but indeed he was not. For
you ought to think in fidelity [or giving your faithful word]
it is to be considered always in promises, what a man have meant [or ought
to have meant.]
meant, not what he said. But the most notable example.
greatest example of justice toward an enemy, is constituted or appointed.
was showed by our ancestors. Whereas a traitor having run away from Pyrrhus.
a runnagate traitor from Pyrrhus had promised the Senate, himself to give
poison to the king, [or to poison the king.]
that he would give the king poison and kill him, He, or the Senate.
the Senate and Caius Fabricius delivered that runnagate traitor to Pyrrhus:
so as it did not not approve by treachery or wickedness.
the treacherous the death.
death no not of an enemy, both mighty and moving war of his own accord.
unprovoked. And thus it is spoken.
have we spoken sufficiently of warlike or warfaring or military Duties.
Duties appertaining to war.

Let us also remember, that there is a justice to be kept even toward the
lowest men, viz. the meanest.
the basest. And the condition and fortune.
estate of servants.
slaves is the basest: whom they that command to use so, as hirelings or
mercenarie.
hired servants to exact.
require [their] labor, and perform just things unto them
give them their due, do not give precepts amiss.
command amiss. But.
Moreover, whereas injury is.
may be done two manner of ways. that is to say, either by violence.
force or by fraud.
guile: guile seems to be the property of the fox.
as of the Fox, force of the Lion; both of them most alienated or (...) ged
from man.
unbeseeming man: yet guile deserves.
[is] worthy the greater hatred. But of all injustice none is more worthy
grievous punishment or more heinous.
more capital, the^ of them, who then when they deceive most, yet so handle the
matter.
do it to the end that they may seem good men. Concerning Justice enough is
said.
[So likewise] enough is said concerning Justice.

Tully here discourses of military duties, and teaches; 1. That the laws of
Arms are chiefly to be observed in a Commonweal.

2. That whereas there are two kinds of contention, the one in debating matters
by reason, the other by force; and that the first of these being proper only
to man, the other more belonging to the beasts; that we are then only to fly
to the later when we cannot prevail by the former.

3. Shows, for for what cause wars are undertaken. viz. That men may live in
peace without injury.

4. What is to be done when the victory is gotten, viz. That they be
preserved who have not carried themselves cruelly in the fight.

This he illustrateth by the example of their ancestors, who received some such
even into the city, as the Tusculanes, Equies, etc. when as they utterly rased
and spoiled other cities, as Carthage and Numance. And so likewise Corint;
though he thinks that this was done only in regard of the situation of it;
lest the place might have encouraged them to new war. Here he gives this
general advice;

That men should always consult for peace, so (...) as it may be free from
danger of treachery. This he teaches by the effects, that if they had done
this as he would, they had had a flourishing co^monweale, which now was none in
respect.

5. That as the conquerors are to provide for the safety of all whom they
shall subdue, except such who have carried themselves cruelly; so more
specially for them who yielding up their weapons have betaken them selves to
the mercy of the governor, though there has been no remedy but to yield or
die.

This he commends by the example and custom of their ancestors, that made
such co^querours as had received to mercy cities or nations, to become patrones
of the same.

6. He declares that the justice of war, is most holily let down in the
law of the heralds of the Romans; and that therein it may be seen what war
is just, viz. No war but which is moved upon demands first made, or proclaimed
sole^aly, or b^dden by open defiance.

7 He sets down certain other special Duties to be observed in war. 1.
That no soldier be admitted to fight with the enenue, but being first solemnly
sworn. This he shows by the authority of Cato, writing to Pompilius the
General, under whom his son was a young soldier: That, whereas he had
heard, that he had dismissed his son, upon the occasion of dismissing that
band (...) he was; he should not suffer him to remain in the army much less
to fight, unless he swear him again; Because he being discharged of his
former oath might not lawfully fight, unless he was sworn again.

Also by another Letter of his, to his son; That whereas he heard that he
being then a soldier in the Persian wa^ was discharged by the Consul, he
should not enter the battle to fight: because it was not lawful for him who
was not a soldier, to fight with the enemy; signifying that none indeed were
soldiers but those which stood sworn.

A second is, that there be as much mildness showed to the enemy as may be.

This he proves by the example of their ancestors; who gave to the enemy
the fairest name they could: as by calling him who was properly perdu^llis,
viz. a stubborn enemy, hostis, meaning, a stranger or forener, according to the
ancient custom; so mitigating the hainousnes of the thing by the mildness
of the word.

This he proves moreover by the laws of the twelve tables wherein the
obstinate enemy is usually called hostis, intimating a stranger.

Although he shows that through process of time the word hostis is used
properly for the open enemy, who proudly beats arms against us.

A third Duty is, That when the war is only for souerantie and glory; as
there must be the same just causes of war, mentioned before: so that war
must be made with as little cruelty as may be.

This he illustrateth 1. by an argument from the like, taken from the manner of
our contention in civil matters. That is in civil strife we deal one way
with an enemy, with whom we contend for life and honesty; and another way
with a competitour who contendeth with us only for honor and dignity: so must
it be in warlike matters.

After, he further manifests it by particular examples: As by the war
against the Celtibers and Cimbrians, which was as against enemies for life: and
contrarily against the Latins, Sabines Samnites, Carthagineans and Pyrrhus for
the empire only wherein they dealt fairer, though some of these enemies were
truce breakers and too cruel.

Thirdly, he shows it by a noble saying of Pyrrhus, about the restoring of
pr^soners, (...) in very by En^ius, to this effect;

That he sought not gold but victory; neither would be have the tri^ll made
with gold. but with the sword.

So that he who should win it by the sword should wear it, with as hearty good
will as the great Gods gave it. This he commends for a princely saying, and
well beseeming one desce^ding from Achilles. A fourth precept is, That the
very private soldiers perform their word to the enemy, though they promised,
being enforced thereunto, by the occasion of the times and straights whereunto
they were driven. This ho^ declares also by examples; first of Regulus a
worthy Roman: who in the first Punike war, being taken prisoner by the
Carthagineans, and by them sent to Rome about the ex changing prisoners, having
sworn that he would return unless he obtained the exchange of them; he both
dissuaded the matter [as inco^modious] and chused rather to return to the
enemy, to endure any punishment (though he was much stayed by his friends) then
to break his promise given to them.

The second example is of the Censors of Rome: who fined all those ten at an
yearly fine, during their lives, who had falsified their oaths, whereby they
had bound themselves to Anniball the enemy that they would return to him,
unless they obtained the ransoming of certain prisoners at Rome. And so dealt
they likewise with one other, who deluded the oath which he had taken, by a
kind of equiuocating, so imagining himself free. For he having sworn to
return; so soon as ever he was gotten without the camp, he returned
presently, as if he had forgot something: and then getting himself out of the
camp again, he thought himself quit from his oath; as he seemed in words,
though indeed he was not.

Which Tully proves by a general rule for all promises;

That the true meaning, not the bare words, is ever to be respected therein. A
fifth precept is this, That there be ever kept a special hatred of treachery.
This he teaches by a notable example of justice even toward the enemy and
against such dealing: That when as a runnagate from Pyrrhus had promised the
Senate to poison him; the Senate sent the traitor back to Pyrrhus signifying
his treachery: Thereby showing their hatred of such a fact, though against an
enemy both mighty, and moving war unprovoked.

Thus far he has spoken of warlike Duties.

Next, he speaks of Justice to be kept, even toward the basest sort and
condition of people, which he makes to be the slaves; that we are as well
bound to give them their due for their labor, as to require their labor of them.

Lastly, he sets down two manners of doing injury: One by force, which is
most proper to the lion; A second by fraud, the property of the fox: both of
them be unbefitting man; but guile the worse of the two.

And here he teaches what is the most heinous kind of all injustice, viz. when
men intend the most deceit, yet do it under a pretense of honesty, and to the
end that they may seem good men.

Chap. 16.
The Argument.
Of liberality the second part of Justice, which yet Aristotle seems to knit.
join to Modesty: wherein Tully teaches three things to be looked unto
chiefly.
shows that three things [are] to be looked to especially. The first [is]
that we give not any thing which may be hurtful to the receiver; nor that
we take from others.
some by wrong that which we would give.
may give to others. The second [is] that we use.
exercise our liberality for the measure of our substance.
according to our ability. The third [is] that we give not to whom we ought
not. But we must give either to [men] being commendable or praise worthy.
to them who are commended for virtue, or to them who prosecute us in honest
good will,
are lovingly affected toward us; or with whom some band of society does come
between to us or pas^e between us.
we have some special band of society: or to conclude, [to them] who [haue]
deserved well of us; to whom a kindness is to be measured back.
repayed even with usury: Last of all, repeating the degrees of humane
society from the chief fountain or spring.
first original, he co^pareth them amongst themselves, that so much may be
performed how much.
as is due to every one. But Seneca has written most carefully.
diligently in many books concerning this part.

Let it be spoken furthermore, as it was purposed, of bounty and liberality.
LEt us now speak, as we had determined.
purposed, of bounty and liberality, then which certainly nothing is more
beseeming or agreeable to.
befitting the nature of man. But.
Not withstanding, it has diverse (...).
cautitions. For 1 First [wee] must see.
take heed lest our bounty.
that our bounty hurt not both those themselves to whom it shall seem to be
done bountifully.
those to whom we would seem to be ^ountifull and also others: afterward.
Secondly, that our liberality.
bounty be not greater then our substance.
more, then our ability: Then.
Thirdly, that we give to every one, according to their dignity. For that is
the foundation of Justice, whereunto all these things must be applied.
are to be referred. For both they that do a pleasure to any one which may
hurt him, whom they would seem to will or desire pleasure.
willing to profit, are not to be judged.
deemed bountious, nor liberal, but pestilent.
pernicious flatterers. And also they who.
that hurt others.
some, that they may be liberal to others, do fall into.
are in the same injustice, as if they should turn other men's goods into their
own. For there are: autem for enim.
And indeed there are many and [those] indeed.
and namely [those who] are desirous of honor and glory, who forceablely take.
catch away from some, that which they give vainly.
lavish to others. These also suppose that they shall seem bountiful toward
their own.
their friends, if they enrich them by any way.
any means. But that is so far off from Duty, that nothing can be more
contrary to Duty. We must therefore take heed, that we use we must see
therefore that.
such liberality, as may profit our friends, and hurt no body.
no man. Wherefore of L. Syll^.
L. Sil. las and C. Caesar's translating.
conueying of money.
goods from the just Lords or maister^
owners unto others.
strangers, ought not to be thought liberal.
liberality. For nothing is liberal which same.
which is not just. the other place of caution was, or the second caution.
The second point of caution was, that the liberality.
bounty should not be greater.
more then our ability; for that they that will be more bountiful.
liberal, then their substance.
ability does suffer, offend first in that.
this, that they are injurious neighbors or kinsmen, next any way.
to their next kin. for what riches it were more equal, etc.
For they convey those riches unto fremfolkes.
strangers, which it were more reason to be dealt and left to their kinsfolks.
to these. There is also for the most part in such liberality a greedy desire
of catching and taking away.
pulling away by injury, that store may abound.
that they may have store to give prodigally.
lavish out to others. we may also see.
Moreover, we may see the most part.
very many, not so liberal by nature, as led with a certain glory.
vain glory, that they may seem bountiful: which things may seem to come.
proceed rather from ostentation, then from a good will.
free heart. And such a dissembling, a nearer neighbor.
counterfeit show is nearer to vanity, then either to liberality or honesty.

The third thing propounded.
caution is, that in [our] liberality there should be a choice.
regard of dignity.
worthiness: wherein both his manners upon whom the benefit shall be bestowed
shall be looked unto.
are to be looked unto, and also his mind or good will.
affection toward us, and community and fellowship of life, and kindnesses
conferred.
performed before q good turns, or services or duties.
for our commodities: to our profit.
All which, it is a thing to be wished.
to be wished that they may meet together, that all which may concur it is to
be wished.
concur: If not, the more causes and the greater, shall have more weight [in
them].

In this chapter Tully discourses of bounty or liberality;

1. Giving it this comme^dation, that nothing is more be seeming man.

2. He teaches that three things are to be looked unto in it: as,

1. That our bounty neither hurt the^ to whom we would seem bountiful, nor
others.

2. That our bounty be not above our ability.

The third is, That we give to every one according to their dignity: for
this he counts the chief foundation of justice, whereunto all these are to
be referred.

Concerning the first of these three; he teaches us to beware of it: first,
because they, who pleasure others with that which may hurt them, are not to be
deemed bountiful, but pernicious flatterers.

And secondly, because they who hurt some to be bountiful therewith to others,
run into the same fault, as if they should take from others to i^rich
themselves thereby,

Now he shows that there are many of this later so^t; as namely all desirous
of glory: who suppose that they shall seem bountiful to their friends, if
they may enrich them by any means But this he teaches to be so far from
Duty, as that nothing can be more contrary unto it.

Whence he gives this general direction for our liberality to our friends,
That it be such as may do them good without the hurt of any man.

And so concludes, that the conueying of goods by Sylla and Caesar from the
just owners to others, ought not to be thought liberality; because nothing is
liberal which is not just.

Concerning the second caution, viz. That our bounty be not above our
ability, he gives these reasons of it: 1. Because such as will give beyond
their ability, are injurious to their next of kin: for that they convey those
riches to strangers, which it were more reason, should be dealt and left to
their kinsfolks.

2. Because there is commonly in such liberality a greedy desire of pulling
from some injuriously, that they may have to lavish to others:

3. Because this kind of liberality springs rather from vain glory then
good nature, only to the end that they may seem bountiful; and so rather
from ostentation, then a free heart.

So that he accounts ^uch a counterfeit show, nearer to vanity, then either
to liberality or honesty.

For the third cautio^ viz. That we give to every one according to their
dignity; he directs, that heerin we have a special regard of the
worthiness of each toward who^ we use our bounty; and therein to consider
both his manners and affection toward us, as also his neighborhood, society,
friendship, and kindnes^es to us.

All which he teaches, that it were to be wished they might concur; otherwise
the more of them and greater to have the more weight and respect with us in our
liberality.

Chap. 17.
manners to be looked unto.
Manners are to be considered, not according to the exact reason.
consideration of the wise Stoicke, but the civil pattern or resemblance.
image of virtue.

ANd because it is lived, lead our life.
we live not with perfect men, and thoroughly or absolutely wise.
fully wise, but with those.
such in whom it is done very well.
it is very well, if they be.
if there be [in them] resemblances of virtue; I think.
take this also meet to be understood.
considered, no man to be despised.
that we despise no man, in whom any signification, or show.
sign of virtue does appear. And every one to be so honored especially.
Also that every man be specially so regarded, as each shall be chiefly
adorned
more specially graced with these milder virtues, [ viz.] moderation.
modesty, temperance, and that same iuslice q we have spoken much before.
of which *many things are spoken already. For a valiant mind and great.
a hauty and a great spirit.
courage is for the most part more fervent, in a man not perfect nor wise.
who is too short in perfection and wisdom: [but] these viz. modesty,
temperance and justice.
virtues seem rather to touch.
appertain to a good man. And these things [may be considered] in manners.

Tully declares in this chapter, what is to be considered concerning men's
manners spoken of before, for the guiding of our liberality.

And first, that we neglect no man, in whom there appears any show of
virtue.

Hereof also he gives this reason; Because we live not with men who are
perfect and absolutely wise; but with such as in whom, we think it very
well, if there be but resemblances of virtue.

2. That we regard every one the more as he shall be more graced with the
mild virtues of modesty, temperance and Justice: and then gives the reason
hereof;

Because hauty courages and hot spirits are not usually in the wisest men;
but contrarily those milder virtues, viz. of Temperance and Justice, seem
commonly to follow a good man.

Chap. 18.
how we are to consider.
How the good will of others toward us, is to be esteemed.
considered.

And.
NOw concerning the good will which every one bears.
has toward us; that is the chief point in Duty, that we give most to him,
of whom we are beloved most. But let us judge
we must measure good will, not after the guise or fashion.
manner of young men, by a certain feruency.
heat of love; but rather by assuredness and steadfastnesse.
stabilitie and constancy.

Here Tully teaches how we are to consider of men's affections toward us.

And first, that this is to be looked unto principally; that we give most to
him of whom we are most beloved. 2. That we measure men's affections toward
us, not by a certain heat of love for a fit, as young men are wont to do; but
by the stability and constancy thereof.

Chap. 19.
How kindness is to be requited to them who have if there shall be deserts.
well deserved of us.

But if the deserts [of men] be such, that favor is not to be gone into or to
besought, but to be requited.
we are not to seek to creep into favor, but to requite kindness; a
certain greater care is to be added.
used, for.
because there is no Duty more necessary then thankfulness.
requiting of thankfulness.
thanks.

For if Hesiode co^mandes to restore those things which you have received to
use or occupy.
borrowed for your use, with a greater.
larger measure, if that you can; what then ought we to do being provoked by
a benefit.
kindness? Ought we not to imitate the fruitful.
fertile fields; which bring much more then they have received? For if we
doubt not.
stick not to bestow kindnesses upon them, whom we hope will profit us.
do us good hereafter; what ones.
what manner of men ought we to be toward them, who have done us good
already?

For whereas there be two kinds of liberality, one of giving.
bestowing a benefit, the other of requiting, whether we will give or no is in
our own power, choice
it is in our own power whether we will give or no: [but] not to restore is
not lawful for a good man.
it is not lawefull for a good man not to restore, if so that he can do it
without injury. There are also choises.
respects to be had of benefits received: neither [is there any] doubt, but
most is due to each greatest, or who has done us the greatest kindness.
to every the greatest. Wherein yet it is especially to be considered.
weighed, with what mind, affection, and good will every one.
any man does it.
has done it. For many men do many things of or through.
in a certain rashness.
headiness, without judgment, reason
discretion or measure, toward all [alike:] or else being stirred up by force
of mind.
carried with violence of affection, as with a certain rushing.
sudden wind: which kindenesses.
benefits are not to be accounted so great, as those which are deferred or given
offered with judgment, considerately.
adui sedly and constantly. But in gratifying any.
bestowing of a benefit, and in requiting kindness, (if [all] other things be
alike.
correspondent) this is chiefly of Duty.
this is a principal point of Duty; that as every one.
any one stands especially.
most in need of [our] aid.
help, so to help him especially. Which is done by the most.
of very many contrariwise.
clean contrary.

For from whom.
of whom they hope for most, although he have no need of these things
of them, yet they respect him.
serve him chiefly.
especially.

Tullie in this chapter gives directions for requiting of men's kindnesses to
us; and first teaches that we ought to have a special care hereof. Because
there is no Duty more necessary then it.

2. That we ought to repay such kindnesses with a greater measure then we
received them.

This he proves first, by the testimony of Hesiode, commanding to restore
things borrowed for our use, with fuller measure, if we can; and therefore much
more such good turns, as have been done us frankly, and whereby we have bin
provoked; herein imitating the fertile fields.

Secondly, he shows it by another reason from the less thu^; That if we
stick not to bestow benefits on them who (we hope) will do us good
hereafter, much more ought we on them, who have done us good already.

3. Whereas there are two kinds of liberality, one of bestowing a benefit,
the other of requiting; he teaches, that howsoever it is in a man's own power
whether he will freely give a benefit or no; that yet it is not in any case
lawful for a good man, not to requite a kindness, if he can do it without
injury to any.

3. For kindenesses received, that we have special regard: because howsoever
we owe most to him of whom we have received most; yet we are to weigh with
what mind and affection any one has benefited us. Because many men do such
things upon a certain headiness without discretion, and toward all alike, or
carried with some violence of affection: which benefits he teaches not to be
so great, as those which are bestowed with judgment, advice and constancy.

Lastly, that in all these, this is a principal part of Duty; that (all other
things being answerable) we help him most that sta^ds in most need: though
men commonly deal clean contrarily; giving to them most, of whom they look
for most, although they have no need.

Chap. 20.
What order [is to be obserued] in the Joining together o^ familiari^e.
neighborhood of life: and first concerning the universal society of all
mortal men.

But the fellowship, love.
society, and neighborhood of men shall be preserved best.
best maintained, if as each, or any one.
every one shall be the nearest [vnto vs] so most liberality shall be
bestowed on him.
we shall bestow most kindness.
liberality upon him. But it seems we must to repeat more deeply.
fetch somewhat further, what are the beginnings of.
natural first things or principles of nature
principles of neighborhood and the fellowship of man.
humane society: for, the first [principle.]
the first is that, which appears.
is seen in the society of all mankind. And the bond thereof is reason and
speech: which wins one man to another.
reconcileth men amongst themselves, and joins them together in a certain
natural society by teaching, learning, communicating.
conferring, disputing.
reasoning, and judging. Neither are we further away in any thing.
do we differ more in any thing from the nature of savage.
wild beasts: in which we say often times strength to be i^*
that there is fortitude, as in horses, [and] in lions; but we do not say [
justice, equity, or goodness to be in them.
that there is in them] justice, equity [or goodness:] for they are void of
reason and speech. And surely this is the society.
fellowshippe which this is the largest spreading fellowship.
extends most largely to men amongst themselves, and to all amongst
themselves.
amongst all: in the which a community of all things, which Nature has given
or afforded.
bred to the common use of men, is to be kept so, as those things which are
described.
appointed by Statutes and the Civil law, be so kept.
holden as it is ordained: of which same things.
besides which [all] other things are to be so observed, as it is in the Greek
proverb; All things to owe to be.
to be common among friends. And.
Likewise all those things do seem to be common of men.
to all men, which are of the same kind: which being put [for example] by
^nnius in one thing, may be applied.
transferred unto many; [thus.]

A man who courteously shows the way to one out of his way,

Does, as if he should light a light.
candle of his light.
at his candle;

That nevertheless it may light himself, when he has kindle it to him.
lighted the other.

For that one precept is sufficient.
there is sufficient commanded by one thing, that whatsoever can be lent
without loss or hurt.
hindrance it.
be granted to every one, even unknown.
yea though unknown. Whereupon those things are common.
are those common sayings; Not to forbid q the running water to any.
[* any] the running water: to suffer [any that will] to take fire from [our]
fire; to give faithful counsel to one deliberating.
to him that asks advice: which things are profitable to those who receive
[the^] [and] not troublesome or burdensome.
hurtful to the giver. Wherefore we must both use those things, and do
something to further the common commodity
always bring somewhat to the common commodity. But because the of every one
by himself.
substance riches.
of each private man is small, and the multitude of them who need these riches.
it is infinite, common liberality must be referred to that end which Ennius
speaks of.
of Ennius, that nevertheless it may shine to him self.
light himself; That we may have ability, wherewith we may be liberal to our
own.

Here Tully sets down certain things concerning the neighborhood and
society of men, and how it may be best maintained.

And first gives this general precept; that as every one is nearest unto us,
so we bestow most on him.

Secondly, notes the degrees of neighborhood and society in nature.

And therein the first is, that which is seen in the general society of all
mankind: the bond whereof he shows to be reason and speech.

Because these join men together in a certain natural society, by teaching,
learning, conferring, reasoning, iudgeing and the like: and also because these
make men to differ most from the nature of beasts: which though they may have
hardi nesse as in Lions, horses, etc. and other such like qualities: yet can
they not have justice or goodness, because they want reason and speech.

Thirdly, he shows that this society extends it self most largely to all
men amongst themselves; and that to this end, a community of all things which
nature has made to the co^ mon use, be kept according as they are appointed by
Statutes and the Civil law;

And for all other things, that they be so observed, as it is in the Greek
proverb; That all things be common among friends.

Fourthly, he notes more particularly, what Duties ought to be common to be
performed to al, besides those appointed by laws; viz. what good soever we may
do to others, without hurt to our selves: and that we are to perform the
same even to them whom we know not; according to the saying of Ennius: as,

To show the way courteously to one going out of his way. To light another man's
light from ours. So, not to for-

So, not to forbid any the running water. To suffer any one to take fire from
our fire. To give faithful counto each asking ou^ advice.

And generally to yield whatsoever things are profitable to the receiver, not
hurtful to the giver.

Whence he concludes that as we are to use these things our selves; so ever to
have respect to the common good of all:

Yet here he gives another caution. That because the substance of each private
man is small, and the multitude of them that stand in need is infinite; that
every one so order his liberality that first he look to himself and his, and
so to all other in their place, and as they are nearer to him or further off in
degree.

Chap. 21.
THere be also more degrees of society of men. for to leave that endless
number.
For that we may depart from that infiniteness, there is a nearer [degree];
To be of the same country or people.
stock, nation, [and] tongue.
language, by which.
whereby men are chiefly.
especially knit together.

It is also more inward.
near, to be of one.
the same City. for there are many things common to citizens among themselves.
For citizens have many things common amongst themselves; the place where the
court is kept or the market.
Common Hall, temples.
Churches, porches or galleries.
Gallerie walks, ways.
High ways, Laws, rights.
Privileges, Judgments, Voices in election, Customs besides.
likewise and Familiarities, also many matters and reasons [couenants or
dealings] contracted.
Bargains with many. But sundry.
a faster k^ting [of men] together, is q a straighter binding together or
nearer.
of the fellowship of kinsfolks. For from that infinite or innumerable.
unmeasurable society of mankind, it is shut up into very little and straight
[place.]
it is driven into a little and a narrow compass. For since.
whereas this is common of all living creatures.
to all living creatures by nature, that they have a lust of procreation,
breeding or ingendring.
a desire of procreation; the first society is in wedlock it self.
in the very wedlock, the next in children and then.
and after that one house, to which.
whereto all things are common. And that.
this is the beginning.
original of a City, and as it were the seminary.
seedplot of a Co^monweale. [Then] follow the conjunctions or societies of
brethren do follow.
kinreds of brethren; after, of cousin germans, viz. brethren and sisters
children.
brothers children and sisters children: which when they cannot now be taken
or holden.
contained in one house, get them abroad into other houses, as into new towns.
Colonies. [Afterwardes] do follow marriages.
entermariages and affinities.
alliances, of which also more.
many kinsfolk [do spring.
arise.] Which multiplication.
propagation and issue or offspring.
succession is the original of commonweals.

And so the fellowship or matching of bloods.
conjunction of blood and good will [thereupon] binds.
knitteth men in love together. For it is a great matter to have the same
monuments of our ancestors, to use the same holy rites.
religion, to have sepulchers, or places of burial common.
the same burying places. But of all societies there is none more excellent.
better, none more sure or stable.
firm, then when good men like in manners.
conditions, are conjoined.
linked together in familiarity. For that honesty, (which we have often times
spoken of.
mentioned) although we see it in another, yet it allureth us.
moves us; and makes us to be friendly.
friends to him, in whom it seems to be in, or to dwell.
be. And although every virtue, or all kind of virtues.
all virtue allureth us to her.
it self, and makes that we love them.
causes us to love them in whom it seems to be; yet Justice and Liberality
q effects it.
to be in, viz. dwell or harbor.
works that q especially.
most of all. And indeed.
But, there is nothing more amiable.
that wins more love, nor more coupling together.
that linketh men more surely together, then similitude of good manners.
a likeness of good conditions. For in whom there are like studies.
the same desires, the same wills.
minds, it is done in these.
it comes to pass amongst these, that each is delighted equally with, etc.
that either is as much delighted with the other as with himself: and that is
effected or comes to pass.
is brought to pass, which Pythagoras wills.
requires in friend ship, that one be made of many.
many become one. Also that community of fellowship, or societies
common fellowship is great, which is made of.
grows of benefits or good turns.
kindnesses given and taken.
received to and fro. which kindnesses.
Which whilst they are common from one to another, and such as pleasure one
another.
mutual and pleasuring, they amongst whom those [kindnesses] are.
those happen, are tied in fast fellowship.
linked in a firm society.

But when you have viewed or perused.
considered all things, in reason and mind
discourse and reason; there is none of all societies.
of all societies there is none more acceptable, none more dear, then that
which is to every one of us.
which every one of us has with the Co^mon-weale. [Our] parents [are] dear,
[our] children [are] dear.
Dear are our parents, dear are our children, [our] q [our] kinsfolks and
familiar [friends] [are] dear.
kinsfolks, and familiars: but our Country alone contaynes [in it selfe] all
the loves of all [these.] For which, what good man can or would.
could doubt to ofter himself to death willingly, or to die.
to take his death, if he may profit the same.
do it good? By which [or by how much.]
Whereby the beastly cruelty of these men is more detestable
more to be abhorred, who have torn in pieces, rende their country in sunder.
rent in sunder their Country with all horrible wickedness.
all manner of mischief, and both are and have been occupied in blotting it
out [or destroying it] utterly. See here the powder traitors and all of that
bloody faction.
in the utter overthrow thereof.

But if any contention and comparison be made.
question and comparison be made, to whom most duty ought to be yielded; our
Country and q most or duty ought to be given.
parents are the q principal.
chief, by whose q by the benefits of whom we are bound chiefly.
benefits we are especially bound: Al Our children Al next our children and our
whole house.
[are] next, and our whole family; which looks to us and can have no other
refuge.
hangs upon us alone, neither can have any other refuge.

And then.
Afterward our kinsfolks agreeing well [with vs] with whom for most part a
common fortune.
who also commonly have the same estate. Wherefore the necessary comforts.
aids of life, are due to those especially whom I spoke of before: but life
and commonnesse of table.
conversation and common living, counsels, communications
speeches, exhortrtions, comfortings.
consolations, and sometimes.
otherwhiles ch^dings, do flourish especially.
are most usual amongst friends. And that is the most pleasant friendship.
that friendship is the pleasantest, which the similitude of manners.
likeness of conditions has yoked together.
linked in one.

Chap. 21.
In this chapter he sets down sundry degrees of the society of men. And
first, how after the general society with all, these are nearer degrees; 1. To
be of the same stock, nation and language, whereby men are more specially
knit together.

2. To be of the same city, is a nearer degree. These also have many things
common among themselves, as common-hals, churches, walks, highways, laws
privileges, judgments, voices in election, customs, dealings, and the like,
to join them together.

3. A nearer degree is of kinsfolks, to be of the same kin, wherein the
society of men is brought into a narrow compass.

And here he teaches, what is the* very first and ^ighest society; and so
how that ascends and spreads.

That whereas there is in all living creatures a natural desire of
procreation, so also in man: whence the first society is in wedlock, the
second in children, a third in one house whereto most things are common.

This he shows to be the original of a city, and as it were the seed plot
of a common weal. A fourth society he notes to be of cousin germans, viz. of
brethren and sisters children: which when they so increase that they can not be
contained in one house, do get them abroad into other houses as into
colonyes, or new towns.

After do follow entermariages:

Whence arises a fifth society; viz. of alliances of kinsfolks by marriage, of
which many kin do spring.

And this propagation he notes to be the original of commonweals. Also,
that this conjunction of blood and good will knitteth men in love together;

And that so much the more, because they have the same momuments of their
ancestors, religion, burying places, etc. which he notes to be a great
matter to knit the hearts of men in one.

5 But of all other societies he teaches that the excellentest and most firm,
is of friends; viz. when good men like in conditions, are linked together in
familiarity.

The reason hereof is, first, because the virtues which we see or imagine in
others, do most firmly bind us unto them, and especially Justice and
liberality.

And secondly, for the likeness of conditions in right friends; then wc^ he
shows that nothing wins more true love, nor linketh men more firmly: for
that in whom there are the same desires and minds, either of them is as much
delighted with the other as with himself; and thence a^iseth that which
Pithagoras requires in friendship; That many become one.

Furthermore, he teaches here, that the fellowship which grows of kindenesses
given and taken to and fro, is very great; because these being mutual and
pleasuring one another, must needs link men in a firm league.

Sixthly, he teaches, that yet all things being rightly considered, the most
acceptable and dear society of all others, is that which which every one
has with the common wealth.

This he proves by an argument from the less, thus; That howsoever our
parents are dear unto us, and so our kinsfolks and familiars, yet our country
alone contains in it self the loves of all these, and therefore ought to be
dearer to us then all these. So that no good man should doubt to lay down his
life for it, if he may do it good.

Whence he notes that the beastly cruelty of such men who seek the utter
overthrow of their countries, or the rending the same in pieces by any
mischief, ought to be abhorred of all. Lastly, he declares, that if yet
comparison and question be made, to which of these societies most duty ought to
be yielded; That,

1. Our country and parents are to be preferred, because we are specially
bound with their benefits.

2. That our children and whole family are next, because they depend upon us
alone.

3. Our kinsfolk carrying themselves well and lovingly toward us.

And to these principally he teaches, that the necessary aids of life
appertain; but that familiar conversation, counsels, speeches, exhortations,
consolations and otherwhile chidings, are most usual amongst friends.

And in a word, that of all friendships that is the pleasantest which is linked
by likeness of conditions.

Chap. 22.
The Argument.
It behooves the Duties of liberality to be looked unto not only, etc.
The Duties of Liberality ought to be considered, not only from.
by these degrees of society, but also by other circumstances.

1 But in distributing or performing al these
doing all these Duties, it is to be seen.
we must mark what is most needful.
necessary for every man, and what every one can attain or cannot.
is either able or unable to attain with us or without us. Therefore the
degrees of friendship must not be alike to the degrees of times.
shall not be the same, which [are] of times.

2 Al There are Al. And there are Duties.
certain Duties which are due rather.
more due to some then to others: as, you shall sooner help your neighbor in
getting.
inning [his] corn, then either your brother, or your familiar friend.

But if there be a controversy in judgment.
trauerse in law, you shall rather defend your kinsman and friend then your
neighbor.

These things therefore, and the like are to be warily looked unto.
thoroughly considered in every Duty; also custom and exercise.
practice is to be taken.
are to be used, that we may be able to give up a good account.
good reckners.
makers of account of Duties: to see by adding and deducting what may be the
sum of the rest or remainder.
what sum remains of the rest. Whereupon you may understand, viz. a man may
understand.
we may understand how much is due to every one. But, as neither Physicia^s,
nor Captains* nor Orators, although they have perceived [or attained] the
precepts
gotten the rules of [their[art, can attain to any thing worthy great praise.
commendation, without use and exercise.
practice: so indeed those rules of observing.
keeping Duty are set down or delivered.
taught us, that we our selves may do them
should put them in ure. But.
For the greatness or difficulty.
hardness of the matter requires also use and exercise. And we have said
almost enough.
And thus have we spoken almost sufficiently, how honesty from which [all]
Duty arises or comes
springs, is drawn or fetched.
derived from those things, which are in the law of right of man's fellowship.
humane society.

Tully in this chapter sets down some other Duties, concerning our bounty
and liberality: as,

1. that in performing Duties to each society mentioned, we must still
consider, what is most necessary for every man; and then what each is able to
attain of himself, and what he cannot without our help: and that the
degrees of friendship and of times are not always alike.

2. That there are certain Duties more due to some further from us in degree
then others nearer. As, that we are sooner to help out neighbor in inning his
corn then our brother, or familiar friend; but in a trauerse of law a man is
rather to defend his kinsman or friend then his neighbor.

3. That as we are thoroughly to consider these things in every Duty, so also
to put them in ure: that by long custom and practice we may become expert to
know what is due to every man.

This he makes plain by a similitude taken from Physicia^s, Captains and
Orators; who although they have gotten the rules of their art, yet cannot
attain ought worthy any great commendation, without use and practice.

And also that all the rules of Duty are taught us that we may practice them;
and for that the hardness of the matter requires use and exercise.

And thus concludes this point, how honesty is derived from those things
which are in the law of humane society.

Chap. 23.
The Argument.
The third fountain of Duty [18] of valiantness of courage, nobleness of
stomach or fortitude.
Magnanimity: which does come from.
is bred of a contempt of humane things, and a certain amplitude or greatness.
nobleness of mind: and it is declared especially in going to [or attempting]
perils.
dangerous attempts, and going about.
atchieuing difficult matters. There is to this at the right [hand.]
This has at the right hand foolish hardiness or ouer^entrous boldness.
a^daciousnesse, (...).
obstinacy, proud presumption.
outrageous fierceness, confidence [or presumption.]
arrogancy, cruelty, frowardness.
rash confidence, cruelty or tyranny
weiwardnesse, anger, an immoderate desire of honor.
rigor, timorousness.
ambition; at the left hand slothfulness.
fearfulness, blockishnesse.
cowardlinesse, that.
stupiditie, and [other] vices of that.
the same kind. Also Magnanimity is practiced.
exercised partly in martial business or matters of war or chivalry.
warlike matters, but more in civil affairs, and to conclude in the private
life, concerning all which Cicero.
Tully disputes.
discourses diversely.

But we must understand, whereas four kinds [of virtue] are propounded, from
which Honesty and Duty should slay.
pro ceed; that to seem most bright, or most glorious.
that seems to shine most brightly, which is done.
wrought with a great and haughty courage.
lofty spirit, despising humane things.
worldly vanities. Therefore [that] is especially in readiness.
commonly ready in reproachful speeches.
reproach, if any such thing may be said.

For in truth ye young men do bear.
carry womanlike minds.
womanish hearts.

And that maid.
virgin [the heart] of a man.

And if there be any thing like to this.

O Salmacis thou give.
give spoils without blood or sweat.

And contrarily in praises, I wot.
know not how, we praise those things, as with a more full mouth, which are
done with a noble.
great courage, both.
valiantly and excellently. Hence is the [large] discourse.
field of the Rhetoricia^s, concerning Maratho, Salamis, the Plateans,
Thermopilanes, Luctrians, and [concerning] Stratocles. Hereby our Cocles,
hereby the Decians, hereby Cneius and P. the Scipioes.
Scipio, hereby M. Marcellus and innumerable others, and especially the very
people of Rome has the commendation to excel.
excels in valorousnesse or nobleness.
greatness or courage. And [their] desire of warlike.
Martial glory is declared, for that we see even [ their images of honor set
up or statues.
their] pictures for most part in military attire, or the attire of soldiers.
in warlike array.

Here Tully enters to speak of fortitude, showing it self in a brave mind,
despising these external things; teaching that it seems the most glorious of
all the four cardinal virtues.

This he proves first by the usual reproaches and taunts which are cast upon
men for their lack of courage:

As the speech of the General in Ennius taunting the cowardlinesse of the
soldiers;

That they bare but womanish hearts, and that a maid by her valor put them
all to shame.

And again: That the Salmatian spoils were without sweat or blood. Secondly,
by the contrary praises, and the exceeding commendations of such exploits as
are done valorously and with a noble spirit.

This he further illustrateth,

1. By the ample praises of the Rhetoricians both of his own and former times,
concerning sundry valorous persons, their noble acts, and places where;
especially of the people of Rome, whose chief fame was for their valor.

And lastly, for that whom the people of Rome would chiefly honor, they
erected them pictures in honor of them, for most part in warlike attire.

Chap. 24.
valor or manhood.
Fortitude if it depart from honesty, to lose.
loses the name of fortitude.
the name.

1 But that loftiness of mind or courage.
spirit which is seen in perils and in labors.
trauells, if it want of justice.
be void of justice and fight not for the common good.
safety, but for the own commodities [or a man's private gain]
private commodity, is in fault [or is to bereckoned faulty]
is faulty. For that is not only not the property of virtue.
no property of virtue, but rather of fierceness.
brutishness, repelling all humanity.
setting all humanity aparte.

2 Therefore valor therefore.
fortitude is well defined of the Stoiks, when they say, it to be a virtue.
that it is a virtue contending.
fighting for in defense of equity.
equity. Wherefore no man that has attained the glory of fortitude, [euer] got
[that] praise, by wily trains and naughty dealing.
treachery, and naughty deceit: for nothing can be honest which is void of
justice. That therefore of Plato is worthy.
Therefore that is a worthy saying of Plato: Not only (quoth he) [that]
knowledge which is removed.
severed from justice is rather to be called craftiness.
subtilty then wisdom; but also a courage which is prepared.
forward to danger, if it be enforced or thrust forward.
set on by the own covetousness or desire of gain.
for ones own greediness, and not for the common profit.
good, may rather have name of rash or lewd hardiness.
audaciousnesse then of manhood.
fortitude. And therefore we would have valiant and noble minded men.
men who are valorous and puissant, to be good and simple.
plain hearted, friends.
lovers of truth, and nothing at all deceitful; which are of the middle praise
of Justice
of the midst of all the praises of justice.

3 But that is odious, that in this
such hautinesse and greatness of courage, there grows very soon.
most easily obstinacy.
a wilfulness, and and ouer-great desire of bearing rule. For as it is in
Plato.
as Plato writes, that the general fashion of the Lacedaemonians, was to be
inflamed with a desire of conquering: even so every one as he does most excel
in greatness of courage, so he specially desires to be prince.
chief of all, or rather to be alone.
without p^ere. And when you shall earnestly desire.
a man coueteth to excel all.
to be above all, it is a difficult thing to keep equity, which belongs
properly.
is most proper to justice. Whereupon it comes to pass, that they cannot
abide that they should be ouercomn or bridled.
endure themselves to be ouercomn, neither by reasoning, nor by any public and
lawful right.
by any common and right order of law. And they become for the most part
giuers of great gifts.
bribers and makers of factions.
factious, that they may attain the greatest wealth, and be rather superiors
by power, then equal by justice. but by how much that is more difficult, by so
much [it is] more famous.
But the harder it is [to master this affection] the worthier it is* For there
is no season.
time that ought to want.
to be without justice. They therefore are to be accounted valorous and of a
worthy courage, not who do, but who drive away injury.
not who do wrong, but withstand it. But a true and wise valor of mind
judges that honesty which* nature chiefly follows, to be put.
to consist in deeds and not in glory; himself to be chief.
and had rather himself to be chief.
be the chief, then to seem so. For whosoever.
he that depends upon the error.
erroneous conceit of the unskillful multitude.
rude multitude, he is not.
is not to be accounted in great men.
in the number of valiant men. But as every man is of courage most high and
desirous of glory, [so] is he most easily enforced or eged on.
driven on to unjust doings.
matters. which is indeed a very slippery place
Which place is indeed slipperie, because there is scarce any man found, who,
labors being undertaken and perils gone into or a^chiued.
when he has sustained trauells, and adventured dangers, does not desire
glory as a reward of his labors.

Tullie in this chapter teaches, how to discern of true fortitude.

And first, that bold nesse in dangers, if it be either void of justice, or
fight for a man's private commodity and not for the common good, is not true
fortitude: because it is no property of virtue, but rather of brutishness,
setting aside all humanity.

Secondly, he commends that definition of fortitude, given by the Stoiks;
That it is a virtue fighting for equity.

And thereupon infers first, that no man ever attained the praise of true
fortitude by treachery or naughty dealing: for that nothing can be honest
which is not just.

Secondly, commends a worthy saying of Platoes to this end;

That as knowledge severed from justice is rather called subtletie then wisdom;
so a courage, though forward to perils, yet if it be set on for greediness of
gain or other private respects, and not for the common good, ought rather to be
termed audaciousnesse then valor.

And thirdly thereon exhorts all who would be truly valorous, to be good men
and of plain hearts, lovers of truth, and free from all deceit; because these
virtues rightly deserve the praise of justice.

In the third place, he reprooues another odious fault which attends upon too
great hautinesse of mind: that commonly such men become headie, and are
ouer-desirous of ruling.

This he proves by the testimony of Plato, showing this to be the general
fashion of the Lacedaemonians, to be inflamed with a desire of conquering: and
that hence; because as any one more excels in courage, so he more desires
to be chief of all and without peer.

And then declares other mischiefs following in them hereupon: as first,
injustice; because it is hard for such to keep equity.

2. Pride, so as they cannot endure to yield to others either in reasoning or
any right trial of law.

3 Bribing or corrupting others by gifts and making factions, whereby they may
attain the greatest wealth and become rather superiors by wealth, then equal
by justice.

But yet he teaches that the harder it is for such valorous minds to be
just, the more excellent it is in them who attain it.

Lastly, he concludes heerupon that they only are to be accounted valorous,
not who do wrong to any; but they who save others from wrong.

And that true valor judges that excellency, which nature aims at
chiefly, to consist in deeds and not in glory.

Also that all who are truly valorous had rather be the chief indeed then to
seem so. Because he who depends on the erroneous co^ ceipt of the rude
multitude, is not to be reckoned in the number of val^ant men.

And besides, because the brauest minds and most desirous of glory are the
easiliest over carried to unjust actions.

And finally, that therefore valorous minds do stand in a very tickle and
slippery place: because it is hard to find a man, who hauiug atchiued great
exploits and dangerous adventures, desires not glory as a reward of his labors.

Chap. 25.
True magnanimity.
valor of mind does consist in two things chiefly: in contemning both
prosperous and adverse things.
prosperity and adversity, and in performing hard matters.
atchiuing hard enterprises.

A Valorous and great mind is altogether.
always discerned in two things especially: whereof the one consists in the
contempt.
despising of outward things: when it is persuaded to a man.
one is persuaded* a man to owe to admire, wish or to desire earnestly nothing
but that, etc.
that a man ought not either to admire, or to wish, or earnestly to desire any
thing, but what is honest and comely; and to yield to none, neither man.
neither to yield to no.
any either man, or passion or affection.
perturbation of mind, nor to fortune.

The other thing is, that when you are so affected*
disposed in mind, as I said before, you do.
undertake great matters.
enterprises, and those indeed most profitable, but vehemently.
very hard, and full of travel and danger both of life, and also of many
things which to life do belong.
appertain unto life. All the splendor or shining brightness.
glory and dignity.
honor of these two things, I add also.
moreover, the profit stands*
is in the later; but the cause and means making worthy men, is in the
former. For that is [or consists] therein.
therein is that which makes excellent courages, and despising worldly vanities.
and such as despise all humane things. And this same thing.
same is seen.
appears in two things; if you both judge that thing only to be good which
is honest, and also be free from all perturbation or vexation of mind.
disquietnesse. For it is to be accounted the part of a valiant and worthy
mind, both to account small, or make small reckoning of.
set light by those things, which seem to most men picked out, or most notable
or choice.
singular and very famous.
excellent; and also to contemn the same with a steadfast.
stable and firm reason.
grounded judgment. And likewise this is [a toke^] of a valiant courage and of
great constancy, so to bear those things which seem bitter, which being many
and diverse are conversant [or fall out.]
whereof there are many and diverse in the life and and fortune [or condition]
of men.
state of man, that you depart nothing.
as that you nothing swerue from the state.
order of nature, nothing from.
nor from the dignity of a wise man. Moreover, it is not agreeable or likely.
suitable him to be broken
that he should be subdued with covetous desire.
inordinate desire, who cannot be broken.
subdued by fear. Nor him to be ouercomn of pleasure.
that he should be conquered by pleasure, who has showed himself i^uincible.
unconquerable by labor.
by [any] travel. Wherefore both these [vices] are to be shunned.
avoided, also covetousness of money is to be fled.
eschewed. for nothing is of ^o strict and little a courage.
For there is no such a sign of a base and ignoble mind, as to love riches:
nothing honest
nor any thing more commendable.
honest and magnificent.
noble, then to contemn.
despise money, if you have it not; [and] if you have it to employ it unto.
bestow it in bounty and liberality. The desire likewise of glory is to be
taken heed of, as I said before. For it plucketh away liberty.
freedom of mind, for the which all contention ought to be to courageous men.
amongst men of worthy spirits.

Neither verily [are] empires to be earnestly desired, and rather not to be
received sometimes, or now and then to be laid down.
And indeed we ought nor to seek for rule; but rather, sometimes either not to
receive it, or otherwhile to give it over. We must also be free from all
passion or disquietnesse of mind.
perturbation of mind, both from desire, and fear, and also from sickness of
mind.
grief, and pleasure of mind.
voluptuousness, and angrinesse; that quietness of mind may be preserved and
voidness of care.
that we may enjoy tranquillity and security, which may bring both
steadfastness and also dignity.
constancy, and also worthy estimation.

But many there are and have been, who earnestly desiring that same quietness.
tranquillity of mind, which I speak of, have removed.
withdrawn themselves from q public * common affairs
businesses, and have fled or got themselves away.
betaken themselves unto idleness, quietness or ease.
a quiet life.

In these.
Amongst these, both the noblest Philosophers, and far the princes or chief.
and even the very chief [of them] others also constant or upright.
and indeed both severe and grave men, could neither bear.
endure the manners of the people, nor of the princes.
rulers; and some of them.
many of them have lived in fields or desert places, or the fielden country.
manor places, delighted [onely] with matter belonging to their family or
private business.
their home matters. The same thing has bin propounded to these which also
[hath bin] to kings.
These aimed at the same end, which kings do; that they might need nothing,
that they might not obey any man, that they might use liberty.
obey no man, use their own liberty: whose property it is, to live so as you
will.
as they list. Wherefore, ^ith this is common of them who are covetous.
both to them who are desirous of ruling or to be great.
of power, with those (whom I spoke) leading the quiet life [or idle.]
and those seeking a quiet life, whom I spoke of; the one sort think
themselves to be able to obtain it.
that they can attain it, if they have great wealth; the other, if they be
content both.
with their own and with a little.
and a little.

In which indeed.
Wherein verily the opinion of neither [of them] is to be contemned altogether.
is utterly to be despised. But.
For the life of the idle or free from great business
those who have betaken them selves to live quietly, is both more easy and
more safe, and less grievous or troublesome to others: but [the life] of them
who have fitted themselves to the commonweal.
applied themselves for the good of the Commonweal, and to do worthily or go
through with
atchiue great matters, is more fruitful or beneficial to the kind of men.
profitable for mankind, and more apt.
fitter for fame and greatness.
honor. Wherefore peradventure it may be yielded to those not going to take,
etc.
it may be that both they are to be borne withal, who do not taken in hand
or meddled with the commonweal, viz. to deal in such matters.
undertake the affairs of the Commonwealth, who being of an excellent wit,
have applied.
given themselves wholly to quietness and to learning: and and also to those.
also they who being hindered by imbecility of their health.
sickness, or some other more weighty cause, have gone back [or departed]
from the common weal.
retired themselves from businesses of the Common -- weal, when as they
granted.
yielded unto others both the authority or liberty.
power and commendation.
praise of managing of the same.

But to whom there is no such cause.
occasion, if they say, themselves to despise.
that they con temne those things which most men admire
have in admiration, [as] rule and bearing office.
magistracy; I think it to be given to those not only not for praise, but also
for a fault.
to those I think it worthy to be accounted not only no commendation, but
also a fault.

The judgment of whom, in that they contemn glory and count it for nothing,
is a thing difficult to be done not to allow or approve.
Whose judgment it is very hard to disallowe, in that they despise glory, and
esteem it as nothing. But they seem to think.
fear the travels and.
troubles and griefs both of offenses.
giving offense, and also of having repulses.
repulses, as a certain reproach and infamy. For there be [some] who are
little constant to themselves.
do not agree with themselves in contrary matters; who do most severely
contemn pleasures, are more tender in grief^s, regard not glory, [and] be
broken.
ouercomne with infamy. And these things indeed [they doe] not constantly
enough.
very inconstantly. But magistracies or governments.
offices are to be obtained.
gotten, and the Common -- wealth is to be governed by them.
served of them, who have helps of dispatch of business by nature.
by nature helps of dispatch of business, all lingering cast away.
set aside. For otherwise neither can a city.
the State be governed or the greatness of courage be declared.

Moreover, both a magnificence.
majesty and contempt.
despising of vvorldly things (which I speak of often.
I often repeat) also quietness.
tranquillity of mind and voidnesse of care.
security is to be added or practiced to them going to take the common wealth.
used of them, who take vpthem [any] government in the Commonweal, nothing
less then of Philosophers, I wot not.
know not whether [not] yea much more I suppose.
more also; if so be that they will not be careful.
overmuch oppressed with cares, and.
but will lead their life.
live with gravity and constancy. Which things be so much more easy to
Philosophers, by how much not so many things in their life lie open, which
fortune may strike.
the fewer things they have in their life, which fortune may strike; and by how
much they less need many things.
and for that they do not stand in need of many things, and also because they
cannot fall so grievously, if any adversity shall fall out.
betide.

Wherefore, not without cause, greater motions of [their] minds are stirred
up, and greater * enterprises
q matters are meet to be compassed.
to be done by them who manage the commonweal.
the governors of the Common-vveale, then by them who live quietly. And q the
quiet or private.
therefore by how much both greatness of courage and freedom from griefs is
more to be added to these
the more greatness of courage and freedom from vexations is to be used of
them. Moreover, whosoever comes to perform a business.
to atchieue any great matter, let him take heed, 1 That he do not only
consider that thing.
consider, how honest the matter is, but also, how it may have a faculty or
ability to be effected.
how it may be discharged.

2 In which same thing.
thing it is to be considered.
a man must consider, that he neither be out of hope.
despair through sluggishnesse, or lack of courage.
cowardlinesse, or trust overmuch
nor be over confident through a greedy desire. 3 Also a diligent preparation
is to be added.
used in all businesses, before you go into them or go in hand with them or
undertake them.
go about them.

Here Tully notes wherein a valiant mind is discerned: to wit, in two things
especially. The first whereof is, in despising outward things. When as a man is
persuaded that he ought neither to admire, not so much as to wish any thing
but that which is honest and comely: nor yet to yield either to man or passion
of mind or to fortune, but only to right reason.

The second is, that when a man is thus disposed in mind, he undertake the
atchieuing of great enterprises, and those such as may be most profitable; but
very hard and full of travel and danger, both unto life, and other things
appertaining to the com fort thereof.

Now, he shows that all the glory, honor and profit arising of these two
things, is in this later of them: but the cause and means of making wo^thie
men, is in the former of them; because the despising of all outward things, as
riches and honors, is the way to make excellent courages.

This again he teaches to appear in these two things: First, if a man judge
that thing only to be good which is honest; and secondly, if he be free from
all passion and disquietnesse of mind.

Because this is, first, to be accounted the true property of a valiant mind;
not only to set light by those outward things, which ^eem to most men
excellent and singular, but also to co^temn them with a stable judgment.

And secondly, because this declares a valiant courage and rare constancy,
for a man so to bear the hardest and bitterest things that can fall out in
this life, be they never so many, as that he never swerve one jot from the
state and order of nature; nor from the dignity of a wise man, to do any
thing against either of these.

And this again, because it is not meet that he should be ouercomne by any
inordinate desire, who cannot be overcome by fear; much less be conquered by
pleasure, who has showed himself unconquerable by any travel.

Therefore he teaches that these things are carefully to be shunned of a
valiant man; and also that covetousness of money is chiefly to be eschewed of
him. Because there is no such sign of a base mind, as to love riches; and
contrarily nothing more noble, then to despise money if a man have it not; and
if he have it, to bestow it in bounty and in liberality.

And secondly, that he is to beware of a desire of glory: because that plucketh
from him freedom of mind, for which all noble spirits ought chiefly to contend.

Thirdly, that he do not proudly seek for soueraintie; but sometimes not to
receive it being offered, otherwhile to give it over, being had.

Fourthly, that he labor to be free from all perturbation of mind, as
namely desire, fear, grief, voluptuousness, and angrinesse; that so he may
inioye both tra^quillitie of mind and also security, which may bring him both
constancy and a worthy estimation.

Here he takes occasion to speak of some, who earnestly desiring to attain
this tranquillity, have withdrawn themselves from public businesses, and
betaken them to follow a quiet life.

And amongst others some of the noblest and very chief Philosophers, and some
most severe and grave men, because they could neither endure the manners of the
people, nor the rulers, have chosen to live in remote and solitary places,
delighting themselves only in their domestical occasions.

Also for these he shows what ends they aimed at herein; viz. the same ends
which kings do: that is, That they might need nothing, obey no man, use their
own liberty, and indeed live as they list.

Now both these sorts, viz. both Philosophers and great men aiming at this
tranquillity and freedom from all disquietnesse; the one sort, viz. the great
men think that they can obtain it, if they can get great wealth; the other, if
they can be content with their own and with a little.

And for these two sorts he declares that neither of their opinions are
utterly to be despised.

First, because the life of those who have betaken themselves to live privately
and quietly, is both more easy and safe, and also less grievous and
troublesome to others.

But the life of those who apply themselves to government, for the good of the
commonwealth, or to atchiue great matters: for the same, is more profitable to
mankind, and also more* fit for attayning fame and honor.

Moreover, he teaches that many of the^ who have chosen the private life may
be borne withal in another respect; because being of excellent wits they
betake themselves to the study of learning.

As also such as being hindered through infirmity of body, or some other more
weighty cause, have left the managing of the affairs of the commo^wealth to
others.

But for them who, have no such occasion, and yet withdraw themselves from
public services in the common wealth, only upon pretense that they contem^e
those things which most men so admire, as namely rule and magistracy; he
shows that he takes it to be not only no commendation to them, but a
fault in them: for that howsoever their judgment may seem not to be
altogether disallowed for despising glory, yet they may withal be thought to
fear the troubles and griefs which follow such callings, as a certain
reproach and infamy.

And then gives the reason hereof; because some are of such a disposition, as
that they agree not with themselves in contrary matters: as, who severely
contemning pleasures, cannot yet endure grief; and despising glory, are yet
ouercomn with infamy.

And therefore he teaches that such men who have the best helps of dispatch
of businesses are rather to sue for offices, that they may serve the
commonwealth, all delays and excuses set aside.

Because otherwise neither can the state be gouer^ed, nor their greatness and
worth declared.

Moreover, he shows, that all such as take upon them any government in the
common weal, are to despise worldly things, and to seek after quietness of
mind and security, as well as the Philosophers, or more, if that they will not
be overmuch oppressed with cares, but live with gravity and constancy.

And thereunto they must strive more earnestly, because the fewer things of the
world the Philosophers have to lose, the more easy is it, to despise it; and
also for that they do not stand in need of so many things, as the magistrate
and great man, neither can fall so grievously whatsoever adversity does betide.

Likewise, because such great comma^ders have occasions of greater stirrings of
their minds, and for that greater matters are to be don by them, then by
Philosophers: whereupon they have need of more greatness of courage and
freedom from vexations.

Lastly, he gives three caueats to all that are to atchiue any great matters.

1. That they take heed, they do not only consider, that the matter be
honest, but also that they have ability to perform it.

2. That they weigh all things so wisely, as that they neither despair,
through cowardliness of the effecting thereof, nor yet be over confident
through a greedy desire.

3. That as in all businesses, a man is to use a diligent preparation; so
likewise, as the matter is greater, to be more careful therein.

Chap. 26.
The Argument.
[Tully] teaches.
shows by many arguments.
reasons [in this Chapter] that it is more valiant.
a matter of greater valor, to excel in businesses belonging to the city
then to the war.
in civil then martial feats.
warlike affairs, and [speaketh] somewhat concerning himself.

1 But whereas very many men.
most men think things belonging to war, viz. martial feats.
martial affairs to be greater then city causes or matters.
civil, this opinion is to be diminished or abated.
altered. For many have often times sought wars, for the desire of glory; and
that falls out for most part in great minds or courages.
stomachs and [excellent] wits: and so much the rather, if they be [men] fit
for military service.
chiualry, and desirous of warfare. But.
Yet if we will judge truly.
aright, there have been many matters belonging to the city.
City businesses greater and more famous.
nobler, then the (...).
martial. 1 For although Themistocles be be commended by right or rightfully
or justly.
rightly commended, and his name be more famous then [the name] of Solons.
Solon; and also Salamis be cited [as] a witness of [this] most famous or noble.
glorious victory, which is preferred before the counsel of Solon, [euen] that
whereby he first ordained the Judges which determined weighty matters
concerning the commonwealth
Areopagites: [yet] this counsel of Solon.
this is to be thought.
adjudged no less commendable.
praise-worthie then that. 1 For that profited or did good once only.
auailed only once: this shall profit the city for ever.
shall for ever do good to the City. the laws of the Athenians [are
preserued] by this counsel, the institutions of the elders are preserved by
this.
By this counsel the laws of the Athenians, by this the ordinances of [their]
ancestors are preserved. And truly.
Moreover, Themistocles in very deed said nothing, wherewith he helped the
village of Mars where the Areopagites ^at in judgment or counsel.
Areopagus. But it is true Themistocles to have bin helped.
that Themistocles was helped by Solon.
him. For the war was managed.
maintained by the counsel or direction.
advice of that Senate which was constituted or appointed.
ordained by Solon. 2 We may say the same thing
the same concerning.
of Pausanias and Lisander: by whose valorous acts.
deeds of arms although the empire is thought to have bin enlarged to the
Lacedaemonians.
the Empire of the Lacedaemonians is thought to have been enlarged; yet in very
deed they are [not] to be compared to the laws, etc. not in the least part.
compared, no not in the least part to the laws and order.
discipline of Lycurgus. moreover they had, etc.
Moreover, upon these occasions.
for these same causes, they had [their] armies both more prepared or forward.
ready and more valiant for these same causes.
valiant. 3 Neither indeed we being children or when I was a child.
when we were children, Marcus Scaurus seemed to yield or give place.
to be inferior to Caius Marius; nor Q. C. etc.
nor when we were conversant or employed.
had to to do in the Common -- wealth, Q. C. seemed to give place, etc.
Quintus Catulus to Cneius Pompeius. For weapons or wars do little avail.
arms are of small force abroad, unless there be counsel.
good advice at home. 3 Nor Africanus, being both a singular man, and a worthy
an emperor or commander.
Captain, did profit more
did more service to the Common wealth in cutting down, destroying, beating
down or sacking.
razing of Numance, then P. N. being a private [man] did] at the same time
when, etc.
then at the same time, Publius Nasica a private [man] did] when he slew
Tiberius Gracchus.

Although this thing in truth is not only of the domestical reason, [or a
civil matter] for it touches also the warlike [or belongs to martial
feats] etc.
Howbeit this case indeed is not only of a civil consideration. For it
concerns also the warlike; because it was done by force and by hand.
strong hand: yet the very same was done, by city counsel.
the counsel of the City, without an army. That also is the best.
a worthy [speach] wherein I hear me to be wont.
that I am wont to be invaded, set upon or touched.
taxed of envious and lewd [persons].

Let wars give place to peace, let the laurel branch [or garland] be granted
to the orator.
Let weapons or wars, because weapons are a sign of war.
arms give place to the gown put for peace whereof it is a sign, or for
civil magistracy.
gown;

Let the the laurel branch a sign of eloquence or a reward thereof.
laurel yield to the [Oratours] tongue.

For, that I may pass over.
omit other [men].
others, did not armed men.
arms yield unto the goune or magistracy in the city.
robe, we governing or when I governed.
when we governed the Common- weal? For neither was there ever a greater
peril.
a sorer danger nor greater hatred in the Commonweal: so that the very
weapons slidden speedily out, etc. by our counsel and diligence fell.
slipping forthwith out of the hands of the bouldest Citizens, fell [to the
ground] by our counsels and diligence. Therefore what so great a matter in war
was ever done.
What so great an exploit I pray you, was ever done in war? what triumph [is]
to be compared [with it?] For (son Mark) I may boast with you,
For I may be bold to glory before you son Mark; who are to be the
inheritor or heir of my glory and imitator of my acts.
unto whom both the inheritance of this glory, and also the imitation of [my]
deeds does appertain. In very truth, Cneius Pompeius, a man flowing full.
abounding with all martial praises, gave me this commendation.
attributed this unto me many hearing.
in the audience.
hearing of many, that he said.
whenas he said, that himself to bear away in vain.
he should in vain have borne away the third triumph, had he not had
unless he had had a place in the Commonwealth by my means.
benefit, where he might triumph.
have triumphed. domestical fortitudes, or courage at home.
Home-valorous acts, then, are not inferior unto military exploits.
martial; wherein also more labor and study is to be put.
we are to bestow more labor and study, then in these. For that reputation,
credit.
honesty which we seek by a lofty and great.
hauty and princely courage, is wrought.
effected by the strength.
power of the mind, not of the body. Yet the body must be exercised and so
affected.
brought into such order, as that it may be able to obey counsel and reason,
in executing businesses, and sustaining or abiding travel.
enduring travel. But that honesty which we search for, or earnestly require.
search out, does wholly consist in the care and devising.
casting of the mind. Wherein they bring no less commodity, who govern the
common -- wealth being gowned or robed.
in peace, then they that make war. And therefore wars are oftentimes either
not undertaken.
begun, or ended, and now and then attempted, by their counsel.
advice: as the third war of Carthage.
Punicke war [was] by the counsel of Marcus Cato: in which the authority of
him prevailed, even being dead.
after his death. Wherefore certainly reason or wisdom of decerning or
decreeing is to be desired more, or of.
wisdom in ending the war.
determining is rather to be desired, then fortitude of striving.
valor in fighting. But we must beware, that we do it not rather for the
flight of fighting.
avoiding of war, then for the reason of profit.
in regard of commodity. And let war be taken in hand so.
And so let war be taken in hand, that no other thing but peace may seem to
have been ^ought. And it is of a valiant and constant mind.
It is moreover, indeed a token of a valorus and resolute.
constant courage, not to be troubled in sharp matters.
disquieted in rough storms; nor utterly out of order.
making a hurliburly, to be cast down from the degree or staire.
to be cast down from his place, as it is said; but to use the counsel of a
present mind.
follow the advice of a present resolution: nor yet to depart.
swerve from wisdom.
reason. Although this is of a [great] mind or courage, that also of a great
wit.
this proceeds from a worthy resolution, that also from an excellent wit, to
perceive by casting things to come.
to conceive aforehand of things to come; and to appoint.
determine somewhat before, what may happen or betide, on either part.
fall out on both sides, and what is to be done when any thing shall hap pen,
nor to commit any thing.
do ought that at any time it should be said I had not thought; or had I
thought of such a matter* I had done thus or thus.
a man should say, Had I wist.

These are the works of a great and lofty courage, and trusting to or leaning
upon.
relying upon prudence and counsel. But to be conversant rashly in the edge or
forefront of the battle.
for a man to thrust himself rashly into the forefront of the battle, and to
skirmis^ with the enemy with hand
fight with the enemy hand to hand, is a certain outrageous or fierce.
brutish and like unto beasts.
beastly thing. But.
Yet when time and necessity does require, a man must fight hand to hand, and
must prefer death.
death is to be preferred before servitude or bondage.
slavery and shame.

Here Tully (about to teach that to excel in civil affairs, is no less
commendation, then in martial exploits, but rather greater) shows 1. That
whereas most men think the contrary, their opinion is to be confuted. And this
he does,

1. By propounding the end which most men aim at in war, to wit getting glory
and renown; especially if they be of high stomachs and excellent wits, and
withal fitted for chivalry and desirous of warfare by nature.

2. By sundry examples both of the Grecians and Romans, of city businesses
which have bin greater and nobler then the Martial.

The first whereof is taken from the Athenians, by comparing and preferring
Solons counsel for Athens before Themistocles victory. That although
Themistocles be rightly commended, and his name more famous then Solons; and
also that the victory of Themistocles namely at Salamis be extolled before
that worthy counsel of Solon whereby he first ordained the Areopagites: Yet he
thinks that indeed, this is to be adjudged no less praise worthy then
that, but more, and that for these reasons;

1. Because that victory did good to Athens once only, but this counsel
should do it good perpetually; for that by this, their laws and the
ordinances of their ancestors should be preserved inviolable.

Secondly, for that Themistocles said nothing whereby he helped that counsel
concerning the Areopagites: but he was helped by Solon and by them; because
that war was managed by the counsel of the Senate which was was obtained by
Solon.

The second example, is from the Lacedaemonians, in preferring the discipline of
Lycurgus the lawgiuer, before the victories of Pausanias and Lisander.

Because although the Empire of the Lacedaemonians is thought to have been
enlarged by their noble exploits yet those are in no part to be compared to
the laws and discipline of Lycurgus. Besides that by the means of these, they
had their armies more ready and valiant.

A third sort of examples is taken from themselves, in sundry particulars: as
in comparing and closely preferring M. Scaurus before C. Marius; and more
lately, Quintus Catulus before Cneius Pompeius, the government and counsel of
the one before the Martial acts of the other. And then gives the reason of
it. Because arms are little worth abroad, unless there be good counsel at
home.

3. By comparing P. Nasica a private man, to Africanus. That although Africanus
was indeed a singular man and a worthy Captain, yet he did not more service
to the common wealt in taking and razing Numance, then Publius Nasica when he
slew Tib. Gracchus. And how beit that act of Nasica might seem not only
civil but martial, because it was done by force and strong hand, yet it was
done by the counsel of the city alone without any army.

This point he further confirms by a worthy and general approved speech of
his own, howsoever some envious and lewd persons did carpe at him for it: to
wit, this;

Let arms give place to the gown, the laurel to the Orators tongue.

The truth whereof he verefieth, instancing in his own example, to omit others,

By an interrogation to his son, as of a matter notoriously known; viz.
whether in his government, arms did not yield to the robe, whenas (though
there was never sorer danger no^ greater hatred in the commonweal: yet the
very weapons seemed to fall out of the bouldest enemies hands, all being hushed
by his own counsel and diligence.

Now he asks him, what so great an exploit was ever don i^ war, or what
triumph was to be compared with it.

And then gives a reason of this his bold glorying therein; That it was but
unto him, his son, as unto who^ both the inheritance of his glory, and the
imitation of his deeds did appertain.

And secondly he declares further the truth heerof by the frank testimony
and commendation of C^. Pompeius a singular man for all martial praises, who
ascribed thus much unto him whenas he said, That it had been in vain for him
to have had a third triumph, but for that he had a place in the common weal
through ^ullies wi^e government, to enjoy the same. Whence he concludes, that
it is no less but even a greater matter, to excel in civil government, then
martial acts: and that therefore we are to bestow more labor and study in
those then in the other.

And secondly teaches, that the honor which is sought by valor, is atchiued
chiefly by the power of the mind, and not of the body; although the body must
be brought in order, to become serviceable to the mind for executing
businesses and enduring travel.

But the honor which is sought by civil government, does wholly consist in the
care and casting of the mind.

Thirdly, that they bring no less commodity who govern in peace at home,
then they that make war abroad.

And fourthly also, that by the advice at home, wars are usually ordered and
managed abroad, for the attempting, beginning and endding of them.

This he instanceth in the third Punike war guided by the counsel of M. Cato,
which they obeyed even after his death.

Whereof he infers, that wisdom in aduising and determining or ending
war, is to be preferred before valor in fighting.

Yet herein he gives this caution: That we do not advise for the ending of
war, only for avoiding the present danger and trouble thereof, but for the
good of the commonweal.

And that war is ever to be ^o undertaken, as that nothing may seem to have
bin sought in it, but an honest and safe peace.

Lastly, he notes one other token of a true valorous and constant courage,
viz. for a man not to be daunted or disquieted so, as to do any thing swaruing
from reason, whatsoever dangers or evils shall betide; but ever to follow the
wise advice of a present resolution. And therefore that he have not only
courage to resolve, but also an excellent wit to conceive of whatsoever may be
likely to fall out; and so to determine before what to do; and never to do any
thing, whereof he may say, Had I wist.

These things he teaches to be the works of a great and worthy courage,
guided by prudence and counsel.

But contrarily for a man to thrust him self into danger, as into the
forefront of the battle, or to fight with the enemy hand to hand rashly and
without just cause, he counts it a certain brutish and beastly thing;

Although when time and necessity does require it indeed, a man is to fight
hand to hand, and to prefer death it self before slavery or shame.

Chap. 27.
[ Here he teacheth] cruelty and also rashness [to be] far off from the
duty of a worthy stomach.
that cruelty and also rashness are unbefitting a valorous man.

But of or touching the ouerturning and spoiling of riches, that is greatly to
be considered.
as concerning the razing and sacking of Cities, this is principally to be
considered, that not any thing*
nothing be done rashly, nor any thing cruelly.

And that is [the part] of.
is the condition of a noble mind.
a valorous man, matters being tossed or ended.
in the end of broils, to punish the offenders to save the common sort.
preserve the multitude, to retain right and honest things in each fortune.
maintain right and honesty in every state.

Here Tully teaches, how valorous men are to car rye themselves in the razing
and sacking of cities.

That they are then to take heed of two faults principally, viz. rashness, and
cruelty.

2. That in the end of all, the victory being fully gotten, they look to
these three things chiefly: viz. to punish the chief offenders; to preserve
the multitude or common sort; and finally, to maintain right and honesty in
each state and degree.

Chap. 28.
How perils are to be undertaken of a valiant man.
adventured by a valiant man.

FOr as there are some (as I said before) who prefer martial matters or
affairs, to civil.
martial prowess before City businesses: So you shall find many, to whom
dangerous.
perilous and subtle.
crafty counsels.
devices seem more bright.
gloriouser and grea ter then quiet cogitations or counsels.
co^sultations.

1 we must never at all.
Indeed we must never commit for flight of peril.
so carry ourselves for avoiding danger, that we should seem cowardous, and
timorous.
cowardes and but.
dastards;

2 that also is to be (...).
Yet q we must also take heed of this, that we offer not our selves to.
thrust * that.
not our selves into dangers without cause; then which, nothing can be more
foolish.

3 Wherefore in going unto or aduenturing.
attempting dangers, the custom [or guise] of Physicians is to be imitated.
we are to imitate the course of Physicians, do lightly cure.
who use light cures to men being sick lightly.
them who are lightly diseased; but are enforced to use pe^ilous and doubtful
cures.
to minister dangerous and doubtful medicines to sorer sicknesses.
more grievous diseases. wherefore to wish an adverse [or boysterous] tempest
in a calm, is of a mad man.
Therefore in a calm to wish a sore tempest is the part of a mad man; but to
help the tempest [or make shift in a tempest] by any means.
prevent the danger of the tempest, by all manner of means, is the part of a
wise man: and so much the rather if you may obtain more good, the matter
being dispatched, then good the matter being doubtful.
when the matter is dispatched, then hurt while it is in doubt.

4 and the doing of things.
Moreover, the managing of great attempts.
things is dangerous partly to the^ who undertake, partly to the Commonweal.
And also some are called into danger.
are brought into hazard of [their] life, others of [their] reputation and
favor of the people.
glory, and goodwill of [their] Citizens. We ought therefore to be more
ready, unto our own perils then common [dangers.]
to adventure our own then common perils; and to fight more readily concerning
or about honor.
for honor and glory, then for other commodities. But there had.
have been many found, who had.
have been ready to spend not only [their] substance.
money, but also their life.
but even [their] very life for their Country, [and yet] the same would not
make the least loss [or hazard] of their glory, not the commonweal requiring.
would not lose, no not the very least jot of their glory; no though the
Commonweal required it: 1 As, Callicratides, who when he was Captain of the
Lacedaemonians in the Peloponesian war, and had done many things egregiously or
very worthily.
very notably, ouerturned all at the last.
in the end, when he obeyed not the counsel of them
followed not their advice, who thought good to transport.
remove the Navy from Arginuse and not to fight with the Athenians. To whom
he answered, the Lacedaemonians, that navy being lost, to be able to prepare
another.
that the Lacedaemonians, though they should lose that Navy, might make forth.
prepare another, himself not to be able to fly.
[but] that he could not fly without his reproach or shame.
dishonor. And this was indeed.
no doubt a mean or meetely ^ore plague.
pretty blow to the Lacedaemonians: 2 [but] that [was] a pestilent blow.
plague, whereby the wealth.
power of the Lacedaemonians fell down or were spent.
fell flat to the ground, whenas Cleombrotus fearing envy, had rashly
skirmished or combated.
incountered with Epaminondas. How much better [did] Quintus Fabius Maximus? Of
who^ Ennius [wrote thus;]

One man has restored [our] matter or wealth to us.
State by pausing or prolonging of time.
delaying:

For, he put not before men's speeches.
preferred not rumors before our safety:

Therefore the glory of the man is famous both after and more.
ever the longer his renown is more famous.

Which kind of offending or misdoing.
fault must also be avoided in city businesses.
civil affairs. For there are [some] who although that which they think, be
never so good.
the very best, yet they dare not speak it.
utter it for fear of envy.

Tully, being here about to set down some other duties of valor in war,
shows, that as there be some such, as prefer martial prowess before city
businesses; so there are many who think subtle and dangerous plots, more
glorious then quiet and safe consultations.

And here teaches, 1. That we never so carry our selves in war, as that for
avoiding dangers, we should seem cowards and dastards. 2. That we never
thrust ourselves into dangers without just cause; for that, that is, of all
other, most foolish.

3. That in dangers we imitate the courses of good Physicians, who use but
light cures in light diseases; whereas in more grievous and desperate diseases,
they are enforced to use more desperate cures.

The contrary practice he shows to be the part of a mad man rather then of
one wise; and to be as if a mariner should in a pleasant calm wish a sore
tempest; which a wise man should by all manner of means seek to prevent.

And for this he teaches, that we are the rather to labor unto it; if we may
obtain more good by it, when the matter is quietly and safely dispatched, the^
we could whilst it was doubtful.

4. Whereas the undertaking of such may be dangerous partly to them who
undertake them, and partly to the commonweal: also that thereby some hazard
their lives, others their glory, and good will of their citizens; he teaches
for the first, that we are to be more ready to adventure of any peril to our
selves then to the common weal:

And for the second, that we are to fight more readily for honor and glory
then for other commodities; and so rather to lose life and all, then true
glory. And yet here he gives warning of a great fault in sundry against the
former of these two.

That there have been many, who though they would readily adventure not only
their money but even their very lives for their countries; yet would not lose,
no not the very least jot of their own glory for the same, although never so
great damage should come to it thereby.

This he confirms by three memorable ensamples:

1. ^e of Callicratides a famous captain of the Lacedaemonians, in the
Peloponesian war: who having there done many things very worthily, yet in the
^d ouerturned all utterly hereby, when he would needs fight with the Athenians
contrary to all advice, and adventure rather the loss of their whole fleet as
it came to pass, then by withdrawing his ships a little and avoiding that
fight, to be thought to flee with disgrace; saying that although they should
los^ their navy they might provide a another, but he cold not fly without his
dishonor.

A second ensample is of Cleombrotus another captain of the Lacedaemonians; who
upon the like surmise of disgrace, would needs encounter rashly with
Epamino^das; wherein his army being ouercomne he utterly overthrew that whole
estate.

But for the contrary, he shows how much better it is, by one worthy
ensample in Q. Fabius Max. who deferring to join battle with Anniball until
he saw that he was able to overcome him; howsoever by delaying he received
some present disgrace, yet at length setting fiercely upon him and ouercomming
him* recovered eternal glory to himself and safety to his country, for which
he is so highly extolled by Ennius in verse.

Lastly, he gives warning of the like fault in civil affairs: for that therein
some dare not utter their minds for fear of envy, though they think that
which is the best.

Chap. 29.
They that shall govern the common weal, let them altogether [or euer] keep
two precepts, etc.
Whosoever shall be governors in the Commonweal, let them ever observe two
precepts of Plato. 1 One [is] that they so maintain the profit of the citizens.
commons, that whatsoever they do, they refer it thereunto, forgetful.
forgetting their own private commodities. 2 Another [is] that they care for
or look to
have care for the whole body of the Co^monweale: lest whilst they defend [or
maintaine] any part, they forsake the rest.
uphold some one part, they leave the rest destitute. For as a wardship or
custody of a child.
gardianshippe, even so the procuration or administration.
government of the Commonweal, is to be done.
used to the commodity of them who are com mitted [to the government of others.
be gouerned] and not of them to whom the government is, etc.
it is committed. But they that provide for part of the citizens, and neglect
part.
But who so provide for [one] part of the people, that they neglect [another]
part, do bring in a most pernicious matter into the Commonweal, q city.
[to wit] sedition and discord: whereupon it happens.
falls out, that some seem people-pleasers.
popular, some studious of every best [or greatest] man.
affectionate to the nobility, [but] few to the q few of all.
whole. Hereupon great discord or breaches.
dissentions sprang amongst the Athenians; and not only seditions, but also
pestiferous or sore.
pestilent civil wars in our Common-vveale. Which a grave and stout citizen,
and worthy of principality or dominion.
rule in the Commonweal, will fly and hate, and will give himself wholly to
the Commonweal, neither will he follow after or pursue.
hunt after riches or power; but.
and will so defend it wholly.
the whole estate that he may provide for all [men.] Neither in truth will he
call.
bring any man into hatred or envy by false accusations; but will so cleave
altogether.
always so cleave to justice and honesty, that so long as, or whilst.
so that he may maintain it, he may.
will grievously offend any one.
incur the grievous displeasure of any; and desire death rather, then forsake
those things which I have spoken of.

Chap. 29.
Tully here, about to set down some Duties of civil governors, teaches that
they must ever observe two precepts of Plato.

1. That they always prefer the common good before their own private, and
refer all that they do, thereunto.

2. That they ever have care for the whole body of the common wealth; lest
upholding some one part, they leave the rest destitute. For the first of these
he shows it by the example of a gardianship: That as it is to be used for
their commodity who are committed to be governed, not of them to whom they are
committed; so it must be in the commonweal.

For the second he confirms it by a dangerous effect that otherwise may
ensue; That providing for one part with the neglect of an other, cause sedition
and discord, which are most pernicious to the commonweal.

And moreover that some of them seem popular, others set to please the
nobility, but few that regard the whole.

The mischief he manifests by particular instances, both amongst the
Athenians and them selves:

That hereupon great dissentions sprung among the Athenians; and not only
seditions, but also pestilent c^uill wars fell out in their own co^monweale.
Now these things he teaches to be such, that a grave and stout citizen, fit
to bear rule will sly, and give himself wholly to the care of the common
wealth, without hunting either after riches or greatness; and will so defend
the whole state, as he may pro uide for the good of each one.

Lastly, he notes this as another property of a worthy magistrate, that he
will not bring any into hatred or disgrace by false accusations; but contrarily
will ever so cleave to justice and honesty, as that he will rather incur
displeasure or danger, yea even death it self, then leave the maintenance and
just defense thereof

Chap. 30.
That it is contrary to the duty [or condition] of a valiant mind, to contend,
etc.
To contend vehemently about honors, to be contrary to the duty of a
magnanimous [man] or one of a high mind.
valorous mind.

Ambition no doubt [or verily.]
AMbition and striving for honors.
promotion, is of all other most miserable. whereof.
Concerning which it is notably said.
spoken in the same Plato; them who.
that they who would contend among themselves, whether of them should rather
rule the Co^mon-weale, to do.
should do ^emblablely or even in like manner.
after the same fashion, as if Mariners should strive, which of them should
chiefly hold [or guide] the helm.
govern.

2 And the same Plato.
man has commanded.
Al taught us, that we Al. does teach.
should think them adversaries.
take them for enemies, who take up arms or armor.
bear arms against us, [and] not those who desire to pre^erue the Co^mon-weal
by their judgment or advice.
discretion; what a one the dissension was, etc.
as was the dissension between Publius Africanus, and Quintus Metellus,
without [any] bitterness.

In this chapter, Tully teaches that m^n of worthy resolutions, ought to
beware of ambition, and all bitter contending for promotion and bearing rule,
as a thing very miserable.

This he teaches by two testimonies of Plato;

1. Comparing their contentions to the contentions of mariners striving which of
them should govern the ship, and in the mean time endanger all.

And secondly, directing that we should take them only for enemies who bear
arms against us; notthose who strive to help to preserve the co^monweale by
their discretion.

This later sort of contention Tully approoueth by the example of the
dissension between P. Africanus and Q. Meteilus, which was for the more safe
preservation of the common weal, without any bitterness.

Chap. 31.
[ It is] To moderate anger is the property of fortitude.
the property of fortitude, to moderate anger.

1 NEither indeed.
certainly are they to be heard.
worthy to be heard, who shall hold opinion that we are to be grievously,
exceedingly, vehemently.
furiously (...) angry at our enemies.
with our enemies, and do judge it the property of a courageous or generous.
magnanimous and valiant man. 2 For there is nothing more comme^dable, nothing
more worthy or beseeming.
seemly for a great and famous man.
noble personage, then easiness to be appeased, and gentleness
placability and clemency.

3 Moreover in free people or cities.
amongst free people, and in equality or equity of law.
where there is equality of law, there must be used also mildness.
gentleness, and loftiness of mind.
nobleness of courage, which is said.
as they term it.
call it; lest if we be anger at either.
angry either with [those] comers vnseasonablely, or crauers without shame
viz. impudent askers.
who come out of time, or who ask impudently, we fall into weywardnesse.
testiness [both] unprofitable and odious. And yet mildness and mercy.
gentleness and clemency are.
is so to be allowed.
approved, that severity be used for the cause of the commonweal or good of
it.
Commonweales sake, without which a City cannot be ordered.
governed.

Chap. 31.
Here Tullie, about to teach that it is the property of true fortitude to
moderate anger,

1. Reproves them as unworthy to be heard, who houlde this opinion, That we
are to be exceedingly angry withour enemies, and judge it to be the property
of a valiant man.

2. Shows that co^trarily nothing is more commendable, nor more beseeming a
great and noble personage, then placabilitie and clemency.

Thirdly, that among all free people, and which enjoy equality of law,
mildness and gentleness must be joined with nobleness of mind. Because
otherwise the magistrates, being angry either with such as come at unfit times,
or who are too boulde or importunate, fall into testiness or rage, which is
both unprofitable and odious.

Lastly, gives this caution, that yet gentleness and clemency are so to be
approved of, that severity be also used sometimes for the common good, for
that without it a city cannot be governed.

Chap. 32.
we must temper our selves especially from anger in punishing.
We must especially abstain from anger in all kind of Correction.

But both all punishment.
ALL punishment ought to be void of taunting reproach or contempt.
contumely; neither to be referred to the commodity of him who punishes any.
and not be done to serve his turn who punishes or chastises in words.
rebukes any, but to the behoof.
commodity of the Commonweal. 3 We must also beware, lest the punishment be
greater then the fault, and lest some be punished for, etc.
that the punishment be not greater then the fault; 4 And that some be not
punished for the same causes, others be not indeed called, [or spoken to.]
not so much as spoken to. 5 Also anger is to be prohibited [or auoided] in
punishing.
Likewise, we must chiefly refrain from anger in punishing. For he that goes
about to take punishment.
goes to punish [others] being angry, shall never keep that measure.
mediocrity which is between overmuch.
too much and too little. Which mediocritie.
[moderation] pleases the Peripatetiks.
Peripatecians: and it pleases.
likes them justly or well.
rightly, so that they would not commend angrynesse, and say, it to be
profitably given of nature.
that it is profitably given of Nature.

But that [ affection of angrynesse.
affection] is in all cases.
things to be refused.
eschewed: and it is to be wished, that they that are over
such as govern the Commonweal, be like of laws.
be like the laws; which are led or drawn
moved to punish not by wrath.
angrinesse, but by equity.

In this chapter, Tully sets down certain Duties to be observed in all
manner of correction: as,

1. That all punishment and chastisement ought to be done without contumely,
viz. without taunting or bitter speeches or contempt to the party punished.

2. That it be not done to serve his turn only who inflicteth the punishment,
but for the good of the commonweal.

3. That there be special care had, that the punishment be not greater then
the fault.

4. That all offending alike, be punished alike; and not some punished, others
not so much as spoken to.

Lastly, that they who are to punish others do refrain from anger; and that
for this cause chiefly;

Because he that goes to punish others being angry, can never keep the true
mean which is between too much and too little.

And for this keeping a moderation, he comme^deth the opinion of the
Peripateticks, only dis liking the^ for their approbation of angrinesse,
affirming it to be profitably given by nature.

But for this passion of angrinesse he teaches, that it is in all things to
be eschewed: and that it were to be wished, that such as govern the common
weal should be like the laws; which punish, not by angrinesse, but only by
equity and justice.

Chap. 33.
It is [ the condition] of a valorous man
of a noble courage, neither to wax arrogant, disdainful, proud.
insolent in prosperous things, nor to be east down in adverse.
in prosperity, nor to be dejected in adversity.

And also let us fly greatly pride, disdainfulnes, and arrogance in prosperous
(...) and flowing to our will.
Moreover, in prosperity, and when things flow even at our will, Let us
earnestly fly pride, disdainfulnesse and arrogance. For as it is a part of
inconstancy to bear adverse things, so prosperous immoderately.
a token of lightness, to take adversity [impatiently]; so likewise to use
prosperity immoderately.

And an even proportion [or equalnesse] in all the life
For a continual evenness in all a man's life, also the same countenance ever,
and the same forehead.
and one manner of cheer, is famous or notable.
very commendable, as we have received.
heard concerning Socrates and concerning Caius Lelius also. I see indeed
Philip king of the Macedonians to have been excelled or gone beyond.
surmounted by his Alexander.
son in noble exploites, or prowess.
valorous acts and glory, to have bin superior.
[yet] in facility or gennesse and humanity
mildness and courtesy to have been far superior. Therefore the one [was]
always great.
noble; the other often times most filthy or dishonest.
beastly. That they seem to give precepts or teach well.
advertise aright, who warn us, that by how much we are superiors [or higher]
we carry our selves more sub^isly by so much.
that the higher we are, the lowlyer we demean.
carry our selves. Indeed Panetius says.
Panetius reports, Africanus his hearer [or scholar] to have bin wont to say.
that Africanus his hearer and familiar friend, was wont to sai, that like as
[me^] are wont.
use to deliver to tamers [or horsebreakers] horses vaunting with fierceness
for their often contentions of battles.
to put to riders, horses waxing over fierce for their often fights in battle,
that they may use.
have them the readier.
more gentle; even so should men headie, headstro^g.
unbridled through prosperity, and trusting too much to [or ouerweening of]
themselves to owe to be brought, as it were, into the circuit of etc.
over much trusting to themselves, be brought as it were, within the compass
of reason and learning, that they might thoroughly behold weakness.
the frailty of the world.
humane things, and the variety or inconstancy.
wavering of fortune. And also we must use most of all the counsel of our
friends in our most high prosper^tie.
Moreover, also in our greatest prosperity, we are especially to use the
advice of our friends; and a greater authority is to be given to them then
before.
and we must give them also a greater authority then before: and at those same.
those times we must take heed, that we open not our ears to flatterers,
nor suffer our selves to be clawed with flattery.
flattered, wherein it is an easy thing to be deceived. For we then think our
selves to be such as we may be praised by by right.
such, that of right we may be praised: whereof innumerable faults do arise.
spring; whenas men puffed up with opinions.
conceits, are shamefully scorned, and are conversant [or entangled.]
vvrapped in the greatest errors.
in very gross errors. But truly these matters hitherto.
But of these matters thus far.

Tully, here proceeding to teach other conditions of a noble courage, shows,

1. That in prosperity, and when all things flow according to a man's will, he
is carefully to shun these vices viz. pride, disdain, arrogancy, which
usually attend upon prosperity and great courages.

Because as it is a token of inconstancy and leuitie, to bear adversity
impatiently; so of the other side to use prosperity so immoderately, as to
fall into these vices.

2. He teaches that a continual evenness kept in all a man's life, and as it
were the same countenance, and one manner of cheer, is very commendable.

This he proves, first, by the examples of Socrates and C. Lelius.

Secondly, of Philip king of Macedonia; who howsoever he was inferior to
Alexander his son, in valorous acts and glory: yet for continual
gentleness (...) courtesy was so far superior unto him, that he was always
noble; whereas Alexander by the contrary carriage was often very base and
ignoble, through the vices mentioned.

Hence he gathers this, as a worthy aduertiseme^t; That the higher we are,
the lowlyer we carry our selves.

Thirdly, he illustrateth it by the testimony of Panetius, concerning a speech
of Africane his hearer and famili^t friend, who was wo^t to say, and so to
urge this point, by this similitude, That like as men are wo^t to put their
great horses to riders, to the end to have them more gentle, whereas otherwise
they would prove over fierce, through their often fights in battle; even so men
being too unbridled through an ouerweening of themselves, are to be brought
within the compass of reason and learning, that they may thoroughly behold the
frailty of all the things of this life, and the inconstancy of fortune.

Lastly, he directs that in our greatest pro^peritie we be especially
careful to v^e the advice of our friends, and then also to give them greater
authority over us then ever before, for the free aduising of us.

And, of the otherside, to take heed chiefly at such times, that we harken
not to flatterers; nor suffer our selves to be flattered in any case; because
it is so easy a matter to be deceived by them. for that, listening to the^, we
think our selves worthy of what praise soever they give us: whereof he
shows, that innumerable evils do spring; and namely this, that being puffed
up with conceitednesse of our selves, we are often times scorned and abused very
shamefully, and wrapped in very gross errors.

Chap. 34.
The duty of a noble mind in an honest vacation or freedom from business.
private life.

But that.
THis then is to be taken thus, that the.
so judged; The greatest things or deeds.
acts, and of the greatest courage to be done.
undertaken by them, who govern the Commonweal; because their administration.
government lies open or reaches most largely.
extends the farthest, and appertains unto most. And to be, and have been.
Yet there be, and have been many of great courage, even in the private.
quiet life, who would either trace or try out.
search out or take in hand.
endeavor certain great enterprises.
matters, and contain.
keep themselves within the bounds of their own businesses; or else being
placed or set.
cast between Philosophers, and those that rule the Commonweal, would be
delighted with their own household business goods domestical or private
estate.
household substance; not heaping it up indeed by every way.
not heaping up the same by all manner of means, nor barring.
excluding theirs from the use thereof; but rather imparting it both to [their]
friends, and to the Commonweal, if at any time need should require.
if there should be need at any time.

which substance or goods.
Which first let it be gotten well.
well gotten, neither by no filthy, etc.
by no dishonest nor filthy.
odious gain. then that it shows itself profitable to very many, so that
worthy.
Secondly, let it be in readiness for the good of many, so they be worthy:
afterward.
Lastly, let it be increased by discretion.
discretion, diligence and sparing.
thrift; neither let it lie, or neither that it lie open to, etc.
and let it not lie open rather to lust and riot, then to liberality and
bounty. It is lawful for a man observing these prescripts to live.
He that observes these precepts may live magnifically, etc.
roially, gravely, and courageously or stoutly.
stoutly, and also plainly, faithfully, and friendly, to the life of men
for the life of man.

Chap. 34.
Tully here (being about to teach that there may be a noble mind, even in a
private life, and some Duties thereof) declares first,

That although the noble acts and which beseem best the greatest courages, are
to be undertaken by them chiefly who govern the commonweal, because their
government appertains to the most; yet that there be and have bin many of
noble minds who have lived a private and a quiet life,

Who would still be either searching out or indeuouring some great matters, yet
keeping themselves within the bounds of their own callings and businesses; Or
else being of a middle rank between Philosophers, and those that rule the
commonweal, have delighted themselves with their own domestical affairs and
estate; not heaping up riches by any ma ner of bad means, nor excluding others
from the use the^eof; but rather imparting their goods both to the use of their
friends, and of the common weal, if there have been need at any time.

Secondly, he gives certain precepts concerning the substance of such.

1. That it be well gotten* and not by any dishonest or odiou* game.

2. That they have it ever in readiness for the good of all who stand in need
thereof being worthy, and to whom they are more specially bound.

3. That it be increased by discretion, diligence and thrift, and be ready
always to be bestowed not on lust and riot, but on liberality and bounty.

Lastly, he declares the benefits of observing these precepts; that a man may
live royally, bravely and stoutly; and also honestly and profitably for the
life of man.

Chap. 35.
The fourth fountain of duty [is] Temperance: which Aristotle thinks to be
a moderation of affections or lusts
desires, [viz.] of those only which are conversant or occupied.
employed about the pleasures of the throat, and parts about the secrets.
gullet and of the groine. A temperate man, quoth he, desires those things
which he ought, and as he ought, and when he ought. The head.
principal point hereof, is, that the desire obey reason, as the child [his]
Scholomaster. From thence arises that comeliness.
decorum, which Tully delivers divinely, how etc.
which, how it is drawn.
derived from nature and other circumstances, and honesty.
graceth every action.
duty of life, Tully sets down divinely.

IT follows, that we speak of that one part of honesty remaining.
one other part of honesty which remains, wherein shamefastness.
bashfulnesse, and temperance, as it were a certain orname^t of life.
of man's life, and also of modesty, and all quieting of the perturbations.
appeasing of the passions of the mind, and the measure of things, is seen.
That [comlines] is contained in this place.
In this place is contained that [comlinesse] which may be called in Latin
decorum; for it is called in Greek (...). The force of this.
nature hereof is, that it cannot be separated from honesty: For both that
which becomes is honest, and also that which is honest becomes. But what a
difference there is of honesty and comeliness.
But what difference is between honesty and comeliness, may more easily.
sooner be understood.
conceived then explaned.
expressed. For whatsoever it is which becomes it then appears.
does then appear, when honesty is.
has gone before.

Tully, coming to speak of the fourth fountain of Duty, viz. temperance,
which he calls the other part of honesty; shows first what parts it
contains under it: to wit, bashfulnesse and temperance, which he terms to
be a special ornament of man's life: and withal, modesty and calmnesse in
appeasing all passions of the mind, and moderation in keeping a measure in all
things: and finally that comeliness which is called in Latin decorum, as it is
called in Greek^ (...).

Secondly, he teaches the nature of this comeliness to be such* as that it
cannot be separated from honesty: because that which becomes is honest, and
that which is honest becomes; But for the difference that is beween these two
viz. between honesty and comeliness, that it may sooner be conceived in our
minds then expressed in words; And that comeliness does then only appear when
honesty has gone before.

Chap. 36.
There is a double decorum.
Comeliness is double: general, which consists in every duty; and
special, which properly arises of or attends upon temperance.
follows te^perance. Saint Ambrose takes that to be the general
comeliness, which is.
arises of a agreement.
harmony and agreement.
concent of all virtues, amongst themselves, and shines brightly in the
concord.
agreement of the universal world.
whole frame of the world: the special [to be that] which shines in any one
part [thereof] but especially in Temperance.

Therefore it appears what is becomes.
decent, not only in this part of honesty, whereof we must dispute.
we are to discourse in this place but also in the three former. for both it
becomes one.
For [as] it is decent both.
to use reason and speech discreetly, and to do that which a man should do
advisedly.
you do, considerately; and also both to see and to defend in every matter
that which is true.
to epsy and maintain that which is true, in every matter; [ and.
so] contrarily it does as much disgrace to err [or miss.]
to err, to slip, to be deceived, does as much disgrace, as to dote, and to
be taken [or distraught] in mind.
distract in mind. All just things also are comely; and contrariwise all
unjust things, as they are dishonest, so they are uncomely. There is a like
reason of fortitude.
The nature of valor is like hereunto. For what thing.
that which is don manfully and with a great courage, that seems.
seems meet for a man, and comely: and what.
and that which [is done] otherwise.
contrarily, as it is dishonest, even so it is uncomely. Wherefore in truth,
this comeliness, which I speak of, does appertain to all honesty; and does so
appertain [thereunto] that it is seen not after a certain hidden sort.
in a certain hidden manner, but may be in readiness.
appears openly.

For there is a certain thing that becomes.
decency, and the same is understood.
perceived in every virtue: which may be separated from virtue rather by
cogitation.
imagination, then in very deed.
indeed. For, as comeliness and beauty.
beautifulness and fairness of body cannot be parted.
separated from health; so this comeliness whereof we speak.
entreat, also it is indeed confused or mingled.
is indeed wholly mixed with virtue, but is distinguished in [ones] mind and
cogitation.
conceit. and the.
Moreover, the description thereof is double.
of two sorts. For both we double.
understand a certain gerall mean.
decorum, which comeliness.
is in all honesty; and another is conversant or exercised or has to do.
under this, which appertains q subject to this, viz. a special comeliness.
to every several part of honesty. And that former is wont almost or for most
part to be defined thus.
to be commonly thus defined; That thing to be comely.
That, that is comely, which is agreeable to man's excellency.
the excellency of man, in which thing.
wherein his nature is different.
differs from other living creatures.

But which part is subject unto the general, they define it thus, that.
But they define that part which is under the genenerall [ viz. the speciall]* in
such sort, that they will have that to be comely, which is so agreeable to
nature, as both moderation and temperance may appear in it, with a certain
comely appearance
honest show. [Now] we may think.
conceive these things to be so, or thus mea^t.
that these things are so understood.
meant by the Philosophers, by that comeliness which the Poets follow:
concerning which more things are wont to be, etc.
more is wont to be spoken in another place.

But then we say.
But we say that Poets do then observe that which is decent.
that grace which becomes, when that which is worthy or befitting every
person.
fitting to every person, is both done and said.

As if Eacus or Minos should say;

q Let them hate, (...) shall hat*
so that they fear.

Or [this.]

The father himself is a grave to his children:

It should seem uncomely, because we have heard, them to have bin just.
that they were just. But Atreus saying [so,] applauses [or clapping of hands]
are stirred up.
it would cause a great applause: for the speech is worthy the.
it is a speech beseeming the person.

But Poets will judge of.
by the person, what may b^e.
is comely for every one.

And.
Moreover, nature it self has put upon us a pers^ great ex^ surmou^ there cre^
a personage of great excellency and pre-eminence, above all other living
creatures. Wherefore Poets will see.
discern in great variety of persons, what is befitting even to the wicked
sort.
vicious, and what becomes [them.] But since that the parts of * constancy, q
settlednesse.
moderation, temperance, and shamefastness.
modesty, are given [vs] by nature, and seeing that the same nature teaches
us not to neglect*
be careless, (...) what manner
how we ca^.
behave our selves toward me^
every man; it is b^ht to pass^
It comes to pass, that it both appears, how far that comeliness, which
appertains to all honesty, q does extend ^or
it self, and also this comeliness
this which is seen in every several kind of virtue. For as the beauty.
fairness of the body, with a fit composing of the members or limbs.
every part, does move the eyes, and delights [^hem] in this same the
even in this, that all the parts consent together amongst themselves with a
certain pleasant grace or comeliness.
grace: even so this comeliness which shines in [our] life, q moves.
shines out or bright.
wins the good liking.
the approbation of those with whom we live, by an order and.
constancy, and measure.
moderation, of all [our] words and deeds.

Therefore a certain reverence is to be given.
There must be used therefore a certain reverence toward men, both of every
best [or chiefe] man.
to every one of the best sort, and also of the rest of meaner degree.
to others.

for it is not only [the part] of an arrogant man but also dissolute, to
neglect what every one (...) of him.
For to be retchlesse what every one thinks of him, is not only a sign of
an arrogant body, but also of one altogether retchlesse or out of all order.
dissolute.

But there is that differs.
a certain difference that differs.
Al in each respect Al. in having a respect of men.
to be had, between justice and shamefastness.
modesty. The parts of justice are.
It it is the part of justice not to wrong any by violence.
to offer men no violence; of modesty, not to give offense to
to offend [the^]: wherein the force.
nature of comeliness is most thoroughly seen.
seen especially. These things therefore thus declared, I think it understood
or plain.
sufficiently understood, what a one that thing is.
what it is which we affirm to be decent.
say, to become.

Here he, proceeding to handle this matter of comeliness, shows, 1. How in a
general manner it appertains to every part of honesty, viz. to every of the
other three virtues as well as to temperance.

And first, how it belongs to prudence, by a comparison, Because as it is
decent to use reason and speech discreetly, and to do whatsoever a man does
advisedly, and withal both to epsy and to maintain only that which is true
in every matter; so contrarily, to err and to be deceived, does as much
disgrace as to doat or to be distracted in mind.

Secondly, how to justice: because all just things are comely; and contrarily
all unjust things, as they are dishonest, so they are also uncomely.

And thirdly, for valor: because that which is done manfully and with a
valiant courage is co^ly for a man; and co^trarily, what soever is done
otherwise is dishonest and uncomely. Whence he concludes this first point,
that this comeliness appertains to each part of honesty; and that so, as it
may be seen therein not darkely or in a hidden manner, but openly.

Yet so, as that it can hardly be separated from the several virtues
themselves; but that it is rather distinguished, by imagination and in a man's
conceit; then indeed.

This he also illustrateth by a fit resemblance: That as fairness of body
cannot be separated from health; so neither this comeliness can be distinguished
from virtue, but only in our mind and conceit: because it is so wholly mixed
therewith.

In the second place he comes to divide this comeliness, making it to be of
two sorts, viz. general and special, and then defines them severally.

And first, for the general he shows that it is wont to be defined thus;

That it is such a comeliness as is agreeable to the excellency of man in all
things; wherein his nature differreth from other living creatures.

The special comlilinesse is that, which is so agreeable to nature, as that
both moderation and temperance may appear in it, with a show of honesty.

That the philosophers did take these things so, he proves it by the
testimony of the Poets in that comeliness which they follow:

Of whom we say, That they observe a right decorum; whenas they bring in
every person both saying and doing that, which is fit ting unto him.

And contrarily that they should utterly misle this decorum (As for example) if
they should bring in Eacus or Minos wickedly, it would be very absurd, because
they were known to be just men:

Whereas bringing in Atreus so speaking, it would be very comely and move a
great applause, because he was a vile man.

Also the reason why they observe this decorum is, Because they judge by the
persons what is comely for every one.

Secondly, he declares it from the work of nature it self: because it has
given man a personage of great excellency and pre-eminence above all other
living creatures.

Whence the Poets will, in great variety of persons, discern what is fitting
and what unfitting to each.

And moreover, for that nature has given us the several parts of constancy,
moderation, temperance and modesty, and teaches us withal, that we be not
careless how we behave our selves toward every man; it shows us likewise
how far that general comlineste, which appertains to all honesty does
extend it self; and also that special comeliness, which is seen (...) every
several kind of virtue.

For the excellency of this comeliness kept in every action, and how it
wins the approbation of all, he illustrateth by a very familiar and notable
ensample.

That as the fairness of the body and comlie proportion of every part moves
the eyes of others, and delights them with the grace appearing therein; even
so a comeliness shining in our life, wins the good will and liking of all
with whom we live, by observing order, co^ stancie, and mode* ration, in all
our words and deeds.

Also for the more full accomplishme^t of this comeliness, he teaches
moreover that we must use a certain reverence toward all sorts, not only them
of higher rank, but also others of meaner degree. Because this will bring us a
good estimation with all men. Whereas contrarily to be retchlesse what every
one thinks of us, is not only a sign of an arroga^t body, but also of one
altogether dissolute.

Lastly, to this purpose he sets down a difference between justice and
modesty:

That it is the part of justice not to offer violence to any; but of modesty,
not to offend them; and that herein the nature of comeliness is seen
especially.

And so ends this point, what comeliness is; as being plain enough by that
which has bin said.

Chap. 37.
Comeliness to be
Comeliness is according to nature, and to avail.
avails very much both in all kinds.
parts [of vertue] and especially in Teperance.

And the duty which is.
Moreover, also the duty which drawn from it
proceeds from that [comliness] follows first.
has first of all this way, which leads unto the agreeableness.
conuenience and preservation of nature: which if we will follow as a guide,
we shall never go awrie.
err. And we Al. And (...) both follows that which is.
shall sharp, and quick sighted.
follow that which is both acute, and witty by nature, and that which is
agreeable to the fellowship of men.
serves fitly for the consociation of men, and also that which is vehement.
forceable and manly. But the greatest force.
efficacy of comeliness, is in this.
stands in this part whereof we dispute. For not only the motions of the
body, which are apt, or befitting nature.
agree unto nature, but much more the motions of the mind, which are likewise
agreeable unto nature, are to be approved.

Chap. 37.
In this chapter T. sets down the efficacy of true co^linesse; that it
leads unto the conuenience and preservation of nature, being agreeable
thereunto: And that following nature, we cannot err; but we shall both follow
that which is acute and witty, viz. prudence; and that which serves for the
increase of humane society, to wit justice; and likewise that which is truly
valorous.

So that he shows that there is a comeliness in all these three parts of
honesty; yet so, as that the greatest efficacy of it consists in this
fourth part of honesty, to wit in temperance. And that, because all motions
not only of the body, but much more those of the mind, if they be agreeable
to nature, are approved and liked of by all.

Chap. 38.
The fountain of all modesty to be.
is, that the appetite obey reason: But.
And Ambrose thinks this same to be the primary, or chief
first fountain of all duties.

FOr the power of the mind and of nature is double.
consists in two parts. The one part is put or placed in appetite.
consists in appetite, which is in Greek
which in Greek is called (...), which snatcheth or haleth.
pulls a man hither and thither. The other [consisteth] in reason.
in reason: which teaches and shows plainly what is to be done or to be
fled.
au^ided. So it comes to pas^e that reason rules, and appetite obeys. And.
Moreover, every action ought to be without.
be free from ^ashnesse and negligence: neither indeed [ought a man] to do
any thing, whereof he cannot give a proueable cause.
he is not able to render a probable reason. For this is almost the definition.
in a manner the almost the definition.
description of Duty. We must also effect [or bring to pass this]
look to this that our desires be ruled by reason.
appetites obey reason, and neither run before it for.
through rashness, neither leave it.
forsake it, through sloth or dastardlinesse, or lack of courage.
cowardlinesse; and that they be quiet, and void of.
free from all trouble or passion
perturbation of mind. Whereupon all constancy and all moderation shall shine
bright.
moderation shall plainly appear. For, what appetites.
desires go too far astray.
stray further.
ouerfarre, and as it were insulting too much, either in coveting.
longing after [things] or flying [from them] are not sufficiently stayed by
reason, these without doubt pass over or exceed.
pass their bound.
bounds and measure: for they forsake.
^eaue and cast away or set aside.
reject obedience, neither yet obey reason, whereunto they are subject by the
law of nature. Of which motions.
Whereby not only the minds are troubled, but also the bodies.
the minds, but even.
also the bodies are disquieted. We ^ay see the in the very faces.
very faces of angry [men,] or of those who are moved by any lust or fear, or
[who] gesture, leap or skip.
rejoice with too great pleasure: all whose countenances, voices, motions, and
stations or hehauiours.
standings are changed.

Of which that is understood
this is gathered (that we may return to the form of Duty) all appetites to
be
that all appetites are to be drawn in or plucked in, assuaged.
restrained and abated, and and all heed and diligence to be stirred up.
that we must stir up all and all heed and diligence to be stirred up.
care and diligence, that we do not any thing rashly and at venturously o^ by
chance.
adventure, [nor] vnadu^sedly.
inconsiderately, and negligently. for neither are we
For we are not so bred of nature, that we should seem to be made to play.
for play and for ^est.
sport; but rather to severity, and to certain more weighty and greater
studies. And as for those [ viz.] sport or jesting.
play and jesting, we may indeed use them, but even as [we vse] sleep, and
other rests.
recreations, then.
at such time when we have satisfied.
dispatched [our] weighty and earnest businesses. And the very manner of [our]
jesting or pastime
sport ought to be not immoderate.
neither excessive, no^ immodest, but honest.
ingenuous and merry.
pleasant. For as we give.
grant not to children all liberty of play, but such as is not strange from
the actions of honesty.
estranged from honest exercises: so in our very jesting there should appear
let some light of an honest wit appear.
some light of an honest disposition.

Chap. 38.
Here (...) (about to s^t ou^ the ^ountaine of all modesty and comeliness,
therein; to wit that the appetite obey reason) teaches first, That the motions
of the mind which he spoke of, are of two sorts: The one sort consisting in
appetite, which appetite the ^recians call (...), which haleth a man hither or
thither.

The other sort consisting in reason: which reason teaches and shows
plainly, what is to be done and what to be avoided. Whereupon it is that reason
is to rule, appetite to obey. And thence he shows that these properties ought
to be in every action: 1. That it be free from rashness and negligence; and
that so far, as that a man ought never to do any thing whereof he is not able
to render a probable reason. For that this is almost the definition of Duty.

2. That our appetites or wills must neither run before reason through
rashness, nor leave the following of it through sloth or cowardlinesse. 3.
that our desires and motions must be quiet and free from all perturbations and
passions of mind; and so thereby all constancy and moderation shall plainly
appear.

Then he gives this reason hereof: Because what desires or motions st^ay
over far from reason, or are too vehement in longing after any thing or flying
from it, those pass their bounds, for that they therein do not obey reason,
whereunto they ought to be subject by the law of nature. And that thence
arises the disqu^etting not only of the minds, but of the bodies also.

This he proves by experience: giving instance in the sudden changes wrought
in men by such (...) motions and desires.

How in angry men and those who are vehemently moved through lust, fear or any
tickling joy, their very countenances, voices, motions and standings are
changed. Whereupon he concludes, that all our appetites are ever to be
restrained and guided according to reason; and that we must use all care and
dil^gence, that we never do any thing rashly or at adventure, nor in
considerately and negligently.

And lastly, he further declares this even from nature it self: That we are
not bred by nature for play and spor^; but rather to severity and to great and
weighty studies. And here he takes occasion to show the right man^r of
sport^ and play, how we may use them aright:

1. For the time; That we use them as sleep and other recreations, only at
such times, when we have dispatched our weighty and earnest businesses.

Secondly, for the manner of them; That they be not excessi^e or immodest, but
ingenuous and pleasant.

This he teaches by a comparison in an instance of that liberty which we
grant to children: That as we grant not to them liberty of al manner of play,
but only of such plays and sports as are not estranged from honest exercises;
so likewise in all our own jesting and sports, some light of an honest
disposition should ever show it self.

Chap. 39.
Of scurrility and witty conceitednesse.
pleasantness of spe^ch.

There is altogether a double kind etc.
TO be short, there is a double kind of jesting: one illiberall or homely.
base saucy, wanton.
malapart, ungracious or wicked.
lewd, baudy or dishonest.
filthy: the other elegant, civil, witty, [and] conceited.
pleasant. With which kind not only our Plantus, and the ancient Comedy of the
Atticks.
Athenians, but also the books of the Philosophers of Socrates sect.
Socratical Philosophers are well stored or full fraught.
full. There are also many things spoken pleasantly and wittily of many men.
many witty speeches of many men, as those that are gathered by ^lde ^ato,
which be called short and witty sentences.
Apothegmes. The difference therefore of an honest and an dishonest jesting.
of an ingenuous and a dishonest [or base] is easy.
homely jest is plain.

The one is beseeming a free man.
meet for an honest man if it be done in time.
season and with a remiss or a mild mind.
mildely: the other is not indeed meet for [any] man, if uncleanness of the
ma^ter, being increased with filt^inesse of words.
if uncleanness of words be adjoined to the filthiness of the things.
matter.

Chap. 39.
In this chapter T. proceeds to discourse of jesting and of the manner and use
thereof.

And first, he divides it, teaching that there is a double kind of jesting.
One very base, malepart, lewd and filthy; the other elegant, c^uil and
pleasant.

This later he commends by the testimony of Plautus, in his practice of it,
and by other ancient comedies (...) are generally approved of; and more
specially by the books of the Socra^ical Philosophers, which he shows to
be full of it.

And to this kind of jesting he teaches that all witty speeches of learned
men do appertain; as namely those called Apothegms, gathered by old Cato and
others.

Thence he concludes, that the difference between these two kinds, viz.
between an ingenuous and base jest, is plain:

Also that the one of them, viz. an ingenuous jest is befitting an honest man,
especially if it be done in season and mildely; but that the other, viz. a
base ^est, is not at al meet, no not for any man; chiefly, if base and odious
matters be uttered, and made worse by base and filthy words.

Chap. 40.
T^ be a certain measure ^uen of honest play.
That a measure must be kept even in honest pastimes.

THere is also a certain measure of playing or recreation.
pastime to be kept, that we do not pour out or spend all too much
lavish out all too excessiuely; and being lift up with too much pleasure, or
too merry.
over merry, slip into some dishonestie. But both our [Martiall] field, and
also the exercises of hunting do minister unto us.
afforde us honest examples of playing.
pastime.

Chap. 40.
Here ^ully proceeds to give directions likewise for our pastin^es and
recreations; teaching, 1. That there m^st be a measure kept even therein, and
that for two special causes.

The 1. whereof is: Lest thereby we should la^ish out our goods too
excessiuely.

The second; lest being over carried with the pleasure of the recreation we
fall into some kind of dishonesty.

Second he directs what exercises are most commendable and safe for avoiding
these evils: as ^amely,

1. Exercises of feats of arms, such as were practiced in Mars field at Rome
2. Hunting.

Chap. 41.
The delight of the mind is to be required.
sought from honest studies.
exercises: the pleasure of the body, because it is meet for beasts.
belonging to beasts, is either to be rejected altogether, or to be added most
sparingly.
used very sparingly.

But it belongs to every question of duty.
to the whole discourse of Duty, to have evermore in readiness.
in mind, how far the nature of man exceeds the nature of cattle.
cattle and all other beasts. For the beasts.
they perc^iue nothing but pleasure, and are carried thereunto * with q with
their whole sway.
all violence. But the mind of man is fed with learning.
is nourished by learning; and does ever either study out or inquire some
matter.
search out some matter by devising, or does perform something; and is led with
a delight of seeing and hearing. Moreover, if there be any one a little more
ready
somewhat too much q inclined unto pleasures, so that he be not of the beastly
kind.
kind of beasts (for there are certain.
some there be [that are] men not in deed, but [onely] in name) but if there
be any somewhat erect or lifted up from pleasure.
less addicted to pleasure [then these,] although he be * caught with
pleasure, carried, overtaken
he hides and dissembleth his appetite.
longing desire of pleasure, for modesty or bashfulnesse.
shame fastness. Whereupon it is understood.
we may observe, the pleasure, etc. to be.
that the pleasure of the body is not befitting.
beseeming the excellency of man; and that.
but that it ought to be despised and rejected. But if there be any man who
attributes somewhat unto pleasure.
yields somewhat unto pleasure [let him knowe] the measure of inioying it, to
be holden diligently of him.
he must very warily keep a measure of enjoying thereof. And therefore.
for that cause, the diet, etc. must be, etc.
let the diet and apparel of the body be referred to health and strength, not
to pleasure.
voluptuousness. And also.
Moreover if we will consider what an excellency and Al dignity Al. dignity
of nature there is in man.
there is in the nature of man, we shall understand how unbeseeming it is to
lavish out in riot or run to riot.
ouerflowe in riot, and to live deliciously and nicely.
wantonly; and how honest.
comely a thing is is to live sparingly.
frugally, temperately.
continently, severely or strictly.
sagely [and] soberly.

Chap. 41.
Here he shows the means how we may keep a measure in our play and sports.
And this point he teaches to belong to every question of Duty. The first
means is this; By having evermore in mind, how far the nature of man
exceeds the nature of beasts. Which he teaches to appear herein
especially, for that they perceive nothing but pleasure, and are carried
thereunto with all violence: whereas contrarily the mind of man is nourished
by learning, and is ever searching out some matter by meditating and devising
or performing something of more worth; and is evermore led with a delight of
seeing or hearing some great matter.

Secondly, for that i^ there be any one who is by nature more inclined to
pleasure (if he be not a very beast as some such beasts there are who are
not men in deed but only in name) although he be sometimes too violently
carried after pleasures, yet for very shame he will hide and dissemble his
ouerlonging desire after the same Whereby he shows that it is most evident,
that very nature teaches, that the pleasures of the body are not beseeming
the excellency of man.

A second means, to keep a measure in our pleasures, especially if we be too
much given thereto, is; So to moderate our diet and apparel, as that we use
them only so, as they may be best for our health and strength, and not for
voluptuousness. A third means is, by considering aright what an excellency
and dignity there is in the nature of man: by the due meditation whereof, we
shall see plainly, how unbeseeming it is for man to lavish out all riotously,
and to live deliciously and wantonly; and contrarily, how comely it is to live
frugally, continently, sagely and soberly.

Chap. 42.
The Argument.
Reader, mark the order: first [Tully] shows [in this chapter] what is
comely according to nature as it is common.
common with beasts: and then, what [becommeth.]
in regard of.
according to the excellency of man: afterward, what becomes the person [or
condition] of every one either given, etc.
every ones person, either given by nature, or imposed by chance, or assumed
with i^dgement. * advise or consideration.


Also we must understand.
WE must further understand, that we have on us as it were [or sustaine] two
persons.
are as it were clothed by nature with two estates or conditions.
persons: whereof one is common, q thereupon, * of that.
because we are all partakers of reason, and of that pre-eminence or dignity.
excellency, whereby we excel.
surmount beasts: from which all honesty and comeliness is drawn.
derived: and out of which the way of finding out of Duty is sought out.

But.
And the other [is that] which is properly attributed.
assigned to every one. For as there be great dissimilitudes.
differences in bodies, (for we see some to prevail or excel.
surpass others in swiftness for to run.
running, some.
others in strength to wrestle.
for wrestling: and likewise in ^ormes, shapes or (...).
cou^tenances, dignit^e to be in some, comeliness in others.
that some have a may sty, other^ amiablenesse: so there are in minde^ also
greater differences.
varieties.

There was in Lucius Crassus and Lucius Philippus much pleasantness; but
greater and more of set purpose, in Caius Caesar the son of Lucius.
Lucius his son. But.
And in the same times
at the same time, there (...) a singular severity in, etc.
there was in Marcus Scaurus and Marcus Drusus being a young man, a singular
gravity; much mirth in Caius (...).
in Caius Lelius much mirth, (...) Scipio his familiar.
in his familiar friend Scipio greater more seeking of honor.
ambitition, more sorrowful or full of discontent, or auster^.
a sadder life.

Also among the Grecians we have heard of Socrates, to have been sweet and
pleasantly conceited, and of a merry speech.
discourse, and also [to have beene] an dissembler.
a pleasant ^ter or jiber.
E^ronist in all his speech, whom the Grecian^ named (...): contrariwise
P^thagoras and Pericles to have attained the highest authority.
very great estimation, without any mirth at all.

We have heard of Hanniball, of [the Captains] of the Carthaginians.
of the nation of the Carthaginians, to to have been crafty.
subtle; Quintus Maximus of our Captains, easily to conceal, hold his peace,
diss^mble, ^rap, prevent the counsels of the enemies.
to have been very cunning in concealing matters, in silence, dissimulation,
plot ting, preventing the devices of enemies. In which kind the Greeks
prefer Themisto^ cles the Athenian and Iaso the Pherean before all other; and
especially the subtle and crafty deed of Solon: who fained himself to be mad,
to the end his life might, etc.
who to the end that his life might be the safer, and that he might do better
service to the co^mo^wealth.
Al somewhat more Al. sometime or in time to come.
further the Commonwealth, feigned himself to be mad. There be others much
unlike to these; plain and open: which think nothing to be done, [as] of a
secret plot, by laying in wait.
that nothing ought to be done secretly, nothing by guile, being lovers of
truth, enemies of deceit. And again there be others, who can endure any thing,
do service to any man, so that they may obtain what they aim at*
desire: as we saw Sylla and Marcus Crassus. In which kind we have heard of
Lysander the Lacedemonian to have been most subtle and most patient.
most able to endure any thing; and contrariwise Callicratides, who was
Admiral of the Navy next after Lysander. And likewise we see another man to
effect by [his] speeches.
in speech we see indeed another man, although he be of great authority.
very mighty, yet so to order the matter, that he may seem to be [but] one of
many.
of the common sort. Which thing we have observed.
seen both in Catulus the father, and in the son.
the son, and also in Quintus Mutius Mancinus. I have heard also of [mine]
ancestors, the same thing to have bin.
that the same was in Publiks Scipio Nasica; And contrarily his father, even
him.
that his father, even who avenged the mischievous enterprises of Tiberius
Gracchus, to have had no gentle [or curteous] manner of speech, or no pleasing
grace.
had no affability of speech: no no^ indeed Xenocrates being the most ^euere
of the Philosophers.
who was the sagest of all the Philosophers, and for that very cause to have
bin both etc.
both great and famous. Innumerable other diversities there be of nature and
manners, yet not at all to be dispraised. But every man's own things.
[gifts] are very greatly to be defended.
carefully to be maintained; [tho] not such as are faulty.
vicious, but yet the pro per.
yet those which are natural, whereby that comeliness which we do seek may
be more easily retained. For we must so deal, that we contend not at all
against the universal nature, or belonging to all.
that nature which is universal: yet that being preserved, let us every one
follow our own proper nature; [So] that although there be other studies more
weighty, etc.
other grauer and better studies, yet ^et us measure.
we measure own studies.
our own by the rule of Nature. For neither avails it to resist nature.
is it to any purpose to fight against Nature, nor to follow.
ensue any thing which you cannot attain.

Whereupon it more appears of what sort.
what manner of thing this comeliness is: since that nothing becomes, Minerua
tho god^ of wisdom and all good sciences being vowilling
maugre Minerua, as they use to say: that is, against nature.
nature with standing and resisting. If there be any thing at all.
And verily if there be any thing comely, certainly there is nothing more,
then an evenness.
even and constant carriage.
course of our whole life and also.
and of every action: which you cannot keep, if you follow.
imitate the nature of other men, [and] let pass.
omit your own. For as we ought to use that kind of speech.
speech which is known vntovs, lest inculcating, thrusting in or beating upon,
or repeating now and then.
chopping in [certaine] Greek words, as some [v^e to doe] we be worthily
mocked or laughed at by very good right.
scoffed at: so we ought to bring no disagreement [or variance] into our
actions and all our life.
so we should show no contrariety in our doings or in our whole life.

And this difference of natures has so great force.
power, that sometimes one man ought to procure death to himself, viz. to kill
himself.
to procure his own death, another ought not, in the same quarrel.
cause.

for M. Cato. was not in one quarrel, the rest in another etc.
For was Marcus Cato in one q quarrel, the rest which yielded themselves to
Caesar in Africa, in another? Yet peradventure it had been given [or imputed]
for a fault [or a reproach] to the rest.
accounted for a fault in the rest, if they had killed.
slain themselves, because their life had been

less austere.
more pleasant, and their manners more easy.
mild. But whenas Nature had given unto Cato an incredible gravity; and
himself had strengthened.
confirmed the same by a perpetual constancy, and ever remained in his purpose
and counsel taken to die rather, then that the face of the tyrant was to be
looked on.
intent and determined purpose, he ought rather to die then behold the tyrants
face.

How many things suffered.
endured Ulysses in that long continued wandering.
long travel, when he both served or became serviceable.
did service unto women (if Circe and Calipso are to be named women) and
desired to show himself fair spoken.
affable and courteous to all men, in all his speech? and also endured the
spiteful taunts of, etc. at home.
at home endured the reproachful or spiteful speeches.
con^umelies of servants and handmaids or wenches.
slaves and girls; that he might once.
at length at^aine to that which he desired. But A^ax ( with what courage he
is reported.
being of that courage wihich is reported) had rather die a thousand times.
deaths, then to endure those things of another man.

which things we beholding.
Which diversities when we behold, it shall be meet.
necessary to weigh, what gifts.
what echone has of his own, and to order those aright; neither to be
desirous to try.
and not to have a desire to try, how other men's things may become.
others men's gra* ces would become him. for every ones pr^ (...) ^ts do (...)
of all become him.
For that especially becomes each man, which is * most of all the own of
every one.
every ones own. Therefore let, etc.
Let every man therefore know his own disposition: and let him make.
show himself a sharp (...) both of his own vices, and good things.
virtues; lest players in comedies and enterludes.
players may seem to have more wisdom.
discretion then we. For they choose not the best comedies.
enterludes, but the fittest for themselves. They that enjoy [or delight in]
their voice, viz. who have excellent voice^.
rely upon their pronuntiation, choose Epigonus and Medea. They [who rely upon
their] gesture, choose.
[take] Menalippa, or Cl^temnestra. Rutilius, whom I remember, ever chused.
[made choice of] Antiopa: Esop not often.
very seldom [chused] Ajax. Shall a player then see this in the stage which a
wise man shall not see in his life? Therefore unto what things we shall be
most, etc.
We are therefore we shall labor chiefly in those.
to labor especially in those things, whereunto we shall be most apt. But if
at any time necessity shall thrust us forth or drive us.
enforce us unto those things, which shall not be of our wit.
fit for our disposition, all care, meditation and diligence is to be given.
we must use all care, meditation and diligence, that we may do.
perform them, if not comelily, yet as little vncomlily
with as little vncomeliness [as may be.] Neither ought we so much to
endeavor ourselves that we may follow.
to follow the virtues which are not given unto us, as that we may fly*
to fly the vices.

Chap. 42.
Tully (still going on to set out more fully the nature of comeliness, and the
fountain thereof) teaches.

1. That enerie one har^ by nature, as it were two persons.

The one of them common; which is in that we are all partakers of reason and
of that excellency whereby we surmount brute beasts: and from this he shows
that both all honesty and comeliness are derived, and the way of finding out
Duty.

The other proper: to wit, that which is properly assigned to every one in
regard of the special constitution both of his body and mind, and therein the
special differences amongst men.

This he notes by experience,

1. In the bodies, for that we see some to excel in swiftness for running,
others in strength ^or wrestling, some having in their cou^tenances a majesty,
others being amiable.

2. By experience in the minds, and that therein also are greater varieties
and differences.

This he proves by sundry particular examples, and first, amongst themselves:
as,

That there was much pleasantness of speech in L. Philippus, but greater and
more of set purpose in C. Caesar L. his son.

Likewise at the same time, that there was in M. (...) sus, though but a young
man, a singular gravity; much mirth in Caius Lelius; In Scipio his familiar
friend grea ter ambition with more austeritie.

Secondly, amongst the Grecians, as he had heard by report; As that Socrates
was sweet and pleasantly conceited, and also of a merry discourse, an Eironist
in all his speech.

Contrarily, that Pithagoras and Pericles were of greater esteem, yet without
any mirth at al.

So amongst great Captains: as, that Haniball of Carthage was very subtle; Q.
Maximus one of their own Captains, very cunning in concealing his purposes,
dissimulation, plotting and preventing the devices of the enemy.

And that among the Grecians, Themistocles the Athenian Captain, and Iaso the
Pherean are renowned for the like.

Finally, that Solon the lawgiuer is famous for policy; and namely in that act,
where in to the end, that his life might both be safer, and he do the better
service to the common weal, he fained himself mad.

Sundry other examples he brings to this purpose not unlike to the former, to
show the great variety of dispositions amongst men.

As that there are some plain and open hearted, enemies to all deceit:

Others who can endure any thing, serve any man, so they may obtain their
desire: as Sylla, M. Crassus, and Lysander the Lacedemonian; though
Callicratides, who succeeded Lysander in the admiralty of the navy, was of a
contrary disposition.

Others excelling in courtesy of speech, and in affability; so as though they
were very great men, yet could frame themselves to the common sort so, as to
win the hearts of all; like as they had seen in the Catuli both in the
father and the son, and also in Q. Mutius Mancinus.

The like he shows to have bin reported of P. Scipio Nasica, tho his father,
otherwise a worthy man (as who avenged the mischievous enterprices of Tiberius
Grachus) yet had no affability of speech at all.

No nor Xenocrates who was the very sagest of all the Philosophers, and for
that cause a great and famous man.

And thus he shows that there are innumerable diversities of natures and
dispositions; yet not to be dispraised.

Now in these several varieties and all other he gives this rule;

That every ones own proper gifts are carefully to be maintained; though not
any such qualities as are vicious, yet all such gifts as are natural, and
whereby that comeliness which we seek may be retained more easily.

And so long as we strive not against that nature which is universal, that
each of us follow our own proper nature.

Whence he teaches this as a second lesson; That although there might be
other grauer and better studies to be followed of us, yet that we are to
measure and limitour studies by the rule of nature, to do nothing against it.

Because it does not avail to fight against nature; or to pursue any thing*
which we have no hope by nature to (...).

And that hereupon it appears more fully wherein true comeliness consists;
that we do not any thing as it were, against nature; but only that whereto we
are fitted by it.

Because, if we ever follow nature, we shall be able to keep an even and a
constant course, both of our whole life* and of e^erie action; then which there
is nothing more com ly: whereas if we imitate the nature of other men omitting
our own, we cannot keep that euennes^e which we ought.

This he (...) plain by a certain similitude:

That as we are to use that speech only, which is known unto us, lest
chopping in Greek or other strange words (as some do) we be worthily scoffed
at; so we are to keep an evenness in all our actions and our whole life,
that no contra^ietie appear at all.

Again, he teaches that the differences of natures are of so great power, that
that may be commendable in one, which should be faulty in another.

As for example: that one man ought to lay violent hands upon himself, which
should be reproueable in others in the same cause.

This he instanceth in M. Cato slaying himself, rather then to yield up
himself to Caesar in Afric as others did; whereas it had bin faulty in the
rest of them, to have done the like, because their lives had bin more pleasant,
and their manners more mild: yet in him it is commended, for that he was of such
an incredible gravity by nature, and had confirmed the same by perpetual
constancy, and al^o had ever remained in this determinate resolution, that he
would rather die, then behold the tyrants race.

2. In comparing the faults of Ulysses and Ajax together: That whereas this was
an honor to Ulysses to have endured the things which he did, in his long
travels, and that he had been able to yield himself to do service to women,
as to Circe and Calipso, (if they were worthy to be named women) and to show
himself so affable and courteous to all; yea after his return home, so to
endure the contum^ly of slaves and wenches, to the end that he might attain
to that which he desired: yet contrarily this is Ajax his honor, that he being
of an unconquerable courage by nature, had rather die a thousand deaths* then
to endure such contumelies or injuries from any.

Hence he concludes, that we are necessarily to weigh what gifts each of us
has properly, and to use the same aright; and not to have a desire to tr^e how
other men's gifts would become us: because that especially becomes every one,
which most properly belongs unto him And secondly, he aduis^th each man to
know his own disposition, and to show himself a sharp judge of his own
virtues, and vices; and so to choose and follow that course which is fittest for
him.

This also he urges by a reason taken from players; Lest they should seem to
have more discretion herein then we.

Because they chufe not the best interludes to act; but those that are fittest
for them, in regard of their pronuntiation, or gesture, and which they can
perform the best; as he shows in sundry particulars:

Whence he infers again what an absurd thing this is, that a player should
see that on the stage, which a wise man cannot in his life.

And so shuts up this point, That we are chiefly to labor in those things
whereunto we are most apt.

Yet here he gives two cautions.

1. That if at any time necessity shall enforce us unto those things to which we are not apt by nature; that then we specially use all care, meditation and
diligence that we may perform them, if not comlily, yet with as little
vnco^linesse as may be.

2. That we do not so much endeavor to attain the virtues to which we have no
aptness by nature; as to shun those vices to which we are by nature strongly
inclined.

Chap. 43.
The Argument.
Comeliness from those things, which fortune has given us, or which we have
gotten to our selves.
gotten by [our owne] judgment.
discretion.

And there is a third person adiovned unto those two, etc.
Moreover, unto those two persons which I spoke of above.
before, a third person is adjoined which some chance or time puts or casts
on us.
imposes [on us.] And also a fourth which we shall fashion or frame.
fit unto our selves after our own judgment.
mind. For kingdoms, empires, nobilities.
nobility, honors, riches, wealth.
power, and those which are contrary to these, being placed in fortune [or in
the power of fortune]
consisting on fortune, are governed by the times.
are ordered according to the times. But it proceeds from our own will.
free will, what calling we will follow.
what person we will.
list to bear.

And therefore some apply themselves unto Philosophy* others the Civil law,
others eloquence: and another or some had rather.
some one chooses to excel in one of those virtues. [another in another.] And.
But whose fathers or (...) have excelled or ^in notable in any commendation.
have been famous in any kind of glory, (...) for the most part.
most of theirs do study to excel in the same kind of praise.
commendation: as Quintus Mu^us the son of Publius
Publius his son [did] in the Civil law: Africanus the son of Paulus.
Paulus his son, military business or feats of arms.
in chivalry. Also certain or sundry
diverse do add some some their own.
of their own unto those praises, which they have receive* from their ancestors.
fathers: as this same Affricanus increased his martial glory by [his]
eloquence. Which self same thing Timotheus Conons son did.
did also Timotheus Conons son: who whereas.
when as he was not inferior then his father.
to his father in the praise.
praises of war, yet added.
adjoined unto that commendation the glory of learning and wit. Sometimes also
it comes to pass.
falls out, that certain the imitation of parents being omitted or let pass.
having omitted the imitation of their parents, follow some trade or
determination.
course of their own; and those especially travel therein for most part, who
being borne of scarce known or base.
obscure parents, appoint to attempt.
propound unto themselves great enterprises.
matters. Therefore when we seek what things do become.
are comely, we ought to comprehend.
cast all these in our mind and thought.
cogitation.

Chap. 43.
In this chapter Tully teaches* that besides those two persons spoken of
before, which every one has by nature, we have other two also.

The first whereof is that, which every one has imposed upon him, by some
chance, or in regard of the times: as to be Kings, Emperors, nobles,
honorable, rich, mighty and the like, or such as are contrary to these: which
as they consist in fortune, so are they ordered according to the times The
later is that which we fit unto our selves, according to our judgment
applying our selves thereunto; for that it proceeds from our own will, what
course of life we will follow.

Hence are the diverse studies of men; that some apply themselves to
Philosophy, others to the civil law, others to eloquence, and that one
chooses to excel in some one of these virtues, another in another.

More specially, that those whose fathers or ancestors have bin famous for any
kind of glory, do for most part (...) to excel in the same: as Q. Mu^us
Publ. his son in chivalry.

Hence also it is that sundry increase the glory of their ancestors: as he
instanceth in Affricanus that he increased his martial glory by his
eloquence; and in Timotheus Conous son who by his wit and learning augmented
the renown which he had received from his ancestors by their martial
praises.

And moreover, that certain leaving the imitation of their parents follow some
course of their own; and especially they who borne of obscure parents, yet
propounde unto themselves great matters.

And thus he concludes, that when we seek what is comely, we ought to
think of all these things.

Chap. 44.
We must determine the kind and purpose or appointment.
course of our life.

But first of all we must determine whom and what manner of men we would be.
have our selves, and in.
of what kind of life: Which consultation or advice.
deliberation is the hardest of all other. For in the entrance into the youth
which is from 12. or 14. to 25. or 30.
youthful time, to which the greatest weakness of counsel is.
wherein there is the greatest weakness of counsel; then every man most
slenderness.
appoints unto q determines.
himself that kind of passing his age or living.
life, which he he has loved most of all.
chiefly likes. And therefore he is entangled with some certain kind and
course of living, before then.
that he could.
be able to judge, what should be best. For that Prodicus says
whereas Prodicus says, Hercules.
that Hercules (as it is in Xenophon) so soon as he began to have a beard, or
came to maturitie or ripeness of years.
began to come to man's estate, (which time is gran ted by nature, to choose what
course or trade of life each will follow
way of living every man will enter) to have gone forth.
went forth into solitary place or wilderness.
a desert place, and sitting there, doubted long and much with himself.
long with himself and much, when he beheld two ways, the one of pleasure,
the other of virtue, whether of them it should be.
were better to enter into.

This peradventure might fallout.
happen unto Hercules being bred of the seed of Jupiter.
borne of Jupiters seed; but not so to us, who imitate whom it seems best to
every one.
every of us; and are allured.
enforced to their studies and and determinations.
fashions.

And for the most part we being instructed.
trained up by the precepts of our parents, we are led or do incline.
are drawn unto their customs.
guise and manner.
manners. Others are carried after the.
by the judgment of the multitude, and most wish for
long after those things especially, which seem fairest.
goodliest to the greater part. Some notwithstanding have followed a right
course of life, whether by, etc.
Yet some, whether by a certain happiness, or by goodness of nature, or by
the instruction of their parents, have followed the right course of life. But
that is the most rare kind of those men.
But that kind of men is most seldom found, who being endued.
adorned either with excellent greatness.
profoundnes of wit, or else with famous learning and knowledge, or with both
of them, have also.
yet taken a time of aduising.
delibe ration, what course of life they would especially follow. In which
deliberation, the whole counsel or advice.
all a man's counsel is to be recalled.
applied to each man's own.
proper nature. For ^ith that we search out in all things, etc.
in all things that are done, we search out of that manner.
nature, whereto every one is naturally inclined.
wherewith every one is borne (as is said before) what becomes.
is comely; then a greater care by much of that matter is to be added, in
determining our whole life.
a far greater care thereof must be had in setting down the whole course of
our life; that we may be constant to our selves in the continuance of our
life, nor to halt in any duty.
ever agree with our selves in all our whole life, and never halt in any duty.
But seeing that Nature has the greatest force.
power unto this choice, [and] Fortune the next; there must ever be had a
consideration.
regard of both of the^, in choosing the kind.
course of our life, but of Nature more. For nature is.
it is both much surer.
more firm and stable.
constant: In so much, that sometimes fortune, as being it self mortal or
mortality it self.
mortal, may seem to fight immortal nature
with nature being immortal. He therefore that will apply all counsel, or
the whole course of his life.
his whole course to the kind of his nature no^ corrupted, let him kee^e
steadfastness.
constancy; For that becomes chiefl^: except peradventure he shall p^rceiue
that himself have erred.
he has erred in c^using his course of life.
the kind of [his] life. Which if it shall fall out ( and it may fall out.
as indeed it may) there must be made a change of manners and purposes. We
may.
shall make that change more easily and commodiously, if the times shall help.
further us; but if not, it must be done by little and little and foot by foot,
or (...) and (...).
leasurely, and by little and little: like as wise men do judge is to be more
(...) or (...). (...) or (...) or (...) (...) as it were stitch by stitch
convenient, to q break off by little and little, those friendships, which do
not so much delight us, and are less approved of us, then to cut the^ off,
suddenly.
of a sudden.

(...) the kind of our life being changed, we must care by all reason.
And when we have changed our course of life, we must by all means take ^eed,
that we be thought to have done it upon good counsel.
advice. But for^ as it is said.
we (...)* a little before* (...) ancestors (...) be imitated.
that we (...) follow.
imitate out (...)* ^et that.
this first ^e ex^, that their vices be not.
are not to be imitated* (...), that we seek (...) ^o follow them (...) (...)
against our nature*
And then it Nature will not bear, that they can.
we can imitate certain things; ^s the son of the elder (...).
the elder Affricanus son, who adopted this ^on to Pau^ (...)*
this ou^ (...) his son, could not, for his infirmity of his health.
sickliness, be so like unto his father, as the other Affricanus son.
other was like his father*
was his: If therefore one be not able, either to (...).
defend causes, or to make orations or (...) to the people.
to retain the people with orations, or to make war.
follow the wars, yet it shall be his duty
he ought to perform those things, which he can.
shall be in his power: as Justice, faithfulness.
Fidelity, ^iberality, Modesty* [and] Te^perance; to the end, that that thing
may be less required.
that that thing, which is lacking in him, may be the less missed. And the
best inheritance is left from the fathers to the children, and better then all
patrimony [or liuelihood or childspart] [ viz.] the glory of, etc.
And indeed the best inheritance [which] is left by fathers unto their
children, and more worth then any patrimony [is] the glory of [their] virtue,
and of worthy deeds: whereunto to be a shame, disgrace or di^paragement.
stain, q judge an unjust thing [or dishonest] and a fault.
is to be accounted [both] a fault and shame. And because the same duties are
not given obefitting.
do not belong to unlike ages* but there are some [^uties] of young men,
others of old, something also is to be said of this distinction.
some are for young men, others for old men, somewhat is also to be spoken of
this diversity.

Chap. 44.
Here T. proceeds to teach, how to determine of the course of our life,
which every one is to follow as most fit for him.

And first he shows that this deliberation is exceeding hard in regard of
the time, when men are to determine hereof.

Because they are to resolve of it in the very entrance into their youthful
age; at what time they are at the weakest for counsel and iudge^e^t to
determine aright: and so e^ch follows that which he likes or fancieth to
himself without any grounded reason. Whereupon it comes to pass that they
have entangled themselves with some certain course of life, before they are
able to judge what were the best:

And that howsoever Hercules (as Xenophon reports) at this age of youth, when
he began to come to man's estate, going into a desert place, and there beholding
two ways, the one the way of plea sure, the other of virtue, and after long
deliberating with himself whether of them he should take, made choice of the
better; viz. the way of virtue:

Yet, this he thinks might befall to Hercules being sprung of the seed of
Jupiter, and so of a divine understanding and judgment: but that there is not
any hope that any of us should make such a choice.

1. Because we use rashly to imitate whomsoever we like best of, and so
follow their studies and fashions.

2. For that we being for most part trained up by the precepts and advice of
our parents, are drawn unto a likeing of their guise and manners.

Or thirdly, for that we use to be carried by the judgment of the multitude,
and so to long after those things which the greatest part do most admire.

Yet notwithstanding how hard soever it is, he acknow ledgeth that some indeed
have followed a right course of life, whether a certain happiness betiding
them, or the goodness of their natures, or through the right institution of
their parents. But for this kind of men who (...) so, he notes that they are
very seldom to be found, which (if they be of profo^d wits, of excellent
learning and knowledge) will take a due time for delibe^ing hereof, what course
to choose.

Thus having showed the difficulty of his deliberation he now comes to set
down the right manner of it; that we ought chi^fly to co^ sider to what we are
most fit by nature.

Because since that we seek in every thing particularly, what is comely, by
doing it according to nature; then much more care ought we to have hereof in
determining the whole course of our life; and that chiefly to this end, that we
may ever agree with our selves in all our whole life, and never halt in any
duty.

And whereas, next unto nature, fortune has the greatest power for making this
choice, he teaches that we are to have a regard even of fortune also therein;
but yet of nature more. For that it is more firm and constant, then fortune; in
so much as fortune sometimes, as being mortal may seem to fight with nature
as being immortal.

In the third place he (...), that a man thus applying the whole course of his
life to the kind of his nature vnco^rupted, ought to be constant in it.

Because constancy principally becomes a man, unless he shall afterward
perceive that he has (...) in his choice: which if it happen (as he shows
it may well) he directs wh^t is to be don, viz. that he must the^ make a
change of his course and purposes.

And for the manner of effecting hereof, that if the (...) serve and (...)
thereto, it may then be made more easily and commodiously* (...) if not, it is
to be made more leasurely, and as by little and little.

And that we are to do herein as wise men in breaking off their friendship
with such as they would ^aine be shut of;

who think it more convenient to break off with the^ by little and little,
then to cut them off, of a sudden: And yet ever to observe this caution in
our change; That when we have thus changed, we may be thought to have done it
upon good advice.

Here also (...) two other (...) (...) (...) (...) ^ration of (...) (...) there is
or ancestors in our courses of life, spoken of before.

1. That we (...) that we do not ^tate their vices.

2. If through nature, or any other imped^ment, we cannot (...) certain
things which were commend^ble in them, like as he instan^eth in the elder (...)
(...), who could not to imitate his father, as the other (...)* son did his,
through ^ickliness; Or if we be not ^o fitted for pleading or defending causes,
or for making orations and like speeches to the people, or to follow the wars
or the like* that yet we are to ^e careful to perform those things which are
in our power (as justice* fidelity, liberality, modesty and temperance) in
the best ^ort that we can, that so what is lacking in us may be less missed.

Finally, he concludes this point, urging the care of it; That since indeed
the best inheritance, which can be left by fathers unto their children, and
which is more worth then any patrimony, is the glory of their virtues and
worthy deeds; and for that cause, seeing to be a stain thereunto, is both a
foul fault and a great shame: therefore eu^rie one should the more warily look
to the right imitation of them.

And thus he ends this matter, making an entrance to the discourse following
of the diuersiue of Duties in regard of ages, etc.

Chap. 45.
What things do properly become young men.
youth.

IT is therefore [the Duty] of a young man.
a young man's duty to reverence his elders, and to choose out of them the best
and most approved; whose counsel and authority he may ^eane unto.
rel^e upon. For the unskillfulness of entering age, or the tender years.
youth, is to be ordered and guided
directed and governed by the experience.
wisdom of old men. This age is also to be specially driven away or weaned.
refrained from pleasures.
lust, and to be exercised in labor and patiently enduring toil both, etc.
patience both of mind and body, that their industry may flourish or be of
chief strength, or they may be most fit for.
excel both in martial and civil duties. And also.
Moreover, when they will refresh their wits.
minds and betake.
give thems^lues to pleasure.
pastime, let them beware of intemperance, and remember shamefastness.
to observe modesty; which shall be more (...)
they may do more easily, if they will their elders will be presen, or amongst
them.
have their elders also p^^sent at such times.
things.

Chap. 45.
Here ^. teaches the special duties of young men, and what things do become
them: as, 1. That they reverence their elders. 2. That they choose out, amongst
the ancienter, the best and most approved, whose counsel and authority they
may use and rely upon. The reason whereof ^s, because the v^skilfulnesse of
youth is to be direc ted by the wisdom of the ancient.

3. That this age is specially to be re^ from lustful^ pleasures, and to be
exercised in labor and patience both of mind and body, that they may excel
in martial and cruall duties, and their industry be s^ene therein.

4. That when they desire to recreate themselves with sports, they carefully
beware of intemperance, and remember modesty. And to this end he thinks it
fit, that they should have some of the ancienter present at such recreations
wherein otherwise might be danger of any intemperance or immode^ty.

Chap. 46.
What things become especially
do chiefly become old age.

But for old men, labors of, etc.
But the labors of the body are to be lessened.
diminished in old men, and exercises o^ the mind do seem.
seem mere to be increased. And their diligence must be given.
they must do their endeavor, that they help as much as they can, or assits
very much.
principally (...) both their friends, and the youth and chiefly the
Commonweal with counsel and wisdom. But old men are to beware of nothing
more.
nothing is more to be taken heed of to old age, then that it give not it
self over to lithernesse and slothfulness.
idleness. But as for riot.
Riotous^esse also is both filthy,
as it is dishonest to every age, and also most foul to old age.
so to old age most shameful. But if the intemperance of lust shall also come
unto it.
moreover be joined therewith, there is a double evil or inconvenience.
mischie^; because both age it self conceiueth.
receiu^th disgrace.
shame [therby] and it causes the intemperance of young men.
the young men's intemperance to be more impudent.
shameless.

Chap. 46.
(...) (...) sets down some Duties of old men, as especially concerning
them: as,

1. that they diminish the labors of their bodies, and increase the exercises
of the mind.

2. That they use all endeavor to help both their friends and the younger
sort, and chiefly the co^monweale, by their counsel and wisdom.

3. That they beware in any case that they give not themselves over to
lithernesse and idleness.

4. That they take heed of riotousness: because as it is dishonest to every
age; so in old men it is most shameful. 5. That they more heedfully avoid
all intemperance of lust: because that, joined with riot or sloth, is a double
mischief; for that both age it self receives shame thereby, and also that it
makes the younger sort to be more shameless and ou^ragious in all intemperance.

Chap. 47.
What things become.
are befitting the person of the Magistrate.

ANd that.
this indeed is not strange or besides the matter.
from the purpose, to speak concerning, or touching.
of the Du ties of Magistrates, [and] of private men* of citizens [and] of
strangers. It is therefore the proper office of a Magistrate, to understand
himself to bear
to consider that he represents the person of the City, and to owe.
and that he ought to maintain the dignity and honor.
honor and reputation thereof: to keep laws.
to see the statutes observed, (...) describe or set down.
to make laws, and to rememb^r those things to be, etc.
that those things are committed to his trust or fidelity.
charge. (...) behooves also a private man, to live with an equal and like
law with the citizens.
under the like law, as the rest of the citizens (neither (...) and base
as an underling and ab^ect, no^ li^ting up himself.
hearing himself too high) and also to will or desire.
seek those things in the Co^mon-weale, which concern peace and honesty.
that are quiet and honest. For we are wont both to esteem.
think and to call such a one a good citizen. But it is the duty of a
stranger and one of another country inhabiting in the city, a ^ner.
alien inhabitant, to ^eddle with nothing (...) his own ^ulinesse. to inquire
[or ask buf^ly] nothing of, etc.
(...) to enquire of another man's matter; and to b^e (...) (...) all.
no whit more busy (...) is (...), or over meddling.
curious in a (...).
strange Co^monweale. So almost.
Thus for the most part Duties shall be found ou^, when it shall be sought out.
enquired what becomes.
is decent, and what is apt, (...), or agree^ble.
befitting persons, times and ages. And there is nothing that does so much
become.
can so much grace a man, as to keep constancy in doing or performing.
managing every matter, and in consultation.
taking of advice.

Chap, 47.
Here T. proceeds to set down certain Duties of Magistrates, private men,
citizens and strangers; as which are most comely and commendable in each of them.

And first, for the magistrate.

1. That it is his proper office to consider ever, that he represents the
person of the city, and that therefore he carefully maintain the honor and
(...)* on thereof.

2. That (...) see the (...) of the (...) observed.

3. That he help to make laws.

4. That he ever remember all things committed to his trust and (...).
Secondly, for the private man.

1. That he live orderly, submitting himself to the same laws and orders as
other (...).

2. That he neither demean (...) ^oo ba^ely, as an ^derling, or (...), nor
bear himself too high.

3. That he follow those things only which concern peace and (...); for that
such are esteemed good citizens.

Thirdly, for the (...) and then inhabitant, he pre^ this, as most be^eeming
and (...);

1. That he meddle only with his own business, without inquiring into other
men's matters; and much more without intermedling in (...) of the co^monweale.

And to conclude, thus he ^heweth that duties may be found our; when there is
a wise consideration what is befitting to persons, (...) and ages.

And finally, to the end that we may be constant in good duties, he ^etteth
this down as a general rule.

That nothing can so grace a man as to keep constancy in managing every
(...), and also in taking of advice.

Chap. 48.
what is comely.
Comeliness in the ordering and motion of [our] body.

But because that.
this comeliness is seen.
appears in all deeds and words, and finally in the motion and form.
gesture of the body, and the same is put.
consists in three things, well fauourednesse
fairness, order [and] adorning or garnishing.
setting forth, meet to action.
for ones doings: it is more difficult to express.
utter, but it will be easy enough to be conceived.
understood. That care also is contained in these 3. things, that we be allowed.
approved of the^ with whom, and amongst whom we live. Let a few words.
some few [wordes] be spoken also.
likewise of these things.

Chap. 48.
In this chapter ^. shows, that (...) is not only to be observed in all our
words and deeds but also in the very motions and gestures of our bodies.

And that this same consists chiefly in these three things, viz. fairness,
order, and handsomnesse of the gesture meet for the thing done. Also that
howsoever this point be somewhat difficult to utter, yet it is plain enough to
be understood.

Finally, that in these three things consists chiefly that care that we may
be approved of them with whom and amongst whom we live.

Chap. 49.
Certain parts of the body to be showed, uncomely: also certain things
either to be done dishonestly, openly; or to be named openly.
That it is uncomely for certain parts of the body to be showed; and likewise
that it is unbeseeming either to do certain things or so much as to (...)
them, openly.

In the beginning very nature.
FIrst of all, nature it self seems to have had a great regard or
consideration.
respect of our body, which has set in readiness that our. etc.
in open view our favor, face or physnomy.
countenance and the rest of our shape, wherein there is a honest.
comely show: but she has covered and hid those parts of the body, which
being given for the necessity of Nature, would have an ill-favored and vnoomly.
^oule sight. The modesty of men.
man has followed this so diligent.
cunning a frame of Nature. for all men, who are of a sound (...) remove from
the eyes those things which nature has hid.
For what things Nature has hid, those all men, who are well in their wits, do
keep from the eyes: and they do their endeavor to obey.
serve necessity of nature.
very necessity as secretly.
closely as they can: also of what parts of the body there are necessary or
base.
servile uses, they neither term.
call those parts nor [their] uses by their own names: and that.
and so that which it is no shame to do, if it be closely or in a secret place.
secretly; it is filthy to speak of it.
uncleanly to report. And therefore neither the open acting or doing of.
doing of those things openly (...) void of shamelessness.
impudency, nor the speech [is void of] filthiness.
nor the speaking of them [free from] dishonestie. Neither yet indeed are the
Cynicks to be heard.
worthy to be heard, or if there have been any Stoics in manner Cynicks, who
find fault with and mock or (...) at us.
reprove and scoff at us, because we say, those things to b^ (...) [or
shameful] in words.
that those things are shameful to be uttered in words, which are not
dishonest in deed: and yet we ^earm those things which be dishonest.
filthy, by their own names: as it is a thing dishonest indeed to rob [or go
a theeuing,] etc.
as, to rob by the high ways, deceive or cousin.
beguile, commit adultery, is a thing dishonest indeed, but it is reported [or
told] not obscenely.
spoken of without any dishonestie: to give he inde^ for children.
to beget children is indeed honest, obscene in name.
but uncleanly to be uttered. And more things are disputed by the same
*Philosoph^rs* to that sentence etc.
And so these Philosophers bring many things to that purpose against
shamefastness.
modesty. But let us follow Nature, and fly.
shun every thing which abhors from [or cannot receive so much as] the
approbation, etc.
abhors the very pleasing.
approbation of the eyes and ears. Let our standing, gate.
going, sitting down, sitting at the table, countenance, eyes, moving of
[our] hands keep that same q decorum. In which * comeliness.
things, two [faults] * faults.
are to be fled.
(...) especially: effeminate [or womanish] and nice or wanton.
that we do nothing effeminately or nicely, and not any thing ^ard [or rude]
or carter-like.
nor rudely or clownishly. Neither indeed may we yield unto stage players.
players and orators, that these things should be fit for them, dissolute [or
left loosly] to us.
seemly done by them, dissolutely by us. The very custom of stageplayers,
has so great shamefastness.
modesty from the ancient discipline.
order, that no man comes on the stage without breeches. For they are
afraid, lest if it should fall out by any chance that some.
certain parts of the body should be opened.
discovered, they would be be beholden.
seen uncomely. And indeed after our manner.
And as the fashion is with us, children growing to ripeness of age.
man's estate, are not washed.
bathed with their parents, nor sons in law with their fathers in law. The
shamefastness or bashfulnesse.
modesty therefore of this kind is to be retained.
observed, especially Nature herself being Mistress and guide.

Chap. 49.
Here T. proceeds to show more specially how comeliness may be retained in
all these, viz word, deed, motion, gesture, that we may be approved of all.

And first, that we are chiefly to follow nature herein likewise:

That as it seems to have had a great respect of our body, having set in
open view our countenance and the rest of our shape, wherein the principal
comeliness is; but hid those parts which being given only for necessity of
nature would be uncomely to look upon so the modesty of man does and ought to
follow this so cunning a work of Nature: which he declares evidently he^reby;

Because what things nature has hid, those all who are well in their wits do
keep fo^th of sight; and do what they can to serve the necessity of nature as
secretly as may be.

Likewise, of what parts of the body there are more servile and base uses,
they do not so much as call them or their uses by their own names. So that,
that which it is no shame to do so it be secretly, yet it is uncleanly to
report.

Whence it is, that the doing of those things openly cannot be without
impudency, no nor the very speaking of them can be free from dishonestie. And
here he confuteth and reproves the Cynicks as unworthy to be heard and also
the Stoics who were almost Cynicks in this point, who used to scoff at them
for this; because they affirmed that these things are shameful to be uttered,
in words, which are not dishonest indeed: and yet they used to term other
things by their own names, which were dishonest and vile indeed, as namely to
rob, cos^n, commit adultery, and could speak of them with out dishonestie;
^ut to beget children a matter honest in it self, they accounted uncleanly to
be uttered.

This and other like reasons they brought against modesty.

But for answer hereof he sets down this as a sure rule;

That we are heerin to follow nature, and to shun every thing which our eyes
dislike to behold, or our ears to hear. So likewise that our standing,
going, countenance, eyes and gestures keep the same decoru^, as that they may
be approved of all.

And here he gives warning of two principal faults:

1. To beware that we do nothing e^feminately or too nicely.

The other, that we do not any thing rudely or clounishlie.

After, he urges this point for observing comeliness:

1. By the examples of players, by who^ it is shame to be reproved herein.

Amongst whom there is so great regard of modesty, in this behalf even
according to the ancient custom, that none of them come upon the stage
without breeches, and that because they fear lest by any chance some parts of
the body should be discovered and seen indecently.

2. By the fashion in bathing, in use amongst them;

That children growing to man's estate might not be bathed with their parents,
nor sons in law with their fathers in law: only for this modesty which
nature has taught.

Hence, finally he concludes, that the modesty in this kind is carefully to
be observed; especially nature herself be^ing such a strict mistress and
guide herein.

Chap. 50.
What form or favor.
beauty becomes a man, what a woman, and how either of them.
both of them are to be decked or preserved.
adorned: in like manner, what gesture, and what motion is comely.

But whereas there are two kinds of amiablenesse or comeliness.
beauty, in the one of which is fairness, in the other Majesty: q dignity.
we ought to account fairness to belong to the woman, and majesty to the man.

All adorning or tricking.
manner of trimming therefore not worthy man.
unbefitting man, must be removed from his beauty.
outward form: and let a fault like unto this be taken heed of in the gesture
and in the motion.

For both wrastler-like motions.
the stirrings like wrastlers are often times too too.
more odious.
misliked, and also some.
many gestures (...) players.
of players are not without follies.
foolish toys: also in both kinds those things are commended which are right and
simple.
plain. But the majesty of the favor is to be preserved by the goodness of
the color, [and] the color by the exercises of the body.

There is to be added besides.
There must moreover be used a cleanelinesse, [which is] not odious, nor too
curious, but only which escheweth all countrie-like and inhumane negligence.
rude and uncivil slouenrie.

we must have*
The same regard is to be had of [our] apparel; in which as in most things a
mean is the best: we must also take heed that we neither use too so^t
slownesses, or too much niceness.
over nice slownesse in our going or gate.
pase, that we should seem to be like the pageants borne in triumphs or
shows to be seen.
Pageants in triumphs, either that we take up.
nor too much swiftnesses.
speed in our haste.

Which things when they are done.
fall out, the breathings are moved.
there follows shortness of breath, the countenances are changed.
countenance is changed, the faces are writhen.
the face is disfigured: of which a great signification is made, no constancy
to be present.
arises a great presumption, that they have no staidness. But we must
study.
labor much more, that the affections.
motions of our mind depart not.
swerve not from Nature: which we shall attain, if we beware that we fall not
into perturbations or moodes.
passions and amazedness.
mazes, and if we will keep our mind^ attent.
heedfull to the keeping.
preservation of comeliness. But the motions of the mind are double.
of two sorts; some of the cogitation.
understanding.
thoughts, others of the appetite. The thought is co^uersant or exercised.
especially busied in searching out the truth: the appetite stitreth a man to
be doing.
inforceth a man to action. Therefore we must care or provide.
We must therefore be careful, that we use our cogitation unto the, etc.
employ our tho^ghts about the very best matters, [and] that we give.
make [our] appetite obedient to reason.

Here T. declares yet more paticularly, what things become a man, what a
woman, what both, so as they may be approved of all.

And first teaches, that whereas there are two kinds of beauty, to wit
fairness and majesty; that fairness belongs more properly to the woman, as
more comely for her, majesty to the man as more gracing him. Whence he gives
these lessons:

1. That men beware of too much tricking their outward beauty.

2 That they neither use over, violent motions like wrastlers, nor too much
gesture or other foolish toys like players; but that such as are most plain
are best.

3. To preserve the (...) of the favor by ^he good* nes of the co^our; and
(...), by the exercise of the body.

4. That they carefully use clenlinesse, and that such as is not any way odious
or too curious, but only which eschews all uncivil slouenry.

5. For apparel that it likewise be clenly; and that in it, as in most things,
a mean is best.

6. For our pase. That we neither use ouernice slownesse, to seem to go like
pageants borne in triumphs, as it were, not moving, nor yet too much speed in
our haste.

This later he gives special warning to prevent by the inconveniences
following thereof; as shortness of breathing, changing of the countenance,
disfiguring the face; whence arises a great presumption of lack of
staidness in the party.

7. That yet above all these, we look to the motions of our minds, that they
swerve not from nature.

And withal teaches how we may attain thereunto; viz. if we bew are that
we fall not into passions, and apply our minds to preserve comeliness.

Lastly, he gives this advice, That whereas the motions of the mind are of
two sorts, some of the thoghts others of the appetite; that we carefully employ
our thoughts about the very best matters, and ever make our appetites obedient
to reason.

Chap. 51.
There is two sorts of speech.
a double kind of speech, cloquent.
rhetorical and daily.
common.

ANd because there is great (...) of speech.
the power of speech is great, and that double.
also [(...)] of two sorts, the one of contention.
vehement speech, the other of talk.
ordinary talk. Let the eloquent speech.
vehement speech let it be given.
serve for pleadings in of judgments, assemblies [or solemn meetings] the
Senate house.
judgments, orations in assemblies, and speeches in the Senate house: speech
let it be used in circles [or common meetings.]
Let the ordinary speech be used in companies, disputations.
reasoning about matters, meetings of ^amiliar [friends.
(...), and (...) (...) [or (...) ^pon] feasts.
let it also be at feasti^gs.

* There are many q the rhetorician^ give many precepts concerning vehement
speech.
precepts of Rhetoricians, of vehement speech, none of ordinary talk*
although I wot.
know not whether these also may be
there may not be such also. H^wbeit there are q But masters [or teachers] are
found for the studies of learners.
masters for their studies that will learn: but there are none that study
this: all places are full with the company of etc.
replenished with store of Rhetoricians. Although those same precepts which are
of words and sentences, will appertain to talk.
may serve for talk. But since that we have [our] voice the * declarer the
vtterer, or to utter.
of [our] speech, and we follow two things in our voice.
and in our voice we seek two things, that it be clear and sweet, both of
them is to be required, etc.
they both are to be fetched altogether from Nature; but exercise will
increase the one, and imitation of men speaking.
of the^ that speak presly and mildely [will increase] the other.
pithily and pleasantly, the other.

What was there in the Catuli, that you should think them to use an exquisite
judgment of letters, or pronouncing.
to be of an exquisite judgment in learning? Although they were learned, but
and others.
so were others also. But these were thought to use the Latin tongue the best,
their sound.
pronuntiation was sweet, their letters neither expressed nor oppressed.
too much mouthed nor drowned, lest it should be either obscure.
dark to be understood, or unpleasant or too much affected.
over harsh. [Their voice was] without straining, neither fainting.
faint nor shrill.
too shrill. The speech of Lucius Crassus [was] more plentiful.
flowing, and no less pleasant.
conceited. But the opinion concerning Catuli, of well speaking, was not less.
Yet for eloquence the Catuli were in no less estimation. But Caesar, the
brother of the father of Catulus, overcame.
went beyond all in salt.
wit and pleasant conceits, that in that very lawyerlike kind of speaking, he
overcame the contention.
surpassed the vehemency of others, [euen] in speech.
[his] familiar talk. we must labor therefore.
We must therefore take pains in all these things, if we seek out what
becomes.
is decent in every matter.

Chap. 51.
In this Chapter and the next. T. gives directions for the manner of our
speech. and here first for the rhetorical or mo^e vehement speec^;

That whereas there are two ^orts of sp^ech, the one more eloquent and
vehement, the other ordinary, he directs that the vehement speech serve for
pleadings, orations, speeches in the senate house, and the like: the ordinary
in usual meetings and debatings of matters at feasts and the like.

2. He shows that the Rhetoricia^s give many precepts for the veheme^^
sp^ech, none for the ordinary:

Howbeit he thinks there may be for this also; (although there are none tha^
study it, and so no such teachers for it, as there are for the vehement, all
places being replenished with store of Rhetoricians: and that ^he same
precepts which serve for words and sentences may serve for ordidinarie speech.

3 For the more vehement; that since our voice is given us to be the declarer of
our mind, and that in it we seek these two things, that it be clear and
sweet; he teaches that although both of them are to be fetched from nature,
yet they may be much helped; the clearness by continual exercise, the
pleasantness by imitation of them who speak most pithilie and pleasantly.

That these two do exceedingly co^me^d the voice, he proves by instances in
the Catuli, who were thought to be of exquisite learning, and to excel others,
who were as learned; and to surpass others in the Latin tongue, only because
their pronuntiation was so sweet.

Their letters were neither too much mouthed, nor drow ned in their
pronu^tiation, lest their speech should have bin either dark or unpleasant.
Their voice also without strayning, neither too weak nor too shrill. So that
although the speech of L. Cr. was more flowing and no less conceited, yet for
eloquence the Caruli were in as great estimation.

Lastly, he teaches by the example of Caesar, Catulus fathers brother, that
each should labor to excel in wit and pleasant conceits; that hereby, in
his very familiar talk he went beyond the eloquence of others; And therefore
concludes that we are to take pains in every one of these, if we seek to
attain what is decent in every matter.

Chap. 52.
[ How our] familiar talk is to be guided, ordered or directed.
moderated.

LEt then this familiar talk.
talk (in which the Socratians most excel) be mild, and not at all obstinate.
gentle, and not froward. Let there be therein a pleasant grace.
a pleasantness. Neither yet indeed let him exclude.
let a man exclude others, as though he were come.
entered into his own possession: but let him think that he ought now and then.
often times to use an enterchange -- able course, as in other matters so also in
common talk.

And let him see.
consider first of all of what matters he speak: if [it bee] of earnest
bus^esses, let him add.
use severity or gravity
sagenesse; if of merry matters, pleasantness. Especially let him foreset.
look unto it that his talk do not declare.
bewray some vice to be in his manners.
in his manners. Which is wont to fall out then especially, when as it is
spoken studiously of the absent, for the (...) of detracting.
men do speak purposely of them who are absent, to their reproach, either by a
mock or severely, or reproachfully or con^umeliously.
in scorn or earnest, either raylingly, or spitefully. And [common] speeches
are had for the most part.
Moreover, ordinary communication is for the most part, ei^ of domestical
businesses, or of the Commonweal, or of the studies of good arts, and of
learning. Therefore our diligence is to be given.
We must therefore do our endeavor* that although our speech.
howsoever our communication shall begin to stray unto other matters, [yet] it
be called back unto these things*
hereunto. But howsoever, the matters shall be present.
be (for neither are we [all] delighted with the same things, nor at every
season, nor alike) [ye^] we must also mark.
consider how our speech may have delight.
be seasoned with delight: and as there was a way to begin it; so let there
be a measurable mean or good fashion.
good manner of the ending thereof. But because this is most rightly commanded.
enjoined, in our whole life, that we fly [all] perturba^ions.
passions, that is to say, all over great stirrings.
unmeasurable moodes of mind, not obeying reason.
not ruled by reason* so (...) (...) must be (...) of such passions, lest
(...) (...) (...) [in it] either anger, or any greedy desire.
covetousness, or ^lothfulnesse.
laziness, or cowardlinesse, or lest any such thing appear. And above all, we
must care.
we are to be careful, that we seem both to reverence and love them with
whom we confer speech.
we talk. Also now and then, there happen or come by chance.
fall out necessary chidings, wherein peradventure we are to use a greater
strayning of voice, and a sharper gravity of words. That is also to be done.
We are also to loo^e to that, that we do not seem to do those things
irefully.
angrily: but as Physicians [doe come] to searing and cutting, so we come
seldom and [as it were] unwillingly to this kind of chastising.
such kind of rebuking; and not at any time but upon necessity.
nor ever but necessarily, if no other remedy will be found. But yet let anger
be far away.
let it be altogether void of anger, with which nothing can be done well,
nothing discreetly or advisedly.
considerately.

And for a great part.
For the most part likewise it is lawful to use
we may use a gentle manner of rebuking, yet gravity being adjoined.
tempered with gravity, that both austeritie be added.
severity may be showed, and all reproachful ^peech be repelled.
contumely avoided. And also that same thing of bitterness which chiding has.
same bitterness which is in chiding, must be signified to have been
undertaken.
used for his sake.
cause who is chidden. It is right.
good also, even in those braules or quarrels.
contentions, which are made with our greatest enemies, although we hear
[wordes] unbefitting us, unfashionable.
unfit to be spoken to us; yet to keep.
retain a gravity, [and] to repel angrinesse.
suppress the angry mood. For those things which are done with any
perturbation.
passion, can neither be done constantly, nor be approved of them that are
present. It is also a matter unbefitting or unbeseeming.
an uncomely thing, [for a man] to report [great matters] of himself,
especially being false; and to imitate the Thraso in Terence.
glorious soldier, with the laughing at o^ scorning.
scorning of the hearers.

Chap. 52.
Here he gives sundry precepts for ordinary talk; Wherein the Socratians
did most excel: as,

1. That it be gentle, not froward, but having (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).

2 That (...) grant others (...) due course (...) free ^betie of (...), as
(...) ^s we wish to our selue^.

3. To consider well of the matter of the communication, that if it be about
carnest business (...) use lagen^ or (...): in (...) (...) itters,
pleasantness.

4. That our speech bewra^e not some vice in our manners. And this he teaches
to fall out then especially, when we speak of set purpose, of them that are
abse^t to their reproach, whether in scorn or good earnest, either raylingly or
spitefully; and therefore to be wary how we speak of such, who being absent
are not able to defend themselves.

5. Our ordinary communication being for the most part of some more serious
matter, as of domestical businesses, or things concerning the co^monweale, or
some matter of learning; that we endeavor to call back and keep our speech to
the point in hand till it be finished, if upon occasion any begin to divert
from it.

6. That whatsoever we talk of (as there are varieties of matters and
occasions) yet we consider and look well to this* how our speech may be
seasoned with delight to give contet to them that hear us.

7. As we are to be careful to take a meet occasion for the entrance into our
discourse; so for the ending of it* to do it in the best manner.

8. That as we are enjoined to fly all pa^sio^s in our whole life, so more
specially in our talk we are to beware of all moodie fits not ruled by reason,
that there appear not in any part of our speech either anger, covetousness,
laziness, or cowardlinesse, or any such unbeseeming fault.

^. That above all we be careful that we may be thought both to reverence and
love them with whom we talk.

10. If it fall out that we are necessarily occasioned to chide any, and
therein to use more loudnes of voice and more sharp nes in words, yet that we
are to look to this, that we seem not to do it irefully or headily: but, as
the wise and disc^eete Physicians who come to searing and cutting but very
seldom and as it were unwillingly, when no other means will serve; ^o we come
likewise to this kind of rebuking, and that never but necessarily* when no
other remedy will be found. Here he gives also four other cautions for our
rebuking of others, that it may be comely and profitable.

1. That it he altogether void of anger, because in it nothing can be done
well or advisedly.

2. That it be done in as mild a manner as may be, yet tempered with gravity,
that a wholesome severity may be showed, and all contumely avoided.

3. If there seem to be any bitterness in it, that it be signified that it
was used chiefly for his good who was chidden.

4. Even in those contentions which fall out to be with our enemies, howsoever
they give us very unbefitting speeches, that yet we ever retain gravity and
suppress our angry mood, because we cannot otherwise carry our selves wisely
therein, nor be approved of them who are present.

Lastly, he gives this advice, that in speaking of our own matters, we
beware how we report any great things of our selves especially false, seeming
to imitate therein the glorious soldier, with the scorning of the hearers.

Chap. 53.
What order is to be kept in building up edifices.
in buildings.

ANd because we pursue all things.
every point ( we will it in very deed.
at least certainly we desire to do it) we must show also what a one it
pleases or it likes us, that the house etc.
it becomes the house of an honorable man and of a Prince to be: the end
whereof is the occupying it.
use, whereunto the description.
plot of the building must be accommodated or fitted.
framed; and yet [withall] a diligent care is to be added or used
there must be a respect be had of the dignity.
stateliness and handsomnesse.
commodiousness of it. We have heard it to have bin, etc.
that it was an honor to Kneius Octauius ( who was made the first Consul of
that family.
who was the first Consul of that family) that he had built a famous [or
gorgeous] and full of dignity.
goodly and very stately house in the palace: Which when it was visited commonly
seen of all the vulgar sort [re^orting thither] it was thought to give the
voice in election.
to further the master [of i^] (being a new man.
a man newly come up) unto the Consulship. S^aurus having demolished or th^owne
down this, ^ade an (...) to his, etc.
plucked this down, [and] enlarged (...) own houses. and so*
Th^rfore the Emperor.
Octauius first brought the Consulship into his house: this the son of a
chief and famous man.
this other a noble and famous man's son* brought into his enlarged house, not
only a repulse but also ignominy and calamity.
shame and misery. For a man's honor is to be adorned.
set out by his house, and not his whole honor sought by.
from his house: Neither is the Master to be honested or adorned.
graced by [his] house; but the house is to be honested or honored.
graced by the Master.

And as in all other things.
things else, a regard is to be had not only of a man's own self, but also
of others; so in a noble man's house.
in the house of a famous.
noble man, into which both many guests are to be entertained.
received, and a multitude.
number of men of all sorts.
every sort [is] to be admitted, there is to be ^ad a care of largeness or
wideness.
there must be made a provision for roomth.

Otherwise, a ample.
large house often times is made.
proves a disgrace to the Master if it be but little* frequented.
if there be in it solitarin^sse, and especially if at any time it was wont to
be much frequented.
well filled by another master.

For it is an odious thing, when it is said of them that pass by
the passers by:

O ancient house, alas with how unequal or vnme^te.
unbefitting a master art thou governed?

Al. Al. which same thing it is lawful to say.
Which indeed a man may [truly] say of many in our times.
now a-daies. You must take heed also, especially if your self build or be a
builder.
namely if you build, that you exceed not.
go not beyond measure in cost.
sumptuousness and gorgeousness or stateliness.
magnificence: in the which kind, there is q much evil * much hurt comes even
by the example.
even in the example. For the most men do imitate studiously the deed^ etc. of
the chief men.
very many do earnestly imitate the doings of Princes, especially in this part.
behalf: as, Who [doth imitate] the virtue of Lucius Lucul. a chief.
singular man? yet how many have imitated the magnificence [or sumptuousnesse]
of his farm houses.
stateliness of his manor places? Of which things doubtless a mean is to
be v^ed.
Whereof yet in very deed a measure is to be kept, and to be recalled.
reduced unto keeping a mean.
a mediocritie, and that same mediocrity to be referred Al. Al. to every use,
and handsomn^sse or conueniencie.
to the common use and ornament of life. But [we have prosecuted] these things
hitherto.
But of these hitherto.

Chap. 53.
Here T. desirous to pursue every point wherein comeliness may consist, comes
to buildings, for the order and decency to be observed in them.

And first, for the house of a Prince or an honorable man, he gives this
precept, That although for the frame and form of it, it must be fitted
especially according to the end of it, which is chiefly the use thereof: yet
notwithstanding that there must be a due respect had, to the state and
comeliness of it, meet for the place and honor of the owner.

This he shows, 1. By the example of Kn. Octauius, the first that was
Consul of that family: who by reason of a goodly house which he had built in
the palace, yet such as was befitting him, is reported, not only to have
received much honor, but also through the concourse of the vulgar sort to
view it, and of other beholders, to have bin advanced to the Consulship; being
otherwise a man but new ly comne up.

2. By another example of Scaurus contrary to this, who building beyond his
est (...) ouerthrewe himself ther^y For ^owsoeuer ^ee was made by Octauius the
first Consul of h^s family for it, and was a noble man's son; yet he brought
into his ^nlarged house together with the Consulship, not only a repul^e, but
also shame and misery in the end, when he was not able to maintain it.

And therefore here he gives two rules to this purpose.

1. That a man's honor is to be set out by his house, and not to be wholly
sought from his house.

2. That the master is not to look to be graced by his house, but his house
by him.

A second precept for such buildings is this, That a man therein have regard
not only of himself, but also of others.

And therefore in great men's houses into which many strangers are to be
received, and a great number of all sorts to be admitted, there must be
special provision for convenient room, so as it may be large enough, and the
owner able to main tain the port* that it may ever be well filled; for that
otherwise a large house may prove a disgrace to the master if it come to be
solitary, especially if it was ever well filled by another master.

This disgrace he exaggerates by the odious speeches of the passers by, as
might be truly verified of many in his days.

A third precept is, that in such buildings a measure be kept for
sumptuousness and magnificence.

Because thereby otherwise arises much evil, even by the example. The reason
is: for that very many do earnestly imitate the works of princes chiefly, in
this behalf, although they never regard their virtues.

This he instanceth in L. Lucullus a singular man for virtue: yet none imitated
him in that; but very many in the sumptuousness of his man our places. And
therefore he concludes, that in all these things a measure is to be kept,
and all to be reduced thereunto: and finally that that same mediocritie is to
be referred to the common use and ornament of life.

Chap. 54.
Three things are to be observed
to be observed in the whole life.

And.
Moreover, in every action to be undertaken.
we undertake, three things are to be kept.
observed. First, that appetite obey reason: then which, nothing is more fit to
preserve duties.
meet to preserve Duty.

And then that it be considered.
Secondly, that we consider how great the matter is, which we desire effect.
to bring to pass; and that neither less.
greater nor less care and pain.
diligence be undertaken.
be used then the cause requires.

A third thing is, that we take heed, Al. Al. that those things which
appertain to an honest show be moderated by dignity.
that we moderate those things which appertain to liberality, by an honest
show and dignity.
seemly grace. And the best mean is, to keep that comeliness, whereof we
spoke before; no^ to proceed any further.
and not to go beyond it. Also the chief of these three is, appetite to obey.
that appetite obey reason.

Chap. 54.
In this chapter T. sets down three things to be carefully observed in a
man's whole life; as, much tending to the gracing thereon and so of every
particular action.

1. That appetite and will ever obey reason; then which he teaches that
nothing can be fitter to preserve us in the way of virtue.

2. That we consider wisely of each matter which we desire to bring to pass;
and so also of a meet diligence for the sure effecting thereof, and neither
more nor less care then the matter requires.

3. That in things which chiefly appertain to honesty, we ever moderate all,
by retaining a decent show and seemly grace according to our place and
estate; and in all things ever to strive to keep that comeliness which has
bin taught; and and not to go beyond it.

Finally, he concludes, that yet of these three this is the chief, That
appetite ever obey reason.

Chap. 55.
Comeliness from the place and time.

furthermore we must speak.
NOw we are to speak of the order of things and opportunity of times: and
herein is contained that science or skill.
know ledge which the Grecians name.
call (...); not this, which we expound.
interpret modesty.
moderation, in which worde^ modus [viz. a mean] is in.
is comprehended. But this is [that] (...), in which is understood a
preservation.
meant a keeping of order. As therefore we call the same modesty or
moderation.
discretion is thus defined of the Stoics: that moderation.
discretion is a science.
the knowledge of placing or disposing.
setting those things which shall be done or said, in their own.
proper place. And so it seems there will be the same force or property.
power of order and placing or disposition.
disposing things aright. For thus also they define Order, to be a framing or
ordering things.
a composing of things in apt and fit.
convenient places. Also they say, place to be of the action, opportunity of
the time.
And place they say belongs unto action, but opportunity unto time. Also the
seasonable [or fit] time of an action.
the time convenient for the doing of any thing [is called] in Greek (...), in
q it is called in Latin occasio
Latin it is called occasio. So it comes to pass.
it is, that this discretion, which we interpret, as I have said, is a
knowledge of the opportunity of fit times to do a thing.
seasons to do any thing. But.
Yet there may be the same defini^ion of prudence, whereof we spoke in the
beginning. But we ask in this place.
in this place we dispute concerning moderation and temperance and other like
virtues.
and [other] virtues like of these.
unto these.

And so.
Therefore what were the properties of prudence have been spoken.
showed in their place. But what properties.
things of these virtues, whereof we have spoke a good while ago.
begun to speak, do appertain to shamefastenesse.
discretion, and to the approbation of them.
to their liking with whom we live, are now to be showed.

Chap. 55.
Here T. about to teach how comlines^e is to be kept i^ regard both of place
and time, viz. in observing the right order of doing things, and fi^test
opportunities of times, for the same, shows,

1. That therein is contained that knowledge which the Grecians call (...),
meaning the^eby not that which the Latins expour d^ modesty, viz. moderation,
in which word modus, to wit a mean, is compre^ended; but (...), viz.
discretion, or keeping order.

2. He teaches how this is defined by the Stoics, viz. That discretion is a
science of setting those things, which are done or said, in their proper place
and order. And so makes it nothing but a faculty of ordering and disposing
things aright. Because thus they define order also;

That it is a composing of things in apt and convenient places; And say that
place belongs to action, but opportunity to time.

3. For the time convenient for the doing of things, he first shows it by
the names; that it is called in Greek (...)* in Latin o^casio and then
defines it, that (...) is a knowledge of the opprotunities, or fit seasons to
do any thing,

Also that prudence (spoken of before) may be defined after the same manner.

To conclude this chapter, he shows that here he speaks concerning
discretion and temperance, and other virtues like unto them, having spoken
before of prudence and the properties thereof, in the right place; and that now
he is only to speak of such other virtues, as appertain to modesty, and to
gain the good likeing of them with whom we live.

Chap. 56.
What becomes.
is decent in every place and time, and what becomes not.
not.

we are therefore to keep such an order.
SVch an order then of our actions is to be used.
observed, that all things be fit and agreeable among themselves, as in a
constant oration, so in the life.
that as in a well framed oration, so in [our] life all things be fit.
apt and agreeable among themselves. For it is a dishonest thing and very
faulty, in a severe.
sage matter to bring in any speech meet for a feast, or delicate.
to bring in any table talk, or wanton speech. Well spoke Pericles, when he
had Sophocles the Poet his colleague or fellow.
joined with him in the Pretorship* and they had talked of the common Duty.
and these two were co^muning about their office; and a fair boy passed by, by
chance.
as by chance a well favored boy passed by, and Sophocles had said, Oh fair
boy ^ Pericles, [he] answered: But for.
But Sophocles, it becomes a Praetor to have not only abstaining or
forbearing.
continent hands, but eyes also. And.
Now if Sophocles had spoken this same in the approbation of wrastlers, or
where wrastlers are allowed or tried.
in a place of approbation of wrastlers, he had wanted.
been free from just reproof. So great force there is both of place and time,
that if any man, when he is to plead a cause do muse.
meditate with himself in his journey, or in his walking, or devise any matter
more attentively.
think of any other thing more seriously, he may not be reproved; but if he do
the same thing
the like at a feast he may be thought vn^iuil, for the ignorance of the time.
for having no regard to the time.

Howbeit those things which far dasagree from humanity.
all ciuility (as if any man sing in the pleading place, or in the street.
market place, or if there be any other great peruer^enesse.
disorder) do soon or plainly.
easily appear, neither do they greatly need admonition or precepts; but
what faults seem to be small, neither can be understood of many, we must
decline from these more diligently.
But we are more carefully to shun those faults which seem to be small, and
cannot be perceived of most.
many: as, in instruments with strings, as harp or lute.
in stringed or pipes.
wind instruments, tho they differ, disagree or be out of tune.
jar never so little, yet it is wont to be marked.
it is vsu^dly observed of a cunning.
skillful [man.] we must live so in [our] life, or to demean our selves.
We are so to carry our selves in our life, least peradventure any thing jar.
that nothing chance to jar; yea and by much more also, by how much a consent
[or concord] of actions.
as an harmony of deeds is greater and better then of tunes.
sounds. And therefore as the ears of musicians.
the Musicians ears do perceive even the least discords q the least things.
in instruments: so we (if we will be sharp and quick.
diligent judges, and censurers or correctors of vices.
markers of faults) shall often understand great things of small; We shall
easily judge by the looking or steadfast beholding or fixing.
setting of the eyes, either by the remission or contraction of the eyebrowes,
by heaviness or dumpishnesse, by mirth, by etc.
by either the smooth looking or bending of the brows, by sadness, mirth,
laughter, speech, silence, contention and submission.
strayning and falling of the voice, and other like things, what is done.
which of them is fitly done, which disagreeth.
swerueth from Duty and Nature. In which kind it is not amiss or inconvenient.
incommodious to judge by others, what a one.
of what sort each of them is: that if any thing be indecent in others, we
our selves also may avoid it. For it comes to pass, I know not by what means.
I wot not how, that we see more in others, then in our selves, if any thing
be done amiss. And so they are corrected most easily in learning.
Therefore in learning, [those scholars] are very soon corrected, whose faults
the masters do imitate for the cause of amending [them.]
counterfeit, to the end to amend them. Neither indeed is it amiss to add
learned men, or also those who are skillful by practice, to choose those things,
which may bring doubt, and to search diligently concerning every kind of
duty, what likes them
to use the advice of learned or experienced men, for the choosing of those
things, which may be doubtful, and to q enquire what likes them concerning
every kind of Duty. For the greater part is wont almost.
is usually wont to be carried thither, whither it is led by nature it self.
very nature. In which things we are not only to consider, what every one
speaks, but also what every one judges.
thinks, and also why each man thinks so, or what their reason is.
for what cause each man thinks so. For as painters, and they who frame
signs or make pictures.
picturers, and also the true Poets every one desires his work to be
considered of the common people.
are desirous to have their works seen of all sorts of men, that if any thing
be reprehended.
found fault with by many, it may be corrected; and they do diligently examine.
enquire both with themselves and others, what is missed or faulty therein.
done amiss in it: So very many things are to be done and left undone of us,
by the judgment
according to the judgment of others, and also changed and corrected.
amended. but what things are done.
As for those things that are done by custom.
after the custom and civil institutions.
ordinances, nothing is to be given in precepts concerning them: for these
very things are precepts.
there is no precept to be given of them: for they are precepts of themselves.
Neither ought any man to be led.
carried with this error, that if Socrates or Aristippus have done or spoken
any thing against the [vsuall] manner and civil custom.
civil order and custom, he should think the same thing to be lawful for
himself. For they obtained this freedom of doing and speaking as they thought
best.
liberty by their great and divine gifts. But the whole reason [o^ guise] of
the Cyniks is to be utterly cast out [or refused]
fashion of the Cynicks is wholly to be rejected. For it is an enemy to
shamefastness.
contrary to modesty, without which * nothing q there can be nothing right,
nor any thing honest.
can be right, nothing honest.

And.
Moreover, we ought to attend upon or mark.
observe and to honor.
reverence them, whose life has been thoroughly tried in honest and great
matters, [being men] thinking or meaning well.
having a good opinion of the Commonwealth, and having deserved or deserving
well [thereof,] [and] affected [or graced] with any honor or dignity.
advanced to any honor or place of government: and also to have old age in
high estimation.
to give much unto old age.

[we ought also] to etc.
To give place to those which have a magistracy [or be in authority.]
bear office;

to have a choice [or difference] of a citizen, etc.
To make a difference between a citizen and a stranger; and also [to consider]
in the very stranger, whether he came privately [or as a private person] or
publicly [as a public person.]
of his own private business, or about the Commonwealths affairs. To the
sum [or summarily] that I may not deal of every one.
In a word (that I may not entreat of every particular) we are bound to love,
maintain and preserve the common reconcilement and consociation of the whole
kind of men.
agreement, and society of all mankind.

Chap. 56.
In this chapter T. being to show what is decent in every action, time and
place, teaches,

1. That such an order is to be kept in all our actions, that in our whole
life, all the parts and every thing therein, be apt both for place and time,
and agreeable amongst them selves; like as in a well framed oration. And
secondly, that of the contrary it is dishonest and very faulty, to do that
which is unbeseeming in any action. As for example: If a man in a sage matter,
should bring in table talk, or any wanton or idle speech.

This he confirms by a witty speech of Pericles: who when Sophocles the Poet
was joined with him in the pretorship, and they two were of a time co^muning
about matters of their office; as by chance a fair boy passed by, Sophocles
said, Oh fair boy! Pericles reprehending him, spoke thus unto him again: But
Sophocles it becomes a Pretour to have not only stayed hands, but continent
eyes also.

Now concerning this speech T. shows, that if Sophocles had used it in some
other place, as where maisteries are beholden or the like, he had been free
from any just reproof: whereas doing it in this place and at this time, he
was justly reproved, for that there is such great force of time and place herein.

3. He sets it forth by another example illustrated by a comparison of
contraries, thus; If any man when he is to plead a cause, do meditate of it
in his iour^ie or as he is walking, or do then think^ more seriously of any
other matter, he is not disliked: whereas if he should do the like at a feast,
he would be thought very vn^iuill, for having no regard of time or place.

4. He teaches, whereas some disorders are so gros^e, and so far disagreeing
from all ciuility, as they need not greatly any admonition or precept, as to
sing in the pleading place or the like; that we are therefore to shun more
carefully those faults which seem to be but small, and cannot be perceived of
every one but only of the wise, for that they are to judge even of the least
disorder.

This he teaches by a fit similitude taken from musicia^s; who avoid the least
jar in their instruments, because the very least is easily observed, of the
skillful: and so we likewise are to demean our selves in our whole life, that
nothing chance to jar therein. And that this we are to do so much the
rather, as an harmony of deeds, is greater and better then a harmony of sou^ds.
Then, where as it may be said, But how shall I come to discern of these
little faults; he answers it by a fit similitude;

That as the musicians ears do perceive even the least discords, in
instruments, by a diligent observation and co^paring of sounds; so we, if we
will be^ diligent markers and judges of faults, shall be able to understand
even the least.

Secondly, he gives special direction how we may judge by others: viz. by
observing the fixing of their eyes, the smooth looking or bending of their
brows, their dumpishnesse, mirth, laughing, speech, silence, or over much
lifting up or falling of their voices, or the like; so in them to judge what
was don fitly, what otherwise, And then what we have observed to be indecent
in others, to avoid the same in our selves.

After, he gives the reason hereof.

Because it usually comes to pass, that we see more in others then in our
selves if any thing be ami^se, and so do better amend our faults thereby.

This he confirms by an instance in scholars, who are the eas^yest corrected,
by their masters counterfetting their faults, to let them see the ill
fauourednesse of them.

5. He directs what means are best, to know what is the fittest in every
kind of duty, and so in all doubtful matters; viz. To use the advice of
learned or experienced men herein. Because the greater part of men is usually
carried whither they are led by nature.

Therefore we are not only to consider what every one speaks* but what he
thinks* and why he thinks so; which wise men can give the best reason o^ and
so to use them chiefly.

And that we are to do herein as painters, pictureres and Poets; who are not
only desirus to have their works seen of all sorts, that if any thing be
generally or justly disliked, it may be amended: but also to this end do
diligently inquire, what is amiss in the same. Even so that we are to do, or
leave undone many things, according to the judgment of others, and likewise to
change and to amend them.

6. He gives this rule: That in what things we have customs and civil
ordinances to follow, we carefully observe them; For that they are precepts of
the^ selves, and so need not to have any pre cepts given of them. And that we
are not by any private man's ensample, though never so wise or of the greatest
authority, to be drawn to do or speak any thing against civil orders and
customs; no not by the ^nsample of Socrates or Aristippus. Because they might
have that liberty by their great and divine gifts, which we cannot have.

Yet here he gives a caveat, That for the fashion and guise of the Cynicks,
it is wholly to be rejected, as contrary to all modesty, without which
nothing can be right or honest. Lastly, he gives some few other particular
directions, concerning this point, and so concludes: as,

1. That we ought specially to observe and reverence them whose lives have bin
thoroughly tried in honest and great matters; chiefly being sound lovers of the
commonweal, having already deserved well of the same, and advanced to any
honor or place of government.

2. That we much respect old age.

3. That we yield and submit our selves to them that are in office.

4. That we put a difference between citizens and strangers; and yet in the
very strangers to consider whether they came of their own private busisinesse,
or about the affairs of the commonweal: And in a word to look carefully to
this general, as comprehending many particulars;

That each know himself bound to love, maintain and preserve the common
agreement and society of all sorts

Chap. 57.
What arts.
trades, and what gains.
what kinds of gain are base: what contrarily are liberal, meet for a free
man [or an honest man.]
honest.

NOw concerning occupations and gains [or manner of gaining.]
trades and commodities, which are to be accounted liberal.
honest, which base, we have received these things almost.
thus commonly we have heard;

First, those gains.
kinds of gains are disallowed which run into the hate of all.
which are odious to all, as [the gaine] of customers taking tole of havens.
tolefarmers, and usurers. The gains also of all who serve for hire or wages.
all hirelings, whose labor and not their arts are bought.
whose labor is bought and not their cunning, are servile and base. for the
very hire in them.
For in them the very wages.
hire is [as it were] the obligation or presse-money.
bond of their bondage.
servitude. They moreover, are to be thought.
to be accounted of the baser sort.
base, who buy of merchants that which they sell straight way as by retayle.
they presently retayle again. for they profit nothing.
For these gain naught, unless they lie very greatly.
exceedingly. neither in truth is there any thing more filthy then vanity.
And indeed there is nothing more dishonest then lying. Also all kind of
workmen or crafts-men.
handicrafts men are employed in a base art [or trade]
serve in base occupations. Neither in truth can the workehouse.
shop have in it any ingenuous thing.
any thing beseeming a gentleman; and in no wise are those trades to be
approved which be seruers of pleasures; [as] Trinkermen.
fishmongers of great fish, butchers, cooks, puddingmakers, fishermen, as,
Terence speaks: add to these, if q you it please you.
please, list.
perfumers, dancers, and all makers of sweet oils, or perfumers.
play at dice. But in * players at plays ^ standing on hazard.
what arts.
sciences there is either greater wisdom, or great gain.
no small gain is sought, as Physic, the art of building or carpentrie.
casting plots for buildings, the learning of honest.
worthy things, these are honest for them for whose degree they are convenient
to whose estate they agree. Ma^chandize also, if it be small, is to be
thought.
accounted base: but if it be great and copious, well fraught.
abundant, conueying to us.
bringing in from every side many commodities, and imparting it to many without
vanity or vain words.
dispersing the same into many men's hands, without lying, it is not much to be
dispraised. And furthermore, if it being satisfied.
satiate or rather content with gain, as it has often comne from the deep.
sea to the haven, so [it shall change or be changed into lands and possessions
to settle thereon.
betake] it self from the haven into fields.
to lands and possessions, it seems to deserve due commendation.
that it may be commended very justly.
by very good right. for nothing of all things.
For of all things from which any [gaine] is gotten.
sought, nothing is better then till age of the ground.
husbandry: nothing more plentiful.
yielding greater increase, nothing more sweet.
pleasant, nothing meeter for a free man.
a free borne man. whereof.
Concerning which, because we spoken things cnow.
have sufficiently spoken in Cato the elder or the elder Cato.
in our book called Cato mayor [or de senectute] from thence you may fetch.
shall take what things shall appertain to this place.
whatsoever shall appertain to this place.

Chap. 57.
T. in this chapter still pursuing this point of comeliness and honesty,
comes to speak of trades and kinds of commodities; and teaches in the first
place, what sorts of them are to be accounted liberal and honest, what base
according to the common esteem of men.

And first he reckneth up sundry of those kinds which are disallowed as base
and odious: As, 1. The trades and gains of tolefarmers and usurers.

2. The gains of all sorts of hirelings, whose labors are bought, and not
their cunning. Because in them their hire is, as it were, the bond of their
servitude.

3. They who buy of the merchants such commodities, as they presently retaile
again.

For that these usually gain little or nothing, unless they lie exceedingly:
then which he shows that nothing is more dishonest.

4. He teaches that all kind of handycrafts men serve in base occupations;
because that in truth, the shop cannot have, in it, any thing beseeming an
ingenuous or free man.

5. Above all other, he accou^teth those trades most base, which are for
serving the pleasures of men: as of fishmongers, butchers, cooks, pudding
makers and the like, and more specially perfumers, dancers, and all gaining by
dicing and such unlawful games.

In the second place he shows what arts are to be accounted liberal and
honest.

As first, All arts and sciences, wherein there is either greater wisdom
required, or no small gain sought: as namely physic, casting plots for
buildings; and so all manner of learning of honest and worthy matters; for that
these are comely for them, for whose state and degree they are convenient.

2. Merchandise, which howsoever being small, it is accounted but base; yet if
it be great, bringing in commodities from foreign countries, and dispersing
the same into many men's hands for the common good, so that it be without lying,
is not much to be dispraised, but rather commended.

And especially if the merchant, being thereby sufficiently enriched, shall
content himself and buy lands and possessions therewith, to settle himself
thereupon, for the good of his country.

3. Of all things from which gains are sought, he prefers husbandry, for
that nothing yealdeth greater increase, nothing more pleasant, nothing meeter
for a free borne man.

But for this matter of husbandry, he refers us to his book de senectute,
where he has written of the delight of it at large, that from thence we may
learn whatsoever we desire in this behalf.

Chap. 58.
Of two honest things, whether is the more honest.

But it seems expounded sufficiently.
I think it sufficiently declared, how duties should be drawn or proceed.
be derived, from those parts which are of honesty.
belong to honesty. But a contention of those very things which are honest, may
often fall out.
Yet of those same things which are honest, there may fall out often times a
question, and a comparison whether of two honest things is the honester.
of two honest things, when there is the honester: q which place is pretermitted
by Panetius.
which point is passed over of Panetius. For whereas all honesty flows or
streameth.
sprin geth out of four^ parts or fount*
heads, whereof one is of knowledge, another is of common society.
community, the third of valorousnesse or couragio^snesse.
magnanimity, the fourth of temperance.
moderation; it is necessary that these be compared often together in choosing
duty.
of necessity, that in choosing of Duty, these be often compared amongst
themselves. It pleases therefore, those duties to be more apt to nature.
We think therefore that those Duties are more agreeable to Nature, which [are
drawn.
borrowed] from common society.
co^munity, then those which are drawn or derived.
fetched from knowledge. And that may be proved.
confirmed by this argument: because, if that life shall happen to a wise man.
if a wise man shall happen on such a life, that he be enriched with flowing
plenty or store.
abundance of all manner of substance.
all things, although he consider with himself with the greatest advice.
leisure, and view.
behold all things which are worthy knowledge.
to be known; yet if his solitariness be so great.
should be so great, that he cannot.
could not have the sight of a man.
see a man, he would depart out of life, or wish to die.
he would wish to be out of this life. And that wisdom which the Greeks
term or name.
call sapientia.
(...), is the princess of all virtues.

for we understand another certain prudence, which the Greeks call (...),
which is the science, etc.
For we take prudence, which the Greeks call (...), to be another certain
thing, which is the knowledge of things to be earnestly desired.
desired, and [things] to be fled.
meet to be eschewed. But that wisdom (which I named the princess) is the
science of heavenly and worldly things, or things belonging to Gods and men.
knowledge of divine and humane things: where in is contained the the common
conuersing o^ intercourse, or fellowship.
community of gods and men, and their society amongst themselves. [Now] if that
virtue.
that be the greatest ( as certainly it is.
as it is indeed) it is necessary that duty to be the greatest which is
drawn from community.
it must needs follow that the Duty which is borrowed from community, is the
greatest also. For knowledge and view [or consideration.]
contemplation of natural things.
Nature is in a certain manner.
is after a sort ^ame and begun [onely.]
maimed and imperfect, if no doing of things.
performance of deeds follow: and that doing is seen especially.
performance does especially appear, in* defending commodities of men.
men's commodities. It then appertains to this community of men.
the society of mankind; and for that cause, is to be preferred before
knowledge. And every best man.
best disposed man does declare and show the same thing, in very deed.
when it comes unto the point. For who is so desirous.
studiously set in through seeing.
the searching out and knowing the nature of things; that if the peril and
danger of [his] country which he might etc.
tidings should be brought suddenly to him handling [o^ treating vpon] and
viewing matters most worthy [his] knowledge.
should be brought him of a sudden, of the peril and hazard of his country,
which he might be able to succor and help; although he were handling and
contemplating matters most worthy knowledge.
to be known, would he not leave and cast away.
cast aside all those things.
these [studies;] yea although he thought himself to be able
that he was able to number the stars, and to measure the greatness of the
worlds? And the same man would do this thing
And he would do the very same thing in the cause o^ peril of [his] parent.
parents or friends. By which things it is understood.
we may plainly gather, the duties of justice.
that the duties of justice which apper taine to the profit of men, then which
nothing ought to be more ancient.
dearer unto man, to be preferred or put before.
are to be preferred before the studies and duties of knowledge. Also they
them selves.
They moreover, whose studies and whole life has been occcupied o^ employed.
spent in the knowledge of things, yet have not.
have not yet withdrawn q gone back or departed.
themselves from increasing the profits and commodities of men. For they also
have instructed many, to make them the better citizens, etc.
to the end that they might be the better citizens, and the more profitable in
their Commonweales; as Lysias a follower of Pithagoras, or a Pitha gorea^
philosopher.
the Pithagorean [instructed] Epaminondas of Thebes.
the Thebane Epaminondas; Plato taught Dion Siracusa.
the Syracusian, and many [haue taught] many.
many other have done many more. And what soever thing
whatsoever benefit we ourselves have brought unto the Commonwealth (if so be
that we have brought any thing) we have come unto it, instructed and adorned
by teachers and learning.
attained unto it, being instructed by teachers, and furnished with learning.

Neither only they living and present do instruct and teach etc.
Neither do they only instruct and teach them that are desirous of learning,
while they are alive and present; but they attain the very same thing also,
even after their death by [their] monuments of learning. for neither.
Neither is there any place.
point pretermitted or ouer-passed by them
omitted of them, which might apperaine to the laws, which [might appertain]
to the manners, etc.
concern the laws, customs and government.
discipline of the Commonweal: so that they may seem to have employed their
quiet studies for our business or commodity.
leisure unto our affairs. Thus they themselves being given to the studies of
learning and wisdom, do co^fer especially
do chiefly bestow Al. their Al. their prudence and understanding.
wisdom, prudence and understanding, to the commodity of men. And for that
cause also, it is better to utter the mind plentifully.
speak copiously so that it be discreetly.
wisely, then to to think [or conceiue] most sharply without eloquence.
meditate even most wittily without utterance; because cogitation [or conceit
is (...) or imployed] (...) in it self, but (...).
for that, meditation serves only within ones-selfe, but eloquence (...)
those (...) whom etc.
serves for the benefit of all those, with whom we beioined in (...)
common society. And as the swarms of Bees are not gathered together ^or the
cause of framing honey combs.
do cluster together not to this end to make combs, but whereas they are
congregable [or soon assembled] ^ by nature they fashion [th^ir] comb^
but being swarming by nature they work their honey combs; So and much more
also, men being of an assembling* or sociable nature, do add the cunning of
doing and devising.
gathered by nature, do use their cunning in doing and devising. Therefore
unless that virtue which consists of defending.
in defending men, that is to say, of the society of mankind.
in maintaining the society of mankind, touch or be joined with.
do meet with the knowledge of things, it may seem a lone-wandring and barren
knowledge And in like manner, greatness of courage, separate from humane
community and neighborhood.
society and frie^dship, is a certain beastliness.
savageness and beastly.
intractable cruelty. So it comes to pass, that the consociation.
acco^panying together of men and common society, far surmounts the study of
knowledge. Neither is it true which is said of certain.
some, therefore this.
that therefore this community and society with men, to be for the necessity.
is for the necessity of life, because we could not attain nor bring to pass.
effect without others, those things which nature might desire. For if so be that
all things which appertain to the food and ornament of life.
furniture of life, were afforded or found.
ministered unto us as is were, by the divine rod.
grace of God, as they say; then every one of the best wit [or of an excellent
wit.]
of a good wit, all businesses omitted or* set aside.
omitting all other businesses, would place or bestow.
employ himself wholly in knowledge and science. But it is not so. For he
would both fly solitariness, and seek a companion of his study; and he would.
would both teach and learn, also hear and speak.

[And] therefore every duty which appertains to maintain the conjunction,
etc.
to the maintenance of the neighborhood and society of men, is to be preferred
before that duty which is contained.
consists in knowledge and science.

Chap. 58.
T. having finished the first maine question concerning honesty, to wit, how
Duty may be derived from the four chief fountains thereof, and also whether
the thing to be deliberated of be honest or dishonest; comes now to the
second question, arising from the comparing of honest things amongst
themselves: viz. Of two honest things propounded whether is the more honest:
which point he shows as before, to have bin omitted by Panetius.

Secondly, he gives the reason hereof: That all honesty springs from out
of these four fou^taines, viz Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, Temperance; that
in the making choice of what duties we are to perform, we use often to compare
these among them selves. And (...) he teaches, that those dut^es are more
agreeable to nature which spring from our community with others, viz. from
Justice, then those which are fetched from prudence; and so to be preferred
before them.

This he confirms by sundry argume^^s from the necessity of humane society,
from which the duties of Justice do proceed. Which society he shows to be
so necessary, That if a wise man should happen on such a life, that he should
be enriched with all abundance of good things, and should have both ability
and leisure enough to contemplate and consider of all things worthy the
knowledge of mortal man; yet if his solitariness, should be such that he
could not see a man, he would wish much rather to die then to live.

Secondly, from that wisdom which is called in Greek (...), and in Latin
sapientia, from which these duties of Justice and community are likewise
derived:

This wisdom he shows to be the princess of all virtues, and distinct
from that which is called in Latin prudentia, and in Greek (...), which is
defined thus, viz A knowledge of things, meet to be desired or eschewed:

Where as this wisdom called sapientia is the knowledge of divine and humane
things, wherein is contained the co^munity of Gods and men, and their society
amongst themselves.

Whence he reasons thus:

If that virtue of wisdom from which these duties proceed be the greatest and
as it were the princess of all virtues, that then these duties flowing from it
must needs be the greatest also. And that they do proceed hence, he proves
further; for that the contemplation and knowledge of nature is maimed and
imperfect, if no performance of deeds follow^: which performance he declares
to appear especially in defending the commodities of others, and so
appertains to the society of mankind; and therefore to be preferred before
mere knowledge.

Thirdly, he proves it by the examples of the best disposed men; who use to
cast aside all duties of getting knowledge, whatsoever, that they may help
their country in any extreme peril. For example, he asks this question,
who there is so studiously set in searching out the nature of things, if
tidings should be brought him of a sudden, of some great imminent peril of
his country, which he might be able to prevent; though he were contemplating
matters most worthy of all other to be known, which would not yet cast aside
all those studies: yea although he thought he should be able by his
searching, to number the stars, and to measure the greatness of the world.

And moreover, for that he would not only do this for his country, but even
in the very cause of the peril of his parents, or friends. Whence he
concludes evidently again, that the duties of Justice appertaining to the
profit of mankind, then which nothing can be dearer unto us, are to be
preferred before duties of knowledge.

Fourthly, he further demonstrateth it by other general ensamples in this
kind. As,

First, in that they whose studies and whole life have bin spent in seeking out
the knowledge of things, yet have not withdrawn themselves from indeuouring to
inincrease the commodities of men. As those who have instructed many, to make
them the better citizens, and more profitable to the commonweales. Of this sort
he gives sundry ensamples: as,

1. Of Lysias the Pithagorean philosopher, who instructed Epaminondas of Thebes.

2. Of Plato, who taught Dion the Siracusian, and many other have done the like.

3. He shows for himself, that whatsoever benefit he had brought to the
commonweal (if he had brought any at all) he had attained unto it by being
himself instructed by teachers, and so furnished with learning.

Secondly, in that such do not only instruct them that are desirous of
learning, whilst they are alive and present with them; but they also effect the
same even after their death much more effectually, by the monuments of their
learning left behind them.

Thirdly, in that they omit no point which might concern the laws, customs
and discipline of the commonweal: so that they may seem to have employed all
their leisure for the benefit of posterity.

Thus he shows, that they being given to the studies of learning, bestowed
all their wisdom and understanding for the good of the commonweal, and so
did ever prefer duties belonging to the society of men.

Fourthly, he proves it by this instance* That for this cause alone it is bet
ter to speak copiously, so it be wisely, then to meditate most wittily without
utterance.

Because meditation serves only within ones self, but eloquence serves for
the good of all with whom we converse, and many others. Fifthly, because we
could not devise nor effect matters sowel alone as with others. This he
proves by a fit similitude taken from Bees: That as they swarm together, not
to the end to make combs, but being thus swarming by nature do make their
combs more ea^ily; even so and much more also, men being of a sociable nature,
do use their cunning in doing and devising much the better and more speedily.

Sixthly, in that know ledge separate from justice or employment for the common
good, remains fruitless and barren. And so likewise fortitude or valor
separate from humane society and friendship, viz if it be not used for the
good of others, is nothing else but savageness and cruelty. Whence he
concludes, Duties appertaining to the society of men to be far greater then
the studies of know ledge.

Lastly, he answers an objection of some, who affirmed, that we use duties
appertaining to society, for our own necessity (for that we could not
effect nor attain with out others, those things which nature might desire) and
not for the good of others.

Whereunto he answers; That if this were true, then if a man had all things
necessary for living, ministered (as it were) by the grace of God, without any
labor or help of others; if the same man were of a good wit, he omitting all
other business would wholly employ himself in knowledge and science.

But he teaches that this is false; Because even such a man would still fly
solitariness, and seek some companion for his studies, and would desire still
both to teach and learn, to hear and speak.

And therefore upon all these grounds he concludes this point, That every
duty which appertains to the main tenance of humane society, is to be
preferred before such as consist in knowledge and science.

Chap. 59.
Whether Justice or Te^perance be better.

That preaduenture may be asked.
THis question may peradventure be well asked, whether this co^munity which is
especially apt.
most agreeable to nature, be also ever to be preferred before moderation and
modesty.
temperance? It pleases not.
I think not so. For there are certain things.
some things partly so filthy.
dishonest, partly so heinous, that a wise man would not do them, no not for
the cause of preserving of, etc.
for the preserving of his country. Possid. has gathered many of them
together; but some.
certain of them so foul.
vile [and] so filthy, that they may seem filthy or dishonest.
shameful even to be spoken. Not any man therefore shall undertake these
things for the cause of the commonweal.
These things therefore ought no man to undertake for the cause of the
Co^monweale, neither indeed would the Commonweal them to be undertaken.
have them vndertake^ for her sake.
cause.

But this matter has it self more commodiously.
stands so much in better case, for that there a time cannot happen.
can befall no time, that it should benefit or further
concern the Commonweal, for a wise man to do any of them. Wherefore let this
be concluded in choosing of Duties, such kind of Duties to excel especially,
which is kept in the society of men.
that such kind of Duties excel most, which concern the society of men. For
considerate dealing*
wise performance will follow knowledge and prudence. So it comes to pass,
that to do advisedly
to perform [our] actions considerately, is better.
of more [worth] then to devise or think of, or ponder wisely
wisely to meditate. And indeed let these things [suffice] hitherto.
And thereof thus far. For the place it self is set open.
this point is sufficiently laid open, that it is not a difficult thing.
difficult in the searching out of Duty, to perceive.
see what is to be preferred of every one or what [duty] is to be preferred
before every other.
what every one is to prefer. Moreover, in that the community it self.
that very common society, there be degrees of Duties, whereby it may may be
known what one is above the other.
of which it may be understood what excels every other: so as.
that the first [Duties] be due] to the immortal Gods, the next.
second, to [our] country, the third to [our] parents, furthermore the rest are
due to others by degrees.
and so forth by degrees, Al. the rest are due to the rest.
to others. Al. some.
Of which things disputed briefly, or handled shortly.
thus briefly discoursed of, it may be understood, men to be wont.
how men are wont not only to doubt that thing.
to doubt, whether a thing be honest or dishonest, but also two honest things
being, etc.
of two honest things set before them.
pro pounded, whether is the more honest.
honester. This [common] place.
point (as I said before) is omitted of etc.
ouerslipped by Panetius. But now let us go forward to those things which
remain.
proceed to the residue of duties.
the rest.

Chap. 59.
Here ^. proceeds to speak of the co^paring of duties; and first, somewhat
in comparing the dutie's of Justice and Temperance, shows that this question
may chance be propounded; Whether duties of society be ever to be preferred
before others of moderation and temperance. Whereunto he answers, that he
thinks not so; and gives his reason, for that there are some things partly
so dishonest partly so heinous, that a wise man would not do them, no not for
the preserving of his country. Of this sort he says, that Possidonius has
gathered many: certain whereof are so odious that they are shameful to be
uttered. Now, these he teaches that a wise man ought not to undertake, no not
for the cause of the commonweal, neither that indeed the commonweal would
have them undertaken for her cause. But for these he shows that there cannot
befall any time wherein it can concern the good of the commonweal for a wise
man to do any of the^. And therefore, notwithstanding all these, he concludes
this point concerning the choosing of duties;

That evermore such duties be preferred which concern the good of others; And
that wise performance of our actions will ever follow knowledge and prudence.
Whereupon it comes to pass, that considerately to per form our actions for
the good of others, is more worth the^ to meditate wise ly. So he shuts up
this whole matter as sufficiently laid open, that in the choosing of duties it
is not difficult to see what every one is to prefer.

Lastly, for the ending of this whole treatise, and the right performance and
preferring of duties, he advises to remember that which was taught before;
That in the common society, there are degrees of duties, whereby it may be
best understood what duties are especially to be preferred and and performed
first and chiefly.

As first those which are due to God; next, such as are due to our country;
thirdly, those to our parents, and so the rest according to degrees as they are
due to others in order.

And thus finally he shows, that we may easily understand by the things
handled before, both these questions, whereof men are wont to doubt, viz.
first, whether a thing be honest or dishonest* Secondly, of two honest things
propounded, whether is the honester; which was ouerslipped by Panetius. And so
prepares himself to proceed to that which follows.

Finis.

