The book of freendeship of Marcus Tullie Cicero.

Anno dn^i. 1550.



To the right virtuous, and my singular good Lady, Katharine duchess of
Suffolk.
AS my prisonment and aduersitee, most honorable lady, was of their own nature
ioigned with great and sundry miseries, so was the sufferance of the same
eased, by the chance of diverse and many commoditees. For thereby found I
great soul profit, a little mind knowlage, some holow hertes, and a few
feithfull friends. Whereby I tried prisonment of the body, to be the libertee
of spirit: aduersitee of fortune: the touch stone of freendship, exempcion
from the world, to be a contempt of vanitees: and in the end quietness of mind,
the occasion of study. And thus somewhat altered, to avoid my old idelnesse,
to recompense my lost time, and to take profit of my calamitee, I gave my
self among other things to study and learn the French tongue, having both
skilful prisoners to enstruct me, and thereto plenty of books to learn the
language. Among which as there were diverse notable, and for their sundry
mattier worthy readyng, so none liked me above this Tullius book of
freendship, nor for the argument any with it to be compared. The whole whereof
when I had perused, and saw the goodly rules, the natural order, and civil
use of freendship, where before I but liked, than was I ravished, and in a
certain wonder with the heathen lernyng, which chiefly for it self I
phantasied, and for my state I deemed good to be embraced, as a glass to
discern my friends in, and a civil rule to lead my life by. These causes
moved me to think it mete for more. Wherapon I (as I could) translated it, and
though not so lively, nor yet so aptly, as some would look for, and many culd
do, yet I trust they will rather bear with my good will, then rebuke my
boldness, for that it proceeded more of a good mind than of any presumpcion of
knowlage: and so my enterprise is to be enterpreted rather by friends, as a
treatise of friendship, then by learned clerks in an argument of translacion.
Well, how so ever it shall be liked of the learned, I hope it shall be allowed of
the vnlatined. Whose capacitees by my own I consider, and for lack of a fine
and flowyng style, I have used the plain and common speech. and to the end the
sense might not be changed, nor the goodness of the matter by shift of tounges,
much minished, I caused it to be conferred with the latin auctor, and so by
the known well learned to be corrected: after whose handelyng me thought a new
spirit and life was given it, and many parts seemed as it were with a new cote
araied, as well for the orderly placyng and eloquently changeyng of some
words, as also for the plainly openyng and learnedly amending of the sense,
which in the Freenche translacion was somewhat darkened, and by me for lack
of knowlage in many places missed.

Thus when the thing was perfected, and I beheld the fame of the auctor, the
nature of the treatise, and the clerenesse of his teaching, I could not judge
to whom I should rather offer it, than unto your grace, whom the freendelesse
daily find their defense, and the helples repair to as a refuge. This did I
not to teach you, but to let you see in learning ancient, that you have by
nature used: nor to warn you of ought you lacked, but to set forth your
perfection: the proof whereof the dead might witness, and their offspring has
just cause to knowlage it, as mo can record it, then can requite it. And such
your freendly steadfastness declared to the dead, does assertaine us of your
steadfast frendlinesse toward the living, which many have felt, and diverse do
prove, and few can want. Of which number your grace has made me one, that
neither least nor seldomest, have tasted of your benefits, both in my trouble
and also libertee. Wherefore your grace in my sight is of all other most worthy
this small fruit of my prisons labor, as a fit patroness to the honor of
such a work, and a true example, in whom it is fulfilled. Thus the lord of
truth preserve you in freendship, increase your friends, and defend you from
enemies.

John Harryngton.

To the reder.
THe wise man i^ his prou^rbes says: A friend loves at all times, that is,
as well in the time of aduersitee as prosperitee. And again he says, The man
that is apt to amitee, and that has bent his heart to entreteyne freendship,
does more love, and faster stick to his fre^d, than one brother to an other.
And it is written in the Ecclesias^icus: Doo^ not b^ecome a foe of a friend. For
such a man obteyneth an ill name, blameworthy and reprochefull, even like as
the double tonged is infamous. And again it is there written, A feithfull and a
trus^y friend is a strong garrison: he that atteyneth such one, fyndeth a
precious treasure. To a sure and trus^y friend (says he) no price is equal.
For an assured freende is the medicine of life: Such a one shall they obtain,
that reverently honor the lord. He that honoure^h the lord, does
stablishe and make sure this freendship^ for eue^ as an other him self shall
his friend be to him. Forsake not thine old freende: for thy new shall not be
equal unto him. A new friend is like unto must or new wine: the which at
length thou shall drink with pleasure. A friend (he says) in prosper^tee can
not be judged: nor the ennemie in aduersites will be hid. In the time of man's
prosperitee his ennemies are sorry: and in aduersitee his freende forsakes him.
Show thy self trusty and sure to thy friend a poor man, that thou may with
him rejoice in prosperitee: Observe fidelitee to him in time of calamitee, that
thou may together with him come into his possession. See (says he) that
thou love thy friend: and show thy self sure and trusty unto him: And if thou
babble abroad his secrets, thou losest him. Thus when I remember, in how many
places of holy scripture, precepts are given concerning friends and friendship:
I do not a littell muse and marvel at the divine gefte, that the most noble
and excellent learned man, the most worthy Romayne Mar. Tul. Cicero had: who in
this his book of Amitee here after following, has so eloquently, so lively, so
pithyly, and so plainly descriued and set out, what Amitee is, how to choose a
friend, how much is to be done for a friend, how friends should ponder
requests, what manner of men are m^ete for friendship, the propretee of true
friendship, the principal cause of freendship, the chief poynct in friendship,
the commoditees of friendship, what thing tries friends, the bonds of love in
friendship, the dissimulacion in friendship, feigned freendship, the profit of
freendeship, the fruit of friendship, the ways to prove friends, what is to
be attributed to true friends, what a freende ought to eschew, and so forth
the end of freendeship, that I think there is no man, but that he may learn
out of the said book, all the poynctes needful for him, that will enter
into, and continue in that most happy and blissful life of true friendship:
whereby he may so order and govern him self, that at length he may atteyne
to that glorious name, to be called a sure and a trusty friend. And certaynely
no man can clyme so high (^ by the descripcion of Tully) but he that is both
good and wise, and that lives vertuousely. And so, after the determinacion of
Cicero, I may conclude, that he that is a feithfull, a sure, and a trusty
freende, must needs be a good, a wise, and a virtuous man.

The book of freendship of Marcus Tullie Cicero.
QUintus Mutius Scaeuola Augur was wont to tell redily and pleasantly many
things o^ Caius Laelius his father in law, Laelius, father in law to Scaeuola
the Augur and to F^^ni^e^
and not to stick in all his kind of comunicacion to call him wise. But I was
so put to Scaeuola by my father, when I came to man's state, that as nigh as I
well could or might, I should never go from the old man's sleue. And therefore
I bare away many things wisely reasoned, and many things briefly and
handsomely told, and sought by his wisdom to grow better learned. When he was
dead, I gat me to P. Scaeuola, whom alone I dare boldly name the chefest of our
city for wit and knowlage, but an other time we shall speak of him, now I
retourn to Scaeuola Augur. As he often talked of sundry matters, so I
remember, sittyng at home in his half round chair (as his manner was) when I
and very few his familiars were present, he fell into that talk, which then
was almost common in many men's mouths. For you remember (as I think) Atticus
(and so much the rather, Pom. Atticus.
) because you haunted Sulpitius company very much. What a wonder of
lamentacion of men there was, when he being Tribune of the people, P. Sulpitius
Tribune. Q. Po^peius Consul.
disagreed from Q. Pompeius with a deadly food, who then was Consul, with
whom very friendly and louynglie he had lived. Therefore at that time Scaeuola,
when he fell in a rehearsal thereof, declared unto us the talk that Laelius had
upon friendship with him and his other son in law C. Fannius, the son of
Marcus, shortly after Affricanes death. The sum of which disputacion I bare
away, and have set it forth in this book after my own fantasy. For I have
brought in as it we^e themselves speaking, to the intent, these words quod I,
and quod he, should not be to often rehearsed. And the rather I did it, that the
talk might s^eme of two that were present before y^u. For where as often times
ye were in hand with me Atticus, that I should write somewhat upon freendshippe,
me thought it a thing both meet for the knowlage of al men, and also for our
familiaritee. And therefore at your request I did it, not vnwillynglie, that I
might profit many^ But as in my book called Cato Mayor, (...) the (...).
which is w^itte^ to you of old age. I have brought in Cato the old man
reasonyng, for that there seem^d no meter man to speak of age then he, who had
been very long aged, and above others in that his age, had flourished: so for as
much as we have understand by our elders the notable acquaintaun^r between C.
Laelius and P. Scipio, The fre^dshippe betw^ne C. Laelius and Scipio.
I have thought Laelius a v^ry fit person, to reason the self same things of
friendship, which my master Scaeuola remembered, was often disputed by hym^ And
certes th^s kind of talk, s^t out with the auctoritee of a^cient men, The
auctoritee of ancient nobl^ me^.
and the same famous, seems I wot not how to have in it a more weightinesse
and grauitee. And therefore I my self readyng mine own works, sometime am in
that mood, that me thinks Cato speaks and not I. But as then age with age
did speak of age, so now to his friend the freendly writes of friendship. Then
spoke Cato at those days, in a manner the eldest and wisest: Now speaks
Laelius of friendship, a man both wise (for so was he counted) and for the
praise of freendship the chiefest.

I would for a while you minded not me, but suppose that Laelius him self
speaks.

C. Faunius, and Q. Mutius comes to their father in law after Affricanes
death, the talk ryseth on them. Laelius makes answer. Whose disputacion is
whole of friendship, which your self (when you read) shall understand.

Caius Fannius.
FAnn. These things be true O Laeli, for neither better, neither nobler has
there been any then Affricanus. But you must think all men have cast their
eyes upon you, and you only they call and judge wise. This name was given not
long sense to M. Cato. We know also, that L. Acilius in our father^ time was
named wise. L. Aciliu^.
But either of them in a sh^er manner. Acilius, because he was though^ connyng
in the Civil law: Cato, because he had experience of ma^y things, and many
of his doo^ynges, both in counsel in the Senate, and in the judgment place
of Justice, were reported to be foreseen wisely, done stoutly, and answered
wittily: atteigned now in his old ag^ (as half a surname) to be called Cato
the wise. But you in an other k^nde, not only by nature and conditions, but
al^o by study and knowlage, they account wise. Nether after the common peoples
reckenyng, but as the learned sort are wont to call one wy^^, that is such a
one^ as in all the rest of Greece is not the like. For those, which narowlie
search out these matters, do not reken them in the number of wise men, which
be called the seven sages of Greece. S^ue^ sag^s of Greece.
In deed one we have heard of, that was at Athenes, and the ^ame Apolloes
oracle adiud^^d the wysest. Socrates judged most wise by Apollo
This wisdom ^en think in you, that you account all your richesse lodged
within you, and that all worldly happes be inf^riours to virtue. And for this
cause (I believe) they enquire of me, and of Scaeuola here also, how you bear
Affricanes death, and so much the rather, because these last non as, when we
came into D. Brutus orchardes the Augur, (as the usage is) to reason upon
matters, you were not present there, who was woonte most diligently to attend
both that day and business. Scae. Many truly ask, Caius Laelie, as Faunius
says. But I make this answer, that I per^eiue, you bear your sorrow
sobrelie, which you take for so noble and freendly a man, and that you ^oulde
not choose, but be somewhat troubled, and otherwise of your own natural
kindness ye could not be. And as to that you were not present at our meetyng
these nones, I said, sickness was the cause, and not sorrow. Lae. Well said
Scaeuola and truly: for neither ought I for any loss to be withdrawn from
this duty, which while I was in health, I always performed: neyth^r do I
think, that it can happen by any occasion, that there should be any
slackenesse of duitie in a constant manne. But you Fannie, Constant men.
do like a freende, that you tell me, the world ascribes so much unto me,
as neither I acknowelage, neither desire: but yet as me seems, you judge not
truly of Cato: for either no man there is (as in deed I rather believe) or
if any be, Cato it is^ that is wise. Ah how (to leave the rest unspoken)
did he take the death of his son? Cato ^erkeded wise if any be wise.
I can remember Paulus, and saw Caius. But these may not be compared to Cato,
the great and the noble. Wherefore beware, how you prefer any before Cato, no
not him, whom Apollo (as you said) adjudged the wysest. for of this man his
deeds, and of that man his sayings be commended. Socrates for his sayings,
Cato for his deeds commended
But concerning my self (to answer now you both) reaken thus. If I deny to
be grieu^d with the loss of Scipio, let the wise judge, how well it were
dooen: but certes lie I should, for I am troubled, that I am now bireft of
such a friend as I suppose never none shall be, and as I can approve, Scipio
co^m^nded.
never none has been. But I need no physic, I can comfort my self, and
chiefly with this kind of comfort, that I am not in that error, wherewith
most men are wont to be accombred, at the departing of their friends. For I
think that Scipio has no hurt, mine it is, if any be. And for a man to be
grievously troubled for his own losses, it is selfly love, and not friendly
love. Self love,
But who can deny, that Scipio is not happi^? for except he would have wyshed
ever life, (which was farthest out of his thought) what has he not obtained,
that was m^te for a man to wish? who in the beginning of this man's state,
with unheard virtues, exceaded the great hope the citesins conceived of him,
being ^ child, who never sued for the Consulship, Scipio twice consul.
and yet was twice made Consul: first before time, being under age: secondly
in time by course, and for the common wealth almost to late: who by destroiyng
two cities, most egar enemies to this Empire, clearly brake up not only
wars, that were present, but wars which were to come. What should I speak
of his gentle manners, his natural duty toward his mother, his liberal^tie
toward his sisters, his goodness toward his servants, his vprightnes
toward all men? All Rome bewailed Scipioes death.
All these be right well known to you. But how dear he was to the city, it
was declared by the mourning at his funeralles. What then could having of a
few years more, have profited him? for old age, although it be no heavy burden
(as I remember Cato did the year before his death discourse with me and Scip.
Old age.
) yet it takes away that fresh youth, wherein the^ Scip. was. Wherefore his
life was such, either by fortune, or by glory, as nothing co^lde be added
more. But his quick departure, took away the grief of death, of the which
sort of diyng, it is hard to speak any certaintee. What men suspecte, you
see. Nevertheless, this a man may safely say, that amongst many his
days, which he had seen in his life time most fair and ioyefull, that day
was the noblest to P. Scipio, How honorably Sci. was brought from the S^nate
house.
when the Senate house being broken up, he was brought home again at night, by
the eldest Senatoures, by the league friends of the Romans, and also by the
Latins, the day before he departed this life, that from so high a slep of
honor, he might seem rather to have mounted to God, then to have gone down to
hell. Immortalitee of the soul.
For I can in no wise agree with them, which began of late to reason thus,
that the soul dies with the body, and al things end by death. I way more
the auctoritee of old writers, and of our elders, which made so godly laws
for the dead. as in mine opinion they would never have dooen, The part of
Italy now called Calabria in the kingdom of ^aples.
if they had thought there had nothing concerned them. And their auctoritee
also I more regard, which were sometime here in this land, and instructed
great Greece with their good rules and lessons, which now is destroyed, and at
that time flourisshed. And his also I esteem more, which by Appolloes oracle
was adjudged the wisest, Socra^
who did not affirm somtym^ one thing, and sometime an other, as in many cases
is used, but always held one, Man's soult.
that man's soul was an heavenly thing: and that the same, when it departed
from the body, had a way to return to heaven very spedie, for every good
and just man. Which self same thing Scipio also thought, who seemed as it
were to have a forefeling of the thing, a very few days before his death,
when both Philus and Manilius being present, Phi. Manilius.
and others more: yea, and you your self Scaeuola, comoned with me, he reasoned
three whole days upon a common wealth, the latter end of the which
disputacion, was of the everlasting life of the soul, which (he said) he heard
of Affricanus in his sleep by a vision. If that be so, that every good man's
soul does easily make his flight to heaven, as out of prison and cheines of
the body, whom can we judge to have had an easier passage to God, then Scipio?
Wherefore to lament this his good end, I fear were rather envious then
freendly. And on the other side, if I were afeard of this, that the soul died
with the body, and that there remained neither felyng of weal nor woe: then
as in death there is no goodness, so neither is there euelnesse. For when a
man's feling is once gone, he is made as though he had never ben born: yet that
Sci. was begot, both we do rejoice, and the city (while it stands,) ought
to be glad. Wherefore, as I said before, he is very well, but with me it is
somewhat wurse, who^ reason rath^r would, as I came before him into this
world, so I should have gone before him out of this life: but yet I take such
fruit of the remembrance of our friendship, that I think I lived happily,
that with Scipio I led my life, with whom I had a ioynct care, for the common
wealth, and for our private causes, with whom both in peace and war I took
like part: yea, and w^e agreed evermore in love, mind, purpose, and opinion,
in which thing the whole pithe of friendship stands. Freendesh^p.
Therefore this fame of wysdom, which Fannius even now rehearsed, does not so
greatly delighte me, (specially being false) as tha^ I trust there shall be an
everlasting memory of our freendship: and the same the rather is an hearti^ye
unto me, because that in so many hundred years, as have passed, there have he
found skace three or ^owre couples of friends, Scase three or four co^ples of
freende^^
among the which sort I see there is hope, that Scipioes and Laelius
friendship shall be known to our of ^pring.

Fan. Uerely Laelie, this can not otherwise be chosen. But seeing you have made
mention of friendship, and we be also at leisure, you shall do a great
pleasure to me, and no less I trust to S^aeuola, if as ye are wont of other
matters, when they are demanded of you, you will so now dispute of friendship,
what you think thereof, whom you count a freende, and what good rules you
give thereon.


Scaeuo. It pleseth me well, and as I was about to be in hand with you for it,
Fannius did forespeke me. Wherefore you shall exceadynglie pleasure both us.


Lael. And I surely think it no pain, if I thought my self well able, for
both the matter seems goodly, and we (as Fannius alleged) be at leisure. But
who am I? or what eloquence is in me? This is the facion of learned men, and
that among the Greeks, to have a matter proponed unto them, whereon they
should reason, although out of hand. It is a buisie piece of work, and
needs no small exercise. Wherefore my judgment is, you should seake the
poynctes to be disputed of freendeship, of those, which profess this manner
of reasonyng. As for me, Fre^deship to be preferred above all thing.
I can no more but exhort you, to set freendship before all kind of
worldely things. For nothing is so agreeable to nature, nor so fit for
prosperitee or aduersitee. F^e^deship only betwe^ne good men
But first and foremost this I think, that frendshippe can be but in good
men.


Neither do I so search the matter to the quick, as they which reason this
gear more subtillie, although perchance ^ruely, and yet little to any common
profit. For they deny, that any is good, but he be wise. And be it so
hardily Yet such a thing call they that wisdom, as never earthely man
atteigned hitherto. But we must^ hope for such things as be in ure, and in
our daiely life, and not for those things, which be feign^d or wished aft^r.
I will never say, that Caius Fabritius, Mar. Curious, C. Fab^^. Mar Cu. ^.
Coruucanus.
and Titus Cornucanus, whom our ^lders de^med wise, were after these men's
rule accounted wise. Wherefore let them keep to them selves their name of
wisdom, both envied and unknown, so they confess these before were good
men: but yet that will not they grant, for they will deny, that that can be
said but by them that be wise. Let us go then even plainly to work like a
pack staff, as the prou^rbe is. They which behave thems^lues, Prouerb^
and do so live, that their faieth, their honestee, their uprightness and
liberalitee is allowed, and in them neither covetousness, neither treachery,
neither rashness is seen to be: and beside this, be of great constancy, as
they were, whom before we named: all these like as they be taken for good men,
Good men^
^o we think them worthy to be called, who follow nature, the best guide of
welliuyng, so far as man's power can lead them. For this me thinkth I do spy,
that we are so borne together, as there should be among all men a certain
fellowship. Thorder of freendship.
And the greater the fellowship should be, the nearer that every one comes to
an other. And therefore cit^sins be derer to us the^ forrains, and kinsfolk
nerer then frennefolke: for toward these Nature her self has bredde a
fre^ndelinesse: but in this there is not suretee enough. for in this point
fre^dshippe passes kindred, in that kindred may be without good will: but
friendship in no wise can lack it. For take away good will, and friendship
l^seth, but cosinage keeps still his name. But how great the virtue of
friendship is, it may here of best be understand, that of innumerable
compaignies of mankind, which nature her self has knitte together, it is a
thing drawn and brought into such a straight, that friendship is alwai^s
ioigned either between two, orels between few. What amitee is.
For frendshippe is nothing else, but a perfect agreement with good will and true
love in all kind of good things and godly. And I know not whether any better
thing has been given of GOD unto men, wisdom excepted, then this same
freendship. Some set richesse before, some health, others power, and othe^s
honor, many also pleasures. Pleasure.
But certes this last is for beasts, and those other vppermore be fading and
uncertain, and be not so much within the compass of ou^ wisdom, as within
the ficklenes of fortune. But they, which place our cheifest weal in virtue,
do therein very well: and yet this same virtue it is, which both engenders
and vpholdeth freendship. No friendship without v^rtue.
Neither may freendship by any means be without virtue. Now let us s^t out,
what is v^rtue, after the manner of our living, and facion of our talk: and let
us not measure it as certain unlearned m^n do, by the stateliness of the
words. And let us reken them good m^n, which are so counted, that is to
say, the Paul's, the Catoes, the Caians, the Scipio^s, and Philons. These were
contented with this common kind of life. And as for such, which can not any
where be found, let us leave them of. Commoditees of friendship.
Therefore among such sort of men, freendship has so many commoditees, as I
can scacely well express. First who can be vita vitalis (to use Ennius terms)
which in english^ is, living in this life, that lives not in mutual love with
some friend? What sweeter thing can there be, than to have one, with who^ thou
dare so boldly talk all mattiers, as with thine own self: how should the
profit of welfare, and prosperitee be so great, if you had not some, which
should reioise so much thereat as your self? But as for evil plight and
aduersitee, it were hard to bear them without such an one, as would bear the
same more grievously than your self. To conclude, all other things, that are
desired, each one to each man serves the turn, as richesse for use, wealth
for worship, honor for pra^se, pleasure for delight, health to want grefe, and
to do the office of the body. Freendship conteigneth more things in it.
Whither so ever you turn, it is at hand, it will be kept out of no place, it
is n^uer unseasonable, nor never troublous. Fre^deship is as necessary as the
elements.
Therefore neither water, nor fire, ne air, as they say, do we in more places
use, then this fre^dship^ And now do I not speak of the common or mean sort
of freendship (which yet deliteth and pro^iteth) but of the true and perfect,
as theirs was, which being few are soon told. For friendship makes welfare
the goodlier, and evil fare, by sonderyng and partyng of greefes, the lighter.
And where freendshippe has in it many and great commoditees, yet this
exceadeth all the rest, that she foreco^fortes us, with the good hope that is to
come. She suffers men's hertes neither to ^eint, nor yet to fall: but he that
beholds his friend, does as it were behold a certain pattern of him self.
The excellency of ^mitie.
Wherefore in friendship the absent be present, the nedie never lack, the sick
thyncke them selves whole, and that which is hardest to be spoken, the dead
never dye. So great honor, remembrance, and desire breeds in the^ toward
their friends. By reason whereof their dethes be thought happy, and the others
life's be much preisid. But if you should take out of the world the knot of
fre^ndship, Want of friendship.
neither can there any house, want of free^dship.
neither any city be able to continue, no not the tillage of the land can
endure. And if this can not be understand herebi, yet of strife and debate it
may well be perceived, how great the power of concord and freendship is. For
what house so stedie, or what city stands so fast, but thorough hatered and
strife, Hatred and strife.
it may be utterly overthrown? Whereupon, how much goodness rests in
freendshippe, it may be easily judged. Men report, Emp^docies.
that a certain Agrigentine, being a learned manne, wrote in Greek verses,
that al things, having their being in the world and mouyng, be by freendship
kept together, and by debate skattered: and this all men both perceive, and
prove in very deed. And therefore if at any time, there has appeared, any
kind part of one friend toward an other, in aduenturynge of parell, or else i^
part w^aryng the same, what is he that would not set it out with great preyses?
What a great show was there, the last day all the place over, at the new made
play of mine old host and friend M. Pacuuius, M. Pacu^ius trag^dy Amitee of
Orestes and Pylades.
when the king, not knowing whether of the two was Orestes, Pylades answered,
that he it was, that was Orestes, because he would have been put to death for
him: and Orestes again, that was so in deed, auowed stiffely, that he it was
that was Orestes. The herers that stood about, preised it with clapping their
hands, being but a matter feigned. What think we then they would have done in
a true matter? Here nature her self did soon bewraie her own ernestenesse,
when these men judged the same to be well dooen in another, which they could
not do them selfs. And thus far me seems, I have thoroughly spoken what I
think of freendshippe. if there be any more things, as A believe there be
many, ask it of them if ye think good, which dispute these kind of matters.

Fan. But we rather covet to hear ^t of you, although for my part I often times
have sought it at their hands, and have heard them very wyllynglie: but we
look for an other manner of vein in your talk.


Scae. You would the sooner have said so Fannie, if you had of late been
present in Scipioes orcharde, when the reasonyng was concerning a common
wealth, and had heard, what a defender of justice be was at that day, against a
curiouse oracion that Philus made.


Fan. that surely was an easy matter for the just to defend justice.


Scae. And what say you by freendship? shall it not be like easy for him to
do the same therein, who has gained great honor, for keepyng the same with
all trustiness, steadfastness, and uprightness.


Lael. Naie, this is as though ye would force me to speak. But what skilleth
it, by what means you drive me to it, I take it truly, that ye force me. Yet
to withstand the earnest desires of a man's friends, especially in an honest
matter, partly it is an hard thing to do, and partly not well standing with
reason. Wherefore many times thinkyng of friend ship, this was wont to be
chiefly weighed of me, whether for stay and for need, men ought to seek
for friendship, to thentent that in doing and taking of pleasures, one might
receive of another, Wherefore friends are sought
that he told not come to by him self, and after that sort might requite
others: and whether this were the very propertee of friendship, or else there
were some other cause more ancient, more commendable, and more proceeding of
nature. For love, whereof freendly love and freendshippe comes, is the chief
cause, to fasten good wills together. Commoditees often times also be gotten
at their hands, Love.
which with flatteryng frenship be sought upon, and as time serves, be
attended upon. But in frendshippe there is no faining, there is no disse^bling,
and what so ever is in it, the same is true and unforced. Wherefore I am of
opinion, that freendship took his beginning rather by nature, Natural free^dship
the^ for any help of stay, and rather by the castyng of ones fantasy
toward the other, with a certain felyng of love, then by the thinkyng, how much
profit might ensue of such a thing. The which surely what kind of thing it
is, may well be understand, even in certain beasts, which so tenderly love
their young ones for a certain space, and be so loved of them again, that their
nature soon appears: which thing in man is much more evident.


First of the love that is beetwene the children and parents, which can not
possibly without some heinouse mischi^fe be withdrawn. And secondarily when a
like bearyng of love appears, as if we have found any body, with whose manners
and nature we agree, because we think we see in them as it were a certain
spark of honesty and virtue. For nothing is better beloved than virtue,
Virtue.
nor nothing more allureth men to cast favor, in so much, that for virtue and
honesty we favor, after a certain sort even those, whom we never saw in
our life. For who is it, that does not use remembrance of Caius Fabritius, or
Marcus Curious, C. Fabri^ius. M. Curious.
who^ he never saw^ with a certeigne love and good favor toward them. Who
again does not hate Tarquinius the proud, Sp. Cassius, and Sp. Melius? With
the two capiteins Pyrrhus and Ha^nibal, Pyrrhus Anniball.
we fought for the Empire in Italy. Notwithstanding from the one, we
withdrewe not much our hearts, for his honest name, and the other always the
city hated for his crueltee. But if the power of honesty be so much, Power
of honesty.
that we love the same, yea in those, which we never saw, and more then that,
we like it even in our very enemies: what marvel is it, if the hertes of men
be moved, when they seem to behold the virtue and goodness of such, with
whom they may be ioigned in acquaintance. Love confirmed by benefits.
Although love be fastened by pleasures received, by good will well tried, and
acquaintance had: all which things together when they be laid to the same
first fantasy of man's mind and love, a certain wonderful greatness^ of good
will does kiendle. Which, if any think it comes of desire, Base o^t
spryng of free^dship^
to have a h^lpe of stay, that it should be a m^ane, whereby every one should
come by that he most desires, truly they leave us a very base, and no
gentlemanlie out spryng of friendship to be, which of lack and need would have
it to issue. But if this w^r so, then as every man felt in him self smallest
habilitee, so should he be most rediest to freendship: which thing is far
otherwise. For as eu^ry man trusts most to him self, and as every man chief^y
with virtue and wisdom, is so furnished, that he has no need of any other,
and takes all his own things to lie in his own power: so he does most
exceade all others in sekyng and honoring freenshippe. Aff^^canus and Lael^us
had no need one of an other.
For what, had Affaicanus any need of me? Nothing at all truly, Nor I of him
neither: but I, for certain wonder I was in of his virtue, and he percha^ce
agein for an opinion he had of my behavior, loved me, and our daily company
increased our good will. But although many and great commoditees ensued
thereof, yet did not the cause of our loving one the other, come of any hope of
such things. For as we be profitable to others and liberal, not of purpose to
get thanks, Usury of plesures.
(for in deed we make no usury of our pleasures) but even of very nature be
given to liberalitee: so do we think, that we ought to covet freendship, not
led thereto by hope of reward, but because all the fruit thereof rests i^
very love self. Fruit of Amitee.
We are far from the opinion of these, wh^che after the nature of brute
beasts, do refer al things to pleasure and sensuality. And no meruail at
al For they, which have cast all their minds, upon so vile and so loathsome a
thing, can have no eye to any heavenlye, to any goodly, or godly thing. Where
fore those manner of men, we will set a side from our talk, and let us imagine
and judge, that loves feelyng, and ernestnesse of good will is engendered of
nature, by some proof of honesty declared. Which honesty who that love, do
apply them selves to the same, and draw nearer, that they may take the use
of the compaigny and manners of him, who^ they began to fantasy: and that they
may be mates and a like in love, readier to do pleasures than to r^quire any
And let this be an honest kind of strife between friends. And thus shall
great commoditees be taken of freendship, and the beginning thereof shall come of
nature, rather then of need, a beginning both weightier and trewer. Free^dship
beginning of nature.
For if profit should fasten friendship, then the same being changed, should
unloose it again. But because nature cannot be changed, therefore true
frendships be eu^rlasting.

Thus the first begi^ning of freendship you see, except peradventure ye have
some thing else to ask.

S^ae. Naie Laelius, I pray you go forth with your matter, and as for him
here, which is my younger, of mine own ^ead I dare make answer.


Fan. In deed you say but well, wherefore let us hear foorth^ Laelius.
Hearken then my friends these things, which many times and often have been
reasoned, between me and Scipio, concerning freendshippe. Continuance of
friendship.
He truly was wont to say, there was nothing more hard then freendship to
continue unto the last hour of death. For he would say, it often times happened,
that either it should not avail both parties, to have it continue still, orels
that friends would ^ot be always of one mind, in the matters of the common
wealth. He would say also, that men's manners did often change, sometime by
reason of evil luck, som^yme as age grew on them. And of these things he
would bring an example by a similitude of boys state, which was, that the
whotte love of children, was often times cast up with their change of voice.
And in case they had continewed it, til they became young men of full age: yet
that friendship was broken sometime, eith^r by reason of s^ryfe, either by some
manner of riote, either by some gain and profit, which both of them being
friends, could not atteigne to at once. So that if any had gone on, somewhat
longer in freendship, yet they brake often times, if they fell in any
contencion for honor or dignitee. For he would say there was no sorer
pestilence in freendship, Couetusnesse in friendship.
then covetousness of moneie, which is in the most part of men, and strife
about honor and glory, which is in the best sort of men. Where upon great
enmitee often times grows between right dear friends. He further would say,
that great variance, and many times just did spryng, when any thing was
required of friends, that was not honest, as either that they should be
instruments to others treachery, orels helpers to do wrong. The which
thing such as would refuse, although they should do honestly in it, yet
should they be reproved of them, whose minds they would not follow, a^ breakers
of the law of friendship. But they, which had the face to require any thing,
what so ever it were, of their friend, he was wont to say, did by their very
askyng profess, that for their friends sake they would attempt all manner of
things. And when such men's malice was once long grown and festered in
heart, not only their acquaintance was wont to be given up, but also great
and continual hatered grew between them. These many things so hang over
freendshippe, even as one should say, by destinee, that he ^aied, to escape
all these, he thought it to be not only a part of wisdom, but also of
very happiness. Bonds of love.
Wherefore if ye be pleased, let us first see this poinct, how far ought
love to stretche in freendship, as if Coriolanus had any friends, Comocio^
of Coriolanus.
whether they ought to have borne weapon with him against their countreye:
whether Becillinus friends Becillinus
should have ordered him in his enterprise for the kingdom: whether Spu.
Melius fre^ndes should have holden with him? We saw Tiberius Graccus, when he
made an up stir in the common wealth, was forsaken of Quin^us Tub^ro and his
companion friends. But Caius Blossius the Cumaine, a geast of your fa^ilie
Scaeuola, when he came to me as a sewter, because I sat in counsel with
Laenas and Rutilius the Consulles, alleged this cause for him self that I
should pardone him, which was that he had Tiberius Graccus in such a
reverence, that whatsoever he willed, he thought it meet to be enterprised.
Than quod I, what and this to, if he would have had you set fire on the
Capitol? Naie quod he, Capitol.
he would never have willed me to such a thing, but and if he had once bydde
me, I must needs have done it. You see how shameful a saying this was, Wicked
answer of Blosius.
and in very deed so he did, yea and rather more than he said. For he did not
follow Tiberius Graccus rashenesse, but was also a ryngleader to it, nor made
not him self a compaignion of his fury, but a capitein. And therefore in this
madness being afearde of a new examincio^, he fled into Asia, and gat him to
our ennemies, and in the end, suffered just and grievous punishement^ of our
city. Offense i^ our friends b^half.
There is therefore none excuse for the fault, if a man offend for his
friends sake, Honest r^quest^s.
for seeing the opinion of ones virtue is the breeder of friendship, it is hard
for friendship to remain, if one swerve from virtue. But if we agree it to be
honest, both to grant ^o our friends what so ever they would have, and to
obteigne of our friends what so ever we desire: there truly we be of a through
tried wisdom, if there can be no fault found with the thing. But our speaking
is of these friends that be in our lie daily, of such as we see, or such as
we have heard of, and our daily experience teaches us. Out of these sorts we
must take examples, and of them chiefly, who come nearest to wisdom. We
know, P. Aemilius.
that Paulus Aemilius was of much familiaritee with Caius Lucinius, C. Lucinius
as we have heard of our fathers, and that they were twice Consulles to gether,
and fellows in office of the Censureshippe. And we read also in stories, that
in that time Marcus Curious and Titus Coruncanus M. Curious C. C^runcanus.
were great friends with them, and dearest one to the other also among them
selves. Therefore we can not so much as suspecte or deem, that any of these
would have earnestly required any thing of their fre^d, that should have been
against their faith, against their oath, or against the commonwealth. For to
what purpose were it, to say that these evils were in such men? For if they
had earnestly required any thing in that manner, I know they could not have
obteigned, for as much as these we spoke of, were very godly men. But let it
be of a like evil to grant, as to make an dishonest suite. Yet Caius Carbo
consented to Tiberius Graccus, and so did C. Cato, who at that time was never
awhit his brother Caius ennemy, First law in fr^^ndship.
but at this present is his earnest adversary. Let this then be the first
law enacted in freendship, that neither we require dishonest things, nor being
desired do any. For it is a foul excuse, and in no wise to be allowed, when a
man shall either in private faults, other else in faults against the common
wealth confess, Foul excuse.
he did it for his friends sake. For we are now, O Fannius and Scaeuola,
set in such place, that it behooves us long before to foresee the chances
that may happen to the common wealth^ For the old custom of our fathers al
ready is somewhat swarued from her course and race. Ambicion of Tiberius
Graccus.
Tiberius Eraceus went about to have gotten the kingdom, and ruled as a king
to, for certain months, did ever the people of Rome hear or see the like?
And his friends and kinsfolk also after his death did follow the exaumple of
him. What parts they played against P. Scipio Nasica, I can not without tears
report. For as for Carbo, who^ we spoke of earwhile, we did suffer and bear
with, because of Tiberius Graccus new punishment. But what I look to follow of
Tiberius Graccus Tribuneship, I lust not to prophecy, for from thence com^th
al matiers, which be ready for mischief: and after they once begin, they
follow headlong on. Ye see already before hand in the tables of the laws, how
great a decaie has happened, first by the law called Gabinia, Gabinius law.
and the^ within two years after, by the law called Cassia. Cassius law.
And me thinks I do alredie see the communaltee of Rome divided from the
Senate, and that the great^st matiers be ordered after the will of the people.
For mo men shall learn how such things may be done, then how they may be
withstanded. But to what end speak I all this? verily because no man go^th
about any such thing without fellowship. The honest sort therefore must be
warned, if unawares they light by any adventure in such a kind of
freendshippe, that they think not them selves so bound, but that they may
forsake their freende, if in any great matter they conspire against the common
wealth. Punishment as due to the partners as ryngeleaders.
And for naughty men a punishment must be de^ised, and no less for such as
follow others, then for those which be the very capitaines and ryngeleaders
them selves of all wickedness. Who was nobler, who was of more power in all
Greece the Themistocles? Themistocles.
who being captain in the war against the Persians, when he had delivered
Greece from bondage, and afterward was banished for envy, could not bear the
same envy of his unthankful country, which his part was to have borne. He
played the like part that Coriolanus did with us twenty years a go.
Themistocles and Coriolanus slew themselves.
These twain found no aid against their country, and therefore they killed
the^s^lfes. Wherefore such naughty me^nes conspiracy, is not to be cloked
with any excuse of friendship, but rather punished with all extremitee, that no man may think it lawefull to follow his freende, that makes war against
his countreie. Which thing (as the world begins to go) I wot not whether
one day it will be so or not. But truly I for my part, have no less care, A
good but a rare care.
what the state of the commonwealth shall be after my death, then what it is at
this day. First rule of freendship.
Let this therefore be agreed, to be the first rule of freendshippe, that we
ask of our friends things that be lawful, and do for our friends sakes
things that be honest. And that we look not upon our friend till he desire
us, Preuentyng of honest reques^es.
but that good will be always ready, and that ^^ackenesse be not used Let us
be glad in deed to give faithful counsel. Let them be of great account in
freendeship, Mocions in freendship.
which counsel well. And let us give them a rule over us, to warn us, not
only plainly: but also if neade be, sharply, and such authority given must
be obeyed. For I suppose some wonderful wonders pleased some of them, whom I
hear say were taken for wise in Greece. But there is nothing, but that they
can descant thereon with their quiditiues, as for example we should avoid
friendship with to many, Few frendes^
for that one man thereby must needs be careful for many, and that it is
enough to do, every man to care for his own. Also to be ouermuche combred
with other men's mattiers (they say) is unwieldy, and to have the raines of
freendshippe at length to pluck straiter or make slacker, as one will, they
think it a pleasure. For they say, quietness is the chief poincte of
happiness, which the mind can not enjoy, if one musts bear the burdeine, or
as it were, travail with child for many. Another sort of them (they say)
speak much more beastelie yet then this, which place a littell above I
briefly touched, and that was, that freendeshippe ought to be desired for an
healpe and stays sake, and not for good will and favor to any body. And
therefore as every manne has little stay, and little succor, so he should
the more seek after freendship. And for this cause (they say) it is, that
women seek more the help of freendship then men, and the poor more then the
rich, and the wretched more the^ the fortunate.


Taking freendship out of the world.
O gaye and goodlye wisdom. For they go about to take the son out of the
world, that would take friendship out of it, then the whi^he we have of God
nothing better, ne nothing pleasaunter. For what manner of quietenesse is this?
truly to see to, pleasant, but in very deed at many times to be refused^
For it is no reason, either not to take in hand or to leave of being taken in
hand, We must alwaie do well.
any honest cause or deed, because thou would not be troub^ed. But if we
will refuse pain, we must also refuse ver^ue, which must of necessitee with a
certain painfulnesse despise and hate his contraries, as for example, the good
must hate the evil, the chaste the lecherouse, the hardy the cowardly.
Therefore you see the right, most of all grieved with vnrightuousenesse, the
mighty with the weakelynges, the honest with the shameless. This therefore is
the property of a well stayed mind, Propertee of a well staide mi^de
to rejoice at good things, and to be grieved with the contraries. Wherefore if
grief of mind light in a wise man (as in veraie deed it does) except we
suppose the nature of man is clean rooted up out of his heart, what cause is
there, that we should utterly bannysh fre^d^hip from the life of man, because
we would suffer no troubl^s for it? For what difference is there, I say not
between a beast and a man, but even between a man and a stone, or a dead
stock, or any such like thing, if you take away the mouynges and modes of the
mind? He means the stoikes.
Neither are these to be h^rd, that will needs have virtue to be an hard
thing, and as it were like iron. Which trwely as well in many things, as also
in freendship, is easy and gentle, so that at the good fortune of his friend
it spredeth it self abroad, and at his misfortune it shrinketh in again.
Wherefore this grefe of mind, that is oftimes to be taken for friends, is not
so great as it ought to take away freendship among men: no more than virtue
should be refused, because it brings with it many cares and troubles of
mind. But for as much as virtue knitteth ^reendeship together (as I said
before) if any spark of virtue do appear, Where love grows.
whereunto one of a like mind may apply and join it self, there love must
necessarily grow, when such a thing happens. Beastlin^sse.
For what is so trastlie, as to be delited with these many kind of vain
things, as honor, glory, buildyng, apparel, and deckeyng of the body, and
not marueilousely to be delighted, with such a mind endewed with virtue, as
both can love and yield love for love again. Requit^ng of benefits.
For there is nothing goodlier, then r^quityng of benefits, nor any thing
pleasanter, than thent^rchangeyng of love and duty. And also if you put this
unto it, which may well be added, that there is nothing, which allureth and so
draws ought unto it, Cause pri^cipall of friendship.
as likeness of conditions does one to freendship. This surely is granted to
be true, Like wol to like.
that the honest, love the honest, and so haunt together, as men n^re ioigned
by kindred and nature. For nothing more coueteth, or is more egar of his like,
then nature. Wherefore this is p^aine, Nature.
O Fannie and S^aeuola, in mine opinion, that the honest bear toward the
honest, a certain goodwill, as of course, which is apoincted by nature, to be
the well spryng of freendship. But this kind of goodness also should appear
toward the common sort. Virtue.
For virtue is not chorlishe, nor empty handed, nor yet lofty: but her
custom is to defend all men, and to do the best for them she can. Which
thing undoubtedly she would not do, if she disdeigned the common sort.

Profit.
Furthermore me think^th those men, that for profits sake dissemble
freendship, do clean take away the louing^st knot of freendship. For the
veraie profit gott^n by ones friend, does not so much like one, as his
friends very love does delight him: and than is that, which comes from a
man's friend a pleasure, when of good will and love it proceadeth. And it is so
beyond reason, that freendship should be sought for necessitee, seeing that
those, which be endued with wealth, richesse and virtue chiefly, wherein most
aid is, have no need of any other, and be most liberal and bounteouse. And I
know not, whether it be a meet thing, that fr^endes should never neade any
thing: for where should our good will have appeared, if Scipio had never
neaded, never favor, never counsel, never our assistaunce, neither in peace
nor in war. Therefore freendship huntes not aft^r profit, Profit follows
free^dship.
but profi^e follows freendship. M^n than that swim in richesse, be not to
be heard, if they shall at any time dispute of freendship, in which nether by
exp^rie^ce, nor by knowelage, they have any vnd^rstandyng. For who is there
(in very sadness) that neither to love any, neither to be loved again, would
walow in all richesse, and live with plenty of all ^hynges earthly? For this
kind of life is for tyrans, A tyrans life.
wherein there is no trustiness, no love, no hope of assured good will, but
all things evermore suspected and cared for: Love and fear.
nor there is no place of friendship. For who can love one, whom he fears:
orelles love one whom he dreadeth? Such yet be honored with feigned
freendship only for a time, that if they happen to take Aduersitee tries
friends.
a fall (as it does many times come to pass) than is it well perceived, how
naked they be of friends. Which thing the report goes, Tarquinius the
tyranne said, at such time as he was banished, that he well understood, what
friends he had faithful, and what unfaithful, now when he was hable to
recompense neither of them. And yet I meruail, if in that his pride and
loathsome conditions, he could possibl^e have any at all. And as this man's
manners, of whom we have spoken, could not pourchase any true friends, so many
men's riches, that be in high authority, Richesse.
do clean shut out, as it were true freendship. For Fortune her self is not
only blind, Fortune.
but makes these also often times blind, whom she most embraces. And
therefore (for the most part) they are puffed up with pride and disdeigne, and
nothing is so irk^some, A fool fortunate.
as a fool in good fortune. And this a man may see, that such as before times
were of indifferent manners, by rule, power, and prosperitee, do change and
despise their old friends, and lean to new. But what more foolish thing
can be, than to study, they may be hable with great heaps and plenty, to
get other things that be sought for, as mon^ie, horses, servants, gaye
clothing, and costly plate, and yet not to secke for friends, being the best
and goodlyest riches of this life. Friends the best richesse.
For they know not for whom they get other things, when they are gotten, nor
to whose use they travail. For every one of these he his, which will win them
with strong hand. But freendship once gotten, abides with every man steadfast
and sur^ly. ^ef^es of fortune.
And although these things continue, which be as one would say, the gifts
of fortune, yet a rude life and destitute of friends can not be pleasant. But
here an end of this mattier.

And now we must set out, Bonds of love in friendship.
how far the bounds and points of love do reach in freendeshippe.
Whereof I see there be three opinions, and I allow neither of them. One is,
that we so love our friend, as we do our selfs. The other, that our good will
toward our friends, do a like and equally answer their good will toward
us. ^. opinions of freendship disalowed.
The third, that how much every man sets by him self, so much he
should be set by of his friends. But I agree to none of these three
opinions. For the first is not true, that every man, is a like herted toward
his freende, as he is toward him self. For how many things enterprise we for
our friends sake, which for our selves we would never do, as to pray and
sue to an unworthy man for our friends cause: to be over earnestly bent
against one, and to pursue him very sore: which things in our own mattiers
stand not well with honesty, but in our friends causes be most honest.
There be many things also, in which the honest sort, hoth take away and
suffer to be taken from their own gains, to the end their friends rather than
them selves, may enjoy them. The second opinion is, that appoints
freendship, to use like benefits, and like good will, but this is to straight
and to ne^re, to bring freendship to be weied in ballaunce, as though there
ought to be a like iompe measure of taking and receiuyng of pleasures. True
friendship.
Me thinks true freendeship is a richer and a bountifuller thing, and does
not take so narrow head to give no more than it may receive. Neither is
there such fear to be taken in freendeship, that we lease not a good turn,
or let it fall in the mire, or that we heap not up more benefits than just
measure. The third is the worst, which is, that how much every man makes of
himself, so much he should be made of by his freende. But in some often
times either th^^e is a more bashful spirit, o^ a more comfort^es hope of
ame^dyng their state. It is not therefore the propretee of a freende, to be
toward him, as he is toward him self, but he ought rather to study and find
the means, that he cheer up his friends dismayed mind, and bring him in a
more hope and better comfort. There is therefore another end of true
freendship to be mad^, so that first I shall tell that which Scip^o was wont
chiefly to reprove. He would deny, that any saying could be found more
against freendshippe than this that said, men ought so to love, as at
sometime they should have And he could not be brought to believe, A saying most
repugnant to friendship.
that this was said by Bias, as it was reported, who was one of the seven wise
men: but that it was the saying of some vile and ambicious man, or else of one
that would bring all ^^ynges to his own power and swaie. For how can one be
his freende, whose enemy he thinks also to be. For first he must needs desire
and wish, that his freende might very often offend, that he might give as it
were occasions to chide. Again, he must needs be grieved and freated, or else
envy at his friends good hap and doings. Wherefore this rule truly were enough
(whose so ever it be) to destroy frenship. But this rather were mete, to have a
rule made, that we should use such warenesse in prouidyng of friends, that we
should not begin to love him, whom at any time we might after hate. Besides,
if we had not been most fortunate in chosyng of our frendabis;, yet Scipio
thought men should ^eare that mischaunce, rather than to seek an occasion of
f^llyng out. What is to be attributed to honest fre^des.
These ends in freendeship therefore I think be to be used, that when
friends manners be honest, all their goods, counsel, and good will, should
be as common among them, without any excepcion: and also if chance so come to
pass, that the v^honest doings of friends, be to be helped in things,
where they stand upon life and death, or upon their estimacion, they may
somewhat swerve out of the way, so that great dishonestie follow not of it.
For freendship may be pardoned herein. Neither is estimacion to be rejected.
Nor yet must we think, that the peoples voice is a small help to have a
doo^yng in things, which to get with flattery and fair words is
dishonestie. Therefore virtue, who has the love of all men following it, is not
to be di^pised. But it was often demanded (for now I return to Scipio, al
whose talk was of freendeshippe,) why in all other thyng^s men were more
diligent, as that every one could tell how many goats and sheep he had of
his own, A question worthy the ^^^yng.
yet could not ^umbre how many friends he had: and that in compassyng the
one he bestows a diligence, and in choosyng the other, he is negligent, and
has as it were, no certeigne signs and mark^s, by the which he should judge
who be fittest for freendeshippe. We must therefore choose sure, steadfast, and
^nwaueryng friends, of the which sort, there is a great ^^arsitie, and it
is hard to know them without a trial. But we must make the trial ^n
freendeshyppe it self, for so freendeshippe goes before our judgment, and
takes away the occasion of t^yall. It is therefore a wise man's part, so to
stay the earnestn^sse of his love, as he does his race in r^nning, to
the^te^t we ma^e so use our friendship, as men that had assaied their horse,
Ways to prove fre^des.
and somewhat tried the manners of their friends. Many men often times in a
little monei^ matter, be found how unconstant they be: there be other some
again, whom when a little money can not attempt, Money.
by a great su^me of money may be soon known. But if some may be found,
which think it beastly to set moneie before freendship, where then shall we
find them, Honor.
that do not set honor, rule, Rule.
authority, Auctoritee
and power, before freendship? that when these be set forth on the one side,
and the power of friendship on the other side, who is there, that will not rather
chose the first then the last? For man's nature is weak (...) refuse rule,
which if me^ follow and little regard freendeship, they think they are to be
exc^sed, because not without a great occasion, they have broken of freendship.
Friendship hardly found among greatte men.
Therefore true freendship is very hardly found in them, which live in honor
and rule. For where can you find such a one, as would prefer his friends
honor before his own? But to leave these, how greuouse and dangerouse do
most men think it, to be fellows and partenars in miseries, whereto not one is
easily found, that will be content to come, although Ennins said well: Sure
freend^.
The sure freende in things unsure is known. Yet these two things make me^
for the most part to be noted of unsteadfastness and lightness, if either in
their own prosperitee they set their fre^des light, or in their fre^des
aduersitee they cast them of. Who therefore shall show him self in both these
discrete, steadfast, and faithful in friendship, A feithful friend.
him ought we to judge of the perfectest kind of men, and in a manner as a god.
For the ground work of that steadfastness and consta^cie, which we seek to be
i^ friendship, is faithfulness. For nothing is steadfast, that is unfaithful.
Besides it is fit we chose our fre^d simple, How to chose a freend^.
familiar, good to agree with, and one that will be moved with the same things,
wherewith we be. All which things belong to the faithfulness that ought to be
in friendship. W^ueryng mind.
For nether can he b^ faithful, that will be in many minds, or that has a
tourning head. Nor he steadfast and sure that is not of the same mode that his
friend is, and agreeable to his nature. What a free^d must ^schew.
Hereunto must be ioyned^ that he which shall be a fre^d, may not take pleasure in
accusing, nor lightly believe accusacions offered, which things belong^ to that
steadfastness, whereof ^arwhile I entreated. And so comes it to be true, which
in the beginning I said that freendship can not be but between good men. For it
is the propertee of a good man Good me^.
(whom we may also call wise) ^o keep these two rewles in freendship.

Two rules in friendship.
First, that nothing be feigned nor dissembled: for it is more honest openly
to hate, than in countenance to cloak. N^xt, that not only he clear his
friend of faults, whereof he is charged by any other, but also that he him
self in no wise be suspicious, or think his friend has done any thing amiss.
There must be besides this, Pleasant talk.
a certain pleasantness in ones talk and facions, which is not one of the
worst sau^es for freendship, but sowernesse and solemness must in no wise be
had, yet sadness and sagenesse in all matters have in it surely a certain
grauitee. Sagenesse
But freendshippe ought to be somewhat more at large, more free and pleasant,
and to all feloweship and gentleness more disposed.

And here rises a very hard question, Whethe^ new or old fre^des are to be
pre^^^red.
whether our new friends worthy of friendship, be to be preferred before our
old, as we use to esteem young horses more than old. A doubt surely unseemly
for men, for of freendship as there is of other things, ought there to be no
gluttyng. And our oldest kind of things like good old wines, ought to be most
regarded. And that is a true said saw, Prouerb^
which commonly is said, that we must eat many busshelles of salt
together, with whom we shall perform the parts of freendship. Yet new
acquaintaunces be not to be refused, if there be any hope in them, Similitude.
as in good trees where appears fruit. And yet old acquaintance must be
kept in his dew place. For in old friends, and acquaintance, and custom is
no small trust.

And as to the horse, whereof we made mention e^while, if nothing let, there
^s none, but had rather use him, whom he has used, Custom.
than a new and unhandled. Neither does custom much on^lie in living things,
but also in things lackyng life. For eue^ with hilly places and woody
countries be we delited, wherein we have dwelled long. But it is a chief
poinet in freendeship, Chiefe-point in free^dship.
the higher to be equal with the lower. For often times there be certain
graces in it, as was in Scipio toward our company of friends, he never put him
self forth before Philus, before Rutilius, before Mummius, or any of his
baser friends. But he honored Quintus Maximus his brother, The elder in
honor preferred.
as his better, because he was his elder, who was surely a notable man, yet
nothing like him, and he was desirouse, that al his friends might be made
richer by him. Which all men must both do and follow, that i^ they get
any betternesse of virtue, wit, or fortune, they should part if among their
friends, and part it with their kins^folkes, as if they be borne of a low
s^ocke, orels have their kynred either in wit or substance worse then the^m
selfs, they should enlarge their richesse, and be as an honor and glory
to their state, as we read in the plays of some, that were in servants
states, by reason the^r birth and stock was unknown, but after they were
perceived, and found either Gods sons, or kings children, yet they bare
still a love toward the sheapherdes, whom they took many years as their
fathers. Which thing we ought much rather do toward our true and well known
fathers. For thence chiefly is the fruits of ones wit, virtue, and all
honesty taken, when it is bestowed on him that is n^erest alied. Therefore as
those which in freendeshippe be the betters in degree, Mutual behavior of
friends.
ought to equal them selves with their inf^riours, so ought inf^riours not to
be grieved, if either in wit, either fortune, either worship, their friends
do excede them Of the which the most part either plain them selfs of
somewhat, or else vpbraide men with their benefits, and so much the more if
they think they have ought, Upbraides of plesures.
which they can prove to have be done either dewtifully, or fre^ndely, or by
any of their travail. But surely the^e vpbr^iders of pleasures, be an hateful
kind of people. Which pleasures he only, on who^ they be bestowed, ought to
remember, and not he that did bestow th^im. Wherefore as the better man must
abase him self in freendeship, so after a sort the better must prefer the
inferior. For there be some which make freendeship very yrkesome, where as
they think them selfs not regarded. Which happens almost to none but
such as think them selfs worthy to be despised. Who must both by words
and deades be brought from this opinion. You must do for every one first so
much as your self can do. How much is to be done for fre^des.
Next so much as he is hable to discharge, who^ you love and would further.
For you can not bring all your friends to high honor, although you be far
above other. As Scipio was hable to make Publius Rutilius Consul, Scipio made
Rutilius consul.
but he could never make his brother Lucius. And if you be hable to prefer
one to what you lust, yet most you take heed, what he is hable to discharge.
And we must always think fr^ndship to be in full grown ages and well stayed
wits. Free^dship in ages and wits.
Nor those, which in their boistate, have been desirous of hunting and
te^esse, must of necessitee take them their friends, Co^panio^s of youth.
whom they loved and delighted than with their pleasure. For so shall nursses and
youth masters challenge much friendship, by reason of old right, who in deed
be not to be despised, but yet after some other sort to be esteemed. For else
freendship can not continue steadfast. Unlike manners.
Unlyke manners have unlike studies, whose vnlykenesse of conditions does
break of all freendship^ And for none other cause the good with the wicked,
and the wicked with the good can not be friends: but for that there is
between them so great difference, as the greattest may be of manners and
affections. It may be also a good lesson in friendship, that no man hinder his
friends profit, through unmeasurable love toward him, as it often happens.
For to come to fab^es. Inordinate love i^ friendship.
If Neoptolemus would have heard Lycomedes, with whom he was brought up, when
he would have stayed his journey with much weepyng, he could never have taken
Troie. And oftentimes there chances weighty mattiers, why a man must depart
from his fr^endes: the which who so ever would let or trouble, because be can
not bear well his absence, is to be compted a weakelyng and cockney natured:
and therefore unreasonable for freendeship. And in all things we must take
head, Friends ought to ponder requests.
both what we ask of our freende, and what we suffer to be obtained of us.
There happens also many times, as it were a certain necessary lamentacion
for the partyng of friendship, for now our talk tourneth from sage men's to the
common peoples freendship. Common peoples ^rendship.
Oftymes friends faults burst out, partly upon friends, and partly upon
s^raunge^s, yet the shame redownes to their friends. Such sort of fre^ndship
therefore must be eased with leauyng of company, and as I have heard Cato
say, must be unhaunted, rather than hastily broken of, except some
vnbeareable injury shall fire it out, as a thing neither comely, neither
honest, neither fit t^ ^e, without a present change and a seuerance. But if
th^r shall be a certain change i^ their manners and likings, a some time there
happens, (...) some variance shall fall abo^^ some part of the common wel^^
(for I spoke as I sai^d a litt^^ before not of wisemens but common freendeship)
a wariness is to be used, Wariness to be used in frendship^
least freendeship seem not only to be left of: but malice also to be bredde.
For nothing is more dishonest, than to be at war with him, with whom thou
have freendly lived. Dishonestie^
Scipio for my sake (as you know) had severed him self from Quintus Po^peius
freendship. For the discencion that was in the common wealth, he was also
withdrawn clean from our ^ellow in office Metellus. Scipios alienacio^ from
two of his fre^d^s,
Both these he did sageli with authority, and no great gri^fe of mind.
Wherefore we must first take head, that dissencion happen not among friends,
and that their friendship seem rather cast of, than oppressed. Also we must
beware, that great frendshippes turn not in to great hatredes: whereof
chidynges, tauntynges, and evil reports do rise, which yet be to be borne,
if any wai^ they be sufferable. And here is the honor of old freendship to be
given, that the fault always be in the doer, and not in the sufferer of
wrong. R^dresse of v^^is in fren^ship.
There is one counsel, and ease for all these vices and disco^moditees, and
that is, that we love not over soon, nor love the unworthy. Who be worthy of
friendship.
They be worthy of friendship, in whose self there is a cause why they should
be beloved. It is a rare kind, and so surely all worthy things be rare, yea
and nothing harder than to find a thing in his kind through perfect. But the
most part of men in worldly things will knowlage nothing good, but that is
profitable, Beasts.
and like beasts they love those friends chiefly, of whom they hope they
shall receive most profit. Therefore they want that fairest and naturallest
friendship, which is to be sought even by it self and for it selfs sake:
neither do they show unto them selfs any token or example of the strength of
this friendship, what and how much it is. For every man loves him self not
as though he would challenge of him self a reward for his love, but because
every man of nature is dearest to him self: which kind of love and dearness
who so does not use it in freendeship, shall never be found a true and
faithful friend. For he surely is a friend, Who is a freende.
that is an other I. That if it appear in beasts, in fowls, in cattle, in
fish, in swine, and wild savage, first that they love them selfs, Comparion
between beasts and men.
(for that propertee is given to every living thing from the first birth) and
next that they covet and lust after some other beasts of their kind, with whom
they may be conuersaunt, and that they do with a desire, and certain likeness
to man's love: how much the more is it by nature in man, who both loves him
self, and gettes him a another, with whom he may break his mind, as though of
two he would make almost one But the most sort of men even froward^lie, (I will
not say shamefully) would have such a friend as they th^mselfes can not be,
Unfrenly request.
and those things, which they do not to their friends, they yet them
s^lfes will crave of them. But it is first m^te, that one be good himself, A
fre^nd must be a good man.
and the^ s^ke after for his like: for in such, that kind of steadfast
freendship^ which I treated of earwhile, may be surely settled, when men
ioigned together with good will, will first rule those affections, which others
do serve, and then take a pleasure in uprightness and justice, and the one
will ^ake in hand all things for the other, and one will not require of an
other, any thing but that is honest and lawful, and they will not only agree
and love together, but they will also stand in a shamely awe of each other. For
he that takes away honest bashefulnes from freendship, Honest bashfulnesse in
friendship.
does take away freendeshippes chief beauty. Therefore in those men is a
very dangerous error, which think that by freendship, a gate is set open
to all lust and vice. For friendship is given by nature as an aid to virtue,
Free^dship an aid to virtue.
and not as a guide to vice, to the intent that seeing virtue can not achieue
alone to the chief things, she should come as it were in arm and accompanied
with a another, which kind of fellowship if either it be, either has been, or
shall be amongst any, they must be said best and luckiest accompaigned, for
the atteignyng of natures chief happiness. For this is (I say) the very
fellowship, U^^aie felouship.
wherein all things be, which men think to be wisshed after, as honeslie,
glory, quietness, and pleasure of mind, so that where these be, there is the
happy life, Happy li^e.
and without these it can not be. The which life seeing it is the best and
chiefest thing, we must give our mind to virtue, Uertue^
if we will obtain it, with out which neither freendship, nor any thing else
to be desired we can attain to. And surely where virtue is despised, those
which think they have friends, do than feale they were deceived, when any
^eighty adventure does drive them to make a trial. Wherefore when you have
judged of your freende, Witty sentence.
you must love, and not when you have loved, than judge. Yea and this had neade
yet oftener to be told you. But where as in many things we be much punisshed
for negligen^e, yet most of all in loving and regardyng of our friends. For we
use oftentimes the clean contrary counsel, and even forbidded we do and
undo, as the old proverb says. Prou^rb^
For when we be toste hither and thither, either by daiely compaignie, or else
by some kind of dutee, sod^inly in the ^niddes of our course we burst of our
freendship, when there ^yseth any little offense. Wherefore such a
carelessness of so necessary a thing, Rechelesnesse in friendship.
is the rather to be despised. For friendship is the only thing in the world,
Profit of friendship.
of whose profit all men with open mouths do agree of, although virtue self
of many is vnsetby: and is said to be a certain outbragge or outshewe.
Richesse.
Many also regard not riches, who being content with a little, right homely
fare and homely apparayle pleases them Promocions also, Promocions.
with the desire where of many be set a fire, a great sort do so little
esteem, that they think nothing vayner nor lighter. Also other things, which
some even wonder at, very many esteem them as nothing. Of freendship all men
have one opinion, both those, which have given them selfs to meddle with the
commonwealth, and those who be delited with the knowelage and learning of
things, and those which quietly tend their own business, and finally those,
which give them selfs over whollye to follow pleasures, think there is no
life without freendeshippe, if it so be they will live somewhat hones^lie.

For freendship I wot not how creapeth through al kind of lives, Free^dship
crepeth through all kind^ of life^
and will suffer no part of a man's life that is led to want her. So if there
be any, of that sowernes and grimnes of nature, that he flies and hates the
compaignie of fellowship of men, of the which sort we have heard say, one of
the Tymons of Athenes was, Timon of A^henes.
but which of them I know not, yet he culd not abide, but must needs seek
after one, to whom he might vomitte up even the bitterness of his gaul. And
this chiefly would be judged, if any such thing might happen, that God would
take us out of this prease of men, and would set us some where in a
wilderness, and geeuyng us there store and plenty of al things, which
nature desires, would take from us the liberty of seeing any man at all, who
were there so stony herted, that could abide that kind of life? And from whom
would not solitariness take the fruicte of all pleasures? Solitariness.
Therefore that is true, which I trow I have heard our elders tell, was wont
to be fathered on Archita the Tarentine, Archi^a.
and so they heard say of other old men, that is, if any man should climb to
heaven once, and thoroughlie beeholde the nature of the world, and the
beautiefulnesse of the sterres: it would be an unpleasant wonder unto him,
which would have been a most pleasant m^ruaile, if he had any, with whom he
might have commoned thereof. Nature loves no solitariness
So Nature (we see) loves no solytari^nesse, and always hangs upon another,
as upon a stay, which even amongst the freudliest kind of men is had for most
del^ght. But where as the same nature d^clareth by so many signs, what she
means and seeks, what she coueteth and desires, yet I can not tell how we
wax deaf, and here not those things, whereof we be warned by her. For diverse
and many ways the use of friendship serves, and many occasions of suspiciouse
offenses be given, which sometime to shonne, sometime to ease, and sometime to
bear the^, is a wise man's part. And this one manner of offense is to b^e
avoided, that both the profit, and faithfulness of friendship may be k^pt
still. For oftentimes we must both warn, yea and chide our fre^des to. And
the same is to be taken freendly, Chidyng in freendship.
when it is done of good will. But I know not how it comes to pass to be
true, that my familiar Terence said in his comoedy Andria, Familiar, because
he used to read his books.
that sowthyng gets friends, and truth does purchase hatred. Truth is
noisome, if there grow hatrede of it, which is a poison to friendship, Southin^
flattery.
but yet sowthing is much more hurtful, which cokereth up his freende in his
faults, and suffers him to run still on hedde. But there is great blame in
him, that cares not for the truth, and much fault in him, that for disceite
is given to sowthyng. Herein therefore we must have all our regard and
wariness, that our warnynges be without bitterness, and our chidynges with
out spitefulness: but in sowthing (because I delight to use Terence word) let
there be an honest likyng, ^^attery.
and let flattery the egger on of vice be set^e a loufe, which not only for a
freende, but for no honest man is me^te. For men live aft^r one sort with a
ty^anne, and after an other sort with a freende: but his good days be to be
dispaired of, whose ears be so shu^te up from the truth, ^^^wth is (...) be
(...)^
that he will not hear it of his friend. For it is a tried saw of Catoes, that
earnest foes d^serue much more pleasure of some, A tried saw of Catoes.
then those that seem to be fawnyng friends. For they sometime, but these
never tell the truth. And ^his is to to foolish, To to ^oolish and thing.
that those, who be warned of their friends, be not agreaued at that they
ought, but at that they ought not. For they be not sorry they did amiss, but
they take it unkindly tha^ be ^hidden, wh^r as contrary wise they should be
sorry for their fault, and glad of the chidyng. As then to warn our f^eende,
and to be warned again, is the propertee of true freendship, Propretee of
^^^we frendship^
and to do the one honestly, and no^ spitefully, and to take the other gentilly,
and not ^rowardly, so must we think, Greatest pestilence in friendship.
there is no greatter pestil^nce in freendeship than flattery, fair speech and
sowthyng, how be it for many causes, this may be noted the fault of light and
subtle persons, which speak all to pleasure, but nothing to truth.
Dissimulacion in friendship.
But whereas dissimulac^on is evil in all things (for it keapeth a man from
iudgyng the truth) yet most of all it is contrary to freendeship, for it takes
away all truth in word, without the ^^iche the very name of free^dship can not
continue. End of friendship.
For seeing the power of friendship is in a man to none other end, but that o^
two m^des there should be mad^ one, how can it be brought to pass, if in one
man there be not one and a like mind always, but a diverse, a wavering, and a
changeable. For what thing can be made so variable, so out of course, as his
mind, which not only turns at every ma^^ fantasy and pleasure, but also at
every man's beck and look? say ye nay? and nay say I. say ye yea? and yea
say I: and to be plain, I have even appoincted with my self to hold up all
things with yea and naie, Gnato the parasite.
as the same Terence says. But this Terence speaks in Gnatoes person,
which kind of speaking to make in a freende, were to to much lightness. But
where as there be many like these Gnatoes, and in place, richesse, and
estimacion a^oue others, Flattery very hurtful.
their kind of flattery is very hurtful, when auctoritee is ioigned with
their vanitee. But a flatteryng freende may be as well discerned and known from
a true friend by taking good head, as all counterfeit and feigned things may
be tried out from true and right things. The assemble of the commons of a
city, which stands most of unskillful perfons, is wont yet to judge, what
difference is between a people pleaser, that is a flatterer, and curri^a^our,
and a constant, a sage, and a discrete citesin. Caius Papyrius.
With the which kind of flatteries Caius Papyrius consul stuffed a late the
peoples ears, when he would have made a law for the restoryng of the Tribunes
for the commons. We persuaded the contra^y, but ^ will say nothing of my
self, of Scipio I will speak gladly. Pithy oracio^ of Scipio.
Good lord, how pithy was he that day, how great a majesty was in his talk,
that you might well have called him the leader of the people, and not a fellow
commoner. But what neade I to speak mu^h^ h^rof, y^ were present, an^ (...)
oracion is in every mands ^a^de. And by that m^anes (...), f^r the g^ttyng of
^he (...) fauou^, by the voic^s of the ^eopl^ self was dasshed.

And that I may r^turne to the matter, you remember, when Q. Maximus Scipio^s
brother, and L. Mancinus were Consuls, how the law of C. Lycinius Crassus,
concerning the Priests dignite^s, was thought to be fauell seeking of the
commons. For the choice of coll^dges was turned to the peoples benefit. And he
first made this order, to dele more truel^ with the common people. Yet the
religion of the ever living godd^s (we defendyng it by our answer) did soon
overcome his oracion, which was even a thing peincted for sale work, and was
done when I was Praetor five year before I was Consul. Therefore that cause
was defended, rather of it self, than by authority of the s^eaker.

But if in stage plays, wherein many feigned and resembled matters be used,
truth is regarded, so that it be set out and declared: what must it be in
friendship, which hanges all on truth? In the which, except you know (as they
say) a man's heart to the bottom, and you show likewise yours, there is no
trust nor trial in it, and surely you can not love nor be loved, when you know
not how trewly it is me^te. although this flattery be hurtful, yet can it not
hinder none but him, that geues ear to it, and is delited with it. And so it
comes to pass, Flatterer herkn^th flatterers. Virtue.
that he opens his ears to flatterers, which flattereth and b^ste lyketh
him self. Virtue always loves ^^r self. For she best knows her self, and
perceiu^th how she is to beloved. But I sp^ake not now of virtue, but of the
opinion which men have of virtue. For with virtue se^fe so many be not as
would seem to be ind^wed. These sort of men flatt^rie delights, when
feigned communicacion is put forth to please them, and they think that
kind of ^ayne talk to be a witness of their praises.

This therefore is no ^^^we fre^ndesh^ppe, when the one will h^are no trew^he,
and the other is ready to lie. Feigned friendship.
Neither would the clawyng of these trencher friends, which be parasites,
seem feate and pleasant in comoedies, except there were myxte therein some
glorious soul^iours, which be Thrasoes: as for exaumple says Thraso: In
Enucho Tere^ce comoedy.
Did Thais my woman ge^e me great thanks. It had been enough for Gnato the
Parasite to have answered, Ye sir great, but he said, ye sir exce^dyng great
thanks. Flattery always settes a thing to the most, Flattery maketh^ much
of a little.
which he would have seem great, for whose plea^ure it is spoken. Wherefore
although this kind of fawnyng vanity, is much este^med with the^, which
embrace and like it them selfs, yet the sager and constantee sort of men
must be warned, that they take heed, they be not snared with subtle flattery.
For eueri man can see an open flatterer, except he be a very sotte. But we must
diligently beware, least the subtle and secret flatterer wind him self in
with us. For he cannot easily be known. Because even with contrariyng of one
often times he flattereth, Snares of subtle flattery.
and feignyng that he chideth, he is fair spoken, and at length he yeldes and
suffers him self to be ouerco^e, that he that is disceued may think he has
got a great victory. But what is more dishonestie then to be skorned? And
therefore we must use the more dilegence, that it may not hap, as in a play
named the Epicure. To day before all my old dotyng foolish friends, you tossed
me goodly, and mocked me gaily: for in plays old men's persons without
forecast and being light of belief, be the most foolish. But I can not tell by
what means from the freendship of perfect and wise men (I mean in such
wisdom as is supposed may be in man) our co^municacion is turned to slight and
slender freendship. Wh^rfore let us come again to the first we spoke of, and
let us conclude at length upon it.

Conclusion of the mattier.
I say virtue, O C. Fannius and Q. Mutius, both gets and keeps friends.
For in it is all agreement, all steadfastness, and all con^tancie: Virtue.
Which when she aduaunceth her self, and shows out her light, and both
sees and knows the same in another, she gives her self to that to, and
takes likewise that she finds in a another. Where upon love and loving
friendship toward each other, is enkendled. For both these two words have
their names of th^s word, to love. But to love is nothing else, but to bear
good will toward him, To love what it is
whom you love, not for any need or profit that is sought, Which profit
florisheth yet of freendshippe, although you the less nothing follow it. With
this kind of good will, we when we were young men, did love Lucius Paulus,
Marcus Cato, Caius Gallus, Publius Nasica, Tiberius ^raccus, our Scipides
father in law. This freendshippe also does more appear among such as be
like of ages, as between me and Scipio, Lucius Furius, Publius Rutilius, and
Spurius Mummins. And we old men also do take pl^asure in young men's love
toward us, as you see, I am delited in yours, and in Quintus Tuberos, being a
very young man, and in P. Rutilius Uirginius compaignie. And seeing an order is
so appoin^ted in our life and nature, that one age may spryng of a another,
chiefly we should desire, that we might live with our like in ages, Living
with like.
that even as we came together with them in our swadlyng cloutes, so we might
keep them compaignie to the windyng sheet. But because this worldly
substance is bri^kle and fadyng, we always provide some, whom we may love,
and of them be loved again. For if love and fre^ship be taken from man,
Scipio being dead lived yet with Laelius.
all pleasure of life is taken away. Scipio surely although he was taken away
sodeinly from this life, lives yet with me, and shall live ever For I always
loved the virtue of that man, which is not dead with me, neither stands it
daiely alone before mine eye, who always have had it in sight, but also to our
child^ens children shall it be noble and notable. No man shall ever enterprise
greatier things with hope and courage, which has not th^mage and memo^y of
him before his eyes. The image and memory of Scipio.
Truly of all the things which fortune or nature gave me, I have nothing to
match with Scipioes freendship. Scipioes fren^ship
^n it was my conference for the common wealth: in it was my counsel for
private causes: In it was my r^st full of al delight. And I never offended him
in any thing that ever I could perceive, and I never herd any thing of him that
I was against. We had one house, one diet, and that even common: yea not that
only, but warfare, and also our iorneis and going abroad were a like common.
But what shall I speak of our studies in serchyng always and learning of some
what, in the which we bestowed all our leisure and time, when we were out of
the sight of men. The remembrance and onthynkyng of the which things, if with
him they had died, I could by no means have borne the lack of so freendly
and loving a man. But those another be dead yet, but rather nourished and
increased by the onthynkyng and remembrance of them. And although I should
wholly be bereft of them, yet mine age self would bring my greattest comfort.
For I could not very long continue in this state. And all short griefs be
sufferable, although they be great. These things be they, which I had to
speak of freendship. And I do exhort you, that you so esteame virtue, (with
out which freendship can not be possible) as saving it, ye think nothing
better than freendeship.

FINIS.
The table.
A
ADuersitee tries fre^des. 36 Affricanus and Laelius had no need one of an
other. fo. 22. Amitee what it is. fo. 14. Amitee of Orestes and ^ylades. fol.
17. Ambicion of T. Graccus. 29. Anniball. fo. 21. Archita. fo. 56. Authoritee.
fol. 3.42.
B
Base outspryng of freendship. fol. 21. Becillinus. fo. 26. Beastliness. fo.
34. Beasts. fo ^1. Bounds of love in friendship. fo. 26.38.
C
Cato the elder. folio. 2. Cato reckened w^se. fol. 6. Cato for his deeds
commended eodem. Calabria. fol. 9. Caius Fabritius. 20. Capitol. fo. 26. Caius
Lucinius. fo. 27. Cassius law^. fo, 29. Care good^ but rare. fo. ^1. Cause
principal of friendship. fol. 34. Caius Papyrius. fo. 59. Chief poinct in
frendsh^p. 46. Chidyng in freendship. fo. 57. Constant men. fol. 6. Couples of
friends. fo. 11. Co^moditees of freendship. 15. Continuance of friendship. 24.
Couetou^nes in friendship. 25. Co^mocion of Coriolanus. 26. Coriolanus. fol. ^^.
Companions of youth. fo. 48. Common peoples freendship. folio. 49. Comparison
between beasts and men. fo. 52. Conclusion of the matter. 63. Custom. fo. 45.
D
Dishonestie. fol. 50 Dissimulacion in freendeship fol. 58. Do well we must
alwaie. 33
E
Elder in honor preferred. fol. 46. Empedocles. fo. 17. End of freendship.
fol. 58. Excellency of freendship. 16.
F
Familiar. fo. 57. Feigned freendship. fol. 62. Feithfull freende. fo. 43. Few
friends. fol. 31. First law in freendship. fo. 28. First rule of friendship.
fo. 31. Flattery very hurtful. fo. 59. Flattery. fol. 57.62. Flatterer
herkeneth flatterers. fo. 61. Foul excuse. fol. 28. Fortune. fol. 37. Fool
fortunate. fol. 37. Freendship between C^ Laelius and Scipio. fol. 3.
Freendship.10. preferred above all thing, and only between good men.12. without
virtue.14. as necessary as the elements. fo. 16. Fruit of Amitee. fol. 22.
Fr^endship beginning of nature. fol. 23. Freendeship taken out of the world.
fol. 32. Friends the best richesse. 37. Freendship hardly found among great
men. fo. 43. Friendship in ages and wits. fol. 48. Friends ought to ponder
requests. fo. 49. Freende must be a good man. fol. 52. Freendshippe an aid to
virtue. fol. 53. Freendship creeps through all kind of life. fol. 55.
G
Gabinius law. fo. 29. Geftes of Fortune. fol. 38. Gnato the Parasite. fo. 59.
Good men. fo. 13.44.
H
Hatred and strife. fo. 17. Happy life. fo. 53. Honest requests. fo. 27.
Honor. fo. 42. How to chose a friend. fo. 43. How much is to be done for
friends. fo. 48, Honest bashefulnesse in friendship. fo. 53.
I
Image and memory of Scipio. fo. 65. Immortalitee of the soul. 8. Inordinate
love in friendship. fol. 65.
L
Laelius father in law to Scaeuola the Augur, and to Fannius. folio. 1. Like
woll to like. fo. 25, Love. fol. 19. Love confirmed by benefits. fol. 21. Love
and fear. fo. 36. Lucius Acilius. fo. 4. Living with like. fo. 64.
M
Man's soul. fo. 9. M. Pacuuius tragaedie. f. 17. M. Curious. fo. 20.28.
Mocions in friendship. fol. 31. Moneie. fol. 42. Mutual behavior of friends.
fol. 47.
N
Nature in friendship. fo. 20 Nature. fol. 35.56.
O
Offense in our friends behalf. fo. 27. Old age. fo. 8. Opinions of
freendship disalowed. fol. 38. Order of freenship. fol. 13.
P
Paulus Aemilius. fo. 27. Pestilence greattest in freendship. fol. 58. Philus
Manlius. fo. 9. Pithy oracion of Scipio. 60. Pleasant talk. fo. 44. Pleasure.
fol. 14. Power of honestee. fo. 21. Pomponius Atticus. fol. 2. Preuentyng of
honest requests. fol. 31. Propretee of a well stayed mind. ^o. 33. Profit.
fo. 35.36. Proverb. fol. 45.54. Profit of freendship. fo. 54. Promocions. fo.
54. Propretee of true freendship. fol. ^8. P. Sulpitius tribune. fol. 2.
Punisshement as due to the partners as to the ryngleaders. fo. 30. Pyrrhus.
fol. 21.
Q
Q. ^ompeius ^onsull. fo. 2 Question worthy the askyng folio. 4^.
R
R^qu^tyng of benefits. 34. Redr^ss^ of vices in freendeship. fol. 51.
Rech^lesnesse in friendship. 54. Richesse. fol. ^7.^4. Rule. fo. 42.
S
Saying most repugnant to freendship. fo. 40. Sagenesse. fol. 44. Scipio
commended. fo. 6. Scip^oes death bewailed. 7. Twice Consul.7. Honorably
brought from the Senate house. 8. Scipio made Rutilius Consul. fol. 48.
Scipioes alienacio^ from two of his friends. fo. 50. Scipio being dead, lived
yet with Laelius. fo. 64. Scipioes freendship. fo. 65. Seven sag^s of Greece.
fol. 5. Similitude. fol. 45. Snares of subtle flattery. 62 Socrates judged
wise. f. 5.9. Socrates for his sayings commended. fol. 6. Solitariness. fol.
56. South^ng flattery. fol. 57. Stoikes. fol. 33. Sure friend. fo. 43.
T
Terence comoedie. fol. 62. Themistocles. fol. 30. T. Coruncanus. fol. 28.
Timon of Athenes. fol. 55. To to folishe a thing. fol. 58. To love what it is.
fo. 63. True fre^ndship. fol. 39. Treuth is to be heard. fol. 57. Tried saw of
Catoes. fol. 58. Treuthe. fol. 61. Two rules in friendship. 44. Tyrannes life.
fo. 36.
U
Virtue. fol. 20.34.35.53.63. Ueraie fellowship. fo. 53. Unhonest requests. fo.
25. Unlyke manners. fo. 48. Unfreendly requests. for 52. Upbraydes of
pleasures. 47. Usurie of pleasures. fol. ^2. Want of friendship. fo. 16.17.
Ways to prove friends. 42. Waueryng mind. fol. 44. Wariness in friendship.
50. Wherefore friends are sought. fol. 19. Where love grows. fol. 34. What is
to be attributed to honest friends. for 41. What a friend must es^hew. fol.
44. Whether new or old friends are to be preferred. fol. 45. Worthy of
friendship. fol. 51. Who is a friend. fo. 51. Witty sentence. fo. 54. Wicked
answer of Blosius. fol. 26.
FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT London in Fletestrete, in the house of Tho. Berthelette.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


