THE OLD WAY.

A SERMON PREACHED AT OXFORD, The eight day of July, being the Act Sunday. 1610.

By ROBERT ABBOTT, Doctor of Divinity, and Master of Balioll COLLEGE.



LONDON Printed for Eleazar Edgar, and Ambrose Carbrand, and are to be sold
at their Shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Windmill. 1610.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN God, the Lord Archbishop of CANTERBVRIE his
Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all ENGLAND, Chauncelour of the University
of OXFORD, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel, my very good
LORD.
MOst Reverend Father, albeit it be somewhat beside custom to make Dedications
of printed Sermons, yet it is not beside duty in me to offer to your Grace,
the first fruits of my return to this famous University, whereof the chiefest
protection under his most Excellent Maiestre, belongs to your Grace, and
wherein through your Grace his commendation, though to a forward and wel-willing
company, I am now become a Head, where I lived sometimes an inferior member.
Which place, as by your Grace his favor it has befallen me, without my
expectation or seeking, so I desire to use it being befallen me in such sort,
as to satisfy your Grace his expectation and good conceit of me. In the
entrance whereof, if I have done a service so acceptable and so likly to profit
many; as the desire of many for the publishing of this Sermon would import, it
shall (I hope) ominate further good in the process of my abode here, which I
wish to be no longer the^ shall be for the glory of God, the service of his
Majesty, and the benefit both in special and in general of the Church of God.
To which I shall be the more encouraged, if it shall please your Grace to
accept in good part, this small work as a token of my thankful mind, which
in all duty I recommend to your Grace his favor, and your self in all your
affairs, to the mercy and blessing of Almighty GOD, who evermore so assist
and guide you in your Pastoral care and Government of his CHVRCH, as that when
the chief Pastor shall appear, you may in lieu of present toil and travel,
receive an incorruptible Crown of glory in that life that is for ever. So
resting,

Your Graces in all most humble affection and duty, R. ABBOTT.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, little thought I when I Preached this Sermon to take a
second pains about it to write it to the Press, but the earnest request of
diverse persons has prevailed with me, to remember them that heard me of that
they heard, and to impart the same to many others that heard me not. If there
may be to thee that good thereof, which they have hoped for, that have so
earnestly desired it, I shall be glad that God disposed me to the service of
that day. Of the matter here entreated I know much might have been said, but I
was to keep my self within the compass of a Sermon, and very little have I
now set down either more or otherwise then I then spoke. Let me now, good
Reader, use this opportunity to request pardon of thee, if by such occasions
which have sundry ways befallen me, since the Printing of my last Book, I be
somewhat the longer, before I give thee the answer to Doctor Bishops late
reproof. I have in the end of that last Book, given thee an advertisement,
which the Printer on the top of every Page, giving to that Addition the Title
of the whole work going before, has mis named, The third part of the defense
of the Reformed Catholic, by which thou may take knowledge of the quality
and condition of that reproof. I pray thee let that satisfy thee for the
time, till leisure may serve to go forward with that, which I have already in
good part begun. Albeit by the reading of that Advertisement, thou may
happily conceive, that it is but labor ill bestowed, to deal with a man so
resolutely impudent, as thou may perceive Doct. Bishop has in that Reproof
framed himself to be. But whatsoever his book be in it self, thou shall see
it will give me occasion of a work, which I hope shall give satisfaction and
be helpful unto many, God therein assisting me, by thy prayer for me, and
giving me health and strength for the performance of it. Further I cannot omit,
to wish thee in my second part against the said Doct. Bishop, to take notice of
one special fault since espied by me, and not noted in the corrections, which
are there set down in the end. Page 978. in the last line thou read, He
received of them no warrant of authority, but only by consent, where it should
be, but only testimony of consent. Some other faults there were ouerslipped in
my hasty reading, as page 362. line 2. This spirit and prayer a true witness,
for this spirit of payer is a true witness, and page 967. lin. 9. it is
unknown, for, it is not unknown, which and such like thou can by thine own
understanding easily discern. For conclusion, understand I pray thee, that
some man lighting upon my copy of that book, after it was past my hands
played the Cuckoo with me, and laid some eggs of his in my nest. As page 549.
lin. 27. where I had said, M. Bishop according to his ignorance, he made it,
M. Bishop according to his opinion muffled in the mists of ignorance. Likewise
page 762. l. 38. where I had said, these are the mysteries of the fornications
of the whore of Babylon, things reasonlesse, witless, senseless, mere
witcheries and inchauntments of men's minds, he has added, and the untimely
fruits of a barren strumpet. These two I noted obscurely before, though I did
not signify by what means they came in, which now I thought good to do.
Another edition, if need be, and God so will, shall expunge these and the rest
of these slouens blots; in the mean time, I pray thee, pass them over, if
thou find any more of the same kind.

A SERMON PREACHED AT OXFORD, The eight of July, 1610.
IEREM. 6. 16. Thus says the Lord, stand upon the ways, and behold and ask
for the old way, which is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find
rest for your Souls.
IT is a memorable sentence, and worthy always to be regarded, which our
Savior Christ the chief Master of sentences has dictated for a perpetual
caveat unto us; Matthew. 16. 26.
What shall it profit a man, though he win the whole world, if he loose
his own soul? The loss of the soul, what is it but the loss of the rest of
the soul, whereby it perishes, Grego. Moral. lib. 4. cap. 7. Al^ter pertre
dicimus vt non sit, a^^ter perire dicimus et male sit. etc. Humana anima beat
viuere sieve per vi^^m sieve per supplicium perdit, essentialiter viuere non
amittit.
Not so as not to be, as Gregory speaks, but so as to be in evil, and
loses, not the life of essence and being, but the life of bliss and
happiness, whilst being divided from God, in whom only is the fountain of
life and bliss, it lives immortally in death, and in a miserable end finds
no end of misery, and is incapable of any destruction whereby to be freed
from destruction: Now if the gain of the whole world be but loss and damage,
when it is joined with this loss of Soul, how highly, how deeply does it
concern us amidst our using the world and the things of the world, to have
always an eye to our Souls health, and to be always jealous of so
intricating our selves in the troubles and businesses of the world, as to run
in danger of excluding our Souls from rest with God? As touching the means of
finding this rest, the Prophet in the words which I have here propounded, very
notably instructs us, 1. Ye shall find rest for your Souls. 2. Upon the
ways.
1. Commending it as the final end of all our travail, by this means only
and not otherwise to be found; 2. Noting the difficulty of finding it, by
reason of so many counterfeit ways pretended to bring us to it, when indeed
they lead us from it. 3. Showing us from whom we are to take 3. Thus says the
Lord.
the certain direction of the right way. 4. Declaring what that direction is,
both 4. Stand, behold, ask.
as touching the care that we are to use for the finding of that way, and 5.
As touching 5. The old way, which is the good way. 6. And walk therein.
the mark whereby it is to be known. 6. Instructing us what our duty is
when we have received the true knowledge of the way, even to walk therein.

2. As touching the first (which I make the first for my order of handling,
though in place of words it be the last) what is all the life that we live
here, but temptation and warfare and trouble? What other then a restless
Euripus, still ebbing and flowing; continually tossed too and fro, distracted
with cares, perplexed with fears, oppressed with sorrows, yielding no Honey
without some Gall, no calm that is not intercepted or interrupted with some
storm. Ovid.
Nulla est syncera voluptas, says the Poet; There is no pleasure that is not
blended with somewhat that is distasteful and unpleasing. Eccles. 1. 14.
I have considered, says Solomon, all the works that are done under the
Sun, and behold all is vanity and vexation of spirit. Grego. Moral. l. 23.
c. 15. Via est vita praesens qua ad patriam tendimus, and idcirco hic occulto
dei iudicio frequenti perturbatione conterimur ne viam pro patria diligamus.
This life, says Gregory, is the way for us to go to our Country, and
therefore by Gods secret judgment, we are here beaten and broken with often
trouble, that we may not in steed of our Country fall in love with the way.
But yet against all this vanity and mutabilitie and misery, vain man is
evermore laboring to settle unto himself an estate, wherein to enjoy
contentment, and peace, and rest; which he seeks here and seeks there, but
finds it no where; and thinks to gain it by obteining this desire, and
this failing, by obtaining that, but no whit the nearer, either by this or
that, whilst in the having of things, he finds not that rest which he
promised to himself in the desire of them, and therefore having obtained his
desire again and again, yet is still ready to desire again; even as the
Dropsiediseased man drinks to aswage his thirst, and by and by his Soul is
dry, and he is desirous to drink again. For as in the great deluge of the
world, the Dove which Noah sent first out of the Arc, Genesis 8. 9.
Found no rest for the sole of her foot, until she returned unto the Arc
again, Even so the Soul of man being in sin, gone out from God, and flying
too and fro in the deluge of the miseries of humane life, finds no where to
rest it self, until it take course to return to God again; God having
engraven it upon all the creatures of the world, which he said of old to the
Jews concerning Jerusalem, Micah. 2. 10.
Non est haec requies vestra; This is not your rest, So as that they repel and
put back from them our desires and delights, and suffer us not with
continuance to stick upon them, by reason that in the use, they breed a
weariness and lothing of them, and Tertul. de habit. mulier. semper abundantia
contumeliosa in semetipsamest.
Abundance, as Tertullian says, causes always it own contumely and
disgrace. There is nothing so sightly as that the eye ioyeth continually to see
it; no melody so sweet but that still to hear it, rather dulleth then
delights; nothing so pleasing to the taste, but that continual sacietie and
fullness makes it loathsome and unpleasing; so as that Greg. Moral. lib. 26.
cap. 28. Per multa duci tur vt quia qualitate rerum non potest, saltem
varietate satictur.
in variety of things, as Gregory well observes, we are forced to seek that
contentment which we cannot find in the quality of them. It remains
therefore that there is no true rest but in the enjoying of God, nothing being
able to content the Soul but he that created the Soul, nor to satisfy the
desire of the heart, but he that made the heart to desire him. In him is
riches, and beauty, and glory, and strength, and immortality, and whatsoever
appertains to the bliss and happiness either of body or Soul; so as that
having obtained him, there is nothing further for us to desire or wish for. The
little sight and feeling that we have of the grace of God how great peace does
it administer unto us, even in this life; even Phil. 4. 7.
the peace of God which passes all understanding? How has it fortified the
hearts of Gods Saints, to go with constancy and cheerfulnes, Psalm. 66. 12.
through fire and water, against all the injuries and violences of adverse and
evil men; persecution, banishment, imprisonment, hunger, cold, nakedness, and
death it self, the inner man rejoicing and resting in God, when the outward
man has been tossed too and fro, with the storms and tempests of the world,
and Cyprian. de Mortalit. Inter ruinas humani generis stare erectum.
amidst the ruins of mankind standing upright, as Cyprian speaks, looking
with boldness up to heaven, as expecting redemption and deliverance to be
yielded unto them from thence? Now if there be so much in the shadow, what
shall there be in the substance, where there shall be nothing to interrupt our
glorious rest, where we shall 1. Cor. 13. 12.
see face to face, and know even as we are known, where Apoc. 7. 16. 17. and
21. 4.
there shall be no more death nor hunger, nor thirst, nor crying, nor pain but
God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes, where it shall finally and fully
be accomplished which the Prophet has said of the redeemed of the Lord, Esa.
35. 10.
Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall fly away.

3 But a matter it is of no great difficulty, to conceive that all our true
contentment and rest stands in GOD, and in the fruition of his goodness, the
greater doubt and question, is concerning the way to come to God. Wherein the
wit of man has infinitely busied it self, who apprehending this principle,
that by Religion and service of God, we are to come to God, has thought
himself wise enough, to direct what is fit for God, and to comprehend that
light that should give him conduct and guidance into the presence of God. Now
it being with men according to the proverb, Quot homines, tot sententiae, So
many men, so many minds, it has by this means come to pass, that variety of
wits has showed it self in this behalf by variety of devises, whence have
grown both without the Church, and within the Church so many opinions of God,
so great differences of Religion, so many Sects, and Schisms, and Heresies, as
in all ages we have seen, every of them pretending it self to be the right
way, and painting it self with colors and shows of truth, and promising the
rest and peace of God and all happiness from him. And indeed if the devil
should appear and show himself in his own likeness, and should profess
himself a deceiuer and a destroyer, every man would abhor him and fly from
him, but therefore he deals psalm. 39. 11.
like the Moth, Greg. Moral. lib. 5. cap. 29. Tinea damnam facil and sonitum
non facit.
Which does the harm, as Gregory says, and makes no noise or sound of it.
Yea 2. Cor. 11. 14.
he transformeth himself into an Angel of light, and teaches his Agents and
ministers to transform themselves as if they were the ministers of
righteousness, to write Pharmaca, medicines, where they should write Venena,
poisons, and to Sugar the brims of their intoxicated Cups, that men the more
greedily and without suspicion may drink those venomous potions, which they
minister unto them therein. Thus even Celsus the Philosopher upon his defenses
of Paganism, sets an inscription of Origin. cont. Celsum. lib. 1. Vera
oration.
the word of truth. Manicheus that blasphemous Heretic, taking in hand to
write to the Church his damnable paradoxes, doubts not to begin thus, August
cont. Epist Fundam. c. 5. Manicheus Apostolus Jesus Christi, etc Haec sut
salubria verba de perenni ac v^uo font.
Manicheus the Apostle of Jesus Christ: these are the wholesome words which
issue out of the everlasting and living fountain. Chrysostom reports of the
Macedonian Heretics, That Chrysostom. de s^ct. and ador^d. ^p. ^emper di^^nt,
No^ r^cia (...).
they were always saying; We walk in the right faith. Yea, Aug. Epist. 56.
Nullus error se ^ud^t extollere ad congregandas sibi ^urbas imper^torum qui non
Christian^ nomi^^ (...) conquirat.
all Heresies, as Augustine somewhere notes, Do seek the cloak and couerture
of the name of Christ, and every one says of his own sect; Idem cont. Faust.
l. 13. c. 15. di^^t, Salus qu^ Christus promisit apud me est, ego dabo.
The salvation which Christ has promised is with me, I will give it. By reason
whereof it comes to pass, which Leo Bishop of Rome says, That Leo in
Natiuit. Dom. ser. 5. Nonin solo opere virtutum aut in sola obseruantia
mandatorum sed etiam in tramite fidei angusta and ardua est viaquae ducit ad
vitam and magni laboris est magnique dis(...) inter du ^ias imperitorum
op^^iones and very similes salsitales ^nam sanae doctrine semita inoffensis
gressibus ambulare, and cu^ vndique se laquei erroresque oppo^at omne per^^ulum
deceptionis cuader*
not only in the work of virtue, and keeping the commandments of God, but
also as touching the way and path of right faith, strait and narrow is the way
that leads unto life, and a matter of great labor and danger it is, amidst
the doubtful opinions of unskillful men and their colorable falsehoods, to
walk the one path of sound doctrine without stumbling or offense, and where on
every side there lie against us snares of errors yet to escape all danger of
such deceit. Now many there are who hearing this multiplicitie of ways, are
offended hereat, and because it is a question which is the right way, therefore
sit them down and go no way at all, or go only the way that company and
occasion offers unto them, being ready to leave it again when occasion
moves them otherwise. But far be it from any of us to be of this mind; Yea
rather as the wayfaring man in his journey, hearing of the perplexity of the
way, and that there are many by-pathes and turnings by which he may go
amiss, does not therefore give over his journey, or go on at all adventure,
but is rather the more earnest and careful to enquire and learn the way; even
so are we in this case to deal, that the malice of Satan purposely laboring
to breed doubt and difficulty of the way of life, do not astonish us, or
drive us to neglect of Religion and faith toward God, but rather stir up and
sharpen our industry and indea^our to search and try which is the true faith.
And if as touching the things of this present life, we have care to gain the
skill and knowledge to discern money, whether it be current and lawful, and
wares whether they be Marchantable and true, and meat whether it be wholesome
and sound; much more may we think it concerns us, to learn the skill and
knowledge of true Religion, and to gain ability to discern and judge of
erroneous and false worshippes, wherein is a departure from God, and the making
of the way to our own destruction.

4 And the more does it concern us to be wary in this behalf, for that
amongst those many ways, which we see diversely frequented by diverse men,
there is but one only way that leads unto God. As there ^ Ephe. 4. 4, 5, 6
is but one God who has called us, and one Lord,, Jesus Christ, by whom we are
called, and one heaven whereto we are called, so also there is but one faith to
know God in Jesus Christ, to obtain life and salvation in heaven by him.
Hilar. de Trinit. lib. 11. Quis ambiget extra fidem esse quicquid extra fidem
vnam est?
It is without the compass of faith, says Hilarie, whatsoever is without the
compass of one faith, and Leo, Leo in Natiu dom. Ser. 4. Nisivna est, fides
non est.
Except it be one only, it is no faith. Absurdly therefore do they err and
are deceived, who with Socrat. hist. lib. 4. c. 27. Themistius admonebat deum
velle tam diuersa ac dispari opinionum ratione gloriam suam illustrare.
Themistius the Philosopher amongst the Pagans, or with Rhetorious the
Heretic amongst Christians, do think that God likes well of the variety
of Religions, and August. de haeres. cap. 7^. A Rhetorio haeresis exorta quae
omnes haereticos recte ambulare and vera dicere affirmat.
that all Heretics walk aright and speak truth; so that it skilleth not of
what Religion a man be, if he be of any; as if heaven were a common harbor for
all professions to arrive at, a common Inn to give entertainment to all that
will offer themselves unto it: but so certain a thing it is, that there is but
only one truth, one only true religion, as that every sect and schism and
heresy professes it self only to be the truth, as granting it out of common
instinct to be a thing to be presumed, that it cannot be the truth, except it
only be the truth.

5 Now which that only true way is, and how it is to be known, none can better
teach us then God himself to whom we go. For as 1. Cor. 2. 11.
no man knows the things of man, but the spirit of man which is in him (which
yet knows not it self) so no man knows the things of God but the spirit of
God, and he Ver. 10.
to whom they are revealed by the same spirit. And as no man sees the Sun
but by the light of the Sun it self, so does no man see or know God, but by
those resplendent beams of light which issue from him in his holy word,
whereby he vouchsafes to minister unto us the understanding of his ways. And
therefore very well S. Ambrose says, Ambros. Ep. ^^. Coeli myster^^ not eat me
Deus ipsequi condid^t, non homo qui seipsum ignorauit. Cai magis de Deo quam
Deo credam?
Let God himself that made heaven, teach me the mystery of heaven, not man who
had not understanding to know himself. Whom shall I believe concerning God,
rather then God himself? Oros. hist. lib. 6. cap. 1. Ab ipso audias, ipsique
Deo credas quod verum velis scire de Deo.
Hear of God himself, says Orosius, and believe God himself as touching
that truth which thou would know concerning GOD. Therefore the Prophet here
being to give instruction concerning the way to come to God, and to find rest
with him, propounds nothing of himself, but delivers his lesson from the
Lord, Thus says the Lord. And this is the only certain direction of true
faith, and of the worship of God. It stands not in the dictates of men, nor
in the definitions of Councels, nor in the revelations of Angels, but the
final resolution of all Controversies of Religion must be into this issue,
Thus says the Lord. August. Ep. 48. Audi, Dicit Dominus; non, dicit Donat^s,
aut Rogatus, aut Vincentius, aut Hilarious, aut Augustinus, sed dicit Deminus
Hear, thus says the Lord, says Austin: not, thus says Donatus, or Rogatus,
or Vincentius, or Hilary, or Austin, but, thus says the Lord. This only is it
that can truly stablish the conscience of man. Other things may breed maze
and astonishment, and may draw the benumbed fancy to the following of this, or
that; but the true life and sense of Religion arises only from this ground,
Thus says the Lord. Which notwithstanding to the Papists is an importable
yoke, who have transcribed the authority of Religion to mortal men, to
Doctors, and Fathers, and Councels, and cry the names of these aloud, but
cannot endure to be required for proof of their doctrine, Thus says the Lord.
Albeit neither do they plead those names as persuaded that their Religion can
stand either by Fathers or Councels, but only to withdraw their followers from
the conscience and due regard of, Thus says the Lord; that having once pulled
them from thence, they may the more easily bring them by degrees to themselves
and their Church, to the decrees and decretals of their Popes and Bishops, to
tie their opinion and conscience of Religion wholly upon them. Surely
Bellarmine, when for the proof of their seven Sacraments he could bring no
witnesse^ either of Councels or Fathers for more then 12. hundred years after
Christ, bringing at last for proof thereof the Council of Trent, to make good
this proof even with one breath blows the other all away. ^. Contra Papae
autoritat^^ ^^^ August^us, nec Hicronymus nec aliquis Doctorum suam sententia
d^fendit.
The validity and force, says he, of all the ol^ Councels, and of all
doctrines of faith depends of the authority of the Church that now is. Let
the Fathers all say what they will, what is that to the purpose? It is the
Church now in being (we know what Church they mean) that must strike the
stroke in all. Accordingly is it written in the Gloss of their Canon law. k
neither Austin, nor Ierom nor any of the Doctors may maintain his opinion
against the authority of the Pope: And in the law it self, Did. 19. Si
Romanorum. Romanorum ^ont^ficum decreto caeteror^m opuscula tract^^orum
^ppr^bantur vel repr^bantur.
The works of other writers are allowed or rejected according to the Popes
decree. Yea further, they have thus whispered one to another in their Index
Expurgatorius, though not thinking that we should hear them; Index Expurgat. ^
In the old Catholic Writers we bear with very many errors, we extenuate
them, we excuse them, by some devised shift we deny them, or feign some
convenient meaning of them when they are opposed to us in disputations or in
contentions, or controversies with our adversaries. What are those very many
errors which they say they bear with in the Fathers, but the doctrines and
assertions of our Religion, which amidst their outcries and clamours that our
Religion was not heard of before Luthers time, they themselves confess to be
contained and taught in the writings of the Fathers, but forsooth the Fathers
erred in saying as we say? Which yet because they hold it would be some
impeachment to their cause always to profess, therefore, according to the
rules of their Index, they put them off with cunning and colorable answers and
exceptions (albeit sometimes also with very lewd and apparent mockeries) when
we bring their testimonies most express and pregnant, and clear against them.
We allege Tertullian affirming the Emperor to be See the place after, Sect.
11.
inferior to none but God. They tell us that Tertullian was Renat. Laurent.
annot. in Tertul. Apolog cap. 30. Noluit offendere Genti^es. Caesaream
maiestatem secundam hac de causa nominat.
loath to offend the Pagans, and therefore did so speak, as if in good earnest
he had not so spoken. We bring Agatho Bishop of Rome professing himself in
express words, Agath. Epist. Synod. 6 Constantinop. act. 4 Pro obedientia
quam debuimus; vt personas, etc. Pro obedientiae satisfactione inqu^rere;
Nostra pusillitas quod ^ussum est obsequenter impleuit
to owe obedience to the Emperor, to be careful to give satisfaction of his
obedience, to perform obediently the Emperors commandment. Doct. BISHOP
forsooth answers, that Reproof, p. 170. 181.
these are but common and usual words of courtesy, uttered of custom and
courtesy in all Countries. We allege Chrysostom, saying that Chrysostom. Op
impers. in Mat. hom. 11. Haec vasa sanctificata in quibus non est verum corpus
Christi, sed mysteri^m corporis e^us cont^etur.
in the sacred vessels there is not the very true body of Christ, but the
mystery of his body. Bellarmine answers, that Bellarm. de Sacram. Euchar. c.
^2. Ab aliquo Beregarij discipulo inserta illi homiliae esse videntur.
these words seem to be foisted in by some Scholar of Berengarius; whereas
they themselves have always so printed the words unto us out of their own
Libraries: and although they say in general, that Edit. venet. ^584. in marg.
^oci. Haec in quibu^da exemplaribus desunt.
the words are wanting in some copies, yet lest they should be taken in a lie,
do not name in particular any one copy where they are otherwise, neither has
any such thing been observed by them, who did formerly publish the same work.
As for that which he adds, that Bellarm. vt supra. Ad rem non faciunt, nam
loquebatur author homiliae devasis sacris templi Salomonis
the words are nothing to the purpose, because they are spoken of the vessels
of the Temple of Solomon, which Balthazar abused, and was therefore punished:
it is a very senseless and wilful shift, because he himself confesses, that
Ibid. In illis vasis non solum non crat verum corpus Domini sed nec mysterium
eius.
in those vessels there was no mystery of Christ's body at all; because
Chrysostom says, not those vessels but these, nor wherein was, but wherein is
contained, speaking in the present tense, as of the vessels which they had then
in use; because it had been ridiculous to warn his hearers of a danger in
abusing the vessels of the Temple of Jerusalem, which they had not to abuse;
and does no otherwise speak of Balthazar, but as bringing a particular example
for proof of a general Doctrine: that by the punishment of Balthazar for
abusing the vessels of the Temple of Jerusalem, we are taught how dangerous it
is profanely to defile vessels of sacred use, as namely the vessels of our
Christian Churches, wherein yet is not the very body of Christ, but only the
mystery of his body. But to strengthen this assertion of Chrysostom we
allege Gelasius Bishop of Rome affirming that ^
the Sacraments which we receive of the body and blood of Christ, are a divine
thing, and we are thereby made partakers of the divine nature, and yet (says
he) there cease not to be the substance or nature of Bread and Wine. Which
words as they astonished Chemnic. in Exam. Council. Trident. de Transubstant.
Cardinal Contarenus in the conference at Ratisbone, so Bellarmine also is
amazed at them; and though he took upon him Bellarm. de Sacram. Euchar. cap.
27.
to answer them as well as he could, yet durst not set them down. The matter
is plain by the testimony of a Bishop of Rome, that there cease not in the
Sacrament to be the substance or nature of Bread and Wine. And what will they
say to it? Bellarm. ibid Melch. Canus loc. com. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Sometimes forsooth the Author of the book was not Gelasius Bishop of Rome,
but another Gelasius Bishop of Cesarea in Palestina, who was more ancient then
he of Rome. And yet Bibhoth. sanct. patrum Tom 4. Pa^is. ^^89.
they themselves as they have found it, so have always printed it, and do
under the name of Gelasius Bishop of Rome: and the Tract being written in
Latin is not likely to be written by Gelasius Bishop of Cesarea, who being of
the Greek Church did undoubtedly write what he wrote in the Greek tongue.
But it has received credit as the work of a renowned Author of that name,
and in all likelihood of Gelasius Bishop of Rome, by Joan. 1. Epist. aduer.
Eutychian. Biblioth sanct. Pat. tom. 4. 1589.
being cyted by a Bishop of Rome, John the first; who was the fourth that
succeeded after the same Gelasius. Therefore Gregory de Valentia seeing little
boot in that answer, sticks not to say both concerning Theodoret and
Gelasius, that Greg. de Val. de Transubst. cap. 8. Antequa^ quaestio illa de
transubstantiatione in Ecclesia palam agitaretur, minime mirum est si ^nus aut
al^er, aut etiam aliqui ex vetcribus minus considerate and recte hac dear
senserint and scripserint.
before the question of transubstantiation was debated in the Church, it is no
maruelif one or some of the ancient Writers did both think and write
unadvisedly and amiss concerning this matter; And again, If Idem, Apolog. de
Idolol. l 3. c. 5. Si maxim Gelasius tanquam Dector aliquis nihil vt Pontifex
determinans, and vnus item aut alter ex Patr bus hac ^^re lapsus errore
fuisset, ^abemus c^rte nubem aliorum testium.
Gelasius as a private Doctor, not as Pope to determine; and some one or other
of the Fathers have erred herein, yet we have for us a cloud of witnesses. So
then Gelasius in private said the same that we do, and was minded as we are,
that there cease not in the Sacrament to be the substance of Bread and Wine;
but he erred therein: and if he had set him down in his Consistory Chair (O
absurd mockery) he would have been of another spirit, and have spoken as the
Papists speak, whereas notwithstanding he wrote these words in a dogmaticall
tract against the two Heresies of Nestorius and Eutyches, and therefore must be
taken definitiuely to resolve against that which is now taught in the Church of
Rome. Not so, says Doct. Bishop, for though the worst come to the worst, yet
Doct. Bishop Reproof, p. ^62.
the sentence may have a good meaning, and may stand well with our doctrine:
for the nature of bread does not wholly cease to be in the Sacrament, because
the form, savor, and taste of bread do still remain, though the whole inward
substance be turned into the body of Christ. Mark this well, I pray you; there
cease not to be the substance of bread; that is, there cease not to be the
accidents of bread, the form, savor and taste of bread: there cease not to
be the substance of bread; that is, the whole substance of bread is turned into
the body of Christ. May we not think that they imagine themselves to have to
do with beasts, and not with men, that will seek to put them off with such
answers and expositions, as these are? Again we allege Epiphanius, affirming
it Epiphan. ^^. ad Joan. Hierosolom Cum hoc vidissem (velum pendens habens
imaginem quasi Christi vel sancti cuiusdam) in Ecclesia Christi contra
authoritatem scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem, scidi illud, etc. Eiusmodi
vela quae contra religionem nostram veniunt.
to be against Christian Religion to have in Churches the Images of Christ and
his Saints, and showing that he himself coming into a Church, and finding a
veyle wherein such an Image was painted, did cut the veyle in pieces. Alphonsus
de Castro tells us, that Alphons. de Cast. lib. 8. tit. Imago. Res non crat
adeo aperta nec deilla re quod sciam vnquam Ecclesia illo tempore definierat.
this matter of Images was not then so clear, neither had the Church defined
any thing thereof: but now Gregor. de Valent. Apol. de idololat. l 2. c. 7. Si
maxim fact^m ill^d Epiphanij explocatum esset, nonne plus ponderis apud nos
Ecclesiae totius authoritas atque vsus habere debet?
the authority of the Church, says the Valentian Jesuit, is to be of more
weight with us then the authority of Epiphanius. Yet we bring the Council of
Eliberis, saying, Council. Eliber. ca. 36. Placuit in Ecclesia picturas esse non
debere, ne quod colitur aut adoratur ^^parietibus d^pingatur.
We will that there be no pictures in Churches, that that which is worshipped
and adored, be not painted upon the wall. Where Bellarm reciting diverse of his
fellows answers, and trusting to none of them, cutteth off the matter briefly
thus: Bellar. de imag. sanct. cap. 9. Quicquid concilium statuerit, etc. contra
nos tantum esse potest concilium 19. Episcoporum quod prouinciale fuit, minime
confirmatum, and in alijs decretis videtur crrasse.
Whatsoever that Council decreed, there can be against us only a Council of
nineteen Bishops, which was but Prouincial, and not confirmed, and seems in
other Decrees to have erred. We bring Hierom determining of the books of
Canonical Scripture as we do, and Hieron. prolog. galeat. Sapientia quae
vulgo Solomonis inscribitur, est Jesus filij Syrach liber, and Tobias, and
Judith, and Pastor non sunt in Canone.
excluding from the Canon the same that we exclude, the books of Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus, Tobie, Judith, etc. Melchior Canus turns him off in a word
thus; Melch. Can. loc. comm. l. 2. c. 11. Nec verum est in decernendis libris
Canonicis Ecclesiae regulam esse Hieronymum.
Hierome is no rule to the Church for the determining of the Canonical books;
whereas Hierome sets not down his own opinion only, but the judgment and
practice of the Church; Hieron. praef in lib. Solom. Judith and Tobiae and
Maccabaeorum libros legit quidem Ecclesia sed eas inter Canonicas scripturas
uon recipit:
The Church reads them, but yet does not receive them amongst the Canonical
Scriptures. Chrysostom lays upon the Virgin Mary some aspersion of Chrysostom.
in Mat. hom. 45. Considera tam matris quam frotrum importunitatem, etc.
Ambitione quadam and ostentatione commoti etc. Patet inani quadam gloria illos
commotos fuisse.
ambition, ostentation, and vain glory: whereby we show his judgment, that
the blessed Virgin was not without sin, but stood in need of her son to be
her Savior. The Inquisition of Venice has given him a check in the margent,
Edit. Venet. 1583. in marg. loci. Hic author excedit.
Here the author goes too far: and Pererius the Jesuit somewhat more
sharply; Perer. Chrysostomus and veritatis and pietatis terminos excessit.
Chrysostom passed the bounds of truth and piety. Of Austins doctrine and
judgment concerning original sin, Pighius doubted not to say, that it is
Pigh. Controu. de pecc. Orig page 7. b. Non solum quod certa non sit, immo quoth
certo falsa sit. and page 35. b. vides in quam absurda dicta Pelagij ratiuncu
la Augustinu^ desce^dere coegerit.
not only not certain, but certainly false, and that by a petite reason of
Pelagius he was driven to speak absurdly thereof. The same Austin in diverse
books against the Pelagians soundly delivers the doctrine of the
predestination and grace of God; but Osor. de iustit. l. 9. Nulla est in
scholis sententia neque maiore contentatione neque minore rationu^ praesidio
defensa, etc.
Osorius a Popish Bishop in a work written at large, purposely and professedly
disputes against him. And thus have they at their pleasure vilified and
disgraced all the ancient histories of the Church. Eeusebius is rejected by
Melchior Canus, as Melch. Can. loc. com. l. 11. c. 6. Ariana haereseos defensor
esse cognoscitur ex Synod. Nicen. 2.
a defendor of the Arrian heresy, and his history is branded and condemned for
Did. 15. Sancta Romana. Historia Eusebij Pamphili Apocrypha^
Apocryphal by their Canon law. Ruffinus is taxed by Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l.
2. cap. 13. Falsa expositio est, etc. Non recte Concilij sententiam Ruffin*
exposuit.
Bellarm. for expounding falsely the Council of Nice; and for reckoning the
Canonical Scriptures, as we do, according as he says, to the tradition of the
Fathers, is noted by Canus as Melch. Can. loc. com. l. 2. c. 11. Ruffinus, pace
lectoris dictum sit, Patrum traditiones ignorauit.
being ignorant of the tradition of the Fathers. Socrates is traduced by
Bellarmine also, as Bellar. de bon. oper. in part. l. 2. c. 15. Dic^ Socratem
non multum fidei mereri cum and Nouatianus and Aerianus fue^it. and de cult,
Sanct. c. 10. Dico fuisse Nouatianum neque testimoniu^ eius in dogmatibus
vllius esse momenti.
a Nouatian and Aerian heretic, worthy of little credit, and is noted by
him, as telling Idem de Clericis, cap. 20. Socrates l. 5. c 21. (...).
three manifest lies at once. Sozomen is likewise contemptuously rejected by
him as (...)d. Socrates and Sozomenus haeretici. S^zomem (...) S. Grego(...)
(...), (...) multa, ^^ quit, ment^tur.
an Heretic and a liar his History being censured by him out of Gregory as
full of lies. Theodoret is taxed for a party. Nestorian and Melch. Can. loc.
com. l. 11. c. 6. Illiusmodi errantium patroc^^a historiae ^eleuant and
authoritatem and fidem.
his defense of them, says Canus, impeacheth the authority and credit of his
Story. Nicephorus with Maldonatus Maldonat. praefat. in Luc. Nicephorus quantam
fidem mercat^r abalijs malim aestimari quam a me dici: mihi temper aud^^ior est
visus.
deserves like credit, and seems to him too presumptuous and bold. Thus
whereas they exclaim against our modest and just exceptions against the
Fathers, such as are taught and approved by the Fathers themselves, and by
which we subject them only to the word of God; they themselves are altogether
impudent in this behalf, using the Fathers as counters, to be somewhat when
they list, and when they list nothing; yet as ciphers to be of no use, but
only as they serve to add to them. Like guardians and tutors, so they dispose
of them as their wards and scholars, to speak when they bid them, or
otherwise to hold their peace; not hereby to yield authority to the word of
God, or to give place to, Thus says the Lord, but to give way to whatsoever
devises and traditions they themselves list to bring into the Church: yea, to
that desperate pass they are brought by the writings of the Fathers, as that
they see they cannot stand but by offering violence unto them. Therefore as the
old Heretics took upon them to be Iren. lib. 3. c. 1. Sicut quidam audent
dicere gloriantes se esse emendatores Apostolorum.
emendatores Apostolorum, the reformers of the Apostles; so do they take upon
them to be expurgatores and emendatores Patrum, the purgers and correctors of
the Fathers; altering and chopping and changing their works, putting in and
putting out, falsifying and corrupting most shamefully all, both their written
and printed books. In a word, like Alexander the great, what they cannot untie
they will cut, not with a knife, but with a sword or an Axe, and having
abandoned the conscience and use of, Thus says the Lord, they are at a pass
with all other authorities, and muniments of faith, saying with themselves,
Psalm. 2. 3.
Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us: Psalm.
12. 4.
With our tongues we will prevail, we are they that ought to speak, who is
Lord over us?

6 But for our direction in the right way, let us now hear what the Lord says;
where first we are to note, what he bids us to do for the finding of the
way; stand, behold, and ask for the way. Secondly, what mark he gives whereby
we are to take knowledge of the way; which consists in this, that he calls
it the old way, affirming the same to be the good way. As touching the first,
we know that the way faring man, coming to a place where there are many ways
and turnings, becomes at a stand. He will not go on at all adventure, but
staieth and looks about him; he coasteth the country, and casts with
himself which may be most likely to be the way; and for the more assurance
asks and enquireth of them of whom he can presume that he shall learn the
way. By which comparison the holy Ghost here instructs us what to do, when
we fall into question and doubt of our spiritual way: First, he wills us to
stand upon the ways, as to deliberate and devise, warning us in this behalf
to do nothing headlongly and rashly, but to consider earnestly and carefully,
what way we make choice of: For as in all things, so specially in Religion
precipitation and headlong wilfulness is greatly to be condemned. For religion
is a matter of greatest consequence; where to use the words of Tertullian,
Tertul de patient. Cuius iudicium in suos non in compede aut pileo vertitur sed
in aeternitate aut poenae aut salutis
the question is not of bondage or freedom, but of eternity, either of
punishment or salvation. And therefore here to deal at all adventure, and in
the cause of God, and hazard of souls health, to go on rashly and without
regard, and to follow a Religion without reason, argues a retchlesse and lewd
mind; which we may not wonder, if God severely revenge, as a matter of high
indignity to himself. For which cause we cannot doubt but that the indignation
and curse of God lies upon a number of our Recusants, who hand over head, and
without any due regard have embraced that damnable way, and have impiously
confederated themselves with the enemies of God, of their Prince and country,
inthralling themselves to Antichrist, the man of sin, the son of perdition,
and yielding themselves to be led by him to their own destruction; even by
him who in infinite pride has taken upon him, that Did. 40. Si Papa suae and
fratern salutis negligens, etc. Innumerabiles populos cateruatim secum ducit
primo mancipio gehennae cum ipso plagis multis in eternu^ vapulaturus, huius
culpas ishic redarguere praesumit mortalium nullus, etc.
though he led de with him innumerable souls to hell to perish with him for
ever, yet may no mortal man take upon him to reprove him. And this many do,
specially women of curiosity and singularity, desirous to seem somewhat by
being that, that others are not, and thinking the name of a Recusant to be a
trim name, because thereby there is a difference made betwixt them, and, as
they conceive, the vulgar sort of men, when in the mean time as touching
judgment and conscience, they have nothing to satisfy either others or
themselves why they do that which they do: which wantonness and pride of
opposition, justly deserves to be chastened by laws, and the rod of
correction is necessarily to be used, to stay the course of this wilful
folly; to cause such headlong persons to stand, and to bethink and advise
themselves of that they do.

7 For so does the Prophet teach us, not only to stand, but also to behold:
willing us thereby to use our eyes, that is, our judgment and understanding,
to esteem and consider of the ways that are before us. For albeit our own
understanding of it self, suffice not to inform us as touching the truth of
faith and religion toward God, yet our sight and judgment out of the notice
of some common and general principles avails so far, as that we are able
thereby to say, that this or that is not true Religion, because fasehood in
Religion commonly has somewhat, wherein, if we use our eyes, we may see the
Image of him that is the Author thereof. And so the case stands in Popery,
where amidst all their varnishes and colors, there are some things so gross,
so palpably absurd, as that a blind man with his fingers and by very touch may
discern, and feel the abominations of them. For their precepts and practice
of equivocation and mental evasion; their doctrine of the Popes power to
depose Kings and Princes, and to give license to their subjects contrary to
their sworn allegiance, to rise in a^mes against them, and either by violence
or treachery to kill them, and that with the merit of remission of sins and
eternal life; their assertion, Tho. Aquin. p. ^ q 80. art. 3. in corp. Eliam
si mus vel canis ^ostiam consecratam manduret, substant^a corporis Christ's non
desin^t esse sub speciebus, etc. Quidam dixerunt quod statim cum Sacramentum
tangitur a mure vel cane, desinit ibi esse corpus Ch^isti; quod derogat
veritati Sacramenti.
that Dogs and Mice, and Swine eating their consecrated Host, do eat into
their bowels the very body and blood of Christ; their abominable paradoxe,
Coster. Enchirid cap. 15. Sacerdos si fornicetur aut domi concubinam foueat,
tamet si graui sacrilegio s^se obstringat, gra^ius tamen peccat si contrah^t
matrimonium.
that it is more lawful for a Priest to commit fornication then to marry a
wife; Bellar. de Amiss^grat. and Stat. pecc. l. 2. c. 18. Non peccat.
Magistratus si m^r^t^cibus cer^um locum vrbis incolendum attribuat.
their defense of public and common Stews; their falling down to worship
stocks and stones, and to pray and offer to them; their Service and prayers in
a strange and unknown tongue; their maiming of the Sacrament by administering
it in one kind, contrary to the express institution and example of Christ in
the Gospel, and that with a Non obstante in the Council of Constance, Council.
Constant. Sess. 13. Lic et Christus post coenam instituerit and suis d^scipulis
administrauerit sub vtraque specie panis and vini hoc venerabile Sacramentum,
tamen hoc non obstante consuetudo quod a laicis tantummodo sub specie Panis
suscipiatur, habenda est pro lege, quam non licet reprobare, etc.
This notwithstanding, yet the custom of administering to the lay people, only
in the form of bread, shall be taken for a law; These, I say, and sundry other
of their doctrines and doings are such and so contrary to the common sense of
Christian piety, as that of them who have had occasion and means to take
notice of them, and yet persist and go forward in their evil way, we have
just occasion to conceive that which the Apostle says, that 2. Cor. 4. 4.
the God of this world has blinded their eyes, that the light of the glorious
Gospel of Jesus Christ should not shine unto them: And again, that Romans 1. 28.
God has given them over to a reprobate sense, to do the things that are not
convenient, and has set upon them a mark of that reprobate illusion, whereof
the same Apostle speaks, 2. These. 2. 10. 11.
Because they regarded not the love of the truth that they might be saved,
therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that they may believe lies, that
they may be damned, which believed not the truth, but took pleasure in
unrighteousness.

8 The next thing that is to be done, is to ask for the way. Now no man
doubts, but that it is expedient and necessary so to do, but the question
is, of whom we are to ask? Whom shall I ask that I may be sure to receive of
him certain and true answer, which is the way of eternal life? Let me go
through all the Religions and professions in the world, Protestants, Papists,
Brownists, Arians, Pelagians, every one will say of that that he himself
follows that it is the right way. Who is now the Judge amongst all these to
give us certain assurance and warrant, which is the way indeed? And whom
shall we think to be this Judge but God himself, who as he is the end
whereto we go, so is the only directour of the way whereby we are to come
unto him? But here the troubled mind asks again, How shall I come to ask
of God? how shall I hear his voice to receive answer from him? Let us take the
answer of this question from St. Hierome, who demanding, Hieron. in Ps. 86.
Dominus narrauit and quomodo narrauit? Non verbo sed Scriptura. In cuius
Scriptura? In populorum, etc. quae Scriptura populis omnibus legitur, hoc est,
vt omnes intelligant, etc. Principes Ecclesiae and princepes Christi non
scripserunt paucis sed vniuerso populo, etc. non vt pauci intelligerent sed vt
omnes.
How will the Lord show or declare? answers, Not by word or voice but in the
Scripture. In whose Scripture? Marry says he, In the Scripture of the people,
which he notes to be so called, because it is read unto all people, that is,
says he, so as that al may understand; because the Princes of Christ, that is,
the Apostles and Evangelists, did write not for a few, but for the whole
people, not that a few, but that all may understand. God then has given thee
his holy Scripture, and has attemperated the same to thy capacity and
understanding, that there thou may ask and receive answer of him, which
the way is wherein thou art to walk, that thou may obtain eternal life.
And hereof says Gregory Bishop of Rome (a far other man then are those
Vipers and Aspes that now are bred out of the Church of Rome.) Gregor. Moral.
l. 16. c. 16. Per Scripturam Deus loquitur omne quod vult.
By the Scripture God tells us all his will. Idem. Exposit. in 1. Reg. c. 3.
Quid cor and animam dei nisi sacram. eius Scripturam accipimus?
What do we understand, says he, by the heart and soul of God, but his holy
Scripture? as to give us to understand, that if we desire to come so near unto
God, as to have him pour forth his heart and soul unto us, we must expect and
look for the same in his holy Scriptures. And therefore is it that our Savior
Christ uses that exhortation, John 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they
are they that testify of me. Hereby does God perform the promise that of
old he made unto his people, ^sa. 30 21.
Thou shall hear a voice behind thee, saying This is the way, walk in the
same. Of which way the Prophet says further, Esaias. 35. 8.
There shall be a path and a way, and the way shall be called holy; the
polluted shall not pass by it, for God shall be with them (that is, with his
people that seek him) and walk in the way; and the fools (the simple) shall
not err, namely because Psalm. 19. 7.
the law of the Lord gives wisdom and understanding unto the simple, Pro. 1.
4.
and to a child knowledge and discretion. Very notable is that of Optatus, and
much to be marked in this behalf, when being at question with the Donatists,
whether it were lawful to rebaptize or not, he says thus, Optat. cont.
Parme. l. 5. Vos dicitis, Licet, nos dicimus, Non licet. Inter vestrum licet
and non licet nostrum nutant and re: migant animae populorum. Nemo vobis credat
nemo nobis omnes contentiosi homines sumus. Quaerendi sunt Iudices. Si
Christiani; de vtraque part dari non possunt, quia studijs veritas impeditur.
Deforis quaerendus est Iudex. Si Paganus, non potest nosse Christiana secreta.
Si Iudaeus, nimicus est Christiani baptismatis. Ergo in terris hac de re nullum
poterit reperiri iudicium. de ^^lo quaerendus est index, sed vtquid pulsa mus
ad calum cum habemus hi^ in Euangelio; testamentum inquam, etc. Ergo voluntas
eius sicut in testamento sic in Euan gelio inquiratur.
You say, it is lawful and we say, it is not lawful. Betwixt your yea and our
nay the souls of the people waver and stand in doubt: let no man believe us,
let no man believe you; we are all contentious men. We must enquire for Judges
betwixt us. If of Christians, they can be given of neither part of us, because
by part-taking the truth is hindered. We must look for one abroad. If a Pagan,
he cannot know the secret of Christian faith. If a Jew, he is an enemy of
Christian baptism. Therefore upon earth no judgment can be found hereof
(little did he think that the Pope in this case is to be the Judge) we must
require a Judge from heaven. But why, says he, do we knock at heaven, when we
have one here in the Gospel, even the Testament of Christ? As in his Will or
Testament, so in the Gospel let us require what his will is. Thus spoke
Optatus in a case all one with ours, and plainly teaches us, who it is that
must be the Judge, to end amongst us all Controversies concerning the right
way, even the Testament of Christ, the word of the Gospel, by which Christ
being in heaven still speaks unto us to give answer of that which we ask
of him. Now we know this offends and galleth the Church of Rome, and they
gnaw their tongues for anger at the hearing of it. As Origin says, Origin. in
Number. ho. ^^. Super omnia eis est tormentorum genera and super omnes paenas
siquem videant verbo Dei operam dare, scientiam d^uinae logis and mysteria
scripturarum intentis studijs perquirentem*
it is a torment to the Devils, to see a man given to the reading of the
Scriptures, so is it a torment to them to hear the people invited to the
Scriptures, and instructed there to ask of God concerning the way of life.
They repine, they wrestle, they cast in scruples and doubts, they do all that
may be done to discourage men from making use of that which God has given to
be the special means and help of our salvation. But the more they rage in
this behalf, so much the more let us acknowledge and accept the gift of God,
and endeavor that Ambros. in Heb. 5. Quomodo p^t^runt sensus nostri exercita^^
esse? Vtique ex vsit and frequent^ lectione sanctarum scripturarum, etc.
by use and often reading and meditation of Scriptures, as Ambrose teaches, we
may Heb. 5. 14.
have our wits exercised to discern betwixt good and evil; esteeming by right
reason, because the late Ballancer of Religion will have the matter to be
weighed Prudent. Balance of Religion in the Epistle.
by natural and right reason; that it is more safe for us to commit our selves
to that whereof there is no question, then to that whereof there is question,
and because al men are questionable, and do question one another; therefore to
repair to the Scriptures, and there to ask and seek the way, where no man
dare deny but that it is the voice of God, the voice of Jesus Christ, which by
his Prophets and Apostles, upon whom Ephe. 2. 20.
the household of God are built, gives answer to us. To which purpose we may
observe that which S. Austin says, August. in 1. Joan. Tr. 2. Contra
insid^osos ^rrores Deus voluit pon^re firmamentum in Sc^ipturis; Contra quas
nullus audet loqui qui q^^quo modo se vult videri Christianum.
Against deceitful errors God would set us a Fortress or Bulwark in the
holy Scriptures, against which no man dare speak which will in any sort be
taken for a Christian man. And of the use of these Scriptures, Gregory Bishop
of Rome tells us thus: Gregor. in Cantic. cap. 5 Sancti viri se consilijs
Scripturae ex toto addicunt, vt videlicet nihil agant nisi quod ex responso
^cripturarum audiunt; etc quae fluenta plenissima dicuntur, quia de
quibuscunque scruplis in Scripturis Consilium quaeritur, sine minoratione de
omnibus ad plenum inuenitu^.
Holy men do wholly addict themselves to the counsels of the Scripture, so as
that they do nothing but what they hear by answer of the Scriptures; which,
says he, are called full streams or rivers, because of whatsoever scruples or
doubts we ask counsel in the Scriptures; we find it to the full of all
things without exception. Understand it according to the words of Chrysostom,
Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. hom. 3. Omnia clarae sunt and manifesta ex Scripturis
diuinis: quecunque necessaria sunt, manifesta sunt.
All things are manifest and clear by the holy Scriptures; whatsoever things
are necessary, they are manifest. In a word, of the Scriptures S. Austin most
comfortably tells, that August. de vtil. credendi. cap. 6. Plane ita
modificata vt nemo inde haurire non possit quod sibi satis est, si modo ad
hauriendum deuote ac pie, vt vera religio poscit, accedat.
the doctrine thereof is so tempered, as that there is no man but may draw
from thence that that is sufficient for himself (though not sufficient for the
answering and determining of al manner questions and doubts, yet sufficient for
himself, for his own souls health) so that he come to draw with devotion and
piety, as true Religion requires he should do: for to such GOD himself is a
teacher, not only outwardly by his word, but also inwardly by his spirit,
enlightening their understanding, and guiding their hearts to conceive aright of
his way, giving them that answer, whereof Gregory speaks, when interpreting
Greg. Moral. l 35. c. 3. Homini d^um inte^rugare est in (...)pect* e^us
ne^c^entem (...)gnos^ere. R(...)mdore aut(...)Det ^st, est eum qu(...) been
h^n^l^ter nescientem cognouerit interms inspiratio^bus erudire.
our asking of God to be the acknowledgement of our own ignorance in the sight
of God, he expounds Gods answering to be his instructing of them by inward
inspirations, Leo in Natiu. Sermon. 5. Quis ad haec id^neus, nisi qui ^p. Dei and
docetur and regitur, dicente Aposto^^. Nos autem non spiritum huius mund.
accep^mus and^. can^nte etiam David; Beatus quem tu e^^dieris, domine, and de
lege tua docucris eum.
who do humbly acknowledge their own ignorance before him. And of this
teaching and answering Leo Bishop of Rome speaks, when having signified the
difficulty of holding the right way amongst so many opinions, and so many
falsehoods, carrying show and likelihood of truth, as has been before said, he
adds, Who is fit for this, but he that is both taught and guided by the
spirit of God, according to that which the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 2. 12.
We have not received the spirit of this world, but the spirit which is of
God, that we may know the things that are given unto us of God; and as David
says, Psalm. 94. 12.
Blessed is he whom thou instructest, O Lord, and teach him by thy law. Then
indeed are we truly taught, and then do we effectually and truly learn,
not when we only read the law, but when God himself teaches us by his law;
and thus he teaches all them who in the study of his law do faithfully and
devoutly ask of him. And by this inspired teaching God provides, as in the
time of Christ, so now also amidst all the illusions of Antichrist, amidst all
the seducements, and Heretics, and false teachers, amidst all the stumbling
blocks that Satan casts in the way, that Mat. 11. 19.
Wisdom notwithstanding is justified of her children, and they without fail
Acts 13. 48.
believe whom God has ordained unto eternal life. As for those Ios. 7. 21.
Achans, that in the midst of Israel are in love with Babylonish garments and
think themselves to be adorned and bewtified thereby, they shall we are the
shame and confusion thereof, they shall 2. Tim. 3. 13.
grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, till Esaias 8. 15.
they stumble and fall, and be broken in pieces, and perish, never to rise
again.

9 It follows now what the mark is whereby God here describes the right and
good way, which to that purpose he terms the old way. The old way, says
he, is the good way. Where we may justly deride the folly of the Papists, who
call their Religion the old way, the old Religion; whereas here we see the
faithful instructed as touching the old way, when as yet there was neither
Pope, nor Papist, nor Papistrie, neither were those superstitions known, which
they now so much commend as the only way to come to God. Certain it is
indeed, that the old way is the only right way, and what is most ancient is
most true; but in this they dally and much decei^e men, that they take the name
of the old way of that that has been some ages and generations before us;
whereas the reckoning of that that is to be termed old, ought to be from the
beginning: neither should that in this case be called old; against which, that
exception stands which our Savior uses in the Gospel, Mat. 19. 8.
from the beginning it was not so. Of which observation to make the better use,
we are to understand, that as from the beginning to the end there is but one
body of the Church; so there is also but Ephesians. 4. 4. 5.
one faith, 2. Cor. 4. ^. 3.
one and the same spirit of faith, as the Apostle teaches. Leo de pass. Dom.
Ser. 14. Vna fides iustificat vniuersorum temporum sanctos.
One faith, says Leo, justifies the Saints of all times; Idem in Not. Dom.
Sermon. 3. Fides qua viuimus nulla fuit aetate diu^^sa.
the faith whereby we live was not diverse in any age. August. de Not. and great.
c. 4^. Ea fides iustos sanauit antiquos quae sanat and nos.
The same faith, says Austin, saved the just of old that now saves us: Idem
in Joan Tract. 45. Tempora variata sunt, non fides. Mutetus est sonus venturus
est, and venit; eadem tamen fides vtrosque coniungit.
the tenses are diverse, they spoke of Christ in the future tense, Christ to
come, we speak of him in the preter tense, Christ already come; but there is
no difference of faith. They differed from us in outward signs and sacraments;
they had circumcision, and the cloud, and the red Sea, and Manna, and the
rock; we have in stead thereof Baptism and the Lords Supper: but August.
ibid. In diuersis signis cadem fides.
in this diversity of signs there is the same faith. Therefore of those
ancient faithful the same S. Austin says, that Idem Cont. 2 Epist. Pelag. l.
3. c. 4. Eadem sides and in illis qui nondum nomine sed reipsa suerunt
Christia^^, and in illis qui (...) s^nt sed (...) c. nt^r.
though not in name, yet in deed they were Christians, even as the Apostle
also says of them, that 1. Cor. 10. 2, 3
they were baptized, and did eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same
spiritual drink that we now do. This is a firm and a sure foundation; and
hereby we understand that the old way wherein we are to walk, the old faith
whereby we attain eternal life, is the same with the faith of the
Patriarchs, and Prophets, and righteous Fathers from the beginning of the
world. Let us then look upon them, and consider with our selves; Were they
Papists? Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, were they Papists? Had they
a Pope to go to for indulgences and Pardons to deliver their souls from
Purgatory? Or was any of them a Pope to give any such? Did they one call upon
another, and pray one to another when they were dead? Did Abraham pray to Abel,
or David to Abraham? Did they say, O Saint Abel pray for us, or O Saint Abraham
pray for us? Did they fall down before stocks and stones, before Idols or
Images to pray or offer to them? Did they go in pilgrimage one to another
relickes, to do devotion to them? Did they intend one to perform
satisfactions for others sins? Did they pray one by the blood of another, to
be brought to heaven, as by the old In feslo transl^t. S. Thom^^
Portesse the Papists prayed concerning Thomas Becket, and Reproose. page 109.
110.
Doctor Bishop lately has defended? A thousand abominations there are in?
Popery, whereof there is no show nor shadow amongst them; and yet shall Popery
be called The old way?

10 But let us come nearer, and take our beginning from the time of Christ
incarnate, of whom the Father gauetestimony from heaven* Matthew. 17. 5.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him; whence Cyprian
gathers, that we are Cyprian. l. 2. Ep. 3. Quod christus debeat solus audiri,
Pater de coelo cont^s^atur; and si solus Christus audundus est, non debemus
attendere quid abquis ante nos faciendum putauerit, sed quid qui ante omac; est
Christus prior fecerit.
to hear him only, and thereof infers: If Christ only be to be heard, we
are not to regard what any before us has thought fit to be done, but what
Christ did first, who is before all: thereby teaching us to forgo all latter
customs and traditions of men, and to rest upon that only which Christ has
taught. Now then let us here again think with our selves, was Christ a
Papist? Did he change the old faith of the Patriarchs and Fathers to bring in
Popery to be the Religion, that thenceforth should continue to the worlds end?
Surely Chry^^st. de sanct. and adorand. sp. Non locutus est ex seipso sed ex
Prophe (...). Non disc^ssit (...) di^i es(...) Proph^t^^.
Christ spoke not of himself, but out of the Law and the Prophets, says
Chrysostom; be swarued not from the Law and the Prophets. If the Religion
which Christ taught, be found in the Law and the Prophets, then surely Christ
was no Papist, because Popery is not found there. But for the further clearing
thereof Tertull de praescript. adu. haeret. Inprimus hoc prop^mo, ^num and
(...)tum aliquid a Christo institutum esse quod (...) ed^re omni ^odo deb^(...)
nat^on^s.
This I propound with Tertullian, that there was some one certain thing
instituted by Christ, which the nations by all means are to believe. It was
one only and certain not containing then any difference, or variety in it
self, not subject afterward to any alteration or change, but so to be still
believed and practiced as at the first it was delivered. This he committed to
his Apostles that they should reach it. They did so, and so did it as that
Ibid. Nec ipsi qui^quam ex arbitrio suo quod ^^ducer ent eleg^runt, sed
acceptam a Christo disciplinam fideliter nationibus adsignau^runt.
they made not choice of any thing at their own will, or upon their own
discretion, to bring in, says Tertullian; but the doctrine which they received
of Christ, they faithfully delivered unto the nations. And thus, Iren. l. 3. c.
1. Euangelium primo praeco^iauerunt, postea per voluntatem Dei in scripturis
nobis tradiderunt, fundamentum and columnam sidei nostrae futurum.
they first preached the Gospel, says Irenaeus, and afterward by the will of
God, delivered it unto us in the Scriptures, to be the foundation and pillar
of our faith. Yea and they so delivered it in the Scriptures as that Tertull.
vt supra. Nobis non est opus curiositate post Christum, nec inquisitione post
Euangelium; cum hoc credimus, nihil desideramus vltra credere; hoc enim prius
credimus non esse quod vltra credere debemus.
we need no curiosity after Christ, nor further enquiry after the Gospel,
says Tertullian again: for when we believe this, we desire to believe
nothing further; for this we believe, first that there is nothing further for
us to believe. Christ then taught all out of the Law and the Prophets. What
Christ taught, he delivered to his Apostles to be preached to all Nations, and
they preached it also, Rom, 16. 26.
by the Scriptures of the Prophets, Gregor. in Cant. cap. 5. Apostoli a
Prophetarum dictis fidem integram acceperunt.
receiving the whole faith, says Gregory, from the sayings of the Prophets.
What the Apostles preached, they have delivered to us in writing, and beside
that which they have written, there is nothing further for us to believe, and
this is the old way. Seek now here for Popery, and where is it? Look
through the Gospels; turn over the Epistles; where is the Pope? Where is his
Supremacy? where are his pardons? where is his Mass? where are his Images?
where is all the rest of that filth, which like the dung out of the stable of
Aug^us, so we have cast out of the Church? Will they say of all these things as
Bellarmine says most ridiculously of their vowing to Saints, to give reason
why it is not spoken of in the Scriptures; Bellarm. de cult. Sanct. c. 9. Cum
^^rib^rentur cript^rae s^^cte, non ^um coeperat vsus vouend^ Sanct^s.
When the scriptures were written, the custom of vowing to Saints was not yet
begun? Witless man, if there were no use or custom of it then, what do we
with it now? or what do we with any thing else that Christ by himself and his
Apostles did not teach? Ambros. de Virgin. lib. 3. Nos noua omnia quae Christus
non d^cuit, ^ure damnamus, etc. si Christus non docuit quod doc^mus, etiam nos
id detestabile iudicamus.
We justly condemn all new things, says Ambrose, which Christ has not
taught; if Christ has not taught the same that we teach, we judge it worthy to
be detested: and Hieron. in Psalm. 86. Vt exceptis Apostolis quodcu^q aliud
postea dic^tur, abscindatur; non habeat post^a authoritatem. Quamuis ergo
sunctus sit aliquis post Apostolos, quamuis disertus sit, non habet
authoritatem.
after the Apostles, says Hierome, whatsoever shall be said, is to be cut off;
it is afterward of no authority, be a man holy, be he learned, after the
Apostles he has no authority; namely, to teach any thing further or otherwise
then they have taught. But this trial the Church of Rome abhors, and as the
thief is ashamed when he is taken in his thef^: so are they here confounded
with shame, and stand as it were astonished, for that they see the Apostles and
Evangelists have said nothing at all for them. They would feign make show of
something; they catch here and snatch there, as the dog does the water at the
River Nilus; but can find nothing to stay upon, nothing for clearing of any
cause that they maintain against us.

11 And what if we come lower to the times after the Apostles, shall we find
cause there to take Popery for the old Religion? Of their maimed and
party-communion, their Jesuits and others confess, that Coster. Enchirid.
cap. 10. Diligenter notandum alterius speciei communionem non tam Episcoporum
mandato quam populi vsu and facto (conniuentibus tamen praesulihus) irrepsisse.
it crept in by custom and by the fact of the people, the Bishops not
commanding it, but winking at it: that Cassand. Consult. art. 22. Compertum
est ecclesiam Romanam mill amplius a Christo annis in solenni praesertim and
ordinaria huius sacramenti dispensatione, vtramque speciem omnibus ecclesiae
Christi membris exhibuisse.
for the space of a thousand years after Christ the Church of Rome did
administer ordinarily in both kinds; so as that Thomas Aquinas in his time
mentions the receiving in one kind, as accustomed but only Tho. Aquin. sum.
p. 3, q. 80. art. 12. in corp. In q^busdam ecclesiis obseruatur vt populo
sanguis sumendus non d^tur.
in some Churches; and we challenge them to show that ever the Communion of old
time was so administered in any Church throughout the whole world. They cannot
show any such thing; and shall we then think that the Religion which now
commands this mangling of the Sacrament of Christ to be the old religion?
Of transubstantiation Scotus one of their great schoolmen acknowledges, that
Bellarm. de sacram. Eucharist. lib. 3. c. 23. Scotus ait, ante Lateranense
concilium non suisse dogma sidei transubstantiationem.
before the Council of Lateran, almost twelve hundred years after Christ, it
was no Article of Faith: and of their other tricks and devices for the
upholding thereof, of accidents subsisting without any subject, and giving
nourishment and food to the body, and such like, the authors of their first
Index Expurgatorius, plainly say, that Index Expurgat. Belg. in Bertram. Quae
subtilissime and ^^rissime posterior aetas per sp. sanctum addidit.
latter time added them by the holy Ghost. If latter time have added th^se
things, then surely these things are no part of the old way. And whereas they
pretend the holy Ghost as the author hereof, we will return to them that which
Chrysostom says to the heretic, Chrysostom. de sanct adorand. sp. Vbi legisti
haec: Ex quo non legit haec scripta s^d ex seipso lo^^itur, manif^stu e^t quod
non habet sp. sanctum,
Where have thou read this? Because he reads not these things in the
scriptures, but speaks of himself, it is manifest that he has not the holy
Ghost. To let pass their seven sacraments mentioned before, their Popes
pardons, their Jubilees, their Church-treasury, their worshipping of Images,
with sundry other apparent and manifest novelties, do they find in the old
religion those preceps which they now deliver of deluding magistrates in their
examinations, by Equivocations and mental reseruations, and Euasions? Was it
thought lawful by that religion that a man might take a solemn oath, and then
play mock-holiday therewith, and salve by the thought of the mind, the false
answer of the tongue? Justinius Martyr tells us the practice of the old way,
far different from this Popish way, Justin. Mart. Apolog. Emori malumus
propter confessionem fidei quam aut mentiri aut inquisitores fallere: alioqui
in promptu erat vsurpare vulgatum illud: Iurata lingua est, animus iniuratus
est.
We had rather die for the confession of our faith, then either lie or beguile
them that do examine us; otherwise we might readily take up the common saying:
My tongue is sworn, my mind is unsworn. That which they would not take up,
is now taken up by Jesuits and Papists, and that is deemed lawful and right
which even the very light of nature taught men to condemn as wicked and
unlawful. In a word, where do they find in the old way that which before I
mentioned, that the Pope or Bishop of Rome, has a superiority over Emperors,
and Kings and Princes? that he has authority to depose them from their crowns
and dignities, and to release their subjects of the allegiance which they have
sworn unto them? that upon his excommunication, it is lawful for their
subjects to rebel against them, and to practice all hostility for the removing
of them? O most impudent and shameless men, carried now beyond all bounds of
modesty or honesty, who have written so many books of la^e for the defense of
this paradoxe? when as in all their books they do not, they cannot bring one
sentence or syllable of antiquity, no precept, no example for just fication
thereof, which notwithstanding they commend for Bellarm epist. ad Archi. presb.
Vnum ex praecipius fidei nostrae capitibus and rel^gion^s Catholicae
fundam^ntis.
a chief and special point of the Catholic and Christian faith. But this
point of Christian faith Tertullian knew not, when he affirmed in the name and
behalf of christians, that they held Tertul. aduer. Scapul. Colimus
imp^ratorem vt hominem a Deo secundum, solo De^ minorem.
the Emperor to be a man next unto God, and inferior to God only: that Idem.
Apologet. cap. 30. In cu^us solius potestate sunt: a quo s^cundi, p^st quem
primi ante omnes.
the Emperors were under the power of God only, being next unto God, and
after God the first before all men. Nor Optatus, who says that above Optat.
lib. 3. Super imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus qui fecit imperatorem.
the Emperor, there is none but God only that made the Emperor. Nor
Chrysostom, who says of the Emperor Theodosius; Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch.
hom. 2. Laesus est qui non habet parem vlliom super terram: summitas and caput
omnium super terram hominum.
He has no peer upon earth: he is the head and highest top of all men upon
the earth. Nor Cyril, who says to the same Emperor Theodosius, Cyril. Epist.
ad Theodos. praefixa lib. aduer. Julian. Vestrae serenitati nullus status
aequalis est.
There is no state equal to your Majesty; Idem de rect. fide ad Theod. Vos
estis and summarum dignitatum sontes and supra omnem eminentiam.
you are the fountain of the highest dignities and above all eminency of men.
Nor Gregory Bishop of Rome, who acknowledges to Mauricius the Emperor, that
Gregor lib. 2. Epist. 61. Potestas super omnes hom^nes dominorum meorum pietati
coelitus data.
to him was given power from heaven over all men. Nor Agapetus a Deacon of
Constantinople, who said to Justinian the Emperor; Agapet, Paraen. ad
Justinian. cap. 21. Non habet Rex in terris se quenquan altiorem.
The King has none Superior to him upon earth. Which sentence Anton. Meliss.
lib. 2. cap. 1
Antony the Abbot, surnamed Magnus, transcribed into his Sermons as Catholic
and sound: as did also Maxim. sentent. ser. 9.
Maximus an ancient Monk, but now the Index Expurgat. Hisp. in Biblioth.
sanct. Patrum. tom. 1. Deleantur illa verba: Non enim habet in terris se
quicquam excelsius.
Index Expurgatorius of Spain has condemned this sentence as vncatholicke,
and unsound; and commanded the same in the sermons of Antony to be henceforth
omitted and left out. But what? shall we think that all these were ignorant of
the Catholic faith? was the Bishop of Rome then the highest State upon earth,
and did not they understand so much? And if it were so, was there never a
Bellarmine, never a Matthaeus Tortus, never a serpens tortuosus that would
hiss and thrust out the sting, against these impugners of so maine a a point
of Christian belief? Or shall we not rather think these most shameless and
ungodly creatures that will thus wilfully go against so clear a stream of
antiquity; having nothing, nothing at all from thence to allege for defense
of that they say; nothing for any color thereof, but only that they bring some
speeches, touching generally the dignity of Priesthood, whereby they may as
well prove every hedge-priest to be superior to the greatest Monarch in the
world, and the meanest Bishop in the world, to be equal to the Pope? Thus
whilst they still pretend and make show of the old way, they give us just
occasion, to say of them as Tertullian said of the old Romaness; Tertull.
Apologet. c. 6. Laudatis semper antiquitatem and noue de die viuitis.
Ye are still commending of antiquity, and are full of new devices from day to
day. But we take knowledge hereby of that Antichrist, of whom it was foretold
by the Apostle that he should 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
exalt himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: which
Saint Hierome expounds to consist in this, that Hieron. in Dan. c. 7.
Eleuatur supra omne quod dicitur Deus, cunctam religionem suae subijciens
potestati.
he shall subject all Religion to his own power; he shall make of Religion
what he list, even as the Pope does.

12 It remains now briefly to note what in duty concerns us when God has
made his way known unto us, and that is, to walk therein. For as it booteth
not to know the precepts of bodily health, if we put not in practice what we
know; so neither avails it to know the way of eternal life, if we only know
it, and be careless to walk accordingly. To walk, I say, both by preserving
integrity of faith, and by yielding conversation of life correspondent and
agreeable to our faith* because the way does not only teach us true faith, but
also a virtuous and godly life. Here it is for us to learn wisdom. If to know
the way were sufficient to eternal life, how many would obtain salvation, who
now go headlong to destruction? To behold the kingdom of God a far off, as
Moses did the land of Canaan, whose heart does it no^ move and enamor with the
desire of it? in whom does it not breed a will to know the way to come unto it?
But to walk in this way and to continue therein, to undergo the yoke of
Christ, to deny our selves and to mortify the desires of the flesh, and of the
world; to fight against sin that fights against us, and in a word to follow
the example of Jesus Christ, and as we have received him so to walk in him;
these are things so vncouch, so strange and cross to our nature and will, as
that many rather then they will thus do, do frustrate all their knowledge,
and are content to betray their own salvation. Bernard. in Cant. ser. 21. Quam
pauci post te, o Domine Jesus ire volunt, cum tamen ad te peruenire n^mo sit qui
nolit, scientibus cunctis quia in dextera tua delectationes vsque in finem,
etc. Ex his erat ille qui dicebat, Moriatur anima mea morte iustorum, etc.
Mortem spiritualium optant sibi etiam carnales, quorum tamen vitam abhorrent,
scientes pretiosam mortem esse sanctorum.
How few are there, O Lord Jesus, that will follow thee, says Bernard, whereas
there is no man but is desirous to come unto thee, all men knowing that at thy
right hand there are pleasures for evermore? Such a one was Balaam, says he,
who said, Let my soul dye the death of the righteous, and let my latter end
be like unto his. And thus carnal men desire to themselves the death of them
that are spiritual, because they know that precious in the sight of the Lord
is the death of his Saints; but in the mean time, they abhor and shun
their kind of life. How many are there, that can like well to yield unto God
all external acts of devotion, but so that he will give them the liberty of
their inward affections? How many can be content to admit the faith of Christ,
so that they may be required no works, or at least no other works then they
please themselves? How many are glad to embrace Christ as Jesus to save them,
who like not to have him urged upon them as their Lord to govern them? But
Christ cannot in any wise brook this dismembring of himself. The true mother
could not endure to hear of the dividing of her child. If Christ be truly
conceived and borne in us, we cannot yield to that dividing, of him but will
receive him whole. If we will needs divide our selves, to God by profession, to
the Devil by action; to Christ by faith, to our selves* surely God because he
cannot be content with half, will leave the devil to take all. Let us not be
like the Philistines, who 1. Sam. 5. 2.
took the ark of God, and set it up by Dagon their idol God. August. in
Psalm. 77. Qui sic su^c^p^unt testamentum Dei vt veter^ vanitate non se exuant,
similes sunt hostibus populi eius, qui captiuatam arcam testamenti iuxta sua
idola pos^erunt,
So do they, says Austin, who so receive the Testament of God, as that they
strip not themselves of their former vanity. So do they that take the faith of
Christ, and set it with the idols of their own corrupt and sinful lusts. Let
us not be like the Jews Mat. 27. 34. Vulg.
who gave Wine indeed to Christ but mingled with Gall. Origin. in Mat. tract.
35. Quanticunque secundum doctrinam quidem occlesiasticam sapiunt a^i^unt autem
male, dant e^ viru ^ bibere f^lle permixtam.
So do they, says Origin, who are minded rightly according to the doctrine of
the Church, but do live amiss. Let us not be like Matthew. 21. 19.
the Figtree in the Gospel, which had leaves only and no fruit; that tree we
know was cursed by our Sa^iour Christ, and withered soon way. This befell not
for the trees sake, but in the tree Christ would teach us what we are to
expect, if we yield leaves without fruit, if we have shadow and show only
without substance; if we labor only to know the way, and make no conscience
to walk in it. Luke 12. 47.
The servant that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten
with many stripes; Iam. 4. 17.
and he that knows what is good, and does it not, to him it is sin. God
direct us the right way to come unto him, that by understanding we may know
him: and by obedience, may serve him, and may so pass the course of this
transitory life, as that the end thereof may be to rest with him in everlasting
peace and bliss, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 5. line 7. for in sin, read by sin. p. 19. l. 9. for not these
vessels but these. r. not, those vessels, but, these. p. 41. l. 18. for
seducements and Heretics. r. seducements of Heretics. p. 26. l. 11. for like
credit. r little credit. p. 29. l. 2. for devise. r. advise. p. 26. l. 8. for
party. Nestorian. r. party-Nestorian. Ibid. l 21. for yet, r. yea.


