FOUR Several Treatises of M. TVLLIVS CICERO: Conteyninge his most learned
and Eloquente Discourses of Frendshippe: Oldage: Paradoxes: and Scipio his
Dream.

All turned out of Latin into English, by Thomas Newton.

Imprinted at London in Fleetestreete near to S. Dunstanes Church, by Tho.
Marshe.

Cum Priuilegio.

1577.

To the Right Honorable, his very good Lord, Frau^cis Earl of Bedford, Lord
Russell, of the Noble order of the Garter Knight, and one of her Majesty's
most Honorable priuye Counsel: Tho. Nevvton wishes the fernent zeal of
God, with increase of much Honor.
EIghte years ago (Right Honorable) some part of these my poor Labors
escaped my hands, and rashly (by peecemeale) passed the Printers Press, not
without some blemishes and Eyesores: which, as my meaning was then to have
repolished and brought into order, so the poastinge speed and shufling up of
the same, without my presence, consent, and knowledge, quight defeated my
purpose, and dashed my determination. But since things passed be irreuocable,
I have thought good (upon request) to take that direct course in the second
edition thereof, which seemed best to breed the Readers profit, and soonest to
salve mine own credit. And thereupon have I pulled all asunder again, and
adventured the same anew, adding thereunto one Book more the^ before I had
done, because ye whole Work being by that means fully supplied, should
come forth uniform, and in one manner of Style and order. Which being now
thoroughly finished, I humbly present and offer unto your good L. not a whitte
doubting of your honorable acceptaunce, if not for any workemanshippe of mine,
which is (God knows) very rude and unsavory, yet for noble Cicero his own
sake, the Author and first writer hereof: whose only name (much more his
learned works) you have (as they are well worthy) in reverent estimation. For
which very cause, I deemed no worthier Counsay loure could be found to defend
and protect so noble a Senator, then your H. whom in the watchful cares of the
Common wealth, profounde VVisdome, grave advise, and politic government, he
so nearly and liuelye resembles. My part of travail in the Interpretation of
whose Sayings, I humbly submit unto your Honorable censure, beseechinge God to
continue and increase his blessings spiritual and temporal upon you, your
honorable Lady, and Children, to the advancement and setting forth of his
glory, the weal of this your Country, and to your own joy and consolation.

From Butley in Chesshyre the. 4. of May. 1577. Your good L. wholly at
commandment, Thomas Newton.

The Book of Freendshippe. Otherwise entitled, Laelius: written dialoguewise
by Marcus Tullius Cicero, unto his very freende T. Pomponius Atticus.
The Preface.
QVINTVS Mutius Scaeuola Augur was wont promptlye and pleasauntly to report
many things of Caius Laelius his father in law, and doubted not in all his
talk to term him a wiseman. And I, as soon as ever I entered into man's state,
was in such sort by my father put to Scaeuola, that as nere as I might or
could, I should not one whit step aside from the old man's sleeue. And
therefore I diligently noted and committed to memory many reasons, wisely by
him discoursed, and many things brieflye and aptly by him spoken, and sought
by his wisdom to become the better learned. After that he was dead, I got me
to P. Scaeuola, whom alone I dare boldlye call (for wit and skille) the
oddestman of our City. But of him we shall speak more at an other time. Now
do I return to Scaeuola Augur.

Among his many other discourses of sundry matters, I do namely remember, yt be
(sitting at home in his half round Chair as his common wont was to do) when
as I, and a very few of his Famyliers were present, fell into that talk,
which as then was almost common in many men's mouths. For as I think
(freende Atticus) you remember well enough, and much the rather, because you
were very famylier with P. Sulpitius, what a wondering and moan there was of
all men when as he beeinge Tribune for the Commons, was fallen at deadlye
variaunce, with Q. Pompeius, being at that time Consul: with whom aforetime
he had lived most freendlye and louinglye. At that very time therefore
Scaeuola entringe into talk about the same, declared unto us the Speech that
Laelius had with him, and his other Son in Law C. Fannius, the Son of
Marcus, a sewe Days after the Death of Aphricanus, touching Freendeshyppe.
The chief points of which his Discourse, I faythfullye committed to memory,
and have in this Book set down after mine own pha^sie and discretion. For I
have introduced them as it were speakinge one to an other, that these terms
(Quoth I) and (Quoth he) should not be to often repeated. And for this
purpose have I done it, because the Treatise might seem to be had, as it
were of persons present even before your faces.

And forasmuch (freende Atticus) as you have often times been in hand with me,
to pen some pretty Discourse of Freendshippe, I deemed the same matter to be
a thing both worthy the knowledge of all men, and also the Familiarity that is
between us. I have done it therefore at thy request, willinglye, to the end
I might benefit many.

But as my Treatise, entitled Cato Mayor (which is written to thee of Oldage)
I introduced Cato an aged man (...) the elder.
reasoning thereof (because I judged no man fitter to speak of that age, then
he, who had both been a very long time an Book of Oldage.
oldman, and also in that his oldage had flourished above others) so now also
forasmuch as we have heard of our elders, what notable familiarity was between
C. Laelius, and P. Scipio, I have deemed Laelius a very fit person, to
discourse upon those points of Freendship, which my A Pair of perfect and
faithful friends
master Scuola remembered were discussed by him.

And certainelye this kind of talk, set out by the Authority of ancient and
the same right honorable personages, The wise words of noble and annciente
persons more regarded and marked then the speeches of others.
seems (I know not how) to carry with it more countenance and grauitye. And
therefore I myself readinge mine own works, am sometime in that case, that I
think Cato tells the tale, and not myself.

But as I then being old did write of Oldage to an old man: so in this book,
as a most faithful friend I have written to my very fre^d concerning Friendship.
The^, did Cato reason the matter, who was ye oldest man almost, and the wisest
in those days. Now, does Laelius, a man both wise (for so was he accoumpted)
and in ye nobleness of frendshippe peerless, utter his opinion of Friendship.
I would that for a while you should not think upon me, but suppose that
Laelius himself speaks. C. Fannius and Q. Mutius come to their father in
law, after the death of Aphricanus. They speak first: Laelius makes
answer: whose whole discourse is of Friendship, which thou thy self in reading
shall thoroughly understand.

FANNIVS. Your words be true, Laelius. For neither better, or nobler has there
benanye then Aphricanus. But you must think that all men have east their eyes
upon you, and that you only, they call and repute wise. This title was
attributed not long ago to M. Cato. We know yt L. Acilius in our forefathers
days was called wise: but either of them in a ^ere manner. Acilius, because he
was taken for a man skilful in the Civil Law: Cato, (because he was of great
experience, and because many things were reported to be by him boche in the
Senate, and also in the place of Pleas, and Judgments, either wisely
foreseen, or stoutly achieved, or wittely answered) purchased thereby now
in his Oldage, as it were, a Surname, to be called wise. But you, they call
wise after an other sort, not only by nature, and manners, but also by study
and learning: and that not after the common peoples accoumpt, but as the
learned sort are wont to call one wise, even such a one, as in all the rest
of Greece is not the like. For they that narowly rippe up these matters, do
not Seven sages of Greece.
reckon them in the number of wisemen who are called the Seven wise sages, In
deed, we have heard of one at Athens, Socrates only adjudged wise.
and such an one as by Apollo his Oracle, was adjudged the wisest man in ye
world. This wisdom men think to be in you, yt you accou^pt al yt, which is
your The true rycheste are the gifts of he mind
own, to be ledged win you, and that you think al worldly haps inferior to
virtue. And for this cause (I believe) they ask me and Scaeuola here also,
after what sort you take Aphricanus death: and the rather because these last
Nones, when we came into D. Brutus Augurs gardein (as ye usage is) to talk and
reason of matters, you were not thereat, who were always before, wont to supply
yt day and that charge most diligently.


SCAE. In deed Laelius, many do ask yt question, as Fa^nius has already
declared. But I shape to them this answer, yt I well perceive you did moderatly
bear the sorrow which you conceived for ye death of so noble a Gentleman, and
so loving a fre^d: and that you could not chose but be somewhat perplexed in
mind: and yt of your natural cleme^cte, you could not otherwise do.

And as concerning your abse^ce from our company these Nones, I laid for your
excuse, yt sickness, and not sorrow was the cause thereof.


LAE. You say very well Scaeuola. and truly. For neither ought I for any loss
of mine own, to be wtdrawen from executing yt charge (which so long as I was in
health I always performed) neither do I think yt any such chance can happen
Consta^cy.
to a constant man, whereby should ensue any intermission of duty.

And as for you Fannius, who say that the world does ascribe so much unto me as
I neither agnize nor require, you do therein frendlye. But me thinckes you
judge not rightly of Cato: for either no Cato a wise man
man (which I rather believe) or if any were, certes he was a wiseman. For (to
pass over all other things untouched) how took he the death of his son? I
remember Paulus, and I have seen Caius. But these may not seem to be
compared to the worthy and noble Cato.

And therefore beware how you prefer any before Cato, no, not him, whom
Apollo (as you say) adjudged ye wisest: for of this man, his deeds, and of
that other, his sayings are commended.

But now (to answer you both at once) as concerning mine own self, thus
stands the case. If I should flatly deny, that I am nothing at al grieved for
the loss of Scipio, how well I should do therein, let wisemen judge: but
truly, I should tell you a stout lie. For I am Death of friends grievous.
plunged in heaviness, being bereft of such a friend, as (I think) never
shall be the like, and as I can well approve, never has any been. But I need
no Physic. I comfort my self, and chieflye with this kind of comfort, that I
am not in yt To be over sorovvful for the death of them that dye well, is to
repyne at their vvelfare and better state.
error, wherewith the more sort of men at the death of their friends be commonly
encombred. For I think that no manner of hurt is happened unto Scipio: mine
is ye harm, if any be. And for a man to pine away with sorrow for his own losses,
is not the propertye of one yt loves his friend, but of one rather that loves
himself. As for him, who can deny that he is not in blessed plight and estate?
For, unless he would have wished to have lived here for ever (which thing
surely was most far from his meaning) what thing has he not obtained that
was requisite and lawful for a man to wish? Who presentlye at his entrance
into man's state, far surmounted with his singular virtues, that great hope
which the citizens had already conceived of him being yet a child. Who never
sued for the Consulship, and yet was twice made Consul: first, before his time:
secondely, When he was but 22. years of age.
in respect of himself, in due and convenient time, but in respect of ye
common wealth almost to late. Who by subuerting two Cities, most bitter and
deadly enemies to this Empire, not only eased us from broiles Carthage and
Numantia.
present, but also rid us from wars to come. What shall I say of his most
courteous manners? of his natural zeal toward his mother? of his liberality
toward his sisters, of his bou^tie toward his friends, of his upright dealing
toward al men? These things be well known unto you. And how entierlye
beloved he was of all the Cittye, was testified by yt moan yt was made at his
funerals. What therefore could the having of a few years more, have profited
him? For oldage, although it be not co^bersome (as I remember Cato a year
before his death Oldage.
discoursed with me and Scipio) yet it takes a way that gallantise, wherein
Scipio as then was Wherefore his life was such, either through Fortune or
glory, yt nothing could be theru^to added more. And his quick departure quight
took away, al pain or sense of Death: of which kind of dying, it is an hard
point, to determine any certeinty. What men do judge, you know. Notwithstanding,
this may I safe lie say, yt among all the famous and joyful days, which P.
Scipio in his life time saw, yt day of al other was ye noblest, when as anon
after the breaking up of ye. Senate, Scipio brought home from the Senate house
honorablye.
the day before he departed this life, he was honorably brought home in the
evening, by the Lords of the counsel, by yt League friends of the Romans, and
by yt Latins: so yt from so honorable a step of dignity, he seemed rather
to have mounted up to heaven, the^ to have gone down to hell. For I cannot in
any wise agree with the^ in opinion, which of late brought these matters into
question, yt the souls died with the bodies: and that death played swoopestake
of al together. I make more account then so, of the aucthority of ancient
persons Immortality of the soul.
in thold time, and of our Elders, which appointed such reverent laws for ye
^ead: which thing (doubtless) they would not have done, if they had thought yt
nothing had concerned the^: and of the^ which dwelled in this land, and
instructed great Greece (which then flourished, but now is quight destroyed (with
their good lesso^s, and precepts: and of him, yt was by Apollo his Oracle demed
the wisest man alive, who did not affirm now one thing, and now another (as
many do) but continued always in one Opinion, that men's souls were
divine, and that as soon as they be departed out of the body, the minds of
every good and just man have a very ready and spedy passage into heaven. Of
which opinion also Scipio was: who as though he should by inspiration foretell
a thing, a very few days before his death (when both Philus and Manilius and
diverse other were present, and when you your self, Scaeuola, communed with
me) discoursed three whole Immortality of the soul.
days together of the common wealth: ye last knitting up of al which
discourse, was in a manner concerning the immortality of the soul: all which
(he said) he heard in his sleep by vysion of Aphricanus. If this be true,
that the Soul of every worthy wighte, at the time of death does easily mount
into heaven, as being delivered out of yt prison, and Gieues of the bodies:
whom shall we think, had an easier passage to God, then Scipio? Wherefore to
be sorye at this his good hap, I fear, were rather the part of an envious,
then of a frendlye person. On the other side, if I were doubtful of this, that
the Soul dyed together with the body, and that there remained no feeling
either of weal or woe: then truly, as in Death there is no goodness, so neither
is there any euilnes. For when Sense and feelinge is once gone, he is become
as though he had never been borne: and yet that he was borne, both we do
rejoice, and all this Cittye, (as long as it stands) shall be glad. Wherefore
as (I said before) he is very well, and in better case then I am: who^ reason
would yt as I came before him into this world, so I should have gone before him
out of this life. But yet I take such an inward joy at the remembrance of our
Friendship, that me thinckes I lived blessedlye, What friendship is.
because I lived with Scipio: with who^ I had a joint care of matters both
public and private: with who^ both in peace and war I took like part: and (yt
wherein ye whole sum of Fre^dshippe consists) there was between us a most
persect agreement of wills, desires, and opinions.

Therefore this fame of wisdom (whithe Fannius ere while rehearsed, does not
so much delight me (specially being false) as that I hope, the memory of our
Friendship shall be everlasting, and the greater hartioye is it to me, because in
so many hu^ndred years passed, there ca^ be reckened scarcely iii or iiii.
couples of Fre^des: There have not ben found above three or four couples of
perfect friends in many hundred years space.
in which sort I see there is hope yt the Friendship of Scipio and Laelius
shall be renowned to posterity.


FAN. It cannot chose (Laelius) but be even so as you say. But because you have
made mention of Friendship, and we be also at good leisure, you shall do me a
singular pleasure, and likewise I hope to Scaeuola if (accordingly as you are
wo^t of other matters when they be demanded of you) you would now make some
pretty discourse of Friendship, what you think of it, what manner of thing you
account it, and what good lessons you give thereupon.


SCAEV. Certainly yt ha^dling of this matter shall singulerly delight me: and
even as I was about to break my mind to you touching the same, Fannius
prevented me. Wherefore sir, you shall excedingly gratify us both.


LAE Certes I would not stick to do it, if I thought my self well able. For
the matter is both excellent, and we be (as Fa^nius said) at very good
leisure. But who am I? or what ability is therein me? This is the fashion of
learned me^ and that among the Greeks, to have a matter propounded unto the^,
to reason upon, although upon the sudden. It is a great piece of work, and
has need of no small exercise.

Wherefore I think it best for you to Friendship to be esteemed more then all
vvorldlye things.
seek those points which may be disputed of Friendship, at their hands which
profess these things. I can no more but exhort you to prefer Friendship
before al worldly matters. For nothing is so agreeable to nature, nothing so
fit either for prosperity or aduersitye.

But first and foremost this do I think, that Frendshippe cannot be but in good
men. Neither do I search this matter to the quick, as they which ryp up this
gear somewhat more preciselye: and although perchance truly, yet little to
common profit. For they deny that any Friendship only among good me^.
man is good, saving him that is wise. Admit it be so. But they expound
wisdom to be such a thing, as never yet any earthly man attaigned.

But we must hope for those things which be in ure and common practice:
not for those things, which be feigned or wished for. I will never say that C.
Fabritius, M. Curious. and T. Coru^canus, who^ our elders deemed wisemen, were
wise, after these men's rule. Wherefore let them keep to themselves their name
of wisdom, being both liable to much envy and also vnaccoumpted of, and let
them grant that these were good men. But they will never so do: for they will
deny that that can be granted to any, saving to him that is wise. Let us
therefore go even bluntly to work, and (as ye Proverb is) in terms, as
plain as a pack staff. They that so behave themselves, and so live, that
their faythfulnesse, honesty, upright dealinge and liberality is allowed, and
in whom is neither any covetousness, lust, or rash boldness, who be also men of
great constancy (as were these whom I erewhile named) those (as they were
accoumpted Nature the best guide to frame our lives by.
good men) so let us think them well worthy to be called: who do follow
nature the best Guide of well living, so far forth as man's power can reach.
For thus much me thinks I espy, that we are so borne, to then de there
should be a certain fellowship among us all: and the nearer that every
one comes to other, the greater should the fellowship Order of Friendship
be. Therefore are our own Countrymen better beloved of us then strangers, and
our kinsfolk dearer to us, then frennefolke. For, toward these, has Nature
herself bred a frendlinesse: but in this there is not such durable surenesse.
For herein does Frendshippe excel kindred, in that, kindred may be without
goodwill: but Frendshippe in no wise can lack it. For take away Goodwill, and
the name of Frendshippe is clean gone: but the name of kindred may still
remain.

Now, of what virtue and strength, Frendshippe is, may hereby namely be
understood: that of the infinite societies of mankind which Nature herself
has knitte together, the whole matter is so abridged and brought into such
narowe rowme, that al perfect Friendship is either between twain, or else between
a very few. For Frendshippe is nothing else but a perfect agreemente with
goodwil and hearty love in all matters, both divine and human. Then What
friendship is.
the which I know not whether any better Gift (Wisdom only except) were
geeuen by God unto men. Some Fre^dshyp the best thig next unto wisdom,
rather prefer Rythesse: some health: others Honor: many also vain
pleasures. But certes this last is for Beasts: the other before are
transitorye and uncertain, consistinge not so much in our own apoyntmentes,
as in the fickleness of Fortune.

But they which repose the chiefeste goodness in Virtue, do therein
excellently well: and yet this same Virtue is Fre^dshyp cannot be where virtue
is not.
it, which engenders and vpholdeth Freendshippe: neither can Freendeshippe in
any wise be without Virtue.

Now let us judge Virtue by the order of our life and talk. And let us not
measure it (as some unlearned do) by the statelynesse of Words: and let us
accoumpte them Goodmen, who are so reputed, that is to wit, the Paul's, the
Catoes, the Caians, the Scipions, and the Pniloes.

These held themselves contented with this common kind of life. And let us
pass them over, which are not any where at all to be found. Among such
manner of persons, Frendshyppe has so great Commodities, as I am scarce able
to express. First and foremoste, ^Co^^^diti^^ (...) Fre^d^^^^^^.
what man can have any Joy to live in this life (as Ennius says) which
delights not in the mutual Frendshippe and goodwill, of some especial
Freende? What pleasaunter thing can there be, then to have one, with whom
thou dare as boldelye talk, and break thy mind, as with thine own self?
What great Joy should a man have in his Prosperity: if he had not some to
rejoice and take part of the same with him, as well as himself?

And as touching Adversity, it were a very hard matter to bear it, without
some, that would take the same, even more greuouslye then thou thy self.

To conclude, all other things which are desired, do (in a manner) al
seuerallye serve to several purposes: as Riches for use: wealth for worship:
Honor, for praise: Pleasure for delight: Health to want grief and to execute
the offices of the body. Frendshippe compriseth many things more. Which way
soever thou tournest thee, it is at hand: in no place is it excluded: it is
never out of season, never troublesome.

Therefore we do use neither water, fire nor air (as they say) in mo places,
then we do frendshippe. Neither do I Friendship no less necessary then the
Elements
speak of the vulgar or mean sort of Frendshippe (which notwithstanding
both delights and profits) but of true and perfect Frendshippe, such as
theirs was, who are very few and sone reckened. For Frendshippe makes
prosperity both more glittringe and glorious: and adversity (by partinge and
communicating of grieves) it makes lighter, and easier. And whereas
Frendshippe conteyneth in it very many and great commodities, this (doubtless)
passes all the rest, in that, it comfort us aforehande with a good hope of
yt which is to come, and suffers neither the heart to quayle nor the courage
to be abated, For he yt eyeth and looks upon his faithful Friend, does (as
it were) behold a certain A true faithful friend is as man's ovvnse
pattern of his own self. And therefore although absent, yet are they
present: and being needye, have store enough, and being weak, are strong:
and (which is a strange matter to be told) being dead are alive. So great
is the honor, remembrance, and zeal, that is bredde in friends one toward
an other, By reason whereof, the death of the one seems blessed, and the life
of the other commendable.

Now, if you take out of the world the knot of Friendship, certes, neither shall
any house be able to stand, ne City to endure, no, nor yet any tillage to
continue. And if hereby it cannot thoroughly be conceived, how great the force
of Freendshippe and concord is: yet at least by discord and diffention, it may
well be perceived. What house is there so well Without Fre^dshyp al things go
to havoc and decay.
staid, what City so strong, that through hatred, and discord, may not be
utterly subverted? Whereby, what goodness resseth in Frendshippe, may easelye
be judged.

Men say that a certain Learned Empedocles affirmed that the world and al
things consisted of Frendeship.
man of Agrigent, displayed in Greek Verses, that all things which are in
this World, and have mouinge, are knit together by Frendshippe, and that by
discord, they are disseuered. And this do all men both understand, and by
proof do find to he very true. Therefore if at any time there has been
kindness showed by one friend toward another, either in aduenturinge, or in
participatinge of perils, what is he that will not highlye commend the same?
What a shout was there of late made by all the whole Stage, at the new Enter
lude made by my host and friend M. Pacuuius? when as the king not knowinge
whether of the twain was Orestes: Pylades affirmed Pylades and Orestes.
himself to be Orestes because he would have suffered death for him: Again,
Orestes (as the truth was) stiffelye aduouched that he and not the other was
Orestes. The standers by clapped their hands together for joy thereat. And
this being done in a feigned tale, what think we would they have done in a
true matter? Here did Nature herself utter her force, when as men adjudged
that thing to be well done in an other, which they themselves could not
doe-Hytherto as me thinckes I have even throughlye spoken my full mind and
opinion of Freendeshippe. If there be any more to be said (as I think
there is a great deal) seek it (if ye think it good) at their hands which
dispute these kind of matters.


FANNI. But we had rather hear it of you. Albe it I have oftentitimes sought
the same at their hands, and have heard them also, and that not
vnwyllingelye. But we look for an other manner of Vein and Style at your
hands.


SCAEVOL. You would much more have said so, Fannius, if you had been present
with us in Scipio his Gardeine, at what time there was reasoninge of the Common
wealth, what a Patron of Justice he was against a certain curious Oration
that Philus made.


FANN. That surely was an easy matter, for a just man to defend Justice.
SCAE. And what say you of Freendeshippe? Shall it not be alike easy for him
to do therein semblablye, who for faithfully, constantlye, and iustlye
keepinge the same, has gotten great renown?


LAEL. This (truly) is even to force me to speak. For what skilleth it, by
what way you do force me? This am I sure of, that ye force me. For to
wythstand the earnest requests of a man's Sons in Law, and namely in a good
matter, partly it is an hard case, and partlye it stands not with reason.

Many times therefore as I debate with my self of Frendshippe, I am wont to
think this one thing therein worthy of special consideration: whether men
ought to seek for Friendship only for a stay to their weakness and need,
that in doing and taking good turns, a man wherefore Friends be sought for.
might receive that of an other, which he could not compass or attaigne unto
by himself, and enter chaungeably requite the same: or whether this were (in
deed) one property belonging to Friendship, but yet that there was an other
cause more noble more co^me^dable, and more procedi^g from nature itself. For
love (where Love.
of frendlye love or Friendship is named) is ye chiefest cause that fastneth
goodwil together. For profit is oftentimes gotten even at their hands, who
under the cou^terfeit show of Friendship are sought unto, and as ye time
serves, are waited upon at an inche. But in Frendshippe there is no glauering,
no dissemblinge: what soever is in it, the same is true and voluntarye.

Wherefore me thinks Friendship had Fre^dshyp natural.
his first beginning rather of nature the^ of imbecillitye: and of castinge
ones fancy toward another, with a certain feeling of Love, rather then by
considering how much profit might eniue thereupon. The which surely, what manner
of thing it is, may even in certain Beasts be perceived: which for a certain
time so te^derlye love their young ones, and be again so loved of them, that
their feeling thereof easily appears: which thing in man is much more evident.
First by yt dear love that is between Children, and Parents which cannot
without detestable bill any be disseuered.

Secondarilye, when as there is a like feelinge of Love again: as when we
have found one with whose Manners and Nature we well agree: (because to our
own thinckinge) we espy in him (as it were) a certain Light of Honesty
and virtue. For nothing is Virtue.
more louelye and amiable then Virtue, nothing that more allureth men to love
one another: Insomuche that for Virtue and honesty we do after a sort, love
even them whom we never saw. Who is he, that does not with a certain singular
Love, and Goodwyll toward the parties, use the remembrance of C. Fabritius,
and M. Curious, whom notwithstanding he never saw? Who again does not hate
Tarquinius the proud, Sp. Cassius, and Sp. Melius? We strove for the Empire,
in Italye with two Capitaines, Pyrrhus, and Hannibal: and yet from the one of
Pyrrhus. Hannibal
them, because of his honest name we did not altogether estraunge our hearts:
The other for his cruelty, this City of ours will for ever deteste.

Now, if the force of Honestye be so great, that we love the same, yea, in
those, whom we never saw, and (which is more) even in our Enemies: what
marvel is it, if men's hearts be moved, when they seem to perceive and
see Virtue, and goodness in them, with whom they may be joined in
acquaintance and conversation. Albeit Love is confirmed by benefits received,
by Goodwyll approved, and Love confirmed by Benefits
by acquaintance adjoined: All which things being laid together to that
first motion of man's mind and Love, there is enkindled a wonderful
greatenesse of Goodwyll, and Freendlynesse. Which if any do think to
proceed and come of Imbecillitye, as though it should be but to serve
every mannestourne, thereby to get the thing which he desires: such men
surely do make a very base and (as a man should say) no Gentleman-like
Base peda grevv of Friendship
race unto Freendeshyppe, if they would have it to descend and have his
beginning from needines and want. Which thing if it were so: then, as every man
felt himself of smallest ability, so should he be most fittest for
Friendship: which thing is far otherwise. For as every man trusts most to
himself: and as every man is with virtue and wisdom so singulerlye
furnished, that he stands not in need of any other, and thincketh that al
which is his, rests in himself: so in seeking and mainteining Friendship does
he especially surmount. For what? Had Aphricanus any need of me? Never a whit
surely. And I neither of him. But I through a certain Scipio and Laelius, ij
perfect friends.
admiration that I had of his virtue loved him: and again, he, for some
opinion perchance, that he conceived of my manners phansied me: and our daily
conversation together, increased our goodwilles. But although many and great
commodities ensued thereof, yet did not the causes of our love one to the other
issue from any hope of such things. For as we be bountiful and liberal,
not of purpose to get thanckes therefore (for we do not lay out our benefits
to vsurye, but are by nature enclineable to lyberalitie) Good turns and
plesures laid out to vsurye.
so likewise do we think that Freendship is to be desired of men, not led
thereto with hope of reward, but because all the fruicte thereof rests in
very love itself. Fre^dshyp must not be desired for profit.


We far disagree in opinion from them which after the manner of brute
Beasts do refer al things to Pleasure and Sensuality. And no marvel.
For why? They that have abased and cast al their cogitations upon a thing so
vile and contemptible, cannot have any regard to any high, noble, and
heavenly thing. Wherefore let us set aside such manner of persons from this
talk: and let us understand yt the feelinge of Love and perfect goodwill is
engendered by Nature, with having some signification or proof of honestye.
Which honestye they that desire and seek after, apply themselves, and draw
nearer thereunto: that they may enjoy both the company, and also the manners of
him, whom they have begone to love: and that they may be Mates, and alike in
Love, readier to do a good turn, then to seek for any. And let this be an
honest kind of strife between them.

Thus shall very great commodities be taken of Freendship, and the first
beginning thereof, being of Nature and not of Imbecillitie) shall be both
waightier and truer. For if Profit should fasten and knitt Freendshyppe,
Nature cannot be changed ne yet Friendship
then the same being changed, should dissolve and lewse it again. But
because Nature cannot be changed, therefore true Freendshyppes are
everlasting. Thus you see the beeginninge of Freendshyppe: except
peradventure there be some thing else that you would demand.


SCAE. Nay Laelius, I pray you proceed in your matter: for, as for him here
that is my younger, I dare upon mine own warrant answer.


FAN. In deed you say well: wherefore let us hear further.


LAELIVS. GEeue ear then Gentlemen to those things, which many times and
often have been reasoned between me and Scipio, concerning Freendeshyppe:
Howbeit his saying was, that nothing was harder, then for Freendeshyppe to
continue unto the last hour of Death. For he would say, that it oftentimes
happened, either that one and the self same thing should not be Continuance
of Friendship.
expediente for both parties: or else that they would not always be of one
mind in matters of the common wealth. He would also say, that men's
manners did often change, sometimes by the world goinge awrye, somtymes by
growinge forward in age.

And of these things he would bring an Example by a comparison made of
Boys age, because the hoattest love that Children had, was oftentimes
determined Children in Freendshipp and love new fangled.
and ended, at the age when their voices c^aunge: And albeit they continued it
till the age of their Adolescencye: yet he said, that their Freendshyppe was
oftentimes broken of, either through some contention, or by reason of Ryotte,
or some other profit because both of the^ could not obteyn one self thing.
Insomuch that if any of them, by longer time continued in Frendshippe, yet
that they often times iarred, if they happened to sue for Preferrement and
Dignitye. And further he said, that there was no greater Covetousness a great
plague to Friendship.
plague in Freendshyppe, then in the most sort of men, Covetousness of monye:
and in the best sort, striving for advancement and glory. Whereupon many
times great enemitye has happened between right dear friends. Also he
recoumpted, that great variaunces, and the same many times upon good causes,
did arise, when as any thing was required of friends, that was not honest: as
either that they should be ministers of Lust to others, or helpers to the^ in
doing of wrong. Which thing they that refused to do, although in so do judge
they did but right honestlye, yet should they be reproved as forsakers of the
law of Friendship at their hands whose requests they would not accomplish.
And that they which had the face to request any thing whatsoever, at their
friends hands, did by such their demand profess, that they for their
Friends sake would do all things. And that through their inueterate
suuffinge one at an other, not only their familiarities was wont to be
extinguished but also great and endless hatred to grow between them.

These so many things (said he) ouerthwarted and hanged (as who should say)
by destenie over Freendshippe: in so much that to escape all these, seemed to
him (as he said) not only a part of Wisdom, but also of very Happiness.

Wherefore if it please you, let us first How far the bounds of frendeshyp
stretche.
see, how far Love ought to stretche in Freendshippe. As if Coriolanus had
friends, whether they ought to have joined sides and borne weapon with the
Co^motio^ of Coriolanus.
same Coriolanus against their country? Whether Becillinus his friends ought
to have helped him, when he aspired to Sovereignty? whether Sp. Melius his
welwillers ought to have taken part with him or no? We saw that Tiberius
Gracchus when he disquieted the Common wealth, was clean forsaken of Q.
Tubero, and other friends yt were his co^paignio^s. But Caius Blosius ye
Cumane, (a Guest of your family Scaeuola) when A man must not for his fredes
sake do any thing that is either unlawful or dishonest.
he came and made suit to me (sitting in counsel with Lenas and Rutilius the
Consuls) alleged this as a cause why I should pardon his trespass: because
(for sooth) he made such special accou^pte of Tiberius Gracchus, yt if he had
but said the word, and commanded any thing, yt same be thought himself bound
in duty to do. Sayye so (quoth I?) what and if he had bid thee to set the
Capitol on fire, would thou do it? He would never Capitol.
(said he) have willed me to do any such thing: but if he had, truly I would
Blosius desperate answer
have done it. You see what a villainous saying this was. And in deed so he
did: or rather more then he said: for he not only followed the heady rashenes
of Tiberius Gracchus, but also was a Ringleader: and showed himself not only
a compagnion of his outrage, but also a Capitain. Therefore in this mad mood
being afraid of a farther examination, he fled into Asia, and got him to
our Enemies, and in the end for his traiterous attemptes against our City,
received a grievous and well deserved Such a^ inexcusable as do attempt any
thing unlawful to pleasure their friends.
punishmente. No excuse therefore will serve for an offense, if a man offend
for his friends sake. For since the opinion of Virtue is the breeder of
Frendshippe, it is hard for Freendshippe to remayn, if a man swerue from
Virtue. Now if we do agree that it is honest and reasonable, either to
grant to our Reques^^^ of frend^ to friend.
Friends, what soever they will have, or to obteyue of our Friends, what so
ever we desire, therein (truly) we be of a right tried wisdom, if there
be no fault committed in our dealings. But we speak of those fre^des, which
be daily in our sights, who^ we see or of whom we have heard talk, or such as
in common dealings of life are thoroughly known. Out of the number of such,
must we cull out examples, and namely of them, which approached nearest unto
wisdom. We certainly know that Paulus Aemilius was very familier with C.
Lucinius, (as we have heard our forefathers report) and that they were twice
Co^suls together, and fellows in ye office of Ce^sorshippe. We find also in
Histories that at that time together with them, M. Curious and T. Coruncanus
were very great friends. Therefore we cannot so much as one suspecte that any of
these did earnestlye request any thing of his friend, that was contrary to
their faith, against their oath, or prejudicial to the common wealth. For to
what purpose should it be, to say that any such things were in such men as
they were? If they had never so earnestly requested any such thing, I know
they should not have obtained their Suit, since they were men most virtuous.
But let it be alike heinous to request our friend an unreasonable As great an
offense to grant an vnlavv full suit, as to request it.
suit, and to grant the same being asked. But yet Caius Carbo favored
Tiberius Gracchus. and so did C. Cato, being at that time no backefreende to
Caius his brother, but is now his most heavy enemy.

LET this therefore be the first decreed An dishonest request must be denied
Law in Frendshippe, that we neither request things unhonest: neither being
requested, do any. For it is a shameful excuse and not to be dispensed
withal, for a man, in any other faults, but namely in offenses against the
Common wealth, to confess that be did it for his Friends sake. For we are
placed (O Fannius and Scaeuola) in that rowme and calling, that it behooves us
long before to foresee the chances, yt may happen to the common wealth.

For the custom that our forefathers used, is now somewhat altered and stepped
There is not such just dealinges among me^ now a days as was in the old
tim^
aside out of his old course.

Tiberius Gracchus wence about to usurp the kingdom: yea, he ruled as a King
in deed for certain months.

Has ever the people of Rome heard or seen the like? His example also after
his death did his friends and kinsfolk follow. What parts they played
against P. Scipio Nasica, I am not hable without tears to declare. And as for
Carbo (of whom I spoke erewhile) we did suffer and hear with him, because of
the late punishment of Tiberius Gracchus.

But what my mind geeueth me, will fall out in C. Gracchus Tribuneshippe, I
am not now disposed to utter. for thence ye matter by little and little stylye By
these two laws made by Gabimus and Cassius, the goods of certain good
Citizens were wholy forfeited and proclamation made that they the^ selves
where ever they were found might lavvfully be slain and a revvard a pointed
for the sleiar.
creeps forward, which fully tending to a further mischief (when it once
beeginneth) will mainlye run beadlonge. You see already aforehande in the
roll of Attaintes, what dishonor has enfued, first by the * Law called
Gabinia, and within two years after by the law Cassia. Me thinckes I already
see the Co^mo^a^^ie of Rome divided from ye Senate, and the weighty affairs
thereof to be ordered after the wills of the common multitude. For more will
learn how to do these things, then home to withstand them. But to what end
do I speak this? Verelye because no man goes about any such attemptes
without mo partahers. * Therefore must a Covent be given to yt honest sort,
that if by any chance they light unawares into such Frendeshippes, they should
not think theymselues so tied thereunto, If our fre^des conspyre against the
common wealth we ought to forsake them.
but that they may lawfully geeue their friends the slip, namely when they
practice any great matter, to the hurt of the common wealth. And unto the evil
disposed persons, must a punishment be devised: and no less for the^ yt
partake with others, the^ for those yt be the very Ringleaders, and Capitaines
of mischief themselves.

What Noble man was there in all Greece more renowned the^ Themistocles? Who
was of greater power then We ought not to seek the spoil of our country,
for any injury to us done.
he? who bring General in the wars against the Persians, delivered Greece
from Bondage: and being afterward through envy banished, could not digest and
suffer that Iniurye of his unkind Country, which his part was to have
suffered. He played yt like part as Coriolanus did xx. years before, with us.
There was not one ma^fou^d yt would aid the^ against Coriolanus.
their country: and therefore both of the^ killed themselves. Wherefore such
co^spiracy of naughty persons is not only not to be cloked with any pretense of
Friendship, but is rather with al extremity to be punished: yt no man may think
it lawful to consent to his fre^d yt warreth against his Country: which thing
(as yt world now begins to go) I know not whether it will one day come to
pass or no. Verily I have no less care, in what state the Common A noble and
most worthy care.
wealth shall be after my death: then I have of the case it stands in at this
present day.

LET this therefore be enacted as ye Lavvfull requests, and graunts of friends,
one to an other.
first law of Friendship, that we request at our friends hands, those things
that be honest: and that we do for our friends sakes, al things that be
reasonnable: and that we do not pinch curtesye in stayinge till we be
requessted, but let us ever have an earnest good will to pleasure them: let all
delays be set aparte: and let us be glad in deed, freelye to geeue our
freende good counsel. Friends may not flatter but freelye and boldlye
advertise and counsel one an other.
Let the Authority of Friends (giving sound counsel) bear great sway and
force in Friendship, and let the same be used to warn one another, not only
plainly, but (if occasion so serve) sharplye: and let such authority so
geeuen be thoroughly obeyed. As for those good fellows, whom (as I hear say)
were accounted ioly wiseme^ in Greece, I think they delited in some uncouth
wonders. Epicures.
But there is nothing whereupon they do not deskant with their quiddities: as
partlye that we should eschew Frendshippe with too many, least one man
should be driven to be careful formanye: and that every man should have
fully enough to do, to care for his own matters: yt it is a great trouble to
be overmuch enco^bred with other men's dealings: and that it is a iolye matter
to have yt Reins of Friendship at will, either to pluck s^reit when a man is
disposed, or to let go at large, at his own pleasure. And that the
principallest point of happy life is Quietness: which the mind cannot enjoy,
if one should bear al yt burden and as it were) travail with child for many.

Another sort (they say) there be, which hold a more beastlye opinion then
these above (as I brieflye noted a little before) affirming that Friendship
ought to be desired for a stay and a help to be had thereby, not for any
goodwil or hearty love. Therefore by this reckening, as every one has of
himself smallest stay and abilitye, so should he most seek for
Frendeshippe. And by this means it happens that seelye women seek the aid
of Friendship more then men: and the needye more then the wealthye: and the
miserably distressed, more then they that be accoumpted fortunate.

Oh passinge brave wisdom. For they seem to take the Su^ne out of the world,
which would take Freendshippe, from among us: then the which, we have nothing
Friendship is as the shininge Sun in the world.
either better or pleasaunter by the immortal Gods given unto us.

For what manner of Quietness is this? forsooth, to see to: very pleasant: but
in deed, in many respects to be rejected. For it stands not with reason,
either not to take in hand, or being taken in hand, to leave of, any honest
cause or We must ever be doing of good.
deed, because thou would not be troubled. But if we refuse care, we
must then refuse Virtue, which must of necessitye with some care despise and
hate those things that be contrary to it: as for example: Goodness must hate
Euilnesse: Temperaunce, Ryotte: Fortitude, Cowardice. Therefore a man may see
the just, greatly grieved at matters unjust, the stout at the weak: the
modest livers with pranckes ungracious. This therefore is the property of
Property of a well staid mind
a well stayed mind, to rejoice at good things, and to be sorry for the
contrary.

Wherefore if grief of mind be incide^t to a Wisema^ (as in very deed it is)
except we think that humanity be clean dislodged out of his mind, what
cause is there, why we should utterly take away Frendshippe from the life of
man, because we would take no pains, or troubles about it? For take away ye A
man void of al affections is like a logg or a stone.
motions of the mind, and tell me what difference there is (I will not say)
beetweene a Beast and a man, but even between a man and a Stone, or a Log, or
any other such like thing?

Neither are they to be geeuen ear unto, which hold opinion that Virtue is
hard, and as it were pronlike: which surely is in many things else, but
especially in Friendship, tender, and tractable: in so much yt at ye weal of
his friend, it spreads itself abroad, and at his mishaps shrinketh in again.
Wherefore this same trouble which must oftentimes be abyden for our friends, is
not of such force, yt it should quight take away Frendshippe from among men:
no more then Virtue ought to be rejected, because it brings sundry cares and
greuaunces. Seeing therefore yt Virtue causes Freendship (as I before have
declared) if any token or signification of virtue appears, wheru^to a mind
se^vlably disposed, may apply and join itself: where this thing happens, there
(say I) needs must Friendship grow.

For what is so absurd, as to be delyted with many vain things, as Honor.
Glory, Houses, Apparel, brauerye and deckinge of the body: and not to be
exceedinglye A preposterous and absurd delight.
delighted with a Mind endued with Virtue, such a one as either can love, or
(as I may say) afoord love for love again? For there is nothing more
delectable, then is the requital of good will: nothing more pleasant then is
the mutual entrecourse of Freendlinesse and courtesies. And if we add this unto
it (which may very will be added) Enterchaungeable requital of courtesies.
that there is nothing which so greatly allureth and draws any thing unto
it, as the likeness of Conditions does unto Freendshippe: then surely must
this be needs granted true, that Likeness of manners and delights causethe
Friendship.
goodme^ do love them which he good, and haunt together in company as me^ near
ly joined together by kindred and nature.

For nothing is more desirous, nothing is more eager and ravenous of his like,
then Nature
Nature.

Wherefore this in my judgment is a One virtuous man loves an other.
plain case (Fannius and Scaeuola, that it cannot choose, but there must
needs be among good men, one toward an other, a freendly and hearty well
meaning: which is the Wellspringe of Freendshippe, appointed by Nature.

But this same goodness apperteyneth Virtue disdaigneth no man.
also to the common sort. For Virtue is not churlish, not exempted, not
statelye, or proud: for her custom is to preserve all men in general, and to
do the best for them that she can: which thing (doubtless) she would not
do, if she disoayned or thought skorne of the love of the vulgar sort.

Furthermore, me thinckes that they which for profit sake feign
Freendeshippe, do take away the louelyest knot Goodvvill of a Freende, is more
to be respected, then the gain that may be gotten by him.
that is in Freendshippe. For the profit gained by a freende does not so much
delice, as does the very love of a friend. And then is that which comes from
a man's freende, pleasant, if it proceed of an hearty love, and good will. And
so far of is it, that Freendshippe should be desired for needinesse, that
they which being endued with wealth and Riches and specially with Virtue
(wherein is most aid) and not standing in need of any other, are men most
liberal and bou^tifull.

And I know not, whether it be expedient and meet that friends should never A
friend is best known in time of necessity.
want any thing at all. For wherein should my hearty goodwill have appeared, if
Scipio had never stood in need, neither at home in time of peace, nor abroad
in time of wars, of my favor, True friendship sekes not after gain.
counsel, and assistau^ce? Therefore Friendship prowles not after profit, but
profit ensues Friendship.

And therefore men yt slow in wealth are not to be heard, if at any time they
dispute of Friendship, whereof they have neither by Practice, neither by
knowledge, any understanding. For what Al vvorldly treasure without a fre^d
is to no purpose
man is he (I pray you in good sadness) yt would desire to wallowe in all
wealth and live in all abundaunce of worldly Richesse, and neither he to love
any body, nor any to love him? For this were a life, such as Tirantes live: to
wit, A Tyrau^ts life.
wherein there can be no fidelity, no hearty love, no trust of assured goodwil:
al things evermore suspected and full of care: and no place at al for
Friendship. For who ca^ We cannot love them of whom we stand in fear,
either love him, who^ he fears: or him of who^ he thi^keth himself to be
feared: Notwtstanding such persons be honored and crowched unto, by a
cou^terfeit show of Friendship, only for a time. But if it happen (as oftentimes
it does) yt they have a downfall, the^ is it well perceived, how bare and naked
of friends they were. Which Adversity tries Friends.
thing ye report goes yt Tarquinius said, yt at such time as he was
banished, he thoroughly understood what faithful fre^des he had, and who were
unfaithful, when as he was not able to require or gratify nether of the^.
Howbeit I do marvel, if in ye his proud and insolent life, he could have
any friend at al. And as this man's manners, who^ I last mentioned could not
procure any true friends: so yt great wealth of me^ set in high power and
authority do quite shut out al faithful Friendship. For Riches blinds men.
Fortune is not only blind, but for the most part also, she makes the^
stark Fortune.
blind, whom she favors.

And therefore commonly they are puffed up with disdaynfulnesse and self will:
and there is nothing so wearisome as a wealthye man, being foolish.

And this may we see, yt some which before time were of manners gentle and
nothing squeimish, if they be raised to rule, authority and wealth, are
clean changed: and utterly dispisinge their old Frendshippes, clean unto
new.

But what foolisher thing is there, then for a man (to the end he may bear
great Port and Swaye through his wealth, richesse, and revenues) to get
Friends the best treasure.
other things that are sought for, as monye, Horses, Servants, Apparayle,
Worship and costlye Plate: and not to get friends being the best and (as I
may say) the goodlyest furniture that can be in this life? For other things
when they are gotten, they know not for who^ they have gotten the^, nor for
whose use and behoof they labor. For every whit of all these, is his, yt can
win it with maine strength: but the possession of Freendshippe once gotten,
remains and continues unto every man steadfast and assured: and although
these other things should continue, which are but as it were the Gifts of
Fortune, yet a clownish life, deuoide of friends cannot be pleasant. But of
these matters hitherto.

Now must we set down the Bounds that are in Frendshippe, and (as it were)
Bounds of Friendship. Three opinions of Frendshippe.
the Lymites, or Buttinges of Love: whereof I do see three opinions: of the
which, I do allow never a one.

One is, that we should in the very same sort be affected toward our fre^d,
as we be toward our selves. 1


An other is, that our goodwyll toward our friends, be likewise equally 2
corresponde^t to their good will toward us.

The third, that so much as every man sets by himself, so much he 3
should be set by, of his friends.

To none at al of these three opinions do I agree. For the first is not true:
that as every man is toward himself, so also should he be affected
toward his freende. For how many things do we for our Friends sake, which
we would never do for our own cause? As to crouche and sue in our friends
behalf to an unworthy man: to be sore bent against any body, and to rattle
him up very sharply: which things to do in cases of our own, stands not
well with honestye: but in our friends behalf, are most honest and commendable.
And many things there be, wherein honest men do abridge themselves somewhat of
their own gains, and are well contented yt it should so be, that their
friends rather then themselves might enjoy them.

The second opinion is it, which defines Frendeship with equal Courtesies, and
wills: but truly this were too strict deali^g to call Frendshippe to account,
and reckning, how many pleasures have been done, to thinte^t so many may again
be received. Me thinks, that true Frendshippe is a great dease richer and
ple^tifuller, and does not so strictly see to his recknings, that he grant no
more the^ he received. For there is no such fear to be taken, least there be
any thing lost, or least it We cannot do to mutch in fre^dshyp.
should be spilt upon the ground, or least we heap up too much measure in
Friendship. The third Bound or End is worst of al: which is, that how much
every man sets by himself, so much he should be set by of his friends. In
some there is many times either a quayled courage, or a comfortles hope of
amending their estate. Therefore it is not a friends part, to be such unto
him, as he is to Comfort and cheering of Friends.
himself: but he ought rather to study and devise which way he may
recomforte the appalied mind of his freende, and to put him in good hope of a
better amendment.

We must therefore prescribe an other kind of true Friendship: but first I will
tell you, what thing it was yt Scipio was wont most to find fault withal. He
said that there could not be devised any word more directlye against
Freendshippe: A saying repugnant to frendshyp.
then his was, which said that a man ought so to love, as though he should
one day again hate. And that he could not be persuaded to think that this
was ever spoken (as it was supposed) by Bias, who was accoumpted one of yt vii.
wise Sages: but rather yt it was the opinion of some lewd and ambitious
person, or of one that would rule al things by his own power and authority
as he lust himself. For how can any man be friend to him, whose enemy he
thincketh that he shall one day be?

Furthermore, needs must he desire and wish, that his freende might very often
offend, to the end he may thereby have (as it were) the more occasions to find
fault with him. Again, he must needs frette, sorrow, and spighte at his
friends well doings and commodities.

Wherefore this note (whose so ever it is) is enough to take Friendship quighte
away. This Rule rather should have been prescribed, yt we should employe
such diligence in the gettinge of friends, that we should not at any time
begin to love him, whom at any time we might after hate. Yea, besides, if
we have not had good hap in the choosing of our friends: yet Scipio thought,
that men should bear with that mischance, rather then to seek occasion to
quarrel, and fall out.

These bounds therefore I think are best to be used, that when the manners of
friends be well qualefied and honest, there should be among them, a
community or participatio^ of al their gooddes Among honest friends al
things should be common.
purposes and wills without any exception. As if the case were so, that some
dealinges of our friends, being not very honest, were to be helped: which
concerned either their life and death, or their fame and credit: we Now and
then we must not stick to step a little aside to save our friends life or
credit.
must strain our selves a little to step awrye, out of the way, so yt
utter shame and dishonestye ensue not thereupon. For there is a stint, how
far Frendshippe may be pardonable. Neither must we slightly neglect our fame.
We must also think, that the good will of the people is no small furtheraunce
to that chieuinge Goodvvil of the people.
of any dealinges: which with glaueringe and flatterye to get, is shameful and
dishonest. Therefore Virtue having hearty love following it, is not to be
despised. But he, oftentimes (for now I return to Scipio, whose whoole talk
was of Frendshippe) complained, that men were in all other things more
diligent: as, that every man could tell how many Goats and Sheep he had, but
that be could not reckon how many friends he had: and that in compassinge
and stoaring himself with the one, he bestowed great care: but in the
choosinge of his friends he was very negligente and rechlesse: neither that
they had any Tokens or Marks whereby to judge what persons were fitteste for
Freendshyppe.

We must therefore choose such as be Sure, Steadfast, and Constante: of
which sort there is great scarsity: and an hard matter is it to judge of
them without trial.

But we must in Freendshyppe make trial: for so Freendshyppe precedeth our
judgment, and takes away the power of Trial.

It is therefore a Wisemans part, so to stay the vehement earnestness of his
good will, even as be would stay his Trial of Friends.
race in runninge: to the intent we may so use our Frendshippes, as men use to
assaye their horses: making somewhat a trial of the manners of our friends.

Some many times in a small paultringe monye matter, are perceived, Money.
how discreditable and unconstant they be. Some again, whom a small portion
could not tempt, are in a great Sum known what they are. Now, if there be
some men found, which deem Money now a days more set by the^ Friendship.
it a berye beastlye thing to prefer money before Freendeshyppe: where shall
we find them that do not esteem Honor, Authority, Rule, and worldly wealth,
more then Freendshyppe? and that when these things be set on the one part,
and the Virtue of Frendshyp on the other, had not leyfer choose the first,
then this latter? For man's nature is frail and weak to refuse Authority,
the which if they may attaigne unto, (although without having any regard at
all of Frendshippe) they think themselves to be excusable: because they
neglected and despised Frendshippe not without cause.

Therefore true Frendshippe is very hard and rare to be found among them True
friendship hard to befou^d among great me^.
which are placed in Honor, and bear rule in the Common weal.

For where shall a man find one, ye prefers and sets more by the honor
of his friend, then he does by his own?

What? (to let these things pass) how grievous and how painful do many
think it, to be partakers of others Men are loath to take part with their
freende in trouble
calamities and miseries? whereunto there is none lightly found, that will
willinglye enter. Albeit Ennius very well says: A sure Friend is tried in
Aduersitye: Yet (notwithstanding) these two things do convince most men of
Inconstancy and Lightness: either if in Prosperity A faithful friend in weal
and vvoe.
they despise their friends: or if in Adversity they forsake them. He
therefore which in both these cases shows himself a man discrete, constant,
and stable in Friendship: him ought we to judge one of the most rarest sort of
men, and almost as a God.

For the ground work of that stablenes, and constancy, which we require and
seek in Frendshippe, is Faythfulnes. For nothing is stable, which is
unfaithful.

Furthermore it is behoueful for us, to Choice of a friend
choose such a one to our friend, as is simple and plain, good to agree
withal, and such an one, as will be moved with the self same things that we
be: all which things pertain unto faythfulnesse. Neither can a running
head, or A running head.
wavering wit ever be faithful. For why? he that is not affected alike with
the same things, that his friend is: neither is of the same mind with him, in
A friend must neither be a tale bearer nor a tale credirer.
matters by nature: can neither be faithful nor steadfast.

Hereunto must be added, that a freende must neither delight in accusing, nor
be leeue any accusations, being brought unto him: which things do belong to
that Constancy, whereof I ere while entreated. And thus, that falls out to
be true, which I spoke of, at the beginning: that Freendship cannot be but
among good men.

For it is the part of a goodman (who^ also we may term a Wise man) to
observe Good me^
these two points in Frendshippe: First that there be nothing feigned nor
Dissimulation.
cou^terfeited. For it is more honesty, eue^ openly to hate one, then under a
glosing An open enemy better the^ a dissemblinge friend.
countenance to hyde dissimulation: and not only to shift away and clear his
friend of accusations, laid to his charge by any other, but also that he
himself be Suspicion
not suspicious, thinckinge always that his friend does somewhat amiss.

There must also (besides this) be a certain pleasauntnes of talk and
manners, Pleasant talk. Courteous manners.
which is (in deed) none of the worst Sawces in Freendeshippe. But lumpish
sadness, and sullen sowernesse must in any wise be abounded. Sulle^nes.


Certes it has in it a certain gravity, but Freendshippe ought to be more at
large, more at liberty, pleasaunter and to all courtesy and gentleness more
disposed.

And here in this place grows a somewhat hard question, whether new fre^des
(being not unworthy of Friendship) Whether new or old friends be better.
ought to be preferred and more set by, then the old: as we use to set more
store by young Horses, then we do by old ones.

A doubt (doubtless) unseemly for a man to stand upon. For there ought not to
be saciety of friendship, as there is of other things. The oldest (like old
Wynes) ought to be pleasau^test: and true is the old common Proverb, that we
must eat many Bushels of Salt together with Proverb
those, with whom we shall throughlye perform all the parts of
Freendeshyppe.

But new Acquaintaunces, if there be hope that they will (as young towardly
shootes, and fructifying budds) New acquaintance. Old Familiaritye.
bring forth fruict, are not (surely) to be refused: but yet
notwithstanding old familiaritye must still be continued in his due place and
estimation. For the force of Auncientnesse, and Custom, is exceedinge great.

And as touching the Horse (whereof I spoke erewhile) if there be no cause of
let to the contrary: there is no man but had leyfer occupy him whom he has
been used unto, then one that is strange to him, and untamed.

And not only in this which is a living Creature does Custom bear great
Swaye, but in things also that are Custom.
without Life, is it of the like force: For even in Hyllyshe and Wyelde
Countries, wherein we have of a long dwelled, we have a pleasure and delight,
still to continue.

But this is a very high point in Fre^dshyp, that the Superior is equal with
A chief point in fre^dshipp
the Inferior. For there be oftentimes certain preheminences: as that was of
Scipio, in our fraternity. He never advanced nor preferred himself before
Philus, never before Rutilius, never before Mummius, never before his other
friends of baser calling. But Q. Maximus his brother, a man (doubtless) right
excellent, but yet nothing like him, because Reverence to our elder.
he was his Elder, he reuere^ced as his better: and was willing that all his
friends should fare the better by him. Which thing is both to be done and to
be imitated of all men: that if they surmount their friends in any excellencye
A notable lesson
of Virtue, Wit, and Fortune, they should imparte the same to their friends,
and communicate it ioyntlye with their Familiers: as, if they be borne of
baser pare^tage, if they have kinredde of smaller power and ability, either in
mind or substance, they ought to enlarge and increase their wealth: and to be
an honor and dignity to their estate. As we do read in Fables, of some, which
having continued for a certain time in the state of mean servants, because
their lignage and Stock was not known, but after that they were known, and
found to be the Sons either of Gods, or of Kings, did yet still bear a
zealous goodwil toward the Sheepeheardes, whom many years they took to be
their own fathers. Which thing surely is much Love toward parents.
more to be done toward our true and well known fathers. For then specially
is the fruict of all wit, Virtue, and excellency taken, when it is bestowed
on him, that is nearest to us alied.

Even as they therefore which in the familiaritye of entier Frendshippe, be
superiors and higher in degree, ought to Inferiors, must not repine at their
superiors.
abase and make themselves equal with their inferiors: so ought not inferiors to
be grieved, if their friends either in wit, state, or dignity, do excel and go
beyond them.

Of which sort, many either are whyninge for somewhat, or else do twighte and
vpbrayde their Benefits, namelye, if they think they have ought, that they
may say, they have done for their friends, courteously, freendly, and with some
pains and crauayle.

These vpbrayders of pleasures, are surely an odious kind of people: which
Vpbrayding of pleasures.
pleasures, he ought to remember, on who^ they were bestowed; not he that did
bestow them.

Wherefore as they which be Superioures and of higher calling, ought in We
ought to remember a good turn.
Freendshippe to abase themselves: So after a force should Inferiors aduau^ce
and put forth themselves. For there be some, which make Frendeshyp unpleasant
and yrkesome, when as they thinck themselves to be contemned; and not cared
for. Which thing happneth almost to none, but to such, as thinck themselves
worthy to be contemned: which must not only by words, but also by deeds, be
reclaymed from that opinion.

And first, a man must do as much for his friend as he is possibly able: and
next, as much as yt party who^ he loves and would further, is able to
discharge. For a man A man cannot advance al his friends,
cannot bring al his friends (though he be never in such high authority
himself) to honorable aduauncemente: as Scipio was able to make Rutilius
Consul: but his brother Lucius he could not. Yea Respect in preferment of
friends.
admit, yt you could prefer your friend to what you lust: yet must there be a
respect had, how he is able to discharge ye place of his preferment.

We must also think, yt Frendshyp can not be, but in wits and Ages,
thoroughly stayed and fully grown. Neither stands Fre^dshyp to be judged at
full grown age.
it upon any point of necessity, yt they which in their boys age, pha^sied
others for some common delighte which they had together in Huntinge, and Tenis
play: should still take them as their very Playfellovves and compaignions in
youth.
dear Friends, whom they then loved and favored, because they took pleasure
in the same delights, that they themselves did. For so should Nurses, and
overseers of Children, by reason Nurses. Tutors.
of old acquaintance, challenge very much: who (in deed) must not be
neglecttd, or slightly passed upon, but yet are after an other sort to be
loved and regarded. For otherwise Freendeshippe cannot long continue steadfast.

For unlike manners pursue unlike delights: the dissimilitude whereof
disseuereth Frendshippes. Neither is it for any other cause, that goodmen
cannot be friends, with the naughty and wicked, Unlike manners dissolueth
Friendship
then for that, there is such great odds, and difference in manners, and
affections, between them, as possibly can be.

It may also be geeuen for a good lesson in Friendship, that no man through We
must not be too fond over our friends against their profit.
a certain intemperate and fond goodwil, do binder (as many times it
happens) the great profices, that might redound to his friend. For (to come
again to Fables) Neoptolemus should never have won Troy, if he wauld have
been ruled by Lycomedes (with who^ he was brought up, going about with many
Fond love (...)
tears, to dissuade and hinder him from that journey.

And many times there happen such great occasions of waightye affairs, that
Friends must needs depart one from an other: the which, he that would go
about to hinder, because (forsooth) he can not well forbear his company, is
both a weakelinge and a Cockeney natured person: and consequentlye in
Freendshippe is unjust and vnreasenable. And in all things, good consideration
must be had, both what thou do Requests must be vvarely vvaighed.
request of thy friend, and what thou suffrest to be obtained at thy hands.

There is also sometimes (as it were) a certain calamity or mishap in the
departure from friends, even necessary: for now I turn my speech from the
famlliarities, that is among Wisemen, to the Frendshippe, that is among the
vulgar Vulgar Fre^dshyp
sort of people. The faults committed by friends do many times burst out,
partly upon the friends themselves, and partly upon strangers: but y^
infamy and discredit redoundeth to their Friends.

Such Frendshippes there fore must be salued by less vsinge their company, and
(as I have heard Cato say) must by little and little be cleanlye shifted of,
rather then bluntly and grossly broken, unless there be so apparent evidence
of some such insufferable iniurye, that we can neither with honesty, neither
credit, How and when we must give a friend over.
neither any way possible, other^^se choose, but presently to make an
alienation and disseueraunce.

But if there be a certain change in them of manners and disposition (as
commonly happens) or if there chance any farring or variaunce in some point
touching ye Common wealth (for I speak Warines to be used.
now (as I said a little before) not of wisemens* Fre^dships, but of vulgar
a^ities) we must beware, least Friendship seem not only to be laid aside, but
Enemitie and malice rather to be taken up.

For there is not a more dishonest thing, then to be at war with him, with
who^ A dishonest part.
before time thou have lived familiarlie.

Scipio, for my sake (as ye know) untwined himself from the Freendeshippe of
Q. Pompeius: and by reason of the Dissension that was in the Common Wealth, was
clean aliened from our Fellow in office Metellus. He did both these,
discretely by authority, without How clenly Scipio shifted himself from the
Friendship of ij. that had been his friends.
any bitterness or offense of mind, to either party.

Wherefore we must take no small beede first that no dissension nor fallinge
out among. Friends do happen: but if any such thing do happen, that
Freendshyppe may seem rather by little and little to go out and quench of
itself, then sodeinly and rashely to be choked and put out.

We must also beware, that Frendshippe turn not into great hatred: out of
which, chydinges, raylinges, and reproachful terms are engendered: which
(notwithstanding) if they be any thing tolerable, must be borne withal. And
this honor is to be attributed to old Frendshippe, that the fault is always in
him that does, not in him that suffers wrong.

Now, of all these vices and discommodities, A good caveat to be remembered.
there is one caveat or Prouiso to be considered: which is, that we neither
begin to love too soon, ne yet, the unworthy. For they be worthy Who be
worthy to be loved.
of Frendshippe, in whom, there is good cause why they should be loved.

It is a rare thing (for surely al excellent things are rare) and theris
nothing harder, then to find a thing which in every respect in his kind is
throughlye perfect. All excellent things are rare.
But many there be, which neither know any thing, yt is good in this world,
saving that which is gainful: and (like Beasts) The common guise of the
world now a days.
they love those Friends most, of whom they hope to receive most profit.

And therefore they do lack yt most goodly and most natural Friendship, which
is of itself, and for itself to be desired and sought: neither do they show
in themselves any example, how great and of what sort, the force of this
Friendship is.

For every man loves himself, not to the end to exact any reward of
himself, for his tender love toward himself, but because every man is bear
unto himself. Which thing if it be not semblably used in Frendshippe, there
ca^ never be found any true friend.

For he is a friend, which is (as it were Who is a friend.
an other himself.

Now, if these things appear so evident in Beasts, Birds, Cattall, Fyshes,
Swyne, and other Creatures, both tame and wild, that they have a love to their
own selves (for this is naturallye engraffed in all lyuinge Creatures) and
also that they desire and lust after some other of the same kind whereof they
themselves be, to company withal, and that with a certain longing desire, and
likeness of humane love: how much more is the same apparaunt in Man, by
nature? who both tenderlye loves himself, and gets an other to whom he
may so francklye impart his mind, as though of two, he would make (in a
manner) but one.

But most men peeuishlye (I will not A peruers reckening
say impude^tly) would have such fre^des as they them selves cannot be: and
such things do they look for to have at their friends hands, as they
themselves do not yield and geeue unto them. But it is fit, that he himself
should first be a A freende must be a good man
good man: and then afterward to seek for another, like himself.

In such manner of persons, may that Stability of Friendship (which ere while
we reasoned upon) be confirmed, when as men joined together with goodwil,
shall first rule and master those sensual lusts and affections, whereunto
others do serve and obaye: and when they shall delighte in Justice and equity:
and the one to undertake and attempt al things for the other: and never the one
to request any thing of the other, but that which No unlawful request must
be made to our friends
shall be honest and right: and shall not only louinglye agree together, and
love one an other, but also as it were reverent lie fear and stand in awe one
of an other.

For, he that takes away reverent awe from Friendship, takes away the
Reverent awe or modest bashfulnes in fre^dshyppe.
greatest Ornament that is in it. They therefore nozzle themselves with a very
pernicious error, which think yt in Frendshippe, the gate is set wide open
freelye to pursue all licentious lusts and lewdenesse. For Freendshippe is
geeuen Fre^dshyp an aid to virtue.
by Nature to be an aid to Virtue, and not a Compagnion to vices: yt since,
Virtue being solitarye, and alone, could not reach to those things which are
most excellent, yet being combined and cowpled with an other, she might
attaigne thereto: which fellowship if either it be or has been, or
hereafter shall happen to be between any, (I say) their fellowship and company
is to be accounted (for the attainme^t of Natures chief goodness) the best and
happiest yt can be. The right fellowship.
This very fellowship (I say) is it, wherein are all those things, which men do
account worthy to be desired, as Honesty, Glory, Tra^quillity of mind, and
pleasantness: so that where these be, there is the life happy: and without
these, it Happy life.
cannot be happy. Which thing being the greatest and the best thing that can
be, if we be desirous to obtain, we must apply our selves to virtue:
without the which, we neither can attaigne to Freendshippe, ne any thing else
yt is to be desired. For who soever (despising Virtue, do think themselves to
have friends, do then perceive their own error, when any weighty plunge of
necessitye A wise and sententious counsel
drives the^ to try the^. And therefore (for it is a thing often to be
repeated) a man ought to love, when he has judged: and not to judge, when
he has loved. But whereas we be in many things much punished for negligence,
yet namely and specially in chosing and regarding our friends. For we go
preposterously to work, and (contrary to ye advise of ye old proverb) we
ouerthwartly do and undo, and labor against the grain. For being enwrapped
too and fro with business, either through some long familiarity and acquaintance
or else through some kindness and courtesies, we suddenly in ye midst of our
course break of our Friendship, when any small offense arises.

And therefore such careless negligence of a thing so principally necessary is
the more to be dispraysed. For Friendship Al men generally agree that Fre^dshyp
is most profitable
is the only thing in this world, of whose profitablenesse all men with one
mouth do agree: albeit Virtue itself is of many men set at naught, and is said
to be nothing else, but a bragguery and Virtue despised.
ostentation.

Many which hold themselves contented with a little, and delight in slender
fare and homely Apparel, do utterly despise Richesse. And as for Promotions,
Riches.
(with ambitious desire whereof some are greatly enflamed) how many Promotion.
me^ be there, which do so much contemn them, that they think there is
nothing vainer nor lighter? Likewise, other things which some do even wonder
at, and be in love withal, there be very many which esteem even as nothing.

But of Frendshippe al men generallye have one mind and opinion, as well
Friendship, generally praised
those which are called to have dealings in the common wealth, as those that
have their whole delight in learning and knowledge of things: and those also
which quietlye tend their own business. And finally eue^ they which have
wholly given themselves over to Sensuality, do think that without
Frendshippe, life is no life: at least wise if they mean any whyt orderlye to
live.

For Friendship spreads (I wot not how) through the life of al sorts of me^:
Every several man's life requires friendship.
neither does it suffer this life in any part to be passed without it.

Furthermore if there be any of that churlish and savage nature, to eschew and
hate the company and Frendshipp of al men, (of which stamp and sort we have
heard say, that there was one Tymo^ (I know not who) at Athens: yet cannot
Tymon a hater of al company.
he choose, but seek out one, to who^ he may vomit out the poison of his
ranckred malice.

And this would especially be judged, if any such thing might happen, yt God
should take us out from this companying with men, and should place us elsewhere
in some wilderness: and there geeuinge unto us abundaunce and store of al
things which nature desires, should altogether take away and wholly debar
us from so much as the seeing of any man: All pleasure and plentye without
company vnpleasa^t
who could be so stonye hearted to abide y^ kind of life? or from whom would
not that same solitariness take away the fruict of al pleasures?

True therefore is that saying which I have heard our Oldmen tell, (and they
Solttarines.
of other Oldemen before them) was wont to be spoken by Architas (I trow
Architas Tarentinus
of Tarento: If a man should climb up into Heaven, and take a full view of the
nature of the world, and the beautifulness of the stars: the admiration
thereof, would be unto him unpleasant, which would otherwise have been mo^^
pleasant, if he had any to whom he^ might make thereof relation.

Thus, Nature loves no solytarines, and always leaves unto some thing a^
Nature loves no solitarines.
unto a stays which in every freendli^^ person is most delightful.

But although the same Nature d^^ by so many signs declare what she m^^neth,
and seeks: what she coueteth and desires: yet do we (I know not how wax
deaf, and geeue no care to thos^ things, whereof we are by her warned.

For the use of Freendship is sundry and manifold, and many occasions of
suspicion and offenses be geeuen, which partlye to eschew, partly to
extenuate, and partly to hear, is a Wisema^s part. And this one offense is
to be redressed, that both profitablenesse and also faythfulnesse in
Frendshyppe, may be We must frendlye admonish and chide our friend.
still retained. For friends must often times be both admonished and chidden
also. And this is to be freendly taken, when it is done freendlye and of
goodwill.

But this is true (I cannot tell how) Flattrye gets friends
which my very Familier freende Terence set down in his Comedy, entitled
Andria, that Soothing gets Fre^des, but truth purchases Hatred.

Truth is gallinge and grievous, for out of it proceeds Hatred, which is unto
Frendshippe a rank poison: but Soothinge Truth.
or Flattery is a great deal more gallinge, which by wincking at his fre^des
faults, suffers him still to run on headlonge in his wilfulnes.

But the greatest blame is in him, who despises ye Truth, and is carried by
soothing into such inconvenience and naughtynesse. Herein therefore we must
bestow all care and diligence: first, that our admonishing be without
bitterness, and our chyding without spitefulnes.

But in soothinge (because I delight to use Terence his word) let there be
Flattrye is to be eschued.
a courteous gentilnesse used withal, and let al flattery (the egger on of
vices) be set aparte, which (in deed) is vnmeett not only for a freende, but
also for any honest man.

For after one sort do men live with a Tyrant, and after an other sort with
Truth must be heard.
a friend. But his recovery is to be despayred of, whose ears from the
hearing^ of truth be shut, that he cannot abide to hear that is true, at
his friends hands. For right wise is that same saying of Cato: that sharp
nippinge A wise saying of Cato.
Enemies do more good unto some, then those friends, which do seem fawning
Clawbackes. For they sometime, but these never tell the truth.

And this is a very absurd matter, yt they which be admonished, find not
themselves aggreeued at yt, which they ought but at that which they ought not.
They An absur de reckening
be not sorry yt they have done amiss, but they take it unkindly to be chidde^,
where as co^trarywise, they ought to be sorry for their faults, and glad of their
chidinge.

Therefore as to warn our friend and to be warned again by him is the
property of true Frendshippe: and the one to do it freely, not roughly,
the other to Property of true Fredshyp
take it patiently and not frowatdlye: so must we make this reckening, that
there is no greater Plague or mischief in Friendship, then adulation,
glauering, and flattrye. Albe it this vice must be for Flatterye the greatest
plage in Frendeshyp.
many respects noted to be the fault of lewd and crafty persons, speaking
all to pleasure, and nothing to Truth.

But whereas Dissimulation in all things is evil (for it takes away the
right judgment of truth and corrupts it) yet namely to Frendshippe it is
most repugnaunt. For it raseth out the truth, without which, ye name of
Fre^dshippe Dissimulation.
cannot continue. For since the force of Frendshippe stands upon this
point, that there should be made as ^^ were one mind of many: how can tha^
be brought to pass, if in one man there be not one, and always alike mind,
but diverse; chaungeable, and wa^tringe? First what thing can there be so
mutable and so wa^dering out of course as is the mind of yt man, which swaieth
not only at every man's fancy and wi^^ but also at every man's beck and look?
Say who nay? Nay, say I* Say^ who yea? Yea, say I. Finally I have enjoined my
self, to hold up all men's sayings with Yea and Nay, as says In Eunucho.
the same Terence* but he speaks those words in the person of Gnato: Gnato.
which to use in the person of a Friend, were too too much lightness.

But for so much as there be many Gnatolike persons, in estate, wealth, and
credit, above others: their Flatterye Hurtful flatterye.
is odious and yrckesome, when as authority ioygneth with vanity.

Now, a flatteringe Clawbacke (if good heed and diligence be taken) may even
as well be discerned, and known, from a true friend, as all counterfei^^^ and
feigned stuff may from things sincere and right. The assembly of the Commons,
which stands most of unskillful and ignorant persons, is wone yet to judge,
what odds and difference there is between a people pleaser (that is to say a
curryfauour, and light person) and between a constant, severe and grave
Citizen. With which kind of Flattering, C. Papyrius ye Consul, of late stuffed
the peoples ears, at what time he Papyrius.
made a law, for the restoring of the Plebeian Tribunes. We dissuaded yt
matter. But I will not speak of my self: I will with better will, speak of
Scipio. What pythines (good Lord) was there in his talk, what a majesty was
there in his Oration? yt a man might well have Pithy Oration of Scipio.
said, he had been the leader and chieftain of the people of Rome, and not a
fellow co^paignion and comoner with the^. But you were present there your
selves, and his Oration, is extant and abroad to be had. Therefore ye same
populer Law was by ye peoples own voices disanulled and dashed.

And to return again to my self: you remember when Q. Maximus ye brother of
Scipio, and L. Mancinus were Consuls, how populer and people pleasing ye law
of C. Licinius Crassus touching Priests dignities, seemed to be. For yt
election and supply of Sacerdotall rowmes, was conueighed over to the
disposition of the common people: and he was ye first of al others, that
brought into the place of Pleas, an order, to make any Oration to the people in
verse. But yet the Religion of the immortal Gods (I defending the matter)
easily defeated that smothing Oration of his, so painted out to the sale. And
this was done, when I was Praetor, five years before I was made Consul.
Therefore that cause was defended rather by ye goodness of yt matter (...)
itself, then by the authority of the Pleader that had it in hand.

Now if in Stage matters, that is to say, in Populer Audience, wherein feigned
and shadowed things be often introduced, yet the Truth preuayleth and bears
away the Bell, if so it be opened and set out accordingly: what ought to be done
in Frendshippe, which is considered and waighed altogether by truth? wherein,
except a man do thoroughly (as they say) see into the very bottom of his
friends heart, and likewise show his own: be cannot stand upon any sure
ground, for trust and trial: nay, he can never love, nor be loved: since
he knows They most ^oue flattry, which be flatterers of themselves
not how it is done truly.

Although this flattery be pernicious and hurtful, yet can it hurt no man but
him, that listeneth to it, and is delighted with it. And so it comes to pass
that he most opens his ears to flatterers, who selfely flattereth himself,
and most delights in himself.

Virtue (surely) loves herself. For she best knows herself, and
perceives Virtue
how amiable she is.

But I now speak, not of Virtue, Many vvoulde rather seem honest then be
honest in deed.
but of the opinion, had of Virtue. For, not so many are willing to be
virtuous, as do desire to seem virtuous. These kind of persons does
flatterye delight: They, when any glosed speech is used to feed their
humor, do streightwais Men that set by themselves, are easy to believe
flatterers.
think, that the same vain words be a testimonye of their praises.

This therefore is no Friendship, when as the one will not hear the Truth, and
the other is ready to lie: neither would the glauering flattery of these
Parasits and Trencher Friends in Comedies, be any whyt pleasant or merry, if
there were not some glorious Soldiers.

What Syrrha, did Thais geeue me great thanckes? It had been sufficient
Thraso.
for the other to have answered, Yea sir, Gnato
great: but he said: Yea sir, very exceeding great.

Flattery always increases, and sets out to the most, that thing, which
Flatterye of a little makes a great deal
the party (for whose tooth it was spoken) would have to be great.

Wherefore although this fawning vanitye be most in ure and practice, with them
which do to the^ allure and inuit it: yet are the Sager and constanter sort of
me^ to be admonished to take heed, that they be not ensnared and mashed with
this kind of fly flattery. For every man can perceive an open Flatterer,
except he be a very Sotte, or Idiot: but we must very carefullye take heed,
that this crafty and fly Flatterer do not wind or close himself within us.
For he is not easelye espied: by reason yt even by contrarying one, he many
times flattereth: and feigning himself to brawle and chyde, does glauer: and
in the end yeldeth and suffers himself to be vanquished, yt he which is
flouted to his teeth, may seem to have gotten ye victory. And what be astlier
thing ca^ there be the^ yt? Which thing, yt it may not happen, we must take the
more heed: as in ye Interlude, entitled Fpicuraeus: Today before almy old
foolish Copesmates you have coursed and flouted me very mynto^ly. For in
plays, ye persons of old vnforcastful and credulous me^, are most foolish.

But my talk (I cannot tell how) is digressed from speaking of the
Frendeshippes of perfect men, that is to say, of Wysemen (I do mean of such
Wisdom as does seem may be in man) unto slyghte and tryfelinge
Freendeshippes. Wherefore let us return to that which we spoke of, and let
us conclude at length upon it.

I say (O C. Fannius, and you Q. Mutius) Conclusion of this matter. Virtue.
yt Virtue both gets, and also keeps Friendship. In it, is al agreement of
things, al stability, al constancy. Who, when she has advanced herself and
showed out her light, and espied and known the same in an other, leans
herself to that also, and takes likewise that which is in an other. Whereupon
breeds between each other, an exceeding love and Frendshippe. Amor and
Amicitia, ab Aman do.
For both these two words have their names of this word, To Love.

Now, to love, is nothing else, but to bear a goodwill unto him, whom you To
love what it is
do hartelye favor, not for any need or any profit that is sought. Which
profit (notwtstanding) springs out of Friendship, although you have not
pursued it accordingly. With this kind of goodwill, we (when we were young
Striplinges) loved those worthy Oldmen. L. Paulus, M. Cato, C. Gallus, P.
Nasica, and Tib. Gracchus, father in law to our dear friend Scipio. This
Frendshippe also more evidently appears, among Equalles and persons of like
age, as between me and Scipio, L. Furius, P. Rutilius, and Sp. Mummius.

Semblablye also, we Oldmen take great pleasure in ye louingnesse of young
men: as for example, I for my part, am singulerly delighted in the familiaritye
of you, and of Q. Tubero a very young Striplinge, and of P. Rutilius Virginius.

For seeinge that the order of our life and nature is so appointed, that one
age must succeed after an other: it is very Like delights with like
greatly to be wished, that we may live with such, as be our Equalles in age:
yt as we came together into the world, much about one time: so also (as they
say) we might keep together, till we pack again out of the world.

But because the state of the world is fickle and fading, we must always
find out some, whom we may both love, and also be of them loved again.
For once take away Love, and goodwil: and all pleasantness of life is quighte
taken away.

As for Scipio, although he was taken away sodeinly from among us, yet The
fame of a worthy man never dies
(surely) to me he is still alive, and always shall be. For I ever loved the
Virtue, of that man, which is not extinct: neither is the same plain and
apparaunt before mine eyes only, who al always had the daily feelinge of
it, but also unto all our posterity, shall it be noble and notable.

No man shall ever enterprise any worthy attemptes, either in courage or
hope, which deemeth not the memory or image of this noble personage, worthy to
be set before him for a Pattern. A true friend is the surest possession
I truly among all the things yt Fortune or Nature has bestowed upon me, have
nothing comparable unto Scipio his Frendeshippe. In it was a freendlye
agreement between us, concerning the Common wealth: in it, was our conference
for our private affairs: in it, was Effects of Fre^dships
my rest, full of delectation. I never offended him (not in the least matter
that could be) that ever I could perceive. I never heard any thing of him yt
ever went against my mind. One house served us both, one fare and that even
common: Yea, not only warfare, but also our trauayles, voyages, and
soiourninges abroad, were alike common.

For what should I speak of our ioynet studies, in always siftinge out and
learning of something: in the which, when we were out of the peoples sight
we bestowed all our leisure and time? The recordation and memory of which
things, if they had dyed together with him, I could never possiblye have borne
the lack of such a freendly and louinge man. But yet these are not extinct.
Nay, they are rather nourished and increased by the cogitation and remembrance
of the^.

And although I should utterly be bereft thereof, yet very Age it self would
bring unto me singular comfort. For I could not very long continue in this
la^guishinge case. But all short things ought to be sufferable, although they
be great.

Thus much had I to say concerning Frendshippe. Now, am I to exhort you,
to have Virtue in such price, (without which Friendship cannot be) that (it
only except) you deem nothing more excellent, then Freendshippe.


T. N.

FINIS.
THE BOOK of Oldage: otherwise entitled, the Elder CATO: written
Dialoguewise, by M. T. Cicero, unto Titus Pomponius Atticus.

The Preface.
O Titus, if I ease thee of that pain,
And heavy care, which does thee now annoye,
And makes thine heart, full pensive to remain,
Shall I herein my labor well employe?
FOR in speaking unto thee (Freende Atticus) I dare be bold to use the same
verses, which that worthy* Poet, Ennius.
(not greatly wallowing in wealth, but fullye fraught with faithfulness) uses
in speaking to Flaminius: albeit I am well assured (friend Atticus) that thou
art not so disquieted night and day, as Flaminius was: for I do know the
moderation, and quiet stay of thy mind. And that thou have brought home with
thee from Athens, not only thy* Syrname, but courtesy also, and Prudence.
Because he was called Atticus.
And yet I suspecte, that now and then, thou art sore troubled in mind, for
the same* matters that I my self am.

The Co^solatio^ whereof is great and therefore For the Civil discension.
to be differred till another time. At this present, I thought it best to
write some little Treatise unto thee, concerning Oldeage: because I would have,
both thee and my self eased of this heavy burden of Oldeage, which is commune
and indifferent to me, as well as to thee, and has now either catched hold
of us already, or else ere it be long, will come upon us.

Notwithstanding, I well know that thou do and wilt take the same
modestly, and wiselye as thou do all other things.

But when as I purposed with my self to write somewhat of Oldeage, thou came
into my remembrance, as a man worthy of such a gift, which both of us, might
ioyntlye and commonly enjoy.

As for my part I promise thee, the penninge of this Book, was such a
delectation unto me, that it did not only clean wype away all the
encombraunces and discommodities of mine Oldeage from me: but rather made mine
Oldeage unto me, pleasant, and delectable. Therefore Philosophy can never be
suffyciently praised: whose Precepts and Rules, who so ever obayeth, may pass
the whole time of his Age, without any grief or trouble. But of those other
points, we have heretofore, and shall hereafter speak.

And we do attribute the whole dyscourse, not to Tithonus, as Aristo Chius
did, least as in a feigned Fable the whole Discourse should carye the less
credit: but unto Old Marcus Cato: to the end the Treatise might carye the
greater Authority. With whom we do introduce Laelius and Scipio, meruaylinge
to see him so patientlye to tolerate his Oldeage, and his answer to them
again. Whom if thou think more learnedlye here to dispute, then in his own
works he was accustomed, impute the cause to his skilfulnesse in the Greek
Tongue, whereof it is well known that in his Oldeage he was very studious,

But to what purpose, should we make any more words? For all that we have
to say concerning Oldeage, the Discourse of Cato himself shall manifestly
declare.

The Speakers Names.
Publius Scipio. Caius Laelius. Marcus Cato.
SCIPIO. OFtentimes both I, and my friend Caius Laelius here also, are wont
much to marvel at thy excellent and absolute wisdom O Cato, as well in all
other matters: as namely and specially, because I never yet perceived thine
Oldage to be burdenous unto the: which to the most part of Oldmen is so odious,
that they say they carye a burden heavier then the Mount AEtna.


CATO. It is no great hard matter, (Scipio and Laelius) which you seem so much
to marvel at. For they that have in themselves no help to live well and
blessedlye: unto such, every Age is combersome: but unto such, as seek all
things at themselves, nothing can seem evil, which comes by the necessity
of Nature.

Of ye which sort is Oldage principally, whereunto to come, al men do desire,
and yet when they have their wish, do accuse it: such is their inconstancy,
folly and ouerthwartnesse: They say it creeps upon the^ sooner then they
thought it would. First, who caused the^ to imagine an untruth? For why does
Oldage sooner steal upon Adolescencie, then Adolescency does after Childhood?
Furthermore, why should Oldage be less troublesome unto them, if they might
reach to the Age of eight hundred years then it is when they be but eighty? For
the age passed be it never so long, when it is once gone, can with no manner of
consolation mitigate foolish Oldage.

Therefore if you be wo^t to have my wisdom in admiration (which I would God
were correspondent to your opinion, and also aunswerable to my * Syrname)
surely we are in this only For Cato by interpretacion signifies a vvittye
man
point wise, because we follow Nature being our best guide, as a god, and obey
her. Of whom, it is not like to be true, when al other parts of age are well
described and set out, yt the last Act of all should (as it were of a drowsy
Poet) be negligentlye handled. But in Age there must needs be some extreme or
last End (and as in berries of trees and fruicts of the earth) when they com to
their full ripenes) a drowpi^g downward and readynes to fall: which every
Wisema^ must patiently tolerate.

For what other thing is it, to war To resist against Nature, is to keep
war against the Gods.
with the Gods, as the Gyaunts did, but to repugne and go against Nature?


LAEL. But you shall do a singular great pleasure unto us both, for I dare
also in this case undertake for Scipio (because we both desire, and also hope
to lyuetyl we be Oldmen) if we might learn a good while before hand of you, by
what means we may most easly suffer and bear out our old Age when it comes.


CATO. I will (Laelie) with all my heart fulfill your request, especially if I
shall thereby do such pleasure unto you both, as you say I shall.


SCIP. Right glad would we be, if it be not too much pains and trouble for
you, O Cato, since you have (as it were run a great race, and made a long
journey which path also we must go) to hear and understand what kind of thing
yt is, whereunto you are already arrived.


CATO. I will do herein O Laelie, what I am able: for I have oftentimes been
in place where I have heard ye complaints of my equalles and familiers (for,
Like with Like, according to ye old proverb Like to like.
will keep company and best agree together) when as C. Salinator, and Sp.
Albinus, men of Consular calling, and in manner of the same age that I my self
am, were wont greatly to be wayle their cases, both because they lacked
pleasures, without which, they accoumpted their life as none: and also because
they were despised of those, of whom they had earste been reverenced.

But in mine opinion, they blamed not that, which was blame worthy. For if ye
cause and blame thereof, were in Oldeage, then should the same discommodities,
happen also unto me, and to all other elderly me^ besides: of who^ I have
known a great mainye, that have lived in their Old age without any whyning or
complaint: who were well pleased to be loosed and delivered, out of the yoke
of their Sensual Lusts: and were never despised of their Friends and
acquaintance. But the fault of all this repyning, is in the Manners and not in
the Age. For discreet and temperate old men, being not stern and churlishe,
do live in their Oldage tolerably and well. But way wardnesse and inhumanitie
is unto every Age tedious and yrkesome.


LAEL. It is even so, as you say O Cato: but there will some peradventure say
unto you, yt your Oldage, seems unto you tolerable enough, because of your
great wealth, riches and dignity: but many cannot have such good hap.


CATO. In deed Laelie, that which you say, is somewhat, but al things do not
rest therein. As, the report goes that Themistocles, nippinglye answered a
Themistocles.
certain Seriphian Paisau^t, obiecting, yt he had not gotten such great glory,
and same by himself, but rather through yt renown of his noble country: thou
say even truth (said he) for neither should I ever have been ennobled. if I
had been a Seriphian, neither thou renowned, if thou had been an Athenian.

Which thing may even in like manner be said of Oldage. For neither in extreme
penurye, and want, can Oldage be easy, no not to a Wiseman: neither can it be
but combersome to an unwise person, although he have never so great plentye.

The fittest weapons for Oldage (O Scipio and Laelie) are Arts and exercises
of Virtues: which being all the Fittest vvepons for Oldage.
time of man's age embraced, bring unto him, when he has lived a long
while, marvelous fruits and commodities. Not only, because they never forsake
or start from him, no, not in the very last pushe of his age (which surely is
a most excellent thing) but also because the Conscience of our former life,
well and virtuously led, and the remembrance of our many good deeds, is most
pleasant.

Certes, I being a young Striplinge, did so love Quintus Maximus (even be that
recovered Tarento) being an Old man, as though he had been mine Equal and of
like Age unto myself. For in yt worthy man, there was a certain Gravity,
seasoned with Curtesy: neither had his Oldeage altered his manners: Albeit when
I first began to honor and reverence him, he was not very old, but yet
pretily stricken in years.

For I was borne a year after that he had been the first time Consul: And in
that year that he was the fowrth time Consul, I being a very young man went
with him as a Soldier unto Capua: the fifte year after that, I was made
Treasorer at Tarento: Then I was chosen Aedile, and four years after that,
Praetor: which office I bare and executed, when Tuditanus and Cethegus were
Consulls. At that time he being a very aged man, was a perswader of ye Law By
this Law, professors of Rhetorik and pleaders of law might take no money for
their labor, but do it of a certain nobl^^es of mind.
Cincia, touching Gifts and Rewards.

And be being a man far grown in years, was both a lustye warrior, as
though he had been still young, and with his forbearing cooled the courage of
Hanniball, being all upon the hoigh, like a dapper yonker, whose commendation
our familer trend Ennius excelle^tly blazeth out, thus:

One man by protracting the time with delay:
Has saude our vveale-publike and restorde it again. Ennius.

For he never forced what ill tongues did say
So that his country still safe might remain.
Therefore his renown and illustrious name,
For aye is enrollde within the Book of Fame.
What vigilance and what wisdom used he, when he recovered Tarento? when as
in my hearing he spoke these words to Salinator (who after the loss of the
Town, fled into the Castle) making his vaunt and saying thus: By my means (O
Fabius) have thou regayned Tarento: *Your Maistership says even true (quod
Fabius) to him again, smyling: A taunt pretelye rebou^ded back again.
for if thou had not lost the Town, I could not have regained it.

Neither was he any whyt excelle^ter in wars abroad then in peace at home.
For being the second time Consul, while his fellow in Office Sp. Caruilius,
sat still and would do nothing, he withstoode as much as ever he could, C.
Flaminius ye Plebeian Tribune, sharing out to every one, man by man, against
the Authority of the Senate, all the ground called Now called Marca Anconitana.
Gallia Cisalpina, now Lu^bardy.
* Picaenu^ and * Gallicum. And when he was Augur, he durst to say, yt all
those things were with most fortunate luck taken in hand, which were done for the
safetye and preservation of the common wealth: and that all those things, which
were preiudicially attempted against the commonwealth, were vnluckely done, and
enterprised.

Many and sundry notable qualities have I known in this man, but none is
more to be meruayled at, then how be took the death of his son Marcus, a
noble Gentleman, and one that had been Co^sul. We have extant abroad an Oration
of the praise of yt man: which when we read, what Philosopher do we not
contemn? Praise of Fabius
Neither was he only renowned in the open sight of all men abroad: but
domestically within his own doors at home, he was more noble. What profound
talk used he? what worthy precepts? what great skill had he in Antiquity?
what exact knowledge in the Art of Divination? There was also in him, as in a
Roman, very great learning: he perfectly remembered and that by heart could
recoumpt all the Wars, as well Civil and Domestical, as foreign and
external. Whose talk and conference I so desirouslye enjoyed as though I had
already diuined and ghessed that thing, which afterward chanced: that he
being dead, there would be none, at whose hands, I might learn ought.

But to what end speak I so much of Maximus? Truly, because you see that it is
an horrible villainy, to say that such an Oldeage was wretched or miserable.

But al men cannot be Scipioes or Maximi, to recoumpte what Cities they have
sacked? what conflictes they have had, both by Sea, and Land: what wars they
have achieved: nor what Victorsouse Triumphs they have solemnized.

For when a man has led his former life quietly, vprightlye, and laudablye,
Plato dyed as he sat writing.
his Oldage is mild and gentle, such as we have heard that ye Oldage of Plato
was, who in the Lxxxi. year of his age, died as he sat writing. And such, as
was the Oldeage of Isocrates, who is reported, Which contained the praises of
Minerua her feasts at Athens, wherein all learned men shevved forth their
Cunning
that he wrate his Book entitled * Panathenaicus, in the ninety and fourth
year of his Age, and lived five years after: whose Scholemaister Leontinus
Gorgias, lived fullye an hundred and seven years, and never faynted, nor gave
over his study and labor which he had in hand. And when it was demanded of
him, why he would wish to live so long: *I have (said he) no cause where A
worthy answer.
by to accuse or mislyke mine Oldeage. A notable answer and worthy to
proceed out of the mouth of a famous and learned man. For doltish fools do
lay all their own faults and blame upon Oldeage: which thing the Poet
Ennius (of whom I ere while made mention) did not.

As Horse which at Olympian Games, Ennius.

full often has borne the Bell,
And won the Price: in aged years,
now rests himself full well.
Lo, this man, whom you can very well remember, compares his Oldeage, to the
Oldeage of a valiant and Victorious borse. For the nynthe year after his
Death, these twain, T. Flaminius, and M. Attilius were created Co^suls, and
he himself died when Caepio and Philip were ye second time Consuls, being
Lxx. years old (for so long did Ennius live) at which time I being lxv. years
old, with a loud voice and earnest suit was a perswader, yt the law By this law
a man having no Children but daughters, had his limitation how much he ought
at his death to be queathe unto the^, and all the rest of his inheritance and
goods to desce^d to the next Issue male of his kyn.
Voconia might be enacted.

Thus he carried two such burdens as are supposed the greatest that can be: to
wit, Poverty and Oldage, and that in such sort, that he seemed in a manner to
be highly delighted therein.

For as far as I do remember I find Four principal causes, why Oldage seems
wretched and miserable. One is, because it impeacheth and hinders a man from
dealing in matters: an other is, because it enfeebleth and weakeneth Four
causes why old age seems miserable.
the body: the third, because it almost takes away al pleasures: and the
fourth, because it is not far of from death.

Now let us (if you please) see of what force, every one of these causes be,
and how just, the allegation of every of them is.

Oldage hinders, and draws a man * The j. dispraise of Oldage. Oldage is no
let or hindera^ce to a man from dealing in offices or functions in the Common
well the.
back (for soothe) from taking a charge or function upon him: from what charge
or function I pray you? from such as are by lustiness of youth, and bodily
strength acchieued? Are there no things appertayning to Old me^, which
although their bodies be weak and feeble, yet may by the mind be done, and
administered? Did Q. Fabius (I pray you) nothing? Did L. Paulus thy father, O
Scipio, and father in Law to yt worthy man my Son, nothing? and a great
sort of Oldmen Grave and wise cou^sellours the chief stay of a Common
vvealths.
more. The Fabritij, the Curii, the Coru^cani, when they meinteyned and defended
ye weal public, with their grave counsels, and authorities, did they
nothing? Appius Claudius besides, his Appius Claudius
Oldage, was also blind: yet he when all the Senate was of mind to incline
to a peace and league to be made with Pyrrhus, was not afraid to speak those
words unto them, which Ennius in his Verses recited:

How are your mynds which erst with wit were fraught
Thus fondly bent to bring all things to naught?
And much more right gravely: for ye Verses are known well enough: And yet
Appius his Oration is to be seen, which he made leuenteene years after his
second Consulshippe: and between his two Consulships, there were ten years,
and he had borne the office of Ce^sor before his first Consulate.

Whereby it is well to be perceived, yt in ye wars which we had with
Pyrrhus, he was a man well stricken in years, and yet have we so heard our
fathers report.

Therefore their reasons are nothing worth, which deny that Old age is
occupied in exploiting affairs of great importance. And they do much like,
unto such as say that the Pylote or Master of a Ship, helps nothing in
Saylyng, when as some climb up into the Master of a Ship.
Mast coppe, some walk upon the Hatches, and some cleanse yt Pumpe: but he
holdinge the Helm, sits quietlye in the stern or Puppe: and although he
do not the same things, which Youngmen do, yet does he far better and
greater service then they.

For waightye matters are not done with the strength, nimblenes, and celerity
of body, but with counsel, authority and advise: whereof Oldage is wo^t not
only not to be deprived, but rather y^ better therewith increased, and
stored. Unless peradventure you think, that I who have been both a Soldier,
a Tribune, a General, an Ambassador and a Consul, and thoroughly tried in
diverse brunts of Wars, do now seem altogether to loyter, because I practice
not the wars, as I was wont to do.

But I do prescribe unto the Senate, what things are most expedient to be
done, and geeue certain information to them before hand, how war may be
made upon Carthage, which has borne a canckred stomach a great while toward
us: of whom I shall never cease to stand in fear, until I perfectly know it to
be utterly subverted.

Which victorious conquest I pray ye Gods immortal to reserve for thee (O
Scipio) that thou may fully fynishe and pursue that which thy Who made
Carthage Tributary to Rome: and this Scipio utterly destroyed, it.
Graundfather left behind him undone.

Since whose death, there are passed. 33. years: but the memorial of that
worthy man, God grant that al posteritye may embrace and receive mindfully.

He dyed the year before I was Ce^sor, nine years after my Consulshippe,
There were alvvayes 4. Consuls: 2. in Office for the year present: and the
other elected to succeed the next year folovvinge.
when he had been created Co^sul the second time, my self then being Consul.
Think you that if he had lived till he had been an hundredth year old, he would
have been wearye of his Oldage?

I grant he would neither practice Skirmishing, nor nimble leaping, neither
tossing the pykes a far of, nor slashing with Swords, hand to hand: but he
would use grave counsel, reason, and aduisement. Which points if they were not
in Oldmen, our Ancestors would never have termed their high and most The
Senate has his name of Old men.
honorable counsel, by the name of Senate. And among the* Lacedaemonians, they
yt bare the highest Offices (as they be) so also are they called Auncientes
Lacedaemonians.
or Sages.

Now, if you be disposed, to hear and read forrayne Examples, you shall find
that noble and flourishing common wealths, have been utterly spoiled by young
youthful heads. And the same by Old sage fathers, to have been maintained and
recovered.

Tell me this, how came it to pass that you lost your mighty and noble
common wealth in such a short space? for to one that moved this Question (as it
is to be seen in the Book of the Poet Neuius, entitled Ludus) many aunsweres
were made and namelye this: Forsoothe, because there stepped into Office, new
vpstart Orators, foolish and light headed Yonckers. Lo, Rashness is incidente
to youthful years, but prudence and wisdom to Oldage.

But the Memory is empayred. I believe Memory not minished in Oldmen.
it well, unless a man do exercise it: or if a man be of nature slow and
blockishe. Themistocles perfectly knew the names of every person in the City.
Do Memory of Themistocles.
you think that he, when he grew into years, used to call Aristides, by yt
name of Lysimachus? Surely I do know not only them yt be yet alive, but their
Fahers and Graundfathers also.

Neither fear I any whyt least when I read * Epitaphes upon Tombs, I should A
foolish persvvasion that was in people of old time.
(as they say) lose my memory. For by the reading of them, I am brought into
remembrance of them that are dead. Neither have I heard of any * Oldman, that
ever forgot in what place he had laid up his Treasure. They remember No old
man so obliuious, to forget where he lays his purse.
well enough all such things as they make any accou^pt of: their
Suretyshippes, and Obligations of apparau^ce at certain days: to who^ they be
indebted, and who to them.

What say we to Lawyers? what to Bishops? what to the Augurs? what to
Philosophers yt are Oldmen? How many things do they remember?

Their wits still remain in Oldemen, fresh enough, so that their study and
industrye continue still. And this not only in noble and honorable personages,
but in private and quiet life also.

Sophocles made Tragedies, even till he was a very Oldman: who being so
earnestly vent to his studies, yt he was supposed not to take any care of his
household affairs, was cited to appear Sophocles accused by his own sons,
for do tag
before the Judges, by his own sons. That, as our manner and custom is, when
any Parents do negligentlye look to their domestical dealinges, to sequestre
and defeact them, from the use of their goods: so also that the Judges should
displace him from the use and occupatio^ of his own goods, as an Old doting
Idiot. Then lo, the Oldeman is said to have openly recyted before the Judges
a certain Tragedy, which he then had in hand, and had lately written,
entitled Oedipus Coloneus: and after he had read the same, to have demanded
of them, whether they thought yt Poetical piece of work seemed to be of any
doatinge fools doing? After the recital whereof, he was by all the Judges
Sentences acquit and discharged.

Did Oldage cause this man, or Hesiodus, or Simonides, or Sthesicorus, or
(those whom I named before) Isocrates, or Gorgias, or Homer: or the Prince of
Philosophers, Pythagoras: or Democritus, or Plato, or Socrates, or afterward
Zeno, Cleanthes, (or him whom you also saw at Rome) Diogenes the Stoicke, to
be nonsuited, or to quayle and fumble in their matters? was not the practice of
the studies in all these men, Equal to their life?

Go too: Let us omit and pass over these divine Studies. I can name unto you,
out of the coast of Sabine, husbandmen my Neighbors and Familiers: whom being
absent, there is never lightlye, any great work of husbandrye done in their
fields, neither in sowing, in reaping, nor yet in inninge of their fruicts.
Albeit in the^, this thing is not so greatly to be meruailed at. For there is
no man so old, but thinks that he may No man so old but hops to live one
year longer.
live one year longer. But they also toil about such things, as they know
does nothing at all perteyne unto them. They graffe Trees, which shall yield
Fruict, after a great while, to them that Men must do good for them that come
after.
shall come after them: as our Statius in his work, entitled Synephoebis,
declares. Neither would an Husband man (be he never so old) stick to make this
au^sweer to one, yt should ask him for who^ he planteth and sows: I do it
for the Immortal Gods: whose pleasure it was, that I should not only receive
these things, at the hands of my Predecessors, but should also surre^der and
deliver the same again to my Successors. Better a great deal has Cecilius
spoken, of an Old man, laboring and providing for his Sequel and posterity,
then he does in this folowi^g: Certes, although Oldage when it comes had none
other inconvenience or mishap joined with it, yet is this one enough, that by
living long, a man sees many things, which he would not see.

Yea, and peradventure he sees many things, which he is right willing to
see. And Adolescency many times happens to see such things, as it would not
see.

But this next saying of the same Cecilius is a great deal worse. This also
(says he) do I accoumpte in Oldeage most miserable, because in that Age, a
Man does feel himself to be odious unto others. Nay pleasant rather then
odious. For even Old men take delight in tovvardly you^gmen
as Wise Oldmen take great delight in towardly and virtuous Young men: and
their Oldage made a great deal easier, which are reverenced and loved of Young
men: so again Youngmen take great An Old ma^s good advertisement, very
profitable and pleasant to a young man.
joy and contentment in the good lesso^s and Precepts of Oldemen, whereby
they are induced to the studies of Virtue. Neither do I perceive my self to
be any whytlesse welcome and pleasant unto you, then you are unto me.

But now you see, how that Oldage is not only not saint, sluggish, nor
drowsy, but is rather still busied and ever doing and devising of some what:
such things (I mean) as every one his delight has been unto, in his former
life.

Nay, how say we to this moreover? that they are every day learning somewhat.
Solo^ waxed Old, by learning every day somvhat
As we have seen by Solon, who glorying in certain verses, said, that be
waxed an Oldma^, by learning every day somewhat: as I my self also did: for I
learned the Greek tongue when I Cato learned the
was an aged man: which I did so greedelye Greek tongue when he was an Oldma^
rake and snatche unto me, as one desirous to staunche and quench a long
thirst: to the intent yt I might attaigne to the knowledge of those things,
which you now see me to use for Examples. Which thing when I heard say that
Socrates had likewise done in musical Instruments, I was (verily) willinge to
have done therein semblably: (for men in the old time learned to play upon
Instruments) but in Learning (doubtless) I took very great pains, and
Dylygence.

NEither do I now any whyt more The Second disprayse of Oldage: alleged by
them that say Oldage is miserable, because it makes the body vveake and feeble
desire or long to have ye lustines and strength of a young man (for this was
yt second point of ye disco^modities belonging to Oldage) then I did being a
young man, desire or long to have the strength of a Bull, or of an Olyphant.
For that thing which naturallye is engraffed in man, it is convenient and meet
for him to use: and what soever he takes in hand, to go through stitche with
it, and to do it effectuouslye.

For what more contemptible word can there be, then that of Milo Crotoniata?
who beeinge now old, and seeinge certain Champions, and Wrestlers tryinge
themselves, in the place or field of Exercise, is reported, that he looked
upon his own Arms, and spoke these words, weeping: Ah las, these Arms of
mine are now dead. Ah thou prattling Milo reprehe^ded because he bevvailed his
lack of strength in his old age.
Fool: thy arms are not so much dead, as thou art thy self: for thou never
gottest any renown of thy self, but by thy strong Sides, and brawny Arms.
Sext. AElius never played the like part, nor many years after that, T.
Coruncanus: yea of late days P. Crassus, never showed the like prancke: by
which men, Laws were prescribed to the Citizens: and whose Prudence continued
with them, even till the last gasp of their life.

But I fear, least an Orator or Pleader, An other objection
drowpe and faynte in Oldage. For why: to his Function is requisite, not only
wit, but durablenesse also, and strength. Assuredly, this same shrilnesse of
voice, does gallantlye shine and appear (I know not how) even in Oldeage:
which I my self have not yet lost, and yet you see my boarye hairs. But yet
not withstanding, a quiet and mylde Speech is comelye in an Oldman: and the
very neat and calm talk of an eloquent Sage, does oftentimes of itself,
cause Audience and ear to be geeuen unto it.

Which thing if a man cannot throughlye do himself, yet may he instruct
and direct Scipio and Laelius. For what To instruct and teach youth is a
necessary and excellent Function
thing is pleasaunter then Oldage guarded with the zealous affections of young
men? Shall we not leave unto Oldage such strength and power as to teach and
instruct Youngmen, and to train them to know every part of their Duties?
Then which office, what can be more excellent? Verelye, me thought that C. and
P. Scipio. and thy two Graundfathers, L. Aemilius and P. Aphricanus were happy
and Fortunate, through the attendaunce and company of young Gentlemen.

All Masters of Liberal Arts, are Learned men.
also to be accoumpted happy, although their strength be decayed and gone:
albeit this same decay and failing of the Youth inordinate lie led makes a
feeble and impotent Oldage.
strength is oftener caused through the defaultes of Adolescency, then of
Oldeage. For libidinous and dissolute Adolescencie, brings unto Oldeage, a
body feeble and impotent.

Cyrus in that talk which he had upon his death Bed, being a very Did man,
Lusty Oldage of Cyrus.
(as Xenophon writes) denies that ever he perceived or felt his Oldage, any
whytte weaker then his Adolescencye was.

I my self beeinge a Boy, remember that L. Metellus, who was made high
Bishop four years after his second Perfect strength of Metellus in Oldage.
Consulship, and executed that rowme of Priesthood xxii years, was of such
perfect strength in the very latter end of his Age, yt he never wished for his
Adolescencye again, I need not to speak any thing of my self: albeit it is
an Oldmans part so to do, and allowed unto us, by the privilege of our Age.

Do ye not see, how often Nestor in Homer makes vaunt of his own virtues?
Nestor lived three hundred years.
For he had now lived three men's Ages, and therefore needed not to fear, least
in telling of himself, yt, which was true, he should either seem too
arrogant or too talkatiue. For there flowed from his tongue (as Homer says)
words Iliad. j. Agamemnon.
and reasons, sweeter then honey: unto which sweetness, he needed not any
bodily strength, and yet that renowned * General of Greece, never wished to
have ten persons like Ajax: but he many times wished to have ten Wisdom
excels strength.
such as Nestor. Which if it might so happen: he doubted not, but Troy
should in short time be ruinated. But now I return to my self.

I am now going on the Lxxxiiii. year of mine Age: and glad would I be, if I
might glory and vaunte of that thing which Cyrus did: but yet this can I say,
that (in deed) I have not that strength which I had at the * Punique wars,
Between the Romans and the Carthaginia^s.
or when I was Lieutenant in the same Wars, or when I was Consul in Spain,
or as I had iiii. years after, when as I being Tribune or Marshall of the
field, fought a Battle at* Thermopyl, A mountain in Greece through which is
a very straight and narrovv passage.
in the time yt M. Attilius, and C. Labeo were Consulls. And yet as you see,
Oldage has not altogether soaked away my strength, nor weakened me: the
Senate house finds no lack of it in me: the Judicial place of Pleas misseth
it not: my Friends, Clientes, and Strangers, see no such want in me.

Neither did I ever assent unto that old and much praised Proverb: which
wishes a man to begin to be Old Enoughe such Cockneyes now a days.
quickly, if he desire to be Old long. But I (truly) had leyfer, not to be
an Old man long, then to be an Oldman before I were old in deed. And therefore
there never yet came any man to talk with me, but I was occupied.

But (in deed) I have not so much Strength, as either of you twain has: And
again, neither of you have the Strength of T. Pontius the Centurion. What
then? is he therefore better then you?

Let there only be a measurable moderation of Strength, and let every Let
every man meddle with no more then he can well compass
man attempt so much as he is able to compass: and then I warrant him, he
shall not feel himself greatly aggreeued for the lack of his strength.

It is said that Milo at the famous Games of Olympia, carried an Ox alive,
Milo carried an Ox alive, upon his shoulders, the space of a furlong.
upon his shoulders, the space of a furlong. Now therefore, whether had
thou leyfer have the Bodilye strength of this Milo, or the notable fine wit and
knowledge, that was in Pythagoras?

To be short: use and take well in worth this gift of Bodily strength, while
it lasts: and when it is gone, seek not after it to have it again: unless
peradventure, you will say, that young Striplinges should desire to be in their
swathing bands and Childhood again: or being somewhat further stepped in
years, should wish to be in their Adolescencye again.

The course of Age is certain, and yt Every age has his proper season.
way of Nature is one, and the same simple: and to every part of Age is his
due tempestiuitie appointed.

For even as weakness is naturally in young Children: wyeldenes in Yongme^:
and Gravity in full consistent age: so is there naturallye in Oldage, a
certain Rypenesse, which ought to be taken in his due time and season.

I think Scipio, that you hear what your Host Masinissa does now days
being 90. years old: who, if he begin Masinissa king of Mauritani at a
worthy and a painful Prince.
any Journey on foot, will not in all yt Journey come on horseback: and when
he rydeth forth, on horseback, will not alight: no Rain, nor Cold can make
him to cover his head: his Body is very dry: and therefore does he in his own
person, execute all the offices and functions that appertain to a King.
Therefore Exercise and temperaunce is able yet to co^serue in Oldage, somewhat of
yt former strength, and youthful lustiness.

In Oldage there is no great strength. Why: Strength is not looked for nor
required in Oldage. And therefore by the Objection
Laws and Ordinances, our Age is exempt and dispensed withal, from those
affairs, and functions, which cannot without strength, be discharged. And
therefore, we are not compelled to do yt thing, which we cannot do: nay, we
are not charged to do so much as we are able to do.

But many Oldmen be so weak and feeble, that they are not able to execute
Objection
any office or function, belonging to Humane Duty, or respecting man's life.
But surely this is not ye proper fault of Oldage, but the common fault of
lack of Health. How wearish and weak, was the son of P. Aphricanus, eue^
he, that adopted thee? what slender health or rather none at all had be? which
if it had not so been, he (surely) would have proved the second Light of our
city. For besides his fathers haughtines and glory, he was also better
furnished with learni^g and You^gme^ subject to infirmities as well as old
qualities of the mind. What marvel is it therefore in Oldmen, if they be
sometime weakishe and feeble, since even Youngmen cannot escape it? We must
resist Oldage (O Scipio and Laelie) and the faults that be in it, must by
diligence be recompensed. And as we would fight against Sickness, so must
we also against Oldage: we must have a special regard to our health we must
use moderate Exercises: we Good lessons to resist Oldeage.
must take so much meat and drink, yt the powers of the body may be
refreshed, and not utterly oppressed. And not only must we have this
special care to our Body, but also to our Soul, and mind much more. For,
these also The diet of the body, aptly rese^bled to a Lamp
(unless a man do observe a measure, as in feedinge a Lamp with Oil) are
quenched by Oldage, and entinguished.

And the Bodies by defatigation and Difference between the powers of the mind
and the body.
Exercise, decay and grow worse, but the Minds by being exercised, are
helped and bettered.

For those, whom the Comicall Poet Caecilius calls foolish Oldmen, he
means to be such as are credulous, forgetful, and dissolute: which are the
faults, not of right Oldage, but of such an Oldage, as is sluggish, slouthful,
and drowsy.

And as Malapertnesse and Sensuality, is more incidence to Youngmen then to
Old: and yet not to all Youngmen, but unto such as be not of good
disposition: so this Oldmanlye foolishness Dotage.
(which is commonly called Dotage) is not in all Oldemen, but in them only
which be lewd, and of small accoumpt.

Appius being both old and also blind, governed and ruled his four tall
Sons, Blind Appius a pattern of a noble Ge^tlema^ and good householder.
his five Daughters, his familye and household, which was great, besides his
Patronage of a great maignye of Clientes. He had his mind bent as it were a
Bow, and neither did he shrink nor yield to Oldage. He reserved and executed
not only Authority, but also an imperious co^maundme^t over al the^, that
were under his charge. For his servants feared him: his Children reverenced
him: all men tenderly loved him: in that house of his, there was a perfect
pattern of the ancient fashion, and discipline of our Country.

For herein is Oldage honorable, if it defend and maintein itself if it still
retayn his authority, if it be not in Bondage What makes Old age, honorable.
to any man: if even to the last breath, it exercise Rule and Commandment
over them that depend upon it.

For as we commend that Young man, in whom there be some points of Youthful
Oldage.
an Oldman: so also do we praise that Oldman, in whom, there is any of ye
properties of an honest Youngman. Which Old young age.
thing who soever follows, may be old in Body, but never in mind.

I am now in hand with my seventh Book of Originalles: I am collecting all
the Monumentes of Antiquity: and now am I earnestlye busied with penning the
Orations of all such famous and notable causes as I have in my time defended. I
study the Augurall, Canon, and Civil law: I geeue my self much to the
study of the Greek tongue: and (as Pythagoras his Scholars were wont to do)
to exercise my memory wtall, I recoumpt every Evening, all that The custom of
the Pytha thagoria^s
I have said, heard, or done, day by day.

These be the Exercises of the wit, these are the feats, wherein the mind
is occupied. In these I paynfullye trauayling and studying, find no great
lack of the strength of body. I am ready and able to help my friends, I
come often into the Senate house, and of mine own accord, I carry thither with
me, matters throughlye debated and canuassed: and them do I defend and
maintain with the strength, not of Body, but of Mind. Which things if I were
not able in person to execute, yet should I take great delectation lying in my
Bed, to think upon those matters, which I could not do. But my age
passed is such, that I can do them. For he yt geeueth himself continually to
these studies and labors, feels not when, nor how Oldage creeps upon him.

Thus does Age, by little and little, and without feelinge, wax old, and
grow to an end: neither is it sodeinly broken of, but by continuance, and
tracte of time quenched.

NOW follows the third dispraise The third Dispraise of Olage: alleged
or fault that is found in Oldage: because they say it lacks Pleasures. by
them that say it is with out al plesures.
Oh worthy gift of Age, if it take that thing from us, which eue^ in
Adolesce^cy is most beastly. For give ye ear (my good Gentlemenne) and mark
ye well an Old Oration or discourse of Architas Tarentinus, a right noble and
excellent man, which was lent unto me, when I was a very you^gman at Tarento
with Bodilye pleasure notablye inueigh ed against by Atchitas.
Q. Maximus. He said that there was not any more pernicious plague, ever
geeuen unto men by Nature, then was this Pleasure of ye Body. Which Pleasure,
men's libidinous lusts, inordinatelye desiring, are rashly and unadvisedly
incited, and stirred to ensue and follow. Hence (said he) spring all Treasons,
and Trecheries against our Country, hence begin all the euersions of Common
wealths: hence are hatched all secret conspiracies, and priuye conserences with
our Enemies. Finally, that there is no villainy, nor any notable enormitie,
which the inordinate desire of Pleasure did not egg, and incense a man
Pleasures the Welspring of al Mischieues.
to enterprise. And that Whoredom, Adulterye, and all such kind of detestable
deeds, were by none other lures, and enticementes, procured, but by Pleasure.

And whereas either Nature, or some God, has geeuen nothing unto man, of more
excellency, then the mind, Dignity of the mind.
or reasonable Soul:, there is no thing so much against this divine Gift and
bountye, as is Pleasure. For where Pleasure bears swaye, Tempe^raunce has no
place at all: neither can Virtue abide within Pleasures kingedome.

For the playner understanding of which thing, he willed, and bade us to A
man addicted to pleasure, most un meet for all virtuous actions
ymagine and in mind to presuppose some man, so greatly plunged in this
bodily Pleasure, as possiblye might be: he thought no man would doubt, but
that so long as any such man, wallowed in this Sensualitye, he should neither
be able by wit, reason, devise, nor cogitation, to co^triue and compass, any
thing that were good. And therefore he said that nothing was so detestable and
pestiferous as Pleasure.

For it beeinge great and continuinge long, would sone mar, and extinguish
all the light of the Mind.

Narchus our Host of Tarento (a man who had still continued in Friendship with the
People of Rome) did then tell me, that he had heard his Elders report, that
Architas had all this discourse with C. Pontius, the Samnite, father unto him,
by who^ our two Co^sulles, P. Posthumous, and T. Veturius were foiled and A
shameful and reprochful ouerthro.
overcome in the Battle at Caudium. At which Discourse, Plato of Athens was
also present: who (as I find) came to Tarento, when L. Aemilius. and Appius
Claudius were Consuls.

But to what end speak I all this? Forsooth, to geeue you to understand, yt
if we cannot by wisdom and reason, set Oldage qualifieth all il motions.
at naught and despise Pleasure: yet that we may say Gramercy to Oldage, by
whose means it comes to pass that we have no lust to do that thing, which
we ought not to do. For Pleasure being a deadly Enemy to Reason, hinders
Pleasure and Virtue are contraryes.
consultation, and (as I may say) dazeleth and bewitcheth ye eyes of the
mind, neither has it any Fellowship with Virtue.

Sore against my will was it, that I disgraded and displaced L. Flaminius, Vice
punished without any parciahtie or respect of persons
brother of yt right valiau^t T. Flaminius, out of ye Senate, seven years after
yt he had been Co^sull: but I deemed it convenient yt his inordinate Lust
should by such open punishment be accordingly met wtal and reproved. For
being Consul in Gallia, he was at a Banquet entreated A dissolute part
committed by Flaminius to fulfill an whores request
by a common Brothel or Curtesan, to behead some one of the^, which were in
Prison, and condemned to dye. He, so long as his brother Titus was Censor
(which was next before me) escaped unpunished: But I and Flaccus could not in
any wise allow of such a Villainous and lewd Lust, which besides his own
private shame, and reproach, emblemished also the Honor of our Empire.

I have oftentimes heard mine Ancestors tell, (who likewise said that they
had heard the same at Oldemens hands before) that C. Fabritius was wont much to
marvel: because being Ambassador to King Pyrrhus, be had heard Cyneas the
Thessalian, report, that at Athens there was a * certain fellow, Epicure.
professing himself to be a Wyseman, who affirmed, that all things which we
go about, ought to be referred unto Pleasure. Which tale, M. Curious, and T.
Coruncanus hearing him report, were wont to wish that the Samnites, and King
Pyrrhus himself, were fullye persuaded to believe, and creedite the same: to
the end they might be a great deal more easelye vanquished, when as they once
addicted theymselues whollye to Pleasures.

This M. Curious. lived with * P. Decius, This man valyantly died in the defense
his Country.
who in his fourth Consulshyppe, five years before the other was Consul,
voluntarily offered himself to death for his Country. Fabritius knew him well,
and so did Coruncanus: who as well by their own lives, as by the deed of this
P. Decius (whom even now I named) judged yt there was somthinge naturallye
good and excellent: which was to be desired, even for itself, and which
every good and virtuous person (abandoning and concemning pleasures) ought to
ensue.

But, to what end speak I so much of Pleasure? because (forsooth) it is not
only no Dispraise at all, nay rather a most high praise and commendation for
Oldage, because it greatly cares not, for any Pleasures. It lacks dayntye
fare, curious dishes, and sundry drinckes. It Objection
therefore lacks Dronkennes, Indigestion, and fantastical dreams.

But if we must needs yield some Hard to resist pleasures allurements
what to Pleasure, because we cannot easelye withstand her allurementes (for
the Divine Philosopher Plato calls Pleasure, ye Bayt of all Mischief,
because me^ are ensnared and caught therwt, as Fyshes with the Hook) I say
all though Oldage lack imoderat glutti^g Moderate Banqueting co^medable and
tolerable for Oldage.
cheer, yet may it be delighted in moderate Banqueting.

When I was a Boy, I oftentimes saw C. Duillius, the Son of M. even he that
first vanquished the Carthaginians by Sea) being an old man, coming home from
Supper. He loved many times to have a Torche or Lyncke carried before him, and
a Musicion also playing: which example or president, no private person before
him ever showed: his Glory and renown emboldned him so far, licentiously to
deal. But what speak I so much of others? Now come I again to myself. First
I always had Company and Fellowship. And Felowshippes were first instituted
when I was Treasurer, at such time as we received the sacred Rites of the
Lady* Great mother of the Gods, out of Cybele
Phrygia.

I banquetted therefore with my Mates, but yet always moderately. But there
was in me then, a certain galantise and heat of Age: which Age growinge
Banquettinge and making merry with honest company.
forward, all things are every day, more and more qualified. For I never
measured my delight in those Ba^quets, for any pleasures of the body: but rather
for the Company sake and talk of my Friends, and well willers.

And therefore our Ancestors did very well, in tearminge a feastinge assemblye
of Friends (because it bath a conjunction of lyuinge together) by the name of
Conuiuium: a great deal better Conuiuiu^
then do the Greeks, who call the self same thing, sometime a * Compotation,
(...)
and sometime a * Concenation: wherein they seem to allow of yt, which in this
kind, is least of all to be made accou^pt of.

Verily I do take delight in seasonable Banqueting, even for the delight that
I take in the talking and conferee^ce: and not with my Equalles only, who are
now very few, but with your Age also, and eue^ with you yourselues. And I
heartily thank Oldage, for that, it has increased in me a greediness of
talk, and taken away the desire of Meat and Drink. Now yet, if any man take
special delight in these things (because I Oldage not altogether without
vulgar pleasures.
will not seem altogether to be at open war and defiaunce with Pleasure,
whereof there is peradventure a certain measure Natural) I do not perceive
that Oldage lacks a fruition and feelinge, no not in these Pleasures
themselves. The Prerogatives, and superiorities at Feasts, instituted by our
Au^cestours, do wonderfully content me: and those points or cases, which by an
ancient custom among our Elders, are propounded at the Table by the chief
Master of the feast: and the Cups as in Xenopho^s Treatise, entitled
Symposiu^) Xenopho^
pretty, small, and clenly rynsed: and in Summer season a pleasant cooling, and
likewise in Winter, either ye warm Son, or a good Fire, is unto me singular
delight. Which things when I lie at my Manor of Sabine, I am vsuallye wont to
put in practice: and every day I thoroughly furnishe my Boorde with my
Neighbors: where we pass away the time together in talkinge of many and
sundry matters, even till it be far in the night.

But there is not so great tickling, and Objection.
as it were an itch of Pleasures in Old men. I believe it well: nay, there is
not so much, as any desire thereto. For nothing is grievous or beauilye taken
of a man, which he neither desires nor cares for.

Very well did Sophocles answer a certain man, which asked him being
Sophocles aunsvvere touching carnal cocupisce^ce
now greatly stricken in years, whether he used Venereall act or Carnal
company with women? God forbid (que he) that I should use any such thing: for I
have willinglye renounced and fled from all such lasciuiousnes, as from a
beastly and furious Master.

For to them that are desirous of such things, the lack and want thereof is
peradventure odious and grievous. But to them which are fullye glutted, and
satisfied therewith, it is more pleasure to want, then to have them: how be it,
he that forces not for athing, lacks He that cares not for a thig, cannot
be said to lack it.
it not. And therefore not to care for it, I say, is greater pleasure, then to
have yt fruition of it.

Now if youthful Age, delight and enjoy these foresaid Pleasures, the reason
is, first because it is more wylling to ensue small matters, and of light
importance, as before we have said: and afterward such things as Oldage, if
it fully enjoy not, yet does it not altogether lack.

And like as he which sits upon the first and chiefest Bench, does better
behold and is more delighted to see* Ambiuius Turpio: An excellent player of
Comaedies and counterfeicter of men's gestures.
and yet is be also delyghted, which sits upon the hyndermost and last
Bench of al: even so Adolescency more nearly beholdinge Pleasures, does
perhaps more frolicklye delight, and joy in them. But yet Oldage beholding the
same aloof and far of, has as much delectation therein, as is sufficient.

But what a singular commoditye is this, that the Mind being as it were freed,
and worn out of the service and thraldom of Sensuality, Ambition,
Contention, Quarrelling, and all filthy Affections, keeps itself within his
bounds, and lives (as the Proverb says) with itself? But if it be
furnished and as it were nourished with the food of some Study and learning:
then truly is there What old age is plesauntest.
nothing more pleasant then is a quiet Oldage.

We saw C. Gallus, the Familier C. Gallus
Friend of thy father, O Scipio, continuallye to apply, and as it were to dye,
in Oldman studious
his earnest study of measuring of* Heaven and* Earth: How often has yt next
Astronomy.
Morning, come upon him ere he had fullye finished that thing which he had
begone Geometye.
to describe the night before? How often did night surprise him, when as he
had begone any thing in the morning? What a singular delighte was it unto
him, when as be long before prognosticated, and foretold unto us, the
Eclipses, both of the Sun and Moon? What diligence bestowed he in lighter
matters and of less importance, but yet very quick, and wittye?

How greatly did Naeuius rejoice in Naeuius.
his Comedy, called the Punique VVarres? How ioyed Plautus in his Comedy
Truculentus? How in his Pseudolus? Plautus


I also, saw old* Liuius, who having set forth a Comedye, seven years
before Liuius Andronicus
I was borne, when Cethegus, and Tuditanus were Consulles, lived fill I was a
pretye Stripling.

What should I speak of the profounde study of P. Licinius Crassus, Licinius
Crassus.
both in the Canon, and also in the Ciuyle Law? Or of this our P. Scipio, who
was this other day created high Scipio.
Priest? But yet all these whom I have named, we saw to be Oldmen, and most
earnestly enflamed with these kind of studies.

As for M. Cethegus, (whom Ennius does very well term the Marowe or Pyth of
Lady * Suada) how studiously The God desse of Eloquence and galla^t speech
called in Greek Pitho.
did we see him busied in Oratorie, being even an Oldman.

What Pleasures therefore of Banquettes, or Plays, or Harlottes, are
comparable to these Pleasures? And these are the studies of learning, which in
men of wisdom, and good inclination do grow, even as they themselves do, in
Age: so that, that saying of Solon is verified, which he uttered in a certain
Verse, as before I have declared, That We wax older by being vviser.
he waxed older and older by learning every day more and more. Then which
Pleasure of the mind, there can none (doubtless) be greater.

I come now to the Pleasures which Husbandmen have, wherewith surely
Husbandrye.
I am incrediblie delited: which neither are impeached, nor hyndered with any
Oldage, and in my fancy, do approach nearest unto the life of a Wiseman. For
their dealing and trade is with the Earth, with never refuses to be under their
commandment and subjection: and ever repayeth that which it before received,
with asurplusage and usury: albeit sometimes with less, but for yt most part with
greater gain and increase. Albeit (in deed) not yt fruits only, but yt power
and nature of ye Earth itself, is it, with delyteth me: which when it has
received yt Seed cast upon it, into her lap, being by tillage well ploughed,
and manured, does first for a time keep it closely covered over with barowing,
whyth is thereupon called Occatio: and afterward being warmed with moisture, and
her therishme^t, she makes it to sprout and shoot up. and brings out of it
a green blade, which being strengthened and stayed with the small stringes at yt
rote of ye ste^mes does by little and little, grow up to a convenient bigness:
and standing upright upon a knottye straw full of joints, is, when it draws
toward rypenesse, enclosed within Husks. Out of the which when it peepeth, it
brings forth ye Corn handsomelye set in thorder of an Ear: and to save it
from being pecked out by small Birds, it is rampyered and fenced with a Trench
or Wall of the Awnes, or Beardes.

What should I speak of the Graffinge, springinge up, and increase of Vynes?
I cannot be enough delighted therein: because I would you should know ye
quietness and delectation of mine Oldage. I do omit the force and Virtue of
al these things, which the Earth brings forth: how, out of one poor kernel
of a Fig, or out of one seely grain of a Grape, or out of the smallest
seeds of other Fruits and Plants, it does procreate and bring forth, such
great Boles, and Stemmes. The small twygs, the Gryftes, the Stalks, the
pla^table Vynes, the platted stays, for them to run along upon, and the old
Wine stocks, do not these cause any man to delight therein with a kind of
admiration?

The Vine which naturallye is fallinge, if it be not under propped, and
shoared up, lies flat upon the ground: but the same, to raise up itself,
claspeth and with his Tendrells (as it were with hands) holds fast what
soever it catches. The which creeping and spreading itself sundry ways, yt
Husbandmans skillful Art, does with his pruninge tool restrain and cut of,
least it should with superfluous Branches, be over grown and spread too much
every way.

And therefore at the beginning of the Spring, in that which was left at the
joints where those twigges were cut of, there sprouteth out a young Burge^ or
Budde: out of the which, the Grape coming forth, does show itself: which
Buddes.
increasing in bigness, partly with ye moisture of the Earth, and partlye with
the heat of the Sun, is at the first very bitter in cast, but afterward
being ripened, waxes sweet and tothsome: and being clad and shrouded with
leaves, lacks neither moderat warmth, and also defends the too much
parthing heat of the Su^ne. Then the which what thing can there be, either for
the fruiet, pleasanter, or for the Eye, gorgeouser and trimmer? whereof, not
the profit only, (as before I said) but yt manuraunce and the self nature
of the thing highly deliteth me. The orders of the shoares or proppes, the
tyinge and byndinge them together at the tops, the shreadinge of the old
Vines and the superfluous Branches (which before I mentioned) and ye placinge
of others in their steedes.

To what end should I rehearse the wateringe of the Plants, the Dygginge and
new renewing of the ground, whereby the Earth is made a great deal rancker
and fruitfuller? What Dygging
should I speak of the profit that com, meth by the Dunginge and Compostinge
of Land? I have said sufficiently Dunging
of it, in that Book which I wrate of Husbandry: whereof the Learned Hesiodus
in his Work which he wrate of Tyllage, spoke never a word? But Homer who
was (as I take it) many hundredth yeaces before him: introduces and makes
Laertes, longing Odyss. ^
and languishinge for the absence of his Son, as an Husbandman, tylling yea
and Dunging also of the ground.

Neither are Husbandlye affairs Sundry delights of Husba^drye.
only delectable and plentifullye stoared with green Corn, Meadows,
Vyneyardes and Copsees: but with Orchardes also and Gardeines, Grasinge of
Cattall, Swarms of Bees and variety of all sorts of Flowers. And not only
Planting, but Engraffinge Planting Graffinge
also is delightful, which are as witty, and as fine posates, as any be in
Husbandrye.

Many delites of Husba^dry can I reckon up: but I suppose yt these which I have
already named, be unto you somewhat redious. But you shall pardon me: for yt
great goodwil with I bear to Husbandry, has carried me somewhat far in the
discourse thereof: and also Oldeage is by nature, talkatiue and geeuen to many
words: because I will not seem to clear it from all faults.

And therefore M. Curious after he had Nobleme^ have delyted to spe^de their time
in Husbandrye
tryumphed over the Samnites, and Sabines, and over Pyrrhus, spent the later
end of his Age in this kind of life. Whose Ferme or country House, as often
as I behold (for it is not far from mine) I cannot but greatly wonder to
consider either the continency of this noble Gentleman, or the Discipline that
was in those days.

For upon a time the Samnites bringing unto this Curious sitting by the fire a
huge sum of Gold, were by him A noble aunsvvere of a worthy man Enemy to
all bryberye.
put back and rejected; saying, he thought it more honorable to have dominion
and to be Lord over them that be full of Gold, then to have Gold himself.
Could such a Noble mind otherwise choose, but lead a pleasant Oldage?

But now come I again to Husba^dmen, because I reckon my self one of their
order and fellowship. Senators, that is to say, Sage Seniors and Did Senators
Oldmen.
men, were in those days Husbandmen. For as L. Quintius Cincinnatus was The
highest office in the common wealth called also the Master of the people: and
for the time had the office of a king.
holding the Plough in the field, news was brought to him that he was made
Lord * Dictator. By ye co^maundment of which Lord Dictator, the master of the
Horsemen, C. Seruilius Hala, slew Sp. Melius a spiring to be king, and goinge
about by intrusion to get the Crown.

Out of their Fermes and Country Houses, was Curious, and many other Oldmen
sent for, and called into ye Senate: whereupon they that went to So^mon Noble
Councillors chosen out of the country.
and call them were named * Viatores, Purseuauntes, or common Messangers. Was
therefore the Oldage of these men miserable, which thus delighted in Tyllage
and husbandrye? Currours or Purseuauntes.
Certes in my judgment. I doubt whether there can be any blessedder life
then this is: and not only for common Duties sake, because Tillage is
expedient and commodious for all sorces of men in general, but also for the
delectation (which I speak of) and for the plentifulnesse and abundance, which
both for In Husba^dry is both profit and pleasure.
the sustenaunce of men, and honor of the Gods are requisitely belonginge.
And since some do desire this, let us now reconcile our selves unto
Pleasures.

For a good and substantial Husband has always his Cellors for Wine, Oil,
Honye, and household provision, well stoared, and his whole House well
furnished. He has stoare of Hog, Kydde, Lamb, Hen, Milk, Cheese and
Honye.

Now, Husbandmen themselves do call and term a Gardeyne, by the name Hortus
altera Succidia.
of an other Larder: and Hawkinge and Huntinge beeinge superuacuous and vain
exercises, does season the same things a great deal better, and makes
them more toothsome.

What should I speak of the green verdure and hue of Meadows, of the
orderlye settinge of Trees, or of the goodlye beautye, and fashion of their
Vyneyardes, and Olyueyardes?

I will in few Words declare my mind. I say there can be nothing, either
profitabler for use, either ttymmer for show, then is Ground, well manured and
tylled: from the fruition whereof, Oldage does not only not hinder a man,
but also rather inuiteth and allureth him thereunto.

For where may that Age better, yea or so well, warm itself, either by
sittinge in the Sun, or by a good fire: or concrarye wise as the Season of
the year serves, be so holsomlye cooled either in shadye places, or
pleasant waters?

Let younger folks therefore take to themselves their exercises of deeds of
Exercises for Young men.
Arms, of Horsemanshippe, of tossinge the Pyke and Spear, of handlinge ye
Clubbe, and Ball, their Practice of Swymminge and Runninge: to us Oldemen, of
many other Games let them leave the Tables, and Chesse, Disportes for Old
men.
(yea and that no further then a man is disposed) because Oldage without these
may be happy.

The Books of Xenophon are very Xenopho^ his book of Householde.
profitable for sundry purposes, yt which (I pray you) vilige^tly peruse and
read, as you do. How copiously does he praise Husba^dry in his book of
Household, entitled Oeconomicus? And that you may well understand how that
nothing seems unto him so Princelye and fit for a King, as is the study
of Tyllage and practice of husbandrye, he introduces Socrates in that Book,
reasoning with Critobulus, and telling him that Cyrus the younger, King of
Persia, Cyrus.
(a Prince both for profoundnes of Wit, and for glorious Soueraigntye of
Empire, renoumed) when as Lysander Lysander
the valiant Captain of the Lacedaemonians, upon a time came unto him at his
City of Sardis, and had brought unto him from his confederates and friends
certain Presents and Rewards, did show himself in all points generallye
courteous and freendlye toward the said Lysander, and namelye that he showed
unto him a certain enclosed field set and planted with Trees right
orderlye.

Now when Lysander had thoroughly viewed, and with admiration beheld both the
heighte of the Trees, and the exact order, precisely observed in ye placinge
and settinge of them in a perfect * Quincuncie, the ground well manured and
pure withal, and the sweet When Trees are so exactly set, that which way
so ever a man look they stand dyrectly one against another.
smelles which the flowers yielded: he told the king, that he wondered not
only at the diligence, but also at the fine wit of him, by whom those things
were measured out and described. Unto whom Cyrus thus answered. It is eue^ I
my self, which have by measure planted and set these Trees: the order of the
Rows wherein they stand, is my only device, and no other man's: the platform
also and the description hereof is mine: yea many of these Trees were planted
and set with mine own hands. Then Lysander well eyinge his purple Robe, and
the rych Apparel of his Bodies, and the rest of his galla^t Brauerye after the
Persian guyse, wrought and garnished with much Gold and many precious Stones
further said this: Now do I well see (O Cyrus) that for very good cause, thou
art reported a Prince, Fortunate: because unto thy Virtue, Fortune also is
Virtuti Fortuna comes.
conjoined. This therefore may Old men lawfullye enjoy. Neither is age any
such let or Obstacle, but that in other things also, and namely in Husbandrye
and Tyllage, we may continue our Practice, even till, the last poyncte of
our Oldage.

We have heard say, that M. Valerius Coruinus lived till he was an Valerius
Coruinus
hundredth years old: and that when he was very aged, he dwelled in the
Country, and fell to Tyllynge of his Land.

Between whose First and Sixth Consulshippe, there were Fortye and Sixth years.
Therefore so long time of Age, as our Auncestoures appointed and would have to
the beginning of Oldeage, did he bear Office and Aucthoritye Authority the
chiefest honor and ornamente of Oldage
in the Common Wealth. And herein was his extreme and last Age blessedder
then his middle age, because it was honored with more Authority: and of
Labor and Travail had less then before.

The highest Title and Honorablest perfection of Oldage, is Aucthority. Oh, how
great was it in L. Caecilius Metellus? how honorable in Attilius Calatinus?
whose Praise and comme^dation is sounded out in this Honorable Testification:
Many Nations with one mouth do agree, that he was the chiefest man of all the
Cittye. The Epitaph yt was engraven upon his Tomb is well known. Worthilye
therefore and by good right was he called a grave Personage, of whose Praises
all men by one consent gave so good a report generallye.

What a worthy man saw we P. Crassus, of late the high Bishop to be? what a
noble fellow was M. Lepidus, who afterward was in the same Office of
Priesthood? What shall I speak of Paulus or Aphricanus, or (as before) of
Maximus? not only in whose discrete Counsels and Directions, but also in
whose beckes there rested Authority?

Oldage (namelye that, which is reverenced and honored) has so great What
manner of oldage is commendable
Authority, that it is much more worth then all the Pleasures of Adolescencie.

But in all this my discourse, remember ye, that I praise that Oldage, whose
foundation was laid and grounded in Adolescency. Whereupon that, which I with all
men's well lyking have so often spoken, is verefied: That the Oldeage which
defends it self only with talk, is miserable.

It is not the graye hayres, nor the wrinckled face, that straightwayes can
bring Authority and Estimation: but a former life vertuouslye and honestlye
spent, yeldeth the fruicts of Authority in the end. For these things which
seem light and of small accoumpt, are (in deed) very honorable: to be
saluted, to be desired into company, to have the wall geeuen, to be
reuerented and risen up unto, to be waited on, home and from home, and to be
sought unto for counsel: which things both among us, and in all other well
governed and nurtured Cities also, are most diligently observed.

The report goes, that Lysander (of The best dwelling for Old age was at
Lacedemon.
whom I ere while made mention) was wont to say, that, The honestest Lodging
and honorablest Mansion for Old age to dwell in, was in Lacedmonia. For in no
place else in the world, is so much reverence showed to Age as there: in no
place is Oldeage more honorable.

It is also left in written Histories, yt Great reverence among the Heathen
shevved to Old age.
a certain Elderly man coming into the Theater at Athens to see a Play, had
no rowme at al allowed unto him, to sit in, among his Cou^trymen in that great
assembly: who afterward coming to the Lacedaemonians (which were there at yt
time Ambassadors, and in respect thereof had a place accordingly appointed
them where to sit) it is said yt they all arose, and received the Oldman to
sit among them.

Whereat when as all the whole assemblye for joy, a great while together
clapped their hands, it is reported that one of the Ambassadoures spoke these
words * The Athenians know what is honest, but to do the same, they will Too
many of the same sta^p now a days.
not.

Many excellent good orders have we in our College: but namely this, that as
every one is in Senioritye and Eldershippe of Age, so has he a prerogative to
utter his mind first. For the Aunciente and Aged Augurs are preferred and
esteemed, not only before them which be in higher Office then they: but
before them also, which bear the chiefeste Swaye, Aucthoritye, and Office,
in the Weal Public.

What Bodilye Pleasures are there comparable to the rewards and advance
mentes of Aucthoritye? Wherein who so ever have honorably behaved
theymselues, they in mine Opinion have notablye well played the Pageaunt of
their Age: and not like bungling Stagiers, in the last Act of al, to have
fumbled and geeuen it over in the plain field.

But many Oldmen be wayward, Objection
careful, testye and ill to please: and if we throughlye siste the matter,
covetous Faults of manners and not of age
and nygardlye also. But these are the faults of Manners, and not of Oldage.

But yet this way wardnesse, and the other faults before rehearsed, have some
color of excuse, which although not just and rightful, yet such as seems
may be allowed of.

They think themselves to be contemned, despised, flouted and mocked: and
furthermore in that frail body of theirs, every small Offense is odious and
captiously taken. Al which (notwithstanding) through good manners and
disciplines are qualified and sweetened: which to be true, may be perceived
as well by the common course of Man's life, as also by the two Brothers in the
Comedy Adelphi. What churlishnes Terence.
and rude behauioure is there in the one? what gentleness and courtesy in the
other? The case stands even so. For as every Wine by Age is not sowred into
Vyneiger: so neither is every Oldage crabbed and eluish.

Severity in Oldage I well allow, but Seueritye in mesure alovvable in Oldme^
yet (as I do of all other things) measurable: but spightfull bitterness I can
not in any wise broke nor away withal.

And as concerning Covetousness in Oldemen, I am nothing acquainted
Covetousness in oldmen.
there with, nether understand I what it means. For can there be any thing more
absurd, or more repugnaunt to reason, then the less way that a man has to go,
the more provision and costage to make and purueighe?

THE fowerth cause which seems most of all to grieve and disquiet our The
iiii. dispraise of Oldage surmysed by the^
Age, remains yet behind to be discussed: and yt is, the neerenesse of
Death: which (certes) cannot be far of from Oldage. O miserable old Caytife,
which which say it is miserable because it is nere unto Death
in so long a time as he has lived, has not perceived and learned that Death
is to be contemned: which either is utterly to be despised, if it altogether
kill and extinguish the Mind or Death not to be feared: and the reasons why
Soul: or else is greatly to be desired, if it conducte and carye the same to
some place, where it shall be eternal. For (certes) there can no * third be found.

Therefore what should I fear, if after For either the Soul lives or else
dies
death I shall be either not miserable, or else blessed? howbeit who is so
foolish, to a warrant himself (although he were never so young) that he
shall live till the next Eueninge?

Furthermore that same Age is subject to a great maigny mo casualties of
Yongme^ more subject to sickness the^ Oldmen
Death then our Age is. Youngemen sooner fall into Sickness: they are sorer
sick, and are hardlyer recured: and therefore few live till they come to
Oldage: which if it were not so, we should live together a great deal better
and wiselyer. For Discretion, Reason, and wise Advice rests in Oldmen: and
therefore if there were no Oldmen, Common wealths and Cities governed and
maintained by Oldmen.
there would be no Cities at all. But now come I again to talk of imminent
Death.

What fault of Oldeage is this, since you see yt same also common to Young
age? I my self by proof have felt, as well in that worthy man my Son, as
also in thy Brothers (Scipio) of whom great hope was generally conceived to
have seen them advanced to most honorable Death spares no Age.
Dignities, that Death is alyke common to all Ages.

But a Youngeman hops to live a great while: which an Oldman may Objection
not look to do. He (truly hops foolishly. For what folisher thing is
there, Answer
then to accoumpte things uncertain for certain, and things false for true?

An Oldeman has nothing to hope for. But he is therefore in far better
Objection
case then a Youngeman: because Answer
he has already enjoyed and obtained that, which the Yongmanne does Old men
have already enjoyed that
but hope for. The one desires to live long: the other has already lived
long. Howbeit (O Lord) what is which young men do but hope for.
there in Man's life, long, or of any lasttynge continuance?

For admit and grant, that we live even till the vttermoste of our Age.
Let us hope to live as long as ever Argantonius lived 120. years
did the King of the Tartessians. For there was (as I find in Hystories) one
Argantonius Prince of the Isles called Gades, who reigned Fourscore years,
and lived an hundred and twe^tye.

But to me, there seems nothing long. wherein is any Extreme, or End.
For when that End is once come, then is yt which is passed, quight gone: and
nothing remains but only that, which a man has by his Virtues and good
deeds achieved.

Hours pass away apace, and so do Days, Months, and Years: neither does
the time once passed ever return: neither can yt, which is to come, Time
passes
be preciselye known.

Therefore, every one ought to be contented with that time, which is granted
him to live. For neither needs a Stageplayer, necessarily to play out ye
Interlude, till the very last end thereof, We must have a greater care to live
well then to live long
to be commended therefore: but in what Act soever of the same he be, he must
so handle his part, that he may be praised: neither should a Wiseman live till
the Plaudite be stricken up.

For a short time of Age is long enough to live well and honestlye. But if you
continue yet longer, you must no more be discontented thereat, then Husbandmen
be, after the pleasantness of the Spring season once passed, to have Spring
Summer and Autumn to succeed. The Spring does signify and represent (as it
were) Adolescencye, and shows what Fruicts are like to ensue. All the other
times and seasons, serve to mow and gather in, the fruicts.

Now, the fruit of Oldage is (as before I have often said) the remembrance and
stoare of Goods, before time gotten. And al things which are done according
Fruicts of Oldage.
to the course of nature, are to be reckned in the number of good things. And
what is so agreeable to Nature, as for Oldmen to dye? which thing happens unto
Youngemen, even Maugre Natures Goodwill.

Therefore Youngmen seem unto me so to dye, as when a raging flame of fire
Yongme^ have greater pain in dyinge then Oldmen.
is with the great quantitye of water quenched. And Oldme^ deceasse, eue^ like
as Fire, when it is all spent, is extinguished of it own accord, without
vsinge any force thereto. And as Apples when they be green and unripe, are
plucked from the Tree with violence: but being ripe and mellowe, they fall
down from the Tree: even so, violent force and painful strugglinge, takes
away life from Youngmen: but from Oldmen, a rypenesse and maturity.

Which is to me so pleasant and comfortable, that the nearer I draw to
Death, the sooner me thinckes I do (as it were) see yt land, and shall at
length after a long Navigations, arrive at the Haven.

Of al other Ages, the certain term is appointed how long each lasts: but of
Oldage there is no certain term limited: Oldage has no certain number of
years a pointed how long to last.
and in it does a man live well and laudablye, so long as he is able to
execute and discharge his duty and Function: and yet to contemn Death.

Whereupon it happens that Oldage is endued with greater Courage and
animositie, then Adolescency and Youth is. Oldage stout and full of courage.
And this is it that was answered by Solon, unto Pisistratus the Tyraunte,
demaundinge of him, upon what hope Solons answer to Pisistr atus the Tyrant.
and confidence, he durst be so bold and presumptuous, so desperatelye to
wythstand and disobey his proceedinges? Even upon the hope (quoth he) of mine
Oldage.

But the best End of living is this: when as (the mind being whole and
perfect, and all the wits and Senses sound and vnappayred) yt same Nature with
compacted and framed the work together, does likewise dissolve and lewse the
same. For as the Ship wright which made the Ship, best knows how to undo
and pull asunder the same again: and as none can better vnioynte down a house,
then the Carpenter that framed it: even so, Nature which joined and fashioned
together the Body, does best dissolve and end the same.

For every Conglutinacion or glewinge, when it is new glewed together is
hardlye pulled asunder, but being old and forworne, is easelye disseuered.

Thus, it comes to pass, that this It is a wicked thing for a man to
murder or kill himself.
small remnaunt of life, is neither gredilye to be desired of Oldmen, nor
without cause to be left and forsaken. And Pythagoras charge us, not to depart
out of the Garrison, and Wardhouse of this life, without the commandment of
our high General, which is God.

There is a notable saying of ye Wiseman Solon, wherein he protests, that he
would not have his Death to be vnbewayled, and unlamented of his Friends.
Solon wished to have his death bevvailed.
His meaning (I think) is, that he would be entierly dear unto his
Friends. But I know not, whether Ennius has a great deal better thereof
judged:

Let no man at my death lament,
Nor weep when I am laid in Grave: Ennius.

For why? in life aye permanent,
I sure am lasting Fame to have.
Such death in his opinion, is not to be lamented and bewailed, which is Death
not to be bevvailed.
exchaunged for Immortality. Now, as touching the Grief or Agonies of dying
(if there be any) certes, they endure but for a small space, especially in an
Oldman: and after Death the same Sense is either such as is blessed and
optable, or else is it none at all. He that still stands in fear of Death can
never have a quiet mind.


But Adolescencie ought to enure itself in this Meditation, still to despise
Death: without which Meditation no man can have a quiet mind.

For surely dye we must, and uncertain are we whether even this very
present day. Therefore who is he, Nothing more certain then Death: Nothing
more uncertain then the hour of Death.
which every hour standing in fear of Death, can have his mind in any rest
and tranquillitye? whereof there needs no very long discourse to be: since I
well remember not only L. Brutus who in the quarrel of his Country was
slain: the two Decij, who gallopinge Valiant knights which dyed for the
honor and safegarde of their country
their horses, voluntarily gave themselves to Death: M. Regulus, who willingly
went and yielded himself to punishment, because he would not forswere
himself, but keep touch and promise even with his very Enemies: the two
Scipioes, which stopped the passage and way of the * Carthaginians, Under the
conduct of Ha^druball. Terentius Varro.
even with their own bodies: thy Grau^dfather L. Paulus, who through the
rashness of his * Copertner and fellow in Office, was in that ignominious and
dishonorable overthrow at Cannas, slain and manquelled: M. Marcellus whose
dead Corpse, his most cruel * Enemy suffered not to lack honorable
interrement: Hannibal
but also how our Legions and Not worthy and honorable Gentlemen only, but
common soldiers and inferior persons have despised Death.
common Soldiers have courageously and stoutlye adventured many times into
such places whence they never thought again to return alive: as in my Book of
Originalles, I have declared. Shall therefore Oldmen which he learned and
skillful fear that thing which young Striplinges, and the fame not only
unlearned but rude and rusticall also, do contemn and set at naught?

But a sacietie of all things (in mine opinion) causes a sacietie of life.

There be some delights peculier to Childhood: Shall tall Striplinges and
Youngmen addict themselves thereunto Every age has his peculier delight and
study.
semblablye? There be also some, appropriat unto youthful Adolescency: Shall
ripe and consistent Age (which is termed the Middle Age of man) desire the
same? And there be of this same middle Age, some Studies, which Oldage cares
not for: And there be some, last of all, peculier to Oldage.

Therefore as the delights of these former Ages do decay and come to an end, so
do these of Oldage dye, and vanish away also. Which when it happens then
does sacietye of life, bring a ripe and conuenable time to dye.

For truly I see no cause to the contrary, but that I dare be bold to
declare unto you, all that I think and judge of Death: namely for that I seem
the deeper to see into it, because I now approach and draw somewhat near unto
it.

And verelye (OP. Scipio and C. Laelie) A true life.
I do believe that, your noble Fathers, which were Gentlemen both right
honorable, and my most dear Friends, are yet still alive, and do live such a
life, as (in deed) is alone to be accou^pted Life.

For so long as we are enclosed with in the Prison or frame of our bodies we
must needs discharge some actions eue^ The Body is the prison or Iayle of the
Soul
of necessity, and are driven to do some such Functio^s as are unavoidable.
For the mind or Soul being heavenly, and inspired into Man from above, is
depressed, and as it were forcibly thrown down to ye Earth: being a place to
Divine nature, and Eternity quight contrary.

But I think that the Immortal Gods inspired Minds into Humane Why the
mind was inspired into man.
Bodies, to the end there should be some, to inhabit the Earth: who
beholdynge the Order of the Bodies Celestial, should imitate the same in the
course of their lives and in Constancy.

And not only reason and disputation enforces me so to believe, but the
nobleness also and Authority of renowned Philosophers.

For I have been in place where I have heard yt Pythagoras and his Scholars
Pythagoras.
the Pythagorians, being dwellers here, and almost endenizoned among us, (for
they were once termed Italia^ Philosophers) never made any doubt in the matter,
but that we had our minds or Souls, tipped, and derived from the very
universal diuinitye of God.

There were moreover showed unto me, those points, which Socrates (even he
which by the Oracle of Apollo was adjudged the Wisest man in the world)
disputed and spoke the last day of his life, concerning the Immortalirye of the
Soul.

What needs many words? I am thus persuaded, and thus do I think,
Immortalitye of the soul
since there is so great celeritye of men's Minds, so good remembrance of
things passed, so great insighte and forecaste of things to come, so many
Arts, so many Sciences, and so many inventions, that the Nature which
understands and conteyneth the knowledge of al these things cannot be
mortal. And since ye mind is ever mouinge and has no beginning of motion
(because it moves itself) so shall it never have any end of motion, because
it shall never leave nor depart from itself.

And since ye Nature of the mind is simple, and has nothing annexed with it
which is unlike or discrepante from itself, that therefore it is indivisible:
and forsomuche as it is indivisible, therefore can it never dye. And that this
serves for a great Argument to prove yt men know sundry things, before they
be borne, because young Children, learning hard Arts, do so quickly conceive
and apprehend the knowledge of innumerable Plato his Reasons to prove the
immortality of the Soul
things, in such sort, that they seem not then first to learn them, but to
renew them fresh again, into memory. Al these in a manner be Plato his
reasons.

In Xenopho^ also we read, yt Cyrus the Elder lyinge on his death Bed, Lib.
8. de Cyri paedia
spoke these words: Do not think my dear children, yt when I am gone from
you, I shall be no where, or brought to nothing. For in all the while that I
have been with you, you did never see my Mind: but yet by those noble Acts
which I have achieved, you did well enough understand, that in this Body of
mine, there was a Mind.

Believe therefore that I have the self same Mind still, although visiblie
with your eyes you see it not. Neither would the honorable memorialles of
noble Personages remain after their Deaths, if their worthy mynds should
atchieue no such notable enterprise, for the which we should the longer
celebrate the memory of them, when they be dead and gone.

Truly it would never sink in my brayn, yt men's Minds or Souls, only lived
while they remained in mortal Bodies, and that being departed out of them,
they utterly dyed. Neither that the mind is Doltish and foolish, when it is
set at liberty, and departed out of a foolish Body: but when it being
clearly rid, from all admixtion of ye Body, begins once to be pure and
sound, then is it wise. And when Man's Nature is by Death dissolved, it is
apparaunt and plain enough, whither every one of the other parts do go. For
All thingesreturn to that vvherof they had their first beginning
all things return to that, from whence at the first they had their
beginning: but yt Mind only, never visibly appears, neither when it is in ye
body, neither when it goes and departs out of the Body. Now, you see yt
nothing is so like unto Death, as Sleep. And yet the Minds of them that are a
sleep, do notably declare their Divinity. For when they be quiet and free,
they forsee many things to come. Whereby it is to be understood how and after
what sort they shall be, when Sleep an Image of Death.
they be clerelye dismissed out of ye Prison of ye Body. Wherefore if these
things be true, then reverence and honor me as a God.

But if the Soul or Mind do dye together with the body, yet you dreading
the Gods, who maintein and govern all the beautiful furniture of this world,
shall godly and inuiolablye solemnize the memorial of me. These words spoke
Cyrus, lyinge upon his Death bed. Now if you think it good, let us suruewe
and consider our own.

No man (Scipio) shall ever persuade me, yt either thy* Father Paulus, or thy
Paulus Aemilius. Pub. Scipio. C. Scipio
two Graundfathers Paulus and Aphricanus, or the * Father of the same
Aphricanus, or * his Uncle, or many other excellent men, which here need not
to be rehearsed, would ever have enterprised such worthy adventures and
attemptes (only to leave a pattern and memoryall thereof to their posterity) if
they had not with the eyes of their mynds perceived and seen that their
Posterity and Sequel might apperteine unto them. Do you think yt I (for I also
must somewhat boast and brag of my self as Oldme^s guise Noble minds desire to
leave a re
is to do) would ever have undertaken so many painful labors, day and night,
both in time of Peace and also of War if I had thought yt my glorious renown
should extend no further then ye bounds of my natural life? For if it should
be so, were it not then much better for a man to lead an easy and quiet life,
without entermedling in any labor or contentious dealing of the world?

But the Mind (I wot not how) raysinge up and erectinge itself, had ever such
a careful respect to Posteritye, as though when it were departed out of this
life, it should then, and never till then, live and flourish. For if it were
not so, ye Souls were immortal, the mind of every good and Virtuous man,
would not so earnestly aspire to immortal Glory. Further more every wiseman
does right willingly and contentedly dye: co^trarywise, The God lie desire
Death but the wicked fear it.
every Fool, most unwilling lie. Do you not think yt the Mind which sees
more and further of, does well percciue and know, that it goes to a far
better state? Again, that he whose insight is dymmer and duller, does neither
see nor consider so much?

But verelye I have a great desire to see your Fathers, whom I both reverenced
and loved. And not them only am I so earnestlye affected to see, whom I
myself erst have known: but them also, of whom I have both heard, read, and
also have myself written.

From which my Journey thitherward, no man shall (by my good will) bring me
back, neither rebound and rebutt me backward, as it were a Tenise Bal: This
place is translated according to ij sundry Latin Textes.
yea although he would undertake to perboyle my old Blood and renew my youth
again as Pelias was.

Certes, if God would grant to me being now in this Age to be a Child
again, and as young as a Babe yt lies cryinge in his Cradle, I would with
all my heart, refuse the offer. Neither would I willingly (when I have as it
were run the whole race) to be plucked back from the Gole or Endmarkes, to
the Listes or place of first setting out.

For what Commodity has this life? Nay rather what moylinge This life full of
trouble and labor.
and labor has it not? But admit, it had some commodity: yet doubtless
it has either some full sacietye, or some final End.

For I mean not to bewail and deplore my life past, as many and yt same A
worthy and virtuous man is not borne in vain.
right learned, Clerks have often times done. Neither do I repent that I have
lived: because I have so lived and led my life, that I may judge of myself,
that I have not been borne in vain. This life is no dwelling place of
continual abode but as an Inn or lodgeinge for a time,
And I depart out of this life as out of an Inn, not as out of a dwelling
house. For Nature has lent unto us a place for to stay and abide in, for a
time, and not to dwell in continuallye.

Oh noble and luckye Day, when as I shall take my voyage toward yt blessed
Crewe, and company of Happy Souls: and when as I shall depart out of this
trouble some world, and common Syncke of all mischief. For I shall not only
go to those worthy men (of who^ I spoke before) but also to mine own Son
Cato, a man of such Virtue, and goodness, as none more, of such piety and
synceritie, as none better: whose Body was * Burned by me, whereas The fashion
then among the Romans was to burn their dead Bodies.
it had been, more agreeable to Nature, that my Body should rather have been
burned and enterred by him. But his Mind or Soul not clearlye forsakinge me,
but ever loooking back and expecting my coming, is assuredlye gone before into
those places, whyther he perceived yt I also must come.

Which my hap and chance I have seemed stoutlye to bear: not because I did
take it so patientlye in deed: but I ever comforted my self, thincking that
our absence and being asunder, should not continue long.

These he the very causes O Scipio, (for you told me ere while, that you and
Laelie were wo^t much to marvel thereat) which make mine Oldage unto me easy,
and to be not only without all greeueunce but rather very pleasant and
delectable.

And if I do err in this poinct, because I am of opinion that the Souls of
men are immortal, verelye I am well contented, in the same error still to
continue: neither will I recant this error (wherein I am so singulerly
delighted) so long as I live. And if the case were so, yt when I am dead I
should feel nothing (as certain petite Philosophers hold opinion) I fear
not a whit, least those Philosophers being dead, should flout and deride this
mine error.

Nay, admit, that we should not be immortal: yet is it good and optable for a
man, in his convenient time to dye. For Nature, as she has of all other
things, so also has she her limitatio^ and end of living. Now, Oldage is
the final end or last part of Age, much like unto ye Conclusion or last
knitting up of an Interlude: the wearysomnesse whereof, we ought to eschew,
specially when we are, even cloyed with saciety.

Thus much have I had to say touching Oldage: whereunto (I pray God) that you
may arryue: that those things which you have heard of me by month, you may by
deed and trial find true accordingly.


Thomas Newton.

FINIS.
Six several Themes of Stoicall Philosophy, written by M. T. Cicero, unto
Marcus Brutus: and Entitled Paradoxe.

The Preface.
SUNDRY times (freende Brutus) have I marked thine uncle Cato, that whenever
he uttered his mind in ye Senate, he entreated of weighty matters taken out
of Philosophy, much dyffering from the Judicial and public use, which we use
in our common Pleading. But yet not with standing, he prevailed so much by
Oratorious persuasion, that his words seemed unto the people probable and
allowable. Which was a thing far harder and busier for him to compass, then
it is either for thee, or for me: because we are better enured and more use
that kind of Philosophy, which brings copy of Eloquence, and wherein those
things are declared, which do not greatly disagree from the minds of the
People.

But CATO being (in mine Opinion) a perfect Stoicke, does both think those
things which of the Vulgar People are not greatelye allowed: and is also of
that Sect, which seeks no brave gallantise of Speech, nor Flowers of
Eloquence, neither dilateth their Arguments: but with little brief Questions,
and (as it were short points) brings to pass that thing which he purposed.

But there is nothing so incredible, but by artificial handelynge may be
made probable: nothing so rugged and rustye, but by Eloquence may be
poolyshed What learning and Eloquence is able to do.
(and as it were glitteringly burnished.

Which thing when I with my self considered, I adventured somewhat further,
and went boldelyer to work then he, of whom I now speak.

For Cato his wont is, after the Stoickes guise, only to reason of
Magnanimity, of Continency, of Death, of the whole praise of Virtue, of the
immortal Gods, of the Love that a man ought to bear to his Country, without
using any colors or ornaments of Rhetorique.

But I, as it were in sportinge sort, have comprised and brought in to Common
Places those things which the Stoics do scarcely permit and allow in their
Schools of Exercise and private Studies.

Which poinctes because they be merueilous, and contrary to the opinion of
all men, are also by them called* Paradoxa: and thereupon Paradoxa signifies
was I desirous to assaye, whether they might be published and Sentences
contrary to the common opynion of most men
brought into the Light, that is to say, into the Forum or place of Judicial
Pleas: and so to be handeled, that they might be allowed and liked: or
whether I might use a learned kind of Reasoninge, proper to the skilful sort,
or else an other vulgar, after the capacity of the Common People.

And the willinger was I to write these things, because these Conclusions and
Points, which are called Paradoxa, do specially seem in mine opinion, to be
Socratical, and most true.

Thou shall therefore. receive at my hands, this small piece of work by me
compiled by Candle light these short nights: because that same * other
VVorcke of mine, of Tusculane Questions
greater peines and study, was published and went abroad in thy name.

And herein shall thou have a taste of those kinds of Exercises, which I
customably use, when soever I transpose and bring those Positive Grounds and
Arguments, which in Schools be termed Thetica, unto this our Rhetorical
kind of Pleading and Oratorie.

Howbeit, I do not desire that thou shouldeste publishe abroad this piece of
work: (for it is not of any such excellency, that it deserves to be set on
some high Pinnacle in the Castle, as that notable Image of Minerua was, which
Phidias made: but yet, that it may appear, that it came out of the same
shop, whence that other did: and that the Author of the one, was Author
also of the other.

The first Paradoxe, wherein is proved, that nothing is good, but only that,
which is honest.
I Fear, some of you will deem, that this my Discourse is not devised and
invented by me of mine own Brain, but borrowed and fetched out of the
Disputations of the Stoickes.

Yet nevertheless I will francklye say, what I think, and that in fewer
words, then so great a thing can well be declared.

Truly I never judged nor thought, yt these men's Money, Su^ptuous Buildings,
Wealth, Dominions and Bodily Pleasures (wherein foolish Worldlinges set their
chief delight) were worthy to be reckned in yt number of such things, as are
good and expetible. For I do see, that although they have great plenty Money,
Riches, and such like, are not to
and foison of such transitory things, yet they be ever coveting and hunting
after more, lackinge even these things be reckened in the number of Good
things.
wherein they do abou^d: for never is their greedy thirst of covetousness
ste^ched: neither are they only afflicted with an inward lust and desire to
increase and augmente that Substance which they already possess, but also
with a Dread and fear of loosynge the same.

And in this point, I oftentimes find alack of discretion, in our Ancestors,
men of virtuous and continente life: who by the bare and only name, demed and
called this uncertain Pelf, and transitory chaffer (which is commutable
between man and man: by the name of Good things whereas in very deed. and in
their dealings, they thought far otherwise.

Can a thing that is simply good, be in an evil man? Or can any man, having
great stoare of good things, be other then a good man? But all these we see
to be such, that both naughty men may possess them, and good men by them,
may be hurt and damnified. Therefore let him ye lust, mock me and spare not:
yet shall truth and sound reason with me be ever preferred before the rash
judgments of the multitude. Neither will I say, that any man has lost his
Good things, when he has lost his Cattal or Household stuff. Neither can I
chose, but oftentimes to praise and greatly commend the wiseman Bias, who (as I
think) was reckened and accoumpted one the seven wise Sages of Greece. For
when his City Priene was by the Enemy taken and ransacked, all the
Inhabitauntes shiftinge for themselves, and carrying with them much of their
Goods and Stuff, he also was advised and counsayled by one of his Friends to
do semblably: I do (quoth he) even as well as they. For I carye away Bias his
wise aunsvvere.
with me, all such Goods and Possessions, as are mine. This man thought not
that the worldly Pelf and transitory Goods, which are subject to variable
chance and hazard of blind dalyinge Fortune, were any of his: which
(notwtstanding) we do call and term Good.

What is Good then (will some say?) If whatsoever is don rightly, honestly, and
according to Virtue, be said to be done well and laudablye: then it follows,
that whatsoever is right, honest and according to virtue, is (as I think)
only Good.

But these things may seem to be somewhat obscure, and not able to be
understood of every weak capacity, forasmuch as they are but coldelye and
superficially disputed without any examples: these therefore must be
illustrated and beautified, with the lives and worthy acts of noble Personages,
since they seem to be disputed more subtillye with words, then is thought
sufficient.

For I demand of you, whether you think that those noble and excellent men,
which were the first founders of our Common wealth, and so left the same unto
us, did seem to have any care or mind upon the greedy and insaciable The
world is now changed from that it was then
desire of Gold and Silver, which tended only to avarice? or upon pleasures,
leruing only to concent the fantasy: or upon new fangled tricks of
household stuff, being instruments of nycenes? or upon sumptuous fare and
belly Covetousness in old time abhorred.
cheer, being the ministers and occasions of voluptuousnes?

Set before your eyes every one of the Kings: will you that I shall begin with
Romulus? Or else with those valiau^t Ge^tlemen which delivered our City from
miserable thraldom and slavery? By Romulus for his valiauncie and Virtue made
a God.
what degrees (I pray you) did Romulus ascend into heaven and become Deified?
by such vain Pleasures as these gross Beetleheades call Good? or else by his
valiant acts and worthy Virtues?

What say we to Numa Pompilius? do we not think yt the Gods were Numa
Po^pilius.
as well pleased with his homely * Cruses and earthen Pitchers, as with the rich
Wherein he offered Sacrifice.
Goblets, and delicate Cups of others?

I omit the rest: for they were al egal one with an other, except Tarquinius
Superbus.

But if a man should ask Brutus, what he did, or whereabout he went, when he
restored his Country to liberty: if a man should ask the rest of his Fellows
and Co^federates, what mark they shot at, and whereunto they had respect in
thenterprising thereof: can it be thought that any of the^ did it for Pleasure
sake, or for Riches, or for any other purpose, otherwise the^ became men of
approved Fortitude and Magnanimity?

What thing animated Quintus Mutius Mutius Scuola, privily co^ueighing himself
into Porsenna his camp, and mynding to have slain the king missed him and
killed an other in his sted
to hazard his life without al hope ever to escape, in geeuinge the attempt to
have slain King Porsenna?

What valiaunce caused Horatius Cocles alone to defend the Bridge against all
the armed rout of his Enemies?

What invincible Courage made Decius the father, and Decius the Son,
volu^tarily to bow and object themselves to death, by preasing into the middle
of their enemies hosts? What pretended the co^tine^cy of C. Fabritius? What
meant ye homlye fare and slender theere of M. Curious?

What say we to our ii. sure and invincible Buttresses at ye Carthaginian
wars, C. and P. Scipio? who sticked not even wc their own bodies to stop ye
passage of the Scipio.
army, yt came to aid and succor ye Carthaginians? What sought the younger
Aphricanus? what desired the Elder? What coueted Cato, who lived between these
two men's times? and innumerable Cato.
others? For we have store enough of Domestical examples.

Do we think that any of these were ever in that opinion, to desire or
seek for any thing in their life, but only that which they supposed and
deemed to be good, virtuous, and laudable?

Therefore let all such as mock and deryde this opinion step forth and show
their faces: let them even themselves Virtue much more to be desired then all
pelf or vvorldlye Riches.
judge, whether they had leifer be like to some of these rich and fat
Chuffes, which have store of gorgeous houses and Buildinges, garnished with the
finest Marble stones, burnished and beset with Yuorye and Gold, beautified and
adorned with Pictures, Cables, Plenty One virtuous man more to be accounted of
and esteemed then many rich and weal thy Cobs that are evil.
of Gold and silver Plate, curiously chased and engraven, and other precious,
and artificial Corynthian worckes: or else be like to C. Fabritius, who never
had neither would ever have any of al these?

And these men commonly are persuaded to confess, that these uncertain Goods,
which are posted and turmoyled over from one man to an other, are not worthy
to be reckened among those things, that are Good.

But yet this poincte they do stiflye maintein and earnestly defend, yt
Pleasure is the greatest Goodness, and chiefest Sensuality and pleasure.
Felicity. Which saying in mine opinion seems rather to proceed out of the
mouths of brute Beasts, then of Men

Will thou therefore so much abase and That is not to be reckened good which
bettereth not him in whom it rests.
cast away thy self, seeing that God or Nature (being the common Mother of all
things) has given to the a Mind, (then which, there is nothing more
excellent and divine) that thou should think no difference to be
between thee, and a dumb Beast? Is any thing Most praise due to most Virtue.
Good, that does not make him that possesses it to be better? For as cuerye
man is most endued and garnished with Virtue, so is he worthy of most praise.
A man may honestly rejoice and glory in himself for good things.
And there is no good thing, but he that is therewith decorated, may honestly
rejoice and glory in himself for it.

But is any of all these in Pleasure?

Does it make a man either better or more praisable? Is there any so shameless
to extol his own lewdness, or to attribute any honest praise to himself,
for ensuinge Voluptuousnes, and Sensual No man of any honesty will make vau^t
and take pride in his own filthy and lewd life.
Pleasure? Seeing therefore yt Pleasure (in defense whereof very many do stiffly
stand) is not to be accoumpted among Good things: but rather yt more that it
is used, the more it does alienate and remove the Mind, from the state wherein
it was before: certes, to live well and happily is nothing else, but to live
uprightly, and honestly.

The Second Paradoxe declaring that in whomsoever Virtue is, in him there
lacks nothing else to the leading of an happy life.
Neither did I ever think Marcus Regulus to be miserable, unhappy or wretched.
For his Marcus Regulus.
Magnanimity, and bautye Courage, was not tormented of the Carthaginians,
neither his Gravity, neither his Faythfulnesse, neither his consta^cie,
neither any of his noble Virtues: neither finallye could his worthy Mind
which was guarded and fortified with a garrison of so many Virtues, and on
every side environed and accompanied with such singular qualities, be
vanquished or made Captive, although his Body was taken Prisoner.

As touching C. Marius, we saw in Marius a noble pattern of constancy and
patience
him such a rare pattern of noble Patience, that when he was af^ote in his
highest Prosperity, he seemed unto me, one of the happiest and fortunatest men
in ye world: and in adversity, one of the noblest and stoutest hearted men that
ever was: the^ which, there can nothing happen unto a mortal Man more Blessed
or Fortunate. Pa^t^^^l^^lye in neighing against Antonius but generally al
others of his disposition.


Thou little know thou foolish and brainsick man, thou little know I say,
what great power and efficacy Virtue has: thou do only usurp the bare
name of Virtue, but thou know not the excellency, and force of Virtue.

That man cannot be but most happy, whose Mind is wholye settled and
accustomed to Virtue, and which puts and reposeth all things in himself
alone.

But he that puts all his hope, co^sidence, He that leans altogether to
biynde Fortune, and hap hazard, hangs in doubtful ballaunce.
reason, and cogitation in fickle Fortune, and altogether depends upon
uncertain hazard, can have no certainty of any thing, neither can he assure
himself, that he shall have the fruition of any thing, not so much as yt
space of one day.

Terrify and affray such a one, if thou can catch any such in thy danger,
with He that is armed with virtue and a good conscience fears not the
threats of the wicked.
thy threateninge menaces, either of Death, or else of Banishment: but for my
part, what chance soever betydeth me, in so churlish and ingrate City, I am
fully resolved patiently to suffer it, and not to refuse it: much less not to
repugne or resist it.

For to what End have I employed all my travail, to what effect are all my
deeds, or for what purpose serve al my former cares, and studious cogitations,
if I have not gotten some what thereby, and learned in such sort to lead my
Learning comfort a ma^in al extremities, and armeth him against al assayes.
life, that neither the rashness of fickle Fortune, nor the envious
hartburning and injurious hatred of mine Enemies, should be able once to
crushe, or dashe me out of countenance?

Is it Death that thou do threaten me withal, by whose means I shall
depart out of this miserable world altogether from among Men: or else it is
Banishment, whereby I shall be ryd out of the company of Naughty packes and
Villains?

Death is terrible to those, whose Death.
life and conversation has been such, that when they dye, all other things
dye, and take an End, with them also: but not to them, whose praise and
renown can never dye, nor be forgotten.

As touching Banishment, it is terrible and dreadful to them which, think
Banishement.
themselves to be circumscribed and enclosed within a certain limite and place
of Dwelling: not unto the^, which think and accoumpt the whole World as one
City.

Thou art overwhelmed in all miseries, thou art plunged in Calamities, thou
art enueigled and led in a Fools Torments of a wicked and guiltye
Co^sciens.
Paradise, thinckinge thy self to be a man happy and in Fortunes good grace:
thine own libidinous Lusts do vex and trouble thee: thou art Night and Day
tormented: thou neither thinckest that sufficient and enough, which thou
presently possessest, and also thou sta^dest in continual fear, least yt which
thou have, will not long continue with thee. The Conscience of thy wicked deeds
pricketh the: thou stand in fear of Sessio^s, Judgments, and Laws: which
way soever thou glau^cest thine eye, thy wrongful dealings, like hellish
furies, do occur and resort into thy remembrance, and will not suffer thee
to take any rest.

Wherefore, as a naughty, foolish and dissolute person cannot be hapyye: so a A
virtuous and wise man can never be miserable.
good, wise, and valiant man cannot be miserable. Neither can his life be
other wise then good and prayseable, whose Virtuous manners and honest
conditions are Godly and commendable: neither furthermore is his life to be
detested and eschued, which deserves praise: which were utterly to be avoided
and fled, if it were wretched and miserable. And therefore I conclude, that
whatsoever is laudable, the same also ought to seem blessed, flourishinge and
expetible.

The Third Paradoxe, wherein according to the opinion of the Stoickes, he
proves all faults to be equal.
THe thing (will some man The Stoickes do not consider and respect what is
done, but with what mind and intent it is done
say) is small and of little value: But verily the Offense is great. For
Offenses, and faults must be waighed and considered, not by the euente of
things, but by the vicious intent and naughtye disposition of the Parties.

One offense (I grant) may be greater or less in value, then another is: but
as touching the nature of the offenses, and By negligence he that drouneth a
Ship laden with Chafe, is as much to be blamed in respect of his
unskillfulness, as though it were fraught with gold.
respecting them simply, which way soever thou shiftest and turnest thyselfe,
they are all one.

A Pylote or chief Mariner which negligently drowneth a Ship, whether the
same be fraughted with Gold, or with Chafe, is as much to be reprehended and
disallowed, for the one, as for the other. For, although there be some odds
and difference in the worth and value of the things, yet his Ignorance and
unskillfulness is all one.

If a man through inordinate Lust, do deslour a woman that is unknown, and
Adultery and fornication committed with a pore maiden as heinous in itself
as with a Damsel of worshipful parentage
of pore estate and Degree, the grief of that villayny does not (in deed)
appertain to so many, as if he had lasciuiously constuprated a noble
Damoysel, descended of some honorable House, and Pedagrewe. But the offense was
of itself never a whit ye less. For Sin is nothing else, but a transgressing
and passinge of the lymites and bounds of Virtue. Which when thou have once
done, the fault or trespass is committed: and it skilleth not how far thou
runneste forward in aggravating or increasing the same transgression with any
more.

Certainly, it is not lawful for any man to sin.

And whatsoever is unlawful to be done, is in this one poinct contained: in
challenging it not to be lawful: which can neither be made more or less: For
if it be not lawful, it is Sin: which is always one, and the same: And
therefore the Vices that spring and proceed out of them, must needs be equal.

Also if Virtues be equal one with another, Vices also must be equal.

But it may most plainly and easily be perceived and understood, yt Virtues
are al equal one with another: forasmuch as there cannot be any man better the^
a good man: nor any more te^perate, then he that is temperate: neither any
stouter and valiaunter then he that is stout and valiant: nor wiser then he
that is Wise.

Will thou call him a Good man, y^ whereas he might gayn clearlye and with out
danger of Law, detain to himself Ten pounds of Gold being committed to
his keepinge and custodye in secret, without any witness, yet faythfullye and
truly redeliuereth the same to the owner thereof: would thou (I say) think
him a good man, if he would As Much right in a penny, as in a pound.
not do semblablye in Ten thousand pounds? Or would you repute and take
him to be a temperate man, which can bridle his affections, from some one Lusts
and affections must be brideled not once but alvvaies.
licencious Lust, and lets go the Reins of al disordered outrage in
another? Only Virtue is agreeably with reason and perpetual Constancy.
Nothing can be added theru^to to make it to be more a Virtue: nothing can be
taken away Virtue a greeable with Reason and Constancy.
from it, but the name of Virtue shall straight ways be taken away and cease.

For if things well done, be rightlye and virtuously done, and nothing can be
Nothing can be better then good.
any thing be found that is better then Good. It follows therefore, yt vices
also are equal, since the naughtiness and prauities of the Mind are aptly
termed Vices. But since Virtues are equal, Virtuous deeds also, (because they
proceed and come of Virtue) ought to be equal. Se^blably Sins because they
spring and arise out of Vices, must needs be equal.

Yea sir (will some say) you take and ground this opinion upon the Philosophers
doctrine. Objection
I was afraid, least you would have said, I had borrowed and gathered it
Answer
of Ribauds and Verlets, Socrates his use and manner was to dispute after such
a Socrates.
sort. Surely I am well apaid thereof: for ancient Histories do record and
witness, yt be was a profoundlye learned, and also a right wise man. But yet
I demand this question of you (seeing we do quietly reason the matter with
gentle words and not with sturdye Buffets) whether when we Men of profoundest
wit and learning fit test to decide controversies in opinion.
dispute of good things, we ought rather to seek the Mind and Opinion of
rude and ignorant Ta^ckerd bearers and drudginge laborers, or else of the
approved learned and famous philosophers especially, since there is no se^te^ce
and opinion, either truer or more auaylable to Man's life then this. For what
power or force does more terrify men, from commyttyng all kind of Wickedness,
then when they know that there is no difference in offenses, and that they do
offend as much and as heynously, in laying violent hands Equality of faults
upon private Persons, as they should, if they did the same to Magistrates?

And what house soever they do pollute with bawdry and whoredom, that the
dishonestie and shame of the lecherous fact is equal and all one.

What? is there no difference (will some say) whether a man kill his own
Father, or else some common Servant? If you mean these two comparisons barelye
and simplye, it is hard to be judged of what sort they be. For if it Who
after nine months siege, and extreme famine rather then they would yield to
Anniball and come into slauerye, burned all their own goods in the market
place and slevvtheir own fathers, wives and children. and last of al the^
selves. Liuius. Lib. i Dec. 3.
be of itself and simply, an horrible offense, for one to kill his Father then
the * Saguntines (who had leyfer their Parents should dye being free and
vnba^quished, then to live in servitude and slauerye) were Parricides. Therefore
in some case the Son may vereue ye Father of his life without offense: and
many times a poor drudge or slave, may not be brought to his death, without
great wrong and iniurye. The cause therefore and not the nature of the fact,
makes the difference herein: which when it is occasioned by the one, then is
the same committed more readilye: but if it be conjoined to both, then must
the faults be needs equal.

Notwithstanding herein they do differ, that in killinge a Slave, if it be don
iniuriouslye, there is but one single offense committed: but in killing and
taking away the life of a Father, there are many faults: for therein is an
unnatural dealing showed to him that begatte thee, that fostered and brought
thee up, that instructed and taught thee, yt placed Diverse r^sons to strike a
reverence in us to wards our Pare^tes.
thee in good state, to live in the common Wealth, and furnished thee with
houses and necessaries. He is notoryous for ye multitude of Offenses, which
takes away from his Father, yt, which he himself, received of him, and
therefore deserves a great deal more punishmente.

But in the rare and course of our life, we ought not to wayghe and consider
what punishment is meet and due for every fault, but to look and perpende
what is lawful and permitted for every man to do. To do that which behooves To
do a miss is of fe^siue, but to do any thing that is expressly forbidden, is
heinous and detestable.
not to be done, we ought to thinck to be an offense: but to do any thing
which is prohibited and unlawful, we ought to judge and accoumpt a detestable
and cursed deed.

Is this to be so precisely taken, for every light matter and small trespass?
Yea truly, for we cannot ymagine a mean of the things: but we may bridle
our affections, and keep our Minds in a mean and measure.

If a Stage player do never so little in his gesture miss and transgress the
notes of measure, or err in pronouncing some one syllable in a Verse, long,
which should be short: or contrary wise that, short, which should be long, he
is hissed at, and with clapping of hands driven from the Stage: and will thou
say, that thou should err and offend so much as in one syllable, in thy
life, We must be so precise in the direction of our life that we should not
trip so much as in a Syllable.
which ought to be more moderate then any gesture, and more inculpable, then
any Verse?

I cannot abide to hear a Poet make a fault in his Verse, though it be but a
trifling matter, and shall I hear a Citizen skanne upon his fingers, his
faults, which in the society of Life he has committed? Which if they seem
to be shorter, yet how can they seem to be lighter, sithence every offense
and sin comes by the perturbation of Reason and order being perturbed, all
virtue goes to havoc.
reason and order? For Reason and Order being once broken and perturbed, there
can nothing be added, whereby it may seem that the Offense may any whitte
more be increased.

The Fourth Paradoxe, wherein is proved, that all Fools be mad and
distraught from their right minds: covertly taunting Clodius, and by him all
others of like manners and conditions.
But I will manifestlye and by necessary Arguments prove thee, not a Fool as
thou art often: not a wicked Villayn, as thou art always: but a frantic
Sotte and a stark mad Idiot.

Shall the mind of a Wiseman which is guarded and on every side fenced in, with
The mind of a wise man, unconquerable.
grave counsel, and advice, patient bearing and suffering al such chau^ces, as
are incident to man, contempt of Fortune, and finally with al other Virtues (as
it were) with a Ra^pier or a wall, be vanquished and overthrown, which cannot
be so much as exiled and banished out of the City?

For what call you a City? Is it an whole assemblye of savage and brutishe
lyuers? or is it a rabbling rout and multitude of Rennegates, and Cutthrote
Rome.
Thieues, congregated into one place? Certes, you will say, no. Then verilye
Where tyranny oppression, and contempt of Laws be practiced no city nor
Commonwealth can rightlye be termed.
was not it to be called a Cittye, when as the Laws were disanulled, and
abrogated, when Judgments were laid aside and contemned, when the aunciente
customs of the Cittye were ceased and extinguished, when the Magistrates were
with sweard and strong hand deposed and disfraunchised, and ye honorable name
of Senate no more used in the Weal public.

Was that flocking rout of Thieves, and Ruffians, and that swarm of Robbers
and Murderers, which under thy conduct were brought and set in the * Forum,
and the residue of the Conspiratours The common place vvher Courts vverekept
and Law matters pleaded.
which after the sedicious Furies and traiterous vprores of Catiline, turned
and co^formed themselves unto thy ungracious villainy and madness, any city?

Therefore I was not banished out of the City, which was then none: but I was
called home, and restored into yt city, when there was in the common Wealth a
Co^sul, which* then was none at all: and So long as Clodius ruled the ro^t.
when there was a Senate, which while thou barest the swaye, was quight
decayed: when the people might francklye and freelye geeue their voices, and
consentes: and finallye, when the xecution of Justice, Law, and Equity, which
be the Lincks and Bonds of a City) were revived and brought again into
fresh remembrance.

But behold, how little I set by these weapons, where with thou mainteinest thy
murderous and thieuish lewdness. I ever made accou^pt, that thou did mean
great and mischievous iniurye toward me: but I never thought that it ever
raught or came near to me.

Unless peradventure when thou did beat down the walls of my House, or
when thou did most wickedlye set my Mansion on fire, thou thoughtest yt
some of such things as were mine, were spoiled ransacked and burned. But
Worldly pelf and transitory goods are not rightlye to be termed any of
ours.
I do reckon nothing to be mine, neither can any Man else, call any thing
his own, which may be taken away or stolen, or by any other means lost.

If thou haddeste berefte me of my long continued Constancy of Mind, of my
provident cares, of my watchful pains, and my sage counsel, whereby the
state of this public Weal is and has been honorably conserved and
maintained, or if thou had abolished Tyraun^es and bloudsuckers have no
manner of power over the mind of the virtuous.
and blotted out the immortal Fame that shall eternallye redound to me for
these worthy benefits, or (which is more) if thou had bereft me of that
Mind, out of which al these Counsels proceeded: then would I confess that I
had received a Wrong, at thine hands.

But forasmuch as thou neither did, neither yet could do this: therefore
has thy injurious dealing toward Virescit vulnere virtus.
me, made this my return joyful and glorious, and not my departure wretched
and miserable.

Therefore I was ever a Citizen, and then especially, when the Senate did write
to Foraine Nations for my safeguard, and gentle intertainment, as for one that
was both a worthy and a virtuous Citizen.

But thou even now at this present, art no Citizen, unless peradventure it
be possible for one, and the same person both to be a deadly Enemy, and a
friendlye Citizen.

Do thou make the difference beetweene a Citizen, and an Enemy by Nature
and distaunte of place, and not by inward will, and plain deeds of the
mind? Thou have committed murder in the Forum, thou have intruded in to the
Temple, and forciblie kept yt possession thereof, with thy armed Cutthroates.
Thou have fiered the houses of pryuate men, and holy Churches. Why is *
Spartacus proclaimed a Rebel A notable Fencer, who gathering an host of
Bondslaues, made vvarres against the Romans.
and Traitor, if thou be a Citize^? Can thou be a Cytyzen, sithence through
thy lewdness, the City was once no City? And do thou call me (by thine
own name) a banished man, since there is no good man but he thought yt at my
departure the Common wealth was banished and departed also?

O thou foolish and frantic Dolte, will thou never be reclaymed to
goodness? will thou never look about the? wylt thou never consider what thou
do and speak? Do thou not know that Exile is the punishment of wicked
and scelerous dealing? and that this my Journey was taken in hand for my most
notable and noble Acts, before by me achieved?

Al mischievous and naughty persons (of whom thou do profess thy self
Captain and Ringleader) whom the Not the change of soil and Country which
makes the banished man
Laws will to be banished me^, are Vagarauntes and banished men in deed,
although they never stir foot out of their native Country. When by all
order of the Laws thou art denounced an Outlawed and Banished person, will thou not be a Banished man?

Is not he called an Enemy, that is found with Weapon about him, and beehold
thy Falchion was taken eue^ before the Senate? Shall he that slaieth a man be
punished, and thou escape, who have murdered a great maignie? Shall he that
sets fire on the City, be adjudged an Enemy, and thou wincked at, which
with thine own hand have burned Cloisters and Churches, dedicated to the
Nymphs? Shall he be punishable, which forciblye surpriseth yt Temples of the
Gods, and thou go skotfree, who have pitched thy Camp even in yt Forum?

But what mean I to recoumpte and declare the common Laws, by all which thou
verily art a Banished man?

Thine own familier freende Cornificius made a special Law for thee, that if
thou did presume to come into the secret Shrowdes of Bona Dea, thou
should be sent into exile. But thou (notwythstanding) art accustomed to
make thy vaunt, that thou haste done it. Seeing therefore thou art denou^ced a
banished man, and thrown into exile by so many laws, do thou not tremble
at, and fear this odious name of a Banished man?

But I am here in Rome (thou wylt say) and therefore how can thou prove me
to be a Banished man? Yea mary Sirre: and so were you in the Shrowdes also.
Therefore a man is not demau^dable to have the benefit and protection of the
place where he rousteth and barboureth, if the Laws do not allow him there
to be, and remain.

The Fyfte Paradoxe, wherein he inueigheth against the insolency and
voluptuous living of Marcus Antonius, and proves all Wise Men to be free: and
al Fools to be Slaves and Bondmen.
Deserves this worthy captain Antonius
to be praised, or to be named and thought worthy of such an honorable name?
How? Or what honest He can ill rule another, that can not rule himself.
Freeman can he be a ruler over, which cannot rule his own affections? Let
him first bridle his own Sensual Lusts, let him renounce and despise
Pleasures, let him qualify his furious and fumishe anger, let him forsake
Covetousness, let him utterly expel and aba^don al other corrupt and naughty
vices: and the^ let him begin to exercise his rule and Authority over
others, when he Vices specially emblemishing there novvme of noble men and
magistrates.
himself has ceased to be enthralled, as a Bo^d slave unto two most vile
masters, to wit, Shame and Dishonesty: For so long as he is the Bondslaue of
those two, he shall not only be accounted no Emperor, nor co^maunder over
others, but rather not so much as a freman.

For this is very excellentlye agreed upon, among the best learned, whose
authority I would not use and allege if the case so lay, yt I should make
this discourse before an audience of blunt and ignorant persons. But seeinge
that I do speak unto them, that are most wise and discreet, unto whose
hearing these things are not strange, why should I dissimule, and feign yt I
have lost all the pains and labor which I have bestowed in these studies?

Therefore right learned men do hold opinion, that no man is Free, but only
Liberty what it is
a Wisema^: For what is Liberty: Forsooth, a Leave and power to live as a man
lust. And who lives as he lust, but he which embraces and discretely
frames to live, in an orderly and provident trade: who is obedient to Laws
not for fear, but stands in reuerente Honest men obey Laws, not for fear
but for love of Virtue
awe of them, because he thincketh it a thing expediente, and wholesome so to
do: who says nothing, does nothing, thincketh nothing, but voluntarilye
and freelye: whose whole counsels, and affairs, what soever they be that A
freema^ described
he takes in hand, does proceed from himself, and to the same are referred:
neither is any thing of so great force with him, as is his own will and
judgment: unto who^ Fortune herself, who is reported to have a marvelous
great power, Fortune.
and to bear a great swaye in all things, yeldeth and gives place:
according, to the saying of that wise Poet: She is fashioned to every man
after his own manners.

Therefore only a Wiseman has this preeminence and good chance, that be does
nothing against his will, nothing grudginglye, nothing by compulsion. Which
thing to be true, although we must be feign in many words to dyscusse and
declare, yet this in few words must needs be confessed, that no man is
Free, saving he only, which is thus disposed and affected. And therefore Who
be Free.
all naughtye persons are Slaves, and Bondemen.

Neither is this so inopinable and merueilous, in deed, as it is in words.
For they do not term and call them Slaves, after such sort as they do Bo^d
men, who serve for drudgerye and vile service, being bound to their Masters
by Indentures and Couenauntes obligatorie, Who be Bond
or by some order of Civil law: But if the vile obedience of an effeminat and
abject mind, lacking any sure stay or Judgment of itself, be (as it is in
deed) a Bondage, who will deny, but that all light fellows, Covetous persons,
and finallye all naughtye Folks, be Slaves and Bondmen?

Shall I think him to be a Free man, which is under the rule of a* Woman,
submitting himself to her beck, Cleopatra.
and Pleasure: over whom she exercises Authority, and unto whom she
enioyneth and prescribes Laws: commands and cou^termaundeth, at her own
pleasure? If she command any service to be done, he dare none otherwise
do, but go about it: if she would have any thing, he dare not deny it: if
she ask or request any thing, he must geeue it: if she call, he must
come: if she cast him of, there is no remedy but to be packinge and trudging
away: if she storm and threaten, he must tremble and quake for awe and
fear. Verily I judge ye man wc is in this case, worthy not only to be called
a Slave and Bondsman, but a most wicked Passaunt and Drudge, yea although he
were descended of honorable stock and Lignage. And as in a great Household of
Fools, some servant be (as they think in their own conceits) brauer and
coper, the^ their other Fellows: as being Porters and Vshers of ye Hal, and yet
they are no better but servants and fooleshaken, as well as thou: so are, they
also teinted with ye like follye and Sott^ge, which are too too curious in
settinge all their delighte in Pictures, Tables, Plate richlye engraven,
Corynthian Fond delights.
worckes, and sumptuous Buildinges.

But we are (will they say) the chief Objection
heads of the City. Truly you are not the chief Masters, not so much as
over your own fellow Slaves. Answer


But as in a great Family, they which handle and go about Vile offices of
drudgerie, as Scowringe, Greasinge, Wyping, Brushing, Sweping, strawinge Rushes
and Flowers, have not the honestest place of service: so in a City, they which
have enthralled and addicted themselves to y^ desires and lusts of these
things, have almost the lowest and basest rowme of al, in ye same City. But
thou will say again: I have valiauntly behaved my self in battayles, and
exployted Objectio^
worthy adue^tures in Martial affairs, and I have had the Governance and
chief rule, over great Empires and provinces. Then carry about with thee, a
Mind garnished with such Virtues Answer
and Qualities, as be praise worthy. But thou art stupefied with some
excellent An excellent painter. A Cunning Image maker.
Table of * Echion his workmanship, or else with some Picture of * Polycletus.

I omit to speak whence thou purloynedst them, and how thou came by them.
But when I see and behold thee so affectionately still to gaze and toote upon
them, to marvel and muse at them, and to make exclamations for wonder of
them, truly I must needs judge thee to be the Slave and Bondsman of all Dotage
and Foolishnes.

But are not these things pretty and trim? Yes mary are they: for we also
have learned Eyes, able to discern things.

But I pray thee, let these be reputed and deemed fair and beautiful, in such
sort, that they be not made as Gyeues and Fetters, to shackle and bynd Men:
but taken as toys and conceits, to delight Children. Who utterly razed
Corynth and carried away all the precious sevvels and costlye vvares thereof to
Rome.


For what do you think, if * L. Mummius should have seen any of these men
greatly enamoured, and very desirouslye delighted to handle the fine Pottes and
Vrinalles of Corynthian work, whereas he himself cared not for the whole
City of Corynth: whether would he, think him to be an excellent Citizen,
orels a diligent ouerseeing Servant? Suppose yt * Curious were alive again: or
some of those worthy Who van quished the Samnites, and drove Pyrrhus out of
Italye.
Personages, in whose simple Fermes and Country Grau^ges, there was nothing
gorgeously decked, glittering, and beautiful, but themselves. If he or any of
these me^, should see one (which by yt election and favor of the people, has
been greatly benefited and promoted) catching young Barbilles out of a
Fishpond, or nicelye ba^dling the^: or rejoicing in himself, for having stoare
and abundance of La^prayes: would not he Judge this man to be such a Slave,
that in a Household, he would not think him worthy to intermeddle in any
greater Charge?

Does any man doubt, but that they are in most beastly state of Servitude,
Vylest Slauerye.
who, for covetousness of worldly mock, refuse no manner of most vile Slavery,
Drudgerye, and Bondage?

What unreasonable Bondage is that Person well contented to suffer, which
gopeth for the Goods and Inheritance of an other man? When does the Old Gapers
for other men's Death.
Rych Childlesse Cobbe, either beck or nodde, but he is ready at his Elbow, and
pressed at an ynche, to do his will and pleasure? He speaks every word to
please the old Churles humor: he knows ye right bent of his Bow, and how to
please him: what he wills to be done, he does: he holds him up with yea
and nay: he sits by him and prayseth him.

What poinct of a Freeman is in any of these? nay rather, what poinct of a
Servile and drowsy Drudge is not herein?

Now, that same ambitious desire of Ambition and desire of Honor
Honor, Principality, and Provinces, (which seems to mask under a better
show of Honesty) what a hard and Rigorous Maystresse is it? How Imperious,
how Stately, and how Vehement is it? This was it, yt caused the chiefest
persons in the City, and those which were coumpted the best, and most
substantiallest me^ in Rome, to become Suitors, and to crowch and kneel unto
Cethegus, (a man not of yt best honesty) and to be under him: to send him
gifts: to Cethegus.
come home to him in the night: to desire him to be good unto them: and
finally, suppliauntlye to prostrate themselves before him, and beseech his
favor.

What call you Servitude and Thraldom, if this may be thought to be Liberty
and Freedom? What shall we say? when the rule and Domination of Affections
has exceeded, does there not enter into their hearts, an other heavy Master,
proceeding and growinge Fear and remorse of Conscience.
of a remorse of Conscience, for yt crimes before committed, which is Fear?

What a miserable and hard Servitude is this? They must obey and follow yt
fancies of prating Young lings. All they that seem to have any shadow of
knowledge, are feared as though they were Lords.

As for the Judge, what domination Judge.
has he? In what fear of him, do guiltye Persons stand? how do they which
know themselves guiltye of any offense, fear and dread him? Is not all kind
of fear, a Bondage and Slauerye?

Therefore to what purpose serves L. Crassus reproved for his dasierdlye
fearfulness.
that coptous, rather then wise Oration of that right eloquent man L. Crassus:
Deliver and ryd us out of Servitude. What Servitude is this to such an
excellent and noble Man? For faintharted, cowardly and abject fearfulnes of the
Mind, is Servitude. What Slavery is


Let us not (says he) be in Bondage to any man. Desires he to be
enfraunchised and restored to Liberty? No. For what does he add afterward? To
none but only to you all, unto whom we may and ought to show our dutyfull
allegiau^ce. He would but change his Landlorde: he desires not to be free.

But we, if we be endued with a lofty and valiant Mind, garnished and
fraught with Virtues, neither ought, neither may be in servile Subjection. But
say thou, O Crassus, yt thou can do so: for why: thou can do it, and be as
good as thy word: but say not that thou ought so to do: because no man
owes any thing, but that, which were a dishonestye not to pay.

But of this hitherto. Now let this iolye * Fellow look well about him, and
Antonius
see, how he can be an Emperor, or Commander, since very Reason and Truth
do most plainly prove him, not to be so much as a Freeman.

The Syxte and last Paradoxe, wherein he proves none to be Rych but only
wise and Virtuous Me^: privily nipping Marcus Crassus, who said, that none was
worthy to have the name of Rich, unless with his Revenues, he were able to
furnish and maintain an Army.
What an insolent bragging and ostentation is this that thou make about the
tellinge of thy Money and Riches? Art thou alone Rich? Oh immortal Gods, may
not I rejoice in my self, that I have heard and learned something? Art thou
alone Rych? What will thou say, if I can prove the not to be rych at al? Nay,
what will thou say, if I prove thee to be poor and beggarlye?

For, what is he, whom we call Rich, or upon what manner of man may we
bestow this word? Verilye I Who may rightly be termed Rich.
think that is best agrees, and may fitliest be applied to him, who
possesses so much, that he thincketh himself very well and co^te^tedly stoared
with enough to live virtuously and honestly withal, who seeks and prowleth
after nothing, coueteth and wishes nothing more then he has.

For it is thy Mind, that must examine and judge itself, whether it be Rich
or no: and not the rumor and talk of the People: neither thy Riches and
Possessions.

He which thinks himself to lack nothing, and cares not for heapinge and
boording up of any more: but is satisfied and well contented with his present
Who is Rych.
wealth, (I graunce) is Rich. But if for filthye lucre and insaciable
greediness of Money, thou think no manner of gain dishonest and reproachful,
and carest not which way nor how thou getrest thy goods, (whereas no gain at
al, can be honest and commendable in one of that order, whereof thou art one)
if thou daily defraude and undermine thy Neighbors: deceive and circumue^t
them: exact unreasonable demands of them: entangle and lap them in
prejudicial bargains and couenauntes: poll and pyll them: spoil and undo
them: Lewd shifts togather wealth.
steal from thy fellows: rob the common Treasury: gape and look for
Legacies to be given the, by thy friends in their last Testamentes: or
perhaps, do not wait and tarry the time, but by forgerye and falsitie do
craftelye intrude and put thy name in steed of an other: whether be these,
the tokens and pranckes of a rych wealthy Man which abounds, or of a needye
poor person that lacks?

It is the Mind of a man, that is wo^t to be called Rich, and not his Coffers.
It is the mind and not the full Coffers that make a man rich.
Although thy Coffers be full stuffed with money and worldly pelf, yet so
long as I see thy self empty and void of Virtue, I will never think thee to
be rich. For men do esteem and reckon ye measure of riches, to consist in
Sufficiency. Sufficiency is wealth enough.
Has a man one Daughter? The^ has he need of Money? Has he two? He has
need of more Money. Has he more then two? He has need of greater He that
has much to do with Money, has need of much Money.
store then before. If he have fifty Daughters (as the Poets do say that king
Danaus had) he must provide so many Dowers to geeue with them in Marriage, which
will ask a great mass of Money.

For according as every one has need, so is the measure of Riches (as before
I have said) considerable and appliable. Therefore that man which has not many
Daughters, but (nathelesse) The Pursuit of fo^d Affections and fleshly Lusts
co^sumeth wealth, be it never so much.
has innumerable Affections, and an infinite number of beastly Lusts, (which
are able in short space to consume very great wealth and foyson of Riches)
how shall I call him Rych, sithence he feels and perceyueth himself to lack?

Many have heard thee say, that no man was Rych, unless he were able with
his Rents and Revenues to maintain What man Crassus judged to be called Rich.
and furnishe an whole Host of Men: which thing the Romayne Nation has of
long time been scarcelye able with all their Trybutes and Rentes to do.

Therefore thine own Reason and Argument beeinge true, thou shall never he
Rich, until thy Possessions be so augmented and increased, that A Legion
contains 12500. Soldiers
therewith thou may be able to maintain Six * Legions of Soldiers: beside
a great number of Horsemen, and Footmen, which come to succor and aid.

Now thou can not choose, but confess thy self not to be Rych, sithence
thou lackest so much, that thou can not accomplish and fulfill thy wished
desire.

Therefore thou did never dissemble and hyde this thy Pouertye, or rather
Needynes and Beggerye.

For, as we well understand and know that those Men, which honestelye seek to
increase their Wealth, by Enter course and Traffic of Merchaundize, by
Letting out Woorckemen for Hyre, by helpinge one an other: and by Ferming
Customs, and Public Tolles, have need of the things which they seek for:
So he that seeeth at thy House the Flockinge Companyes of Accusers,
Complaynaunts, and Judges, all at once: he that marketh the Defendauntes and
Guyltye Persons, beeinge full of Money, goinge about and Practisinge with
Brybes, and Rewards (which they (which they learned of thee) to pervert and
defeat the due course of Justice and Shifts whereby Crassus gatte all his
wealth
Judgment: he that notes thy Legierdemaine and craftye Bargains yt thou
make with thy Clients: what reward thou shall have for thy Patrocinie and
counsel in their Causes: for what su^mes of Money thou do indente with
those yt be Co^petitours or Suitors for Office in general asse^blies: be yt
calls to memory, how thou sendest abroad and let out thy Slaves and
Servants for hyre, to shave and exact unmeasurable gaynes by vsurye of the
Provinces: he that marketh how thou threatenest thy poor Neighbors and
Tenauntes out of their Houses and Fermes: he that considers thy open
Robberies abroad in the fields: he that calls to mind how thou use to
be partaker and Copertener with poor Slaves, Libertes and Clyentes, and al for
money: He that beholds the Houses and Possessions left void and uninhabited,
by reason that the poor Fermers be expulsed: the Proscriptions, and
Attendours of wealthye Personages: the Slaughter and Ransacking of incorporate
Towns: He that perpendeth, the lamentable havoc and general Spoil,
practiced in Sylla his usurped Principality: he yt records ye forged Wills
and Testaments: and the great number of Persons cast away and manquelled: and
finally how all things were then sold for Money: Mustring of me^: Decrees and
Statutes: his own, and other men's Sentences also: Judicial matters: his own
House: his goodword and Voice: yea his syle^ce and forbearing to speak: and al
these sold for Money: who is he, but will think, yt this man must confess, yt
he has need of those things which he seeks?

And whosoever has need of that thing which he toyleth to get and gain,
who can ever truly call him a Rich man? For, the Fruicte of Riches is in
Plenty: which Plenty, the Sacietie of things, and Abundaunce of Wealth He
that has need is not rych
brings: the which for as much as thou shale never attain unto, thou shall
never be Rich.

And because thou do contemn my Substance and Wealth, and well too, (for
it is after the Vulgar Peoples Assesseme^t, mean and indifferent: in thine
Opinion, in manner nothing: in mine own judgment, competent and measurable)
I will say nothing of myself, but speak of thee.

If we shall throughlye waighe and consider the thing as it is, whether shall
we more esteem the Money which King Pyrrhus sent to * Fabritius, or else Who
being veryepoore refused great Su^mes of Money sent in revvard to him from
King Pyrrhus.
yt Continency of Fabritius, who would not receive the same, being freely
offered unto him?

Whether shall we more waighe the great Mass and Sum of Gold, of the
Samnites: or else the Answer of * M. Curious, to the Messengers that brought
the same to him? the Inheritance of L. Paulus or else the liberality Who
refused agreat mass of Gold, sent unto him from the Samnites.
of Aphricanus, who gave his part and Portion of Lyueloode, to his Brother
Quintus Maximus?

Verily, these notable Examples being chief and principal points of most
excellent Virtues, are more to be esteemed, then those that be the Members of
Wealth, and Money.

The cause therefore standinge thus, yt he which possesses yt thing which is
most of all others to be esteemed, is co^sequentlye to be accoumpted the
Rychest and Worthyest Man: who doubts but that the True Riches do True
Riches consist in virtue.
co^siste only in Virtue? For no Possession whatsoever, no Mass of Gold and
Silver, is to be preferred or so much No vvorldly treasure comparable to
Virtue.
to be esteemed as Virtue. Oh immortal Gods Men do not perceive and
understand, what a great Revenue and Rent, moderate Expenses and Parsimony is.

For now will I leave to speak of this Magnum vectigal Parsimonia.
beggerlye Lickepeny yt prowleth al for Gain, and speak a little of prodigal
Spe^ders and unmeasurable Wasters. There is some one, yt may yearly dispe^d in
Lands and Rents. 600. Sestertia: My Revenues amount skantly to one hundredth:
Every Sestertium is in value 25. French Crowns
to such one, gorgeously Seeling and gilting the roofes of his Manours and
Country Houses, and pauing his floores with fine Marble, and still desiringe and
infinitely couetinge Pictures, Furniture, Implementes, and gallaun: Apparel,
Immoderate expe^ces and need less charges, about the fedi^g of affections.
all the aforsaid Sum of Money will not only be too little to discharge ye
same, but also will scanclye suffice to pay the Annual vsurye, for the loan
thereof.

I do so qualefy and bridle mine Affections under the Reins of moderate
Expenses, that out of my final yerelye Lyueloode, somewhat remains at the
Measurable spending best.
years end.

Whether of us is ryther therefore? He that lacks, or else he that has more
then he spends? He that is needye, or he that has plenty? he whose
possessions, the greater they be, the more is required to the maintenance of
his Each man must spend according to his degree and calling.
Port and state: or else he, that poyzeth his expenses and charges, according
to the rate of his ability?

But what mean I to speak of my self, who peradventure also through the
iniquity and corruption of times and manners, am not altogether clear from the
infection of this Error? Marcus Manilius who lived of late years, even in our
Fathers days and remembrance (because I will not always speak of such
precise Fellows, as the Curij, and the Lucinij were) was a very poor man: for
he dwelt in a small A Row of houses so called because they were built like to
the heels of ships.
Cotage^, in the Street called * Carinae, and had a little plecce of Ground in
Lycopum. Are we therefore which have greater possessions, rycher then he? Would
God we were.

But the measure and consideration of Money and Riches, is not to be made by
the estimation and value of Wealth, but by convenient Meat, Drink, Cloth, and
orderly living.

It is a great Fee and Pension, not to be Greedye and Covetous of Money: and
not to be a Buyer, a Purchaser, or a Common Chapman, is a great Revenue. But
to be contented with a man's Lotte, and Vocation, and Contented life is the
Rychest life.
to live quietiye and contentedly in his Calling, is the greatest and surest
Riches in the World.

For if these Lurkinge and Craftye Prycesetters of things do set an high
price upon their Meadows and Spare Roumes, because such kind of Possessions,
cannot lightlye take any harm: How much more is Virtue to be esteemed, Causes
why Virtue is chieflye to be esteemed.
which can neither be forciblye taken, nor priuilye stolen away from a Man:
which also can neither be lost by Shipwreck, nor yet by casualtie of Fire:
and is never changed by any alteration of Tempests or times? where with
whosoever be endued, are only Rych.

For they only do possess the things that are both Fructuous, Perpetual and
Permane^t: and they alone (which is the very Property of Riches) are
contented with their Substance and State, whereunto they be called. They
think yt, which they presently enjoy, to be sufficient: they covet nothing:
they lack nothing: they feel not themselves needye of any thing: they
crave and require nothing.

But wicked Persons, and covetous Pinchpenies, because their Possessions are
uncertain and casual, and are ever desirous to gather and scrape more: (in so
much that there was never yet any of them found which thought himself
contented and pleased with his present Store) are not only not to be
reckened Wealthy and Rich, but rather very Poor and garly.

T. N.

FINIS.
A Philosophical Discourse of M. T. Cicero: entitled, SCIPIO HIS Dream.
AFter my coming into Aphrique, being Marshal or Trybune to ye fourth Legion
of Souldyers (as you know) under Anitius Manilius the Consul: I desired
nothing so much, as to visit King * Masinissa: a King of Nun. dia
Prince for good causes and just respects, bearing most unfeigned goodwill to
our House and Familye. Unto whom when I came, the good old King embracing me,
fell into weepinge: and within a while after loking up toward Heaven, said
these Words: I render thanks unto thee, O Sovereign Sun, and unto all you
other celestial Creatures, that before I depart out of this life. I do Joy
of fre^des at their Meeting.
see within mine own Territory and Kingdom, yea, and under the Roof of mine
own House, my dear Friend P. Cornelius Scipio, with whose very name, I am
singulerlye refreshed and comforted. For the remembrance of yt most noble and
invincible Man, never departs out of my Mind.

Then began I to question with him, concerning the state of his Kingdom, and
he me of our Common wealth: and so, with much talk too and fro had, we spent
all that Day.

But afterward being entertained with Princely furniture and Courtesy, we
continued our talk til far in the night: ye old King speaking of nothing
else, but of Africanus, and recoumptinge not only his valiaunte Acts, but
also his wise and pythye Sayings. After this, we went to Bed, where I being
both wearye with my Journey, and having ouerwatched my self before, slept
more soundlye then I was wont and accustomed to do.

Here me thought (and I verilye Dreams, co^monlie represent to us in Sleep,
those things we most earnestlye delighted in and devised waking.
think that it so happened through the talk which we twaiue had before: For it
is commonly seen, that our Cogitations and Talk, do represent and cause some
such thing in our Slepes, as Ennius writes of Homere, that is to say, such, as
the Mind wakinge used oftenest to think, and talk on) Africanus appeared
and showed himself unto me, in such a manner of Shape, whereby he was better
known of me, by his Image, then he could have been by his own Person.
Whom after that I knew, truly I shynered and was sore afraid. But (quoth he
unto me) be of good Cheer, and lay aside all fear O Scipio, and commit
well to Memory, such things as I shall tell thee.

Do thou not see yo^der * City, which having been once heretofore compelled
by me to yield obeysaunce to the Roman Carthage
people, renueth old Grudges, seeks new Wars, and cannot be quiet? and
there wtal he showed Carthage unto me, from an high and stelliferous, clear
and lightsome place: to ye Besieging and Conquest whereof, Being not above 28 or
29 years old.
thou now come, beeinge little more the^ out of thy service or time of *
Soldier. This same shall thou being Co^sul subvert, and destroy, wtin these
ii. years, and shall thereby purchase and wyn a * Surname To be called
Africanus.
to thy self, which thou have as yet of us, by descent of Inheritance. And
when thou have spoiled and overthrown Carthage, Sole^nized a Triumphau^t
Victory, borne ye office of Ce^sor, and been Lieutenau^t General into Egypt,
Syria, Asia, and Greece,: thou shall being absent, be chosen and elected ye
second time Consul, and shall be ye victorious General of a mighty Battle,
and shall Sack, and Scipio vvon Carthage and Numa^tia.
utterly Ruinate Numantia. But when thou shall at thy return enter into the
Capitol, ryding in a Chariot, thou shall find yt Common wealth merueilously
fr^shed and disquieted through the ruflinge Stir, and Procurement of my *
Nephewe. Tib. Gracchus.


Herein O Africanus, it shall be very expedient and needeful, that thou set to,
thy helping hand, and show forth for thy Countries sake and behoof, the
haultie courage and vndau^ted prowess of thy Mind, Wit, and Counsel. But
of that time, I do see (as it were) the way of Fate and Destiny to be very
doubtful. For when thou shall come to be Seven times Eight Winters, and 56
years old.
Summers old, and that these two numbers (whereof both are accoumpted full, the
one for several cause from the other) shall accomplish and consummate the
fatal term of the Years, which thou shall live, with a natural Reuolutio^:
the whole City shall leave and repose her whole trust upon thee only, and
upon thy name: Thee shall ye Honorable Senate reverence: thee will all good Men
A valiau^t and worthy Peer in a Realm is the sure Pillar and stay thereof.
honor: the will all Fellows and Confederates of the Roman People regard:
thee, will the Latins, love and obaye: in thee only, shall the sauegarde and
preservation of the City consist. And to be short, thou being enstalled in the
office of Dictator, must needs redress the Abuses of the Common wealth, and
set the same in good order: if thou may escape the cursed hands of thine
own kynred and Lignage.

At this last talk, Laelius with pityfull scritches, crying out, and all the
residue greatly sorowing, Scipio myldlye smyling, said: I pray you do not
awake me out of my Sleep, but be quiet and still, and hear the rest.

But to the end (Africane) that thou should have the more will and
animositie to defend ye Weal public, make thy sure accoumpt of this: that
unto al those which have been Mainteiners, Mainteyners and protectors of their
country*
Ayders, and Encreasers, of their Country, a certain and definite place is
here in Heaven appoincted, where they in blessed state shall live
euerlastinglye.

For there is nothing (namely done here on earth) which more pleases God (the
most high Prince of all, who protecteth and governs all this World) then the
Congregatio^s and Assemblies of men, lawfully linckinge and lyuinge together
with faithful society and Brotherly What a City is
Fellowship, one with an other: which are called by the name of Cities. The
vprighte Magistrates, and Mainteyners whereof, departing thence, shall hither
return.

Here, albeeit I was fore afraid, and not so much for dread and fear of
Death, as for the Treacherous Conspiracy, of some of mine own Kinsfolks: yet
did I demand of him, whether my father Virtuous and worthy persons do live
after death.
Paul, were yet living, and others mo, whom we supposed, and thought to be
dead. Yea undoubtedly (quoth be) they are alive, which he ryd out of ye
Bendes of their mortal Bodies, as out of a Prison. But that which you call
Life, is Death. Yea, behold where thy Father This Life is no life
Paul comes toward thee.

Whom when I saw, certes, I shed great Abundaunce of Tears. But be
embracinge and kissing me, vadde me surceasse my Blubbering.

As Soon as I had left Weepinge, and was able to speak: I beseech you, most
holy and worthy Father (quoth I) seeing this is the true Life (as I hear
Africane say) why do I linger and tarry on Earth, and not hasten and make
speed to come byther to you? Not so (quoth he) For unless God, who is the
Owner We must not haste^ our own Deaths, before our appointed time.
of all this Temple which thou see, dismiss and discharge the from ye
custodye of thy Body, there cannot be any Entry or Passage, open for thee to
come hither.

For Men be created to this end and condition, that they should manure and Why
men were created.
inhabit yonder round Globe, or Ball, which thou see in the Middle of this
Temple, called the Earth. And to the^ is infused and geeuen a Mind out from
these everlasting Lights, which you call Planets and Stars: which beeinge
perfect round, and Bowlewise, inspired with Divine and heavenly power, do
finishe and execute their Reuolutions, Quick motion of the Celestial Spheres.
Circles and Ordes, with merueilous Celeritie and Quickenesse.

And therefore Public, it behooves both thee, and all other godly Persons to
keep still your Minds within the custody or Wardhouse of your Bodies, and not
to depart out of your mortal life, without the commandment of him that first
gave and inspired the same into you: least Til God apointthe time, we must
not seek to shorten the days of our life
in so doing, you should seem to refuse and start from the Function and
office yt is unto you, by God, appointed and assigned.

But Scipio, see that thou embrace and maintain Justice, and Piety: even as
thy Grau^dfather here before thee, and I thy Father which begatte thee, have
done. Which, although in our Parents and Kinstolkes, it be great: yet
namelye and especially is it greatest in Love to our Cou^trye.
our native Country: for that Life is ye right way into Heaven, and into this
Fellowship and Company of them, which have now already finished their
natural race on Earth, and being dismissed out of their Bodies, do inhabit
this place of Joy which thou see.

The place was a very white and shininge Circle, resplendaunt among Flames, The
Milk way, called now adays of some Watling street and of some the way to
S. James.
(which you, as you have heard of the Greeks) do term and call the Milkye
Circle.

Whereupon I perusinge and viewinge each thing, al ye residue seemed both
excellent and wonderful. And they were those Stars, which we never saw
from this place: and the greatness and Magnitude of them, was so big, as we
never thought they had been. Among whom, * that was the least, which The Move
has no Light but of the Sun. The least fixed star perfectlye seen is as
big as the whole Earth. Alfraganus.
being furthest of from Heaven, and nearest to the Earth shyned with borrowed
Light. And the Globes of ye Stars were a great Deal bygger then the whole
Earth. Now the Earth itself seemed unto me so small, that I was even ashamed
of our Empire and Seigniorye: being so little, that we enjoy and occupy,
(but as it were) a small prick or point of it. Which when I had beheld, and
looked on more stedfastlye, I pray thee (quoth Africane) how long will thy
Mind be pooring and fixed to the Groundward? Markest and considerest thou
not, into what Temples thou art come and arrived? Behold al things are
compacted and framed with Nine Orbs, or rather Globes, whereof one is the
uttermost Heaven, which compasses and contains all the other within it: the
most Sovereign and omnipotent God, holding and containing the others, in whom
are fixed those Stars, which roll about and are carried with perpetual
Reuolutions.

Under whom, are Seven, which Saturn the highest and slovvest of the 7.
Planets finisheth his course in 30 years. Jupiter in 12 years.
make their Course backward, with contrary motion to the Heaven. Of whom,
that possesses one Globe, which on the Earth is named * Saturn

Then next unto it, is that prosperous and luckye Brightness to Mankind,
which has to name * Jupiter.

Next is he, that is Ruddy and dreadful Mars in 2. years.
to the Earth, whom you call * Mars.

Then even almost under the middle Region, the Sun reigns as chief, The
Su^ne in 1. year.
the Guide, the Prince, and the Governor of all the residue of the Lights, yt
Venus in 9. months Mercurye in 80. days
Life geeuer, the Mind and Temperature of the World: being so great and so
bygge in quantity, that it searches and fills all things, with his Shyning.
These ij, last be alvvais nere unto the Sun


Him as Wayters and Companio^s do still follow, * Venus and * Mercury in their
Courses.

And in the lowest Circle or Orb, ye The Moon ends hercourse in 28 days
and has no Light but of the Sun.
Moon lightened with the Rays or Beams of ye Sun, has her Revolution.
Beneath this Globe of ye Moon, there is nothing but yt, which is mortal,
transitory, and corruptible, saving only ye Minds or Souls, which Almighty
God has geeuen and inspired into Mankind. Souls immortal.


Above the Moon all is Eternal and incorruptible. For the Earth which is
middle and the Nynth, is not moved All heavy things do svvaye dovvnevvard.
and is lowest of all others, and unto it are all ponderous and heavy things,
even with their own sway, carried.

Which thing when I (as one greatly astonished) much mused and merueyled to see:
after I was come to my self again: what sweet noise and melodious The
svveete harmonye in the motion of the Celestial Bodies.
Harmony is this, (quoth I) that thus delights and fills mine ears? This
is (quoth he) that Tune co^pact with uneven Distances (but yet according to yt
rated proportion of yt parts, distinct, and different) which is caused and
made through the swift Reuolutio^ and moving of these same Orbs: which
tempering Sharpes with Flattes, proportionallye, causes sundry tunes of
Harmony. For (truly) such great and swyft Motions, cannot be moved and
incited with Silence: and natural Course and Order requires, that the Extremes
on the one side should geeue a Flat sound, and on the other, a Sharp.

For which cause, the highest Course of the Starry Heaven, whose whirling
about and Revolution is swifter and quicker, Starry Firmament.
is moved with a Sharp and Shrill sound: But this lowest Course of the Moon is
moved with a very Base and Flat sound. Moons heaven.


For the Earth being the Nynthe, is lumpishe and immovable, and sticks
Earth.
fast always in the lowest Seat, compassing and vecispping the middle place
of the World. And those Eight Courses, in which is one self same Venus and
Mercurye
strength and time of * twain, do make notes distinct with Seven Stoppes and
Distances, which* number is (in a manner) The Septenary number has tn it many
and mystical conclusio^s. Aul. Gel.
the Knot of al things. Which, Learned men with Stringes and songs
perceiuinge and imitating, have opened a way to theimselues to have access
into this Place: as there likewise have been some others, who being men of most
pregnaunt and excellent wits in their life time, honored and applied divine
Studies.

This sound so filled men's ears, that there with they became dunch and deaf.
Neither is any Sense in you blunter or duller: as it is in them which dwell
near where the River Nilus at the place called Nilus.
Catadupa, falls down from very high and stiepe Mountains with a most
Catadupa
violent and headlong fall, in such sort, yt the people which dwell and inhabit
nere there about, forth incredible greatness of the noise and sound, are
generally al deaf. And this noise of yt whole World, by reason of his most
vehement and quick conversion and moving is so great, that the ears of men
are not able to conceive and comprehend it: like as you are not able to look
steadfastly upon the Sun direct against you with your eyes: but with the rays
and beams thereof your sight dazeleth and your Sense is overcome.

Although I greatly wondered hereat, yet did I now and then cast mine eyes
Worldly things are to be contemned, and heavenly things to be desired
toward the ground. Then spoke Africane unto me, saying: I perceive, that you
yet still castest an eye toward yonder seat and habitation of Men: which if it
seem unto thee (as it is in deed) very little and small, cast thine eyes
always toward these Heavenly things, and contemn those mortal and human
matters. For what celebrity of fame canste thou obtain by the talk and report
of Men, or what Glory canste thou there win, worthy to be desired? Thou
seeest the dwellinges and habitable places which men have on earth, be in sere
places and narow corners: yea and in ye same also (which are but as it were
certain spots or pricks, where they do inhabit) thou see great Deserts and
wast Wyldernes to be laid between and interiected. Also thou see them
which How the world is habitable
dwell upon the Earth, be not only so interrupted and disseuered in
situatio^ that nothing between them can pass from one to another: but
partlye they dwell awrye from you, partly overthwart This is because of the
roundnes and globosity of the earth
to you, and some directlye against you, at whose hands you can not look to
receive any glorious Fame and Renown. Thou see also the same Earth
environed and compassed about, as it were with certain Gyrdles, whereof thou
see two, most diverse, and contrarily distaunt, one from the other, lyinge
under the * Poles, of Heaven, on both sides, to be ever stiff Arcticke and
Antarcticke.
with extreme chilling and Froste. That which is in the middle, and is the
greatest, is broyled with continual and excessive heat of the parching Sun.

Two are habitable, whereof the one Antipodes which in respect of the roundnes
of the world seem to dwell underneath us, and to set their feet against
ours.
is Southward, and they that dwell therein, do set their * feet against yours,
and belong nothing to your kind. The other which lies toward the North
wherein you dwell, mark how slender a Portion thereof comes to your share. For all the Earth which is inhabited of you, being narow at the Poles, and brother at
yt sides, is a little small Island environed with that Sea, which you on earth
call the Atlanticke, the Great, and the main Nothing deserves to be called
great in this world.
Ocean Sea. Which notwithstanding these his glorious names and great titles,
how small it is, thou see.

From these inhabited and known Lands, was either thy name, or the name of
any of us, able to reach either beyond The greatest hyl in the world called
also Taurus.
this hyl * Caucasus which thou see, or else to swim over yo^der River *
Ganges? Who in the rest of the vttermoste and furthest parts of the East, or
West, North or South, shall hear tell of thy A river in India viij. miles over
in the narrovvest place, xx. in the brodeest, and an 100. foot diepe in the
shalovvest place
name?

These being amputated and cut of, certes, thou see in what narrow straytes
your glory is able to extend and stretche itself. As for them that shall speak
of you, alas, how long shall they speak?

Furthermore if your Successors, and they that shall come after, were desirous
and willing to blaze abroad and leave to their Posterity the worthy praises of
every one of us, which they have heard Worldly fame, renown, and glory, is
but vanytye and to no purpose.
of their fathers, yet by reason of the Deluges, and Inundations of waters, and
the burninges of Lands which of necessity must happen at a certain time, our
glory which we may attain, shall be not only not eternal, but also not so much
as of any continuance.

And what skilleth it to be talked of and remembered by them, which shall be born
hereafter, since there was no report made by them which were borne before:
who (doubtless) were neither fewer in number, and certes, were better Men a
great deal? Especially since among the^ unto who^ the report of our Fame may be
heard, no man is able to bear any thing in memory, the space of one year.
For commonly men do reckon a year only by the course and Revolution of the
Sun, that is to wit, of one Planet.

But in very deed when all the Signs and Stars of the Fyrmament are come
again to the same point, from whence they once set out, and begin anew their
former description of the whole Heaven, after long space and tract of time:
then may that be truly named the Turning year, where in how many men's Ages are
contained, I dare scarcely report. For as the Sun erst seemed to be eclypsed
and dimmed at that time, when the Soul of Romulus ascended into these Temples:
so when soever the Sun in the same part, and in that same time, shall again A
full and complete year after Plato.
be obscured and darckned, then (all the Stars and Signs being revoked back
to their self same first beginning) accoumpt thou and reckon it, for a full,
complete and perfect Year. And this know further, that the twentieth part of
this Year, is not yet expyred and run out.

Therefore if thou despair of thy return into this Place, wherein al things
are for Noble and worthy Personages, how much worth then is this fading glory
of Men, which can scarcelye last and reach, even unto a small part of one
Year?

Therefore if thou will lift up thine eyes on high, and view this Habitation
The diepe consideration of heaven and heavenly joys easelye draws a godly
man from the love of this world.
and eternal Mansion, thou shall neither be affectioned to give thy self to
the talk of the vulgar people, neither repose thy hope and confidence in
worldly promotions, and aduau^cement. For it must be only Virtue herself,
which must with her allurementes draw thee to the true Honor and renown.

What others do speak and talk of the, let they themselves look: but yet
talk True honor must be gotten by virtue only
they will. But al their talk is both enclosed within the straites of yonder
Regions which thou see: neither has their talk talk been of any man
perpetual: it both dies when the Men dye, and is utterly quenched with yt
oblivion of Posterity.

When he had thus said, certes (quod I) O Africane, if to the well deseruers of
their Country, there lies as it were a path, open to thentry of Heaven,
albeit from my childhood, walking in my Fathers steps and yours, I have ven
nothing behind with my duty, to atchieue, and further your renown, yet now
seeing so great a reward set out and propounded, I will eudeuour and bend my
self thereunto Honor is a spirit to noble minds.
far more diligently.

Do so (quoth he) and make thy sure account of this, yt it is not thou, which
art mortal: but it is this Body of thine: neither art thou yt, which thy
outward Form and shape declares: but the Mind A man is his Mind.
and Soul of every Man is he: and not that figure and shape which may be
pointed and showed with the finger. Therefore know this, that thou art a God,
if (forsooth) a God be that, which lives, which The mind rules and directs
the body
feels, which remembers, which foreseeth, which does so well rule, govern
and move that Body over whom it is appointed Ruler, as that most high prince
God, does this World.

And as God being himself eternal, does move this World, being in some part
mortal: so likewise the Mind being sempiternall, does move ye Body being
frail and transitory: for yt which is ever moved, is eternal. But that which
brings motion to another, and which self same, is moved from elsewhere,
when it has an end of mouinge, needs must it have an end of living also.

Therefore that only which moves itself, because it is never forsaken nor left
of itself, never (truly) cease it not to be moved. Moreover, this is the
fountain and beginning of mouinge to all other things that are moved. And the
beginning has no original: For all things proceed and spring from a
Beginning, but itself can be made of nothing.

For that which should have generation elsewhere, could not be a beginning.

So therefore if it never spring and begin, neither does it ever dye. For the
Beginning being extinct, neither shall itself ever grow again out of an other,
neither shall it create any other of itself. For all things must needs spring
from a Beginning. And so it comes to pass. yt the beginning of moving is,
because it is moved of itself, and it can neither breed nor dye: or else the
whole Heaven would fall down, and al Nature would of necessity stand at a
stay, and not obtain any force and power wherebye to be moved with his
first impulse and motion. Since therefore it plainly appears, that what
soever is moved of itself, is eternal: who is he that dares to deny this
Nature to be geeuen to Minds for that is without life, which is moved with
external force and motion: but that which is a Soul, is moved with internal
and proper moving: for this is the nature and power that is peculier to a
Soul. Which if it be one and the alone thing of al, which moves itself,
certes it was neither borne, and is also eternal. This see yt thou exercise in
the best things.

And the best cares that a man can take, are such as tend to the avail and
profit Best cares that aman can next after God employe his mind unto.
of our Country. In which cares the mind being enured and practiced, shall
have spedier access and arrival into this Habitation, as into his proper
Mansion place: and the sooner shall it do so, if then, when it is enclosed in the
Body, it surmounte abroad, and beholdinge those things, that are outwardly,
do greatly withdraw itself, as much as is possible from the Body.

For the Minds of them that have enthralled and given themselves to bodylye
Pleasures, and have made theymselues (as it were) the Bondslaues and ministers
thereof: and by the egginge and procuremente of sensual Lust and Appetite
obaying Voluptuous livers.
Pleasures, have profaned and violated the Laws both of God and man: those
men when they be dismissed and delivered out of their bodies, are tumbled and
tossed about the Earth, and do not return into this Place, till they have
been pursued and turmoyled many hundredth years. He departed: and I
immediatelye awaked out of my Sleep.

Thomas Newtonus,
Cestreshyrius.
FINIS.
The Table
A
ACcusation. 29. Acquaintance, new and old. 30. Adolescencie. 47. 55. 59.
61. 62. 63. 69. 75. 77, 80, 81. 82. 83. 84. Adulterye. 65. 101. Affection 102.
must be brydeled. 104. 113. 116. Agamemnon 60. Age. 61 Agreement. 42. Al
things return to that, whereof they had their first beginning. 87. Ambition,
a great plague to perfect Frendshyppe. 26. 113. Anger. 109. Antipodes. 129.
Antonius. 109. 114. Apollo. 3. 85. Apparel. 119. Appius Claudius being old
and blind, had a noble courage. 53. A perfect pattern of a noble Gentleman,
and worthy householder. 63. Archytas Tarentinus. 37. 64. Argantonius lived
120 years. 81. Astronomy. 70. Athenians. 68. Atticus, why so named. 45.
Auncientnes in familiarity. 30. Augur. 78. Aucthority, the chiefest ornament
of Oldage. 77. 79. 119.
B
BAnishement. 99. dreadefull and terrible, to whom. 100. Banished man, who.
108. Banqueting moderately used, commendable. 67 Baibilles. 112. Baudrie. 103.
Benefits, confirm love and Frendshippe. 14 Best dwelling for Oldage. 78.
Bias one of the vij wise Sages. 26. 96. Blosius his desperate aunsvvere. 17.
Body, the prison or jail of the Soul. 85. 124 the vvardhouse of the soul.
125. Bona Dea, her temple. 108. Bondslaue to Vices. 109. Bondslaue, who, 110,
111. 112. Bondage what it is properlye ibid. Bounds of Friendship 17. 25.
Briberye. 73, 117. Brutus 87. 96. Budde. 72. Buildinges sumptuous. 95. 111.
C
Coecilius. 62. Care of each noble and worthy man. 20. after a sort, incident
to Virtue. 21. 22. Care, rather to live well, then long. 81. Carinae, a
streate, or Row of houses in Rome. 120. Carthage conquered by Scipio. 54.
122. Catadupa. 128. Cattall. 96. Cato Called wise, why. 34. 47. his wise
saying 38. learned the Greek tongue in his old age. 46. 57. 63. his sundry
Offices and service in the common wealth. 54. 64. a perfect Stoicke. 91. 97.
Caucasus. 129. Cethegus. 113. Chafe. 101. Children in friendship, new fangled
and fickle. 16. Choice of friends. 26. 27. 28. 36. Chydinge. 34. 38. when and
how to be used, ibid. and 39. 42. Circles of the celestial motions. 125.
City. 105. 106. 107. 124. Citizen. 105. 107. Clavvbackes and disse^bling
friends, worse the^ plain enemies. 38. how they may be known and
discerned. 39. Cleanthes. 56. Cleopatra. 110. Clovvnish life without friends,
yrkesome and unpleasant. 25. Coffers stuffed with money, makes not the rich
man, but a contented Mind. 116. Comforting and cheering of distressed friends.
26 Common wealths vpholden by grave oldmen, weakened by young and youthful
officers. 55. 80. Co^munitie of al things among friends. 27. Comparison. 79.
82. Conscience. 100. Conscience of virtuous Life, comfortable. 49. Consenting
to the request of friends, against the weal of our country, unlawful. 20.
Conspiracy against the common wealth with al extremity to be punished. 20.
whence it proceeds. 64. Constancy. 4. 28. 29. 42. 85. 99. 102. 106.
Contented life rych. 115. 120. Contention. 16. Continuance of friendship: ibid.
Coriolanus, moved with the unkindness of his Country, vvarred against it, and
last of al killed himself. 17. 20. Cornelius Gallus an Ancient and excellent
Astronomer. 70. Corynthian works. 97. 111. 112. Coruncanus. 8. 18. 53. 58.
66. Courage. 98. Covetousness a plague to Friendship. 16. in old men. 79. ever
needy and never satisfied 96. 120. in the old time abhorred. 96. 110.
Counsaylours, grave and wise, the stays of common wealths. 53. Crassus,
114. whom he accoumpted rich. 116. his shifts to get monye. 117. Currours.
74. Courteous manners. 29. Custom. 30. Custom of such strict and virtuous life,
as was in the old time, now clean gone. 19. Custom of the Pythagoreans, to
debate and call into remembrance every Eueninge, al things said, done, or
heard, the day before. 63. Cybele, Lady great Mother of the Gods. 67. Cyneas.
66. Cyrus. 75. a prince virtuous and fortunate. 76. 86 87.
D
DAnaus. 116. Death. 7. not to be feared. 80. 83. not to be bevvayled ibid.
spares no age. ibid. hour and time thereof uncertain. 80. 83. the Haven of
rest 82. 99. Fear thereof causes a troubled and unquiet mind. 83. despised
even of common persons. 84. desired of the Godly, and feared of the wicked 88.
terrible, to whom. 100. must not be hastened before the appointed time. 125.
Death of friends grievous. 4. Decius, 66. 84. 97. Delights in husbandry. 71.
73. Delights peculier to every several age. 84. Democritus. 56. Departure of
friends one from another. 32. 33. Desire of honor. 113. Destenie. 123.
Dictator, what officer he was. 74. Diet of the Body and mind resembled to a
Lamp. 62. Difference betvveene the powers of the body and of the mind.
ibid. Digginge. 72. Dignity of the mind and Soul. 65. Diligence
preposterous. 27. 38. Diogenes Stoicus. 56. Discord. 11. Dishonesty. 109.
Dishonest point, to fall out with him, that has been an old familier friend.
33. Dissimulation. 29. 39. Dotage. 63. Dreams. 122. Drudge. 113. Drudgerye.
ibid. Dunginge of Land. 72.
E
EArth round like a Ball. 125. 126. lovveste, lu^pish, and immovable. 127.
how it is habitable. 129. Earthly matters, contrary to heavenly. 85. Echion a
cunning Paynter. 112. Eloquence. 92. Empedocles opinion, that the world and al
things, consisted of Friendship. 11. End of living best. 82. Enemy. 108.
Ennius. 10. 44. 50. 52 83. 122. Epicures opinion of Frendshippe. 20. repose all
felicity in pleasure. 66. Epitaphe. 55. 77. Equalitye in frendshippe. 30. 31.
Equalite of faults. 103. Every man meddle with no more then he can well
compass. 61. Every age has his proper season. ibid. Excuse for doing ill, to
pleasure our friend not allowable. 18. Exercises for youngmen. 75. Exercises
for old men, ibid. Exercises of vvytte, 63. Exile. 108. Expenses moderate, a
great revenue. 119.
F
FAbius praised. 50. 51. 53. Fabritius. 8. 13. 53. 66. 97. 118. Face vvrinckled
not the cause of authority and credit. 77. Faythfulnesse. 28. 99. Fame of
worthy men, never dies. 43. 107. Familiarity. 30. Faults in oldage how to
be redressed. 62. Faults in manners. 79. Fear is Bondage. 113. 114. Fear of
death what it causes. 83. Feastinge. 67. Fee. 120. Felovvshippes. 35.
Fishpond. 112. Firmament. 127. Flattry and dissembling, worse then open enmity
29. gets friends now adays. 38. to be eschevved. ibid. the greatest plague
to truefre^d ship. 39. which kind of it is most hurtful. ibid. who are
most hurt thereby, and who lysten most thereto. 41. of a little makes a great
deal ibid. Slyly done, most carefully to be taken heed of ibid. Fond
delights. 111. Forgery. 116. Fortune. 24. 99. 110. Four causes why Oldeage
seems miserable. 52. Forum what it was. 106. 107. 108. Free who. 109. 110.
Freeman 109. described. 110. 113. 114. Friend is as a man his own self. 11.
34. best known in time of Adversity. 23. Friends perfect, very fevv 7.
wherefore they are are too be sought. 12. must not flatter one an other. 20.
the best treasure of all other. 24. 4^. when, how and for what causes, they
may lavvfullye be forsaken, and geeuen over. 33. must be admonished and
friendly chidden. 38. effects thereof. 43. whether new or old fre^des be
better. 29. departure one from another. 3^. 33. must be Good men. 35. rejoice
when they meet together. 122. Friendship what it is. 7. 9. to be preferred
before al vvorldly things. 8. agreeable to nature, and fit both for
Prosperity and Adversity. ibid. cannot be but among Good men. ibid. excels
kindred. 9. the best Gift, next unto vvisdome ibid. can not be but where
virtue is ibid. and 18. commodities thereof. 10. 11. as necessary as the
Elements. ibid. how far it is perdonable 27. generallye profitable 36.
property thereof 3. 9. bounds. thereof. 17. 25. without all cogginge and
dissimulation. 13. natural, ibid. 15. 34. not to be sought for profit sake,
but for virtue. 14. 21. 34. continuance thereof. 16. new fangled in children
and not durable. ibid. plagues belonginge to it. ibid. hard to be found among
great men. 28. best judgment of it, at full grown Age. 32. compared to the
Sun shininge in the world. 21. reioyseth at their friends vvelfare, and
sorovveth at their mishap 22. geeuen by nature for an aid to virtue. 35
generally praised. 36. most plainlye appears in men of equal and like age.
42. Friendship of vulgar or common sort 33. only for gain, and money now
adays. 34. Fruict of Oldage. 81. Fruict of Wit and Virtue. 31. Furniture.
119. 122.
G
Gain. 119. Ganges. 129. Gapers for other men's Death. 113. Gardeyne. 74.
Garrison of this life must be kept, til God, our Captain discharge us
thence. 83. Geometrye. 70. Gifts of the mind, the truest Richesse. 3. Gifts
of Fortune. 25. Glory, 35. 88. Gnato. 39. 41. God. 125. 126. Godly persons
desire Death. 88. Goddess of Eloquent speech. 70. Gold. 73. 97. 101. 102.
119. Good for every man in his convenient time and Age to dye. 90. Good man.
29. 96. Goodvvil and hearty frendlynesse among good men, 23. more to be
regarded then profit. ibid to be desired. 27. 42. Gorgias Leontinus his
worthy Oldage. 51. 56. Graffinge. 72. Grape. 72. 73. Gravity, 50. 77. 99.
Granting an unlawful suit, as great an offense as to request it. 18. Grave
hayres bring not straightvvayes Authority and estimation. 77. Grief of mind
incident to wise men. 21. Gross error to think the soul to dye together
with the body. 6.
H
HAnnibal. 13. 84. Happy life. 35. Harmony, in the motion of the Celestial
Bodies. 127. Havvkinge. 74. Heavenly things only to be desired. 129. Heavy
things svvaye dovvnvvarde. 127 Hesiodus. 56. 73. Homere. 56. 122. Honest men
obey laws, not for fear, but for love of virtue. 110. Honor, wealth, and
riches, change manners. 24. how truly to be gotten. 130. Horatius Cocles, a
valiant Gentleman. 97. Household stuff. 96. Householder. 63. Huntinge. 74.
Husbandrye. 71. 73. in old time the delighte and life of Noble men. ibid. a
blessed kind of life. 74. both necessary and profitable. 74. 76.
I
IL rulinge another, who cannot rule himself 109. Image of Minerua. 92.
Immortality of the Soul. 6. 85. Inferiors must not repine at their
superiors. 31 Instructing of youth, an excellent and vvorthie function. 59.
Joy of friends at their meetinge. 122. Isocrates his lustye old age. 52.
Jupiter one of the vij. planets, in what time he fully runs his course.
126. Judge. 113. Justice the lincke or Bond of all cities. 106.
K
KIlling himself, a thing wicked and horrible. 83. Kinffolke. 124. Knights
which dyed for for the honor and sauegarde of their country. 84. Knowledge.
59. 86.
L
LAcedaemonians 54. most of al others, honored Oldage. 78. Lack of health. 62.
69. Lack of wealth. 116. 117. Laelius, and Scipio, ij faithful and perfect
Friends. 2. 7. 14. 43. A very wise man. 3. 46. Lamentation for the Death of
Friends. 5. 6. Lampraye. 112 Law called Gabinia and Cassia, what it was. 19.
Law called Cincia what it was. 50. Law called Voconia, what it was. 42.
Learning and liberal Arts. 59. 92. comfort and armeth a man against all
extremities and assayes. 100. Learned men, fittest to decide controversies. 103
Legacy. 52. 115. Legion. 116. Liberty, what it is. 109. Life, which is only
and truly worthy to be so called 85. in this world, full of misery and
trouble. 88. not worthy to be called life, 124. compared to a Lodginge or
Inn for a small while. 89. Life contented, the rychest life. 115. 120.
Likeness of manners and delights, causes friendship. 22. Like delights, and
draws to like. 43. 48. Love. 13. confirmed by benefits and mutual
courtesies. 14. what it is. 42. Love to our Parents. ^1. 125. Love to our
Country. 125. Love tovvard our friends, beeinge against their profit, is fond
and foolish. 32. being taken away, all pleasauntnes of this life is taken
away. 34. Liuius Andronicus. 70. Liuelode. 119. Lucre. 115. Lumbardie,
sometime called Gallia Cisalpina. 51. Lust, 66. 101. 102. 109. 111. 116.
Lycopum. 120. Lysander. 75. 78.
M
MAgistrate. 103. 106. 124. Magnanimity. 98. Man virtuous and worthy, not
borne in vain. 89. Man is his Mind. 130. Man most happy, who. 99. created
why. 125. Man void of all Affections, compared to a Log, or stone. 22. Manners
of men often change. 16. Manilius. 120. 121. Marcellus. 84. M. Curious. 8. 13.
18. 46. 53. 66. 73. 74. 97. 112. 118. 120 Many rather desire to seem, then to
be virtuous 41. Mainteynors of their country 524. Marius, a pattern of noble
constancy, and patience. 99. Mariner. 101. Mars, one of the vij. Planets, in
how many years he finisheth his course and revolution. 126. Masinissa a
worthy and paynful prince. 61. 121. Memory. 55. Mercury, one of the vij.
Planets. 126. the time of his course. ibid. and 127. Merchaundise. 117.
Metellus, strong and lustye in his oldage. 59. Milo Crotoniata, his effeminate
speech reprehe^ded. 58. carried a living Ox upon his shoulders the space of a
furlong. 61. Mind why inspired into man. 85. is only it which makes a man
Rich. 115. 116. his dignity and excellency. 65. 98. immortal 86. invisible.
ibid. chiefly lives after it is rid out of the body. 88. 99. 111. 114. 125.
130. 132. Mind wavering and mutable. 39. Mind of a wise man, unconquerable.
105. Minerua. 92. Milk way, or Milkie Circle, in heaven what it is. 125.
Modest bashfulnesse. 35. Money, 28. 95. 115. 116. 117. 118. 119. 120. Moon the
least and lowest of the planetes. 126. has no light but of the Sun. ibi.
in what time and space she runs her course 127, be neath and under it, all
is corruptible, mortal and transitorye, except Souls. ibid. above it, al
eternal and incorruptible. 127: her heaven. ibid. Most Friendship now a
days, for most money 34. Motion of the Planets, and celestial bodies. 125.
Mummius vvanne Corinth. 112. Mutius Scaeuola. his valiant enterprise. 97.
N
Naeuius. 70. Nature the best Guide to direct our lives by. 8. cannot be
altered. 15. loves her like 22. loves no solitariness. 37. has her
limitation, of lyuinge. 90. Necessity, tries a Friend. 24. Negligence. 36.
101. Nestor lived. 300. years. 60. Nilus. 128. Noble men, Husbandmen. 74.
Noble Natures desire to vvynne honor, and to leave a fame and memorial behind
them. 87. No man so Old, but hops to live one year longer. 56. Nothing
evil which comes by necessity of Nature. 47. Nothing long or of continuance
in this world 81. Nothing better then good. 102. No unlawful request, ought
to be granted. 18 19. Nurse. 32. Numa Pompilius. 96. Numantia. 123.
O
Ocean. 129. Offense. 101. 104. 105. Oldage 5. no hinderer from dealing in
public offices and functions. 53. Surmised to be vvretched, because it is
vveake and vvearish. 58. lacking strength. 61. dispensed vvithal, and
privileged from dealinges of main strength and labor. ibid. Sickelye ibid.
Surmised to lack pleasures. 64. Qualifieth all ill motions. 66. 67. allowed
moderatelye to banquet. 67. has pleasures enough and competent, 69. what
kind of Oldage is pleasauntest. ibid. and 73. most commendable. 77. Talkatiue
and full of words. 73. what is the chiefest honor and ornament thereof. 77.
testie and captious. 79. Mislyked because it is near death. 80. Fruicts
thereof. 81. has no certain number of years appointed how long to last. 82.
stout and courageous. ibid. bragging and praising themselves and their former
deeds. 87. Lusty. 59. must be resisted. 62. wherein honorable. 63. prerogative
thereof. 78. last part or final end of this life. 90. Old betimes, who
would be old long. 60. Old young age commendable. 63. Oldmen delight in the
louingnes of youngmen 42. 57. wrongfully charged to be obliuious, 55. forget
not where they lay their purses, or hyde their treasure. ibid. vvayvvard. 79.
who, are called by Caecilius, foolish. 62. studious. 70 their exercises 75.
where the best dvvellinge for them was, and where they were most
reverenced. 78. severe. 79. covetous ibid. endued with profoundnes of reason.
good counsel and grave advise. 80. dye with less pain the^ Youngmen, and
more agreably to Nature. 82. One good and virtuous man, more to be regarded,
the^ many rich Cobbes, being wicked. 97. Oppression. 105. Oracle of Apollo. 3.
Oration of Scipio, pythye. 40. Orbs of the planets and Celestial Bodies.
125. nine. 126. Order. 105. Originalles, a Book so entitled and penned by
old Cato. 63. 84.
P
Paysaunt. 111. Papyrius. 40. Paradoxa. what it signifies. 93. Socraticall
and true. 94. Parsimonye. 119. Partaking with Friends in trouble. 28. Pelf
and vvorldlye wealth. 96. Pension great, not to be covetous. 120. Phidias a
notable Image maker. 94. Picaenum, in Italy, how now called. 51 Picture, 97.
111. 112. 119. Pisistratus the tyrant. 82. Planets. 125. Plantinge. 73. Plate.
97. 111. Plato how he lived in his Oldage, and how he dyed. 51. 56. 66. 67.
his reasons, prouinge the immortality of the Soul. 86. Plautus. 70.
Playfelovves in youth. 32. Pleasure. 15. beastly and pernicious. 64. 65. 132.
Welspring of al Vices. 65. must be abandoned. ^09. contrary to virtue. 66.
Bayte of mischief 67. hard to resist the allurements thereof. ibid in some
respects tolerable. 68. Ytch thereof. ibid. most in Youngmen. 69. Pleasure of
learning and knowledge, excels al other pleasures. 70. Plenty. 118.
Praise due to Virtue. 98. Prauitie of the mind. 102. Principality. 113.
Profit by Frendshippe. 23. Promotion. 36. Property of a well stayed mind.
21. Protectours of their country. 124. Proverb. 30. Prison of the Soul. 85.
87. Poet: 105. Poles of heauenl. ij. 129. Polycletus, a cunning Imagerer. 112.
Porsenna. 97. Possessions. 119. 120. Poverty and Oldage ij. heavy burdens to
bear. 52. Pylades and Orestes 11. Pylote of a ship. 53. 101. Pyrrhus. 13.
53. 66. 73. 118. Pythagoras. 56. 61. 83. 85. Pythagoreans custom. 63. 85.
Punishment. 104. 108. Purseuauntes. 74.
Q
QValification of vices. 109. of affections. ibid. Qualities of the mind. 62.
112. Questions brief and compendious. 92. Quick motion of the Celestial
Spheres. 125. Quietness. 21. Quincuncie, what it is. 76.
R
Rashness, incident to youngmen. 55. Realm, nobly protected by worthy
Gentlemen. 1^5. Reason. 102. 105 Regulus Attilius. 84. 98. Remorse of
conscience. 113. Request of one friend to another. 18. 20. 32. 35. Requital of
courtesies. 22. Resistaunce against Nature. 48. Respect in preferment of
Friends. 32. Revenue. 119. 120. Reverence to elders and betters. 30. Reverence
to Parents. 104. Reverent awe in Frendshippe. 35. Reuolutions of the
celestial Bodies. 125. Right in a penny, as well as in a pound. 102. Riches. 24.
36. 95. fruict thereof. 117. consists only in virtue. 119 whereby to be
measured, 120. property thereof. ibid. possessed many times by evil and
naughty men. 96. Rich man being foolish, very tedious and vvearisome in
company. ibid. Rich who. 115. 119. who not rich. 118. Riot. 16. Rome 105.
Romulus. 96. 130.
S
SAcietie of life. 84. 90. Saguntines. 103. Saying most repugnaunt to
Friendship, 26. Samnites. 118. Saturn the highest Planet. 126. in what time.
he fully finisheth his course. ibid. Scipio a worthy Gentleman. 5. 6. 23. a
perfect and steadfast friend to Laelius. 2. 7. 14. 43. Subdued Carthage and
Numantia. 5. 54. 70. 84. 97. 122. 133. Sea Atlanticke. 129. Senate and Senators
why so named. 54. delited in thold time in husbandrye, 74. 106. Sensuality.
15. 65. 98. 109. 132. Septenarye number, mystical. 127. Sestertium, what it
is in value. 119. Severity in measure, allowable. 79. Shame. 109. Shifts
dishonest to get wealth. 115. Shypvvracke. 120. Short things sufferable. 43.
Shrylnesse of voice. 59. Simonides. 56. Sin 101. unlawful. 102. 103. Sincke
of al mischief. 89. Slave. 112. Slauerye most vile. 112. 113. what it is.
114. Sleep, an Image of death. 87. Socrates, the only wise man of the world.
3. 56. 85. learned to play upon musical Instruments in his Old days. 58. his
manner of disputinge. 103. Summer. 85. Solitariness. 37. Solon waxed every
day older by learning daily more and more. 57. 70. his stout aunsvvere to a
Tyrant, 82. 83. Sophocles. 55. accused by his own Sons of Dotage. 56. his
aunsvvere touching carnal concupiscence. 69. Soothing and holding up with yea
and nay. 38 Souls. 85. Immortal. 88. 89. 90. 127. Spartacus, a notable Ruffian
and Rebel. 107. Speech myeld and courteous, commendable in old men. 59. Spending
prodigallye. 119. measurablye and ratably to our gettinges. ibid. Spring. 72.
81. Stabilitie of Frendshippe. 34. 42. Stage player. 104. Stars. 125. bigger
then the Earth. 126. Starry Firmament. 127. Statius. 36. Stepping aside a
little from honesty, to save thereby the credit or life of our friend. 27.
Stesichorus. 56. Studies appropriate to each several age. 84. Suada, Goddess of
Eloquence. 70. Sufficiency is wealth enough. 116. Sullennes. 29. Sun the
chiefest, greatest and most sovereign light. 126. In what time he perfourmeth
his Revolution. ibid. Superiors, must help and relieve Inferiors. 30
Suspicion. 29. Syllable in life. 105.
T
TAbles. 97. 111. 112. Talebearers and tale creditours. 29. Talk. ibid.
Tarquinius. 13. how and when he tried his fre^des. 24. 96. Taunt rebounded.
50. Terence. 79. Terentius Varro, slain. 84. Themistocles. 20. 49. his
excellent memory. 55. Thermopylae, a mountain in Greece. 60. Thetica. 93.
Things fair and beautiful, how to be esteemed 112. Things excellent, rare,
and hard. 34. Thraso. 41. Three supposed special opinions of friendship. 25.
Tiberius Gracchus. 17. 19. 123. Tyllage. 74. 75. Timon, an hater of al
company. 37. Torment of a wicked and guilty conscience. 100. Tra^quillity of
mind. 35. Trial of Friends. 27. 28. Truth. 38. 40. Treasure not comparable to
Virtue. 119. Treason. 64. Treacherye ibid. Tusculane Questions. 93. Tutours to
children. 32. Time passes away. 81. Time ripe and convenient to dye. 84.
Tyrant 23. 107. Tyranny. 105.
V
VAlerius Coruinus 76. Vaunt of lewd life, most beastlye and detestable. 98.
Venerous copulation. 69. Venus one of the vij. planets. 126. her course and
revolution, ibid and 127. Virtue amiable and draws men to love her. 13. well
liked and loved, even in our enemies, and them whom we never savv, 14. 15.
dysdaynful of no man. 23. not to be despised, 27. despised, 16. 41. gets
and keeps Freendeship, 42. 44. cannot be where pleasure rules 65. to be
desired even for herself. 67. more vvorth then all vvorldly treasure. 97. 99.
agreeable to reason and constancy. 102. Virtues equal. 102. praise worthy.
112. causes why most chiefly to be esteemed. 120. Virtuous man, cannot be
miserable. 100. lives after he is dead. 124. Unlawful requests of Friends.
16. 17. 18. Unlike manners, unfit for frendshippe. 32. Vpbrayding of pleasures
and benefits. 31. Vrinalles. 112. Usury. 117. 119. Vice to be punished
without respect of persons, 66. Vices equal. 192. Vine. 71. 72.
W
VVAightye matters, how achieved. 53. Wardhouse of this life. 83. 125.
Warynesse. 33. Wayvvardnesse. 49. 79. Wealth and vvorldly Riches without a
Friend, unpleasant. 23. 37. 115. 119. alters manners. 24. are not rightly to
be termed any of ours. 106. Weapons fit for Oldage. 49. 54. Whoredom 65. 103.
Whole World as one cytty. 100. Wicked lyuers afraid to dye. 88. Wisdom
passes strength. 60. Wiseman. 110. Wise and sententious counsel. 36. Wit
wavering. 29.
X
XEnophon. 68. 75. 86.
Y
Year, called the turning year, what it is. 130. Young head, rash and
unskillful. 55. You^ge men subject as much or more to sickness then Old men.
62. 80. their exercises. 75. dye with greater pain then Oldmen. 82. Youth
inordinately led, makes a feeble and impotent Oldage. 59. delights in vain
Pleasures. 69. Youthful Oldage, most commendabl^* (...).
Z
ZEno. 56.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Fleetstrete by Thomas Marsh. 1577.

Cum Priuilegio.


