EPITOME OF CERTAIN LATE ASPERSIONS CAST AT CIVILIANS, THE CIVIL AND
ECCLESIASTICAL LAWS, THE COURTS CHRISTIAN; AND AT BISHOPS AND THEIR
CHANCELLORS.

WHEREIN THE AVTHORS THEREOF ARE REFVTED, AND REFELLED.

WITH An Appendix, wherein the Civil and Canon Laws, with the causes of the
Cognizance or Cognition of either of them in the Church or Commonwealth in the
Kings Dominions, (what they are,) are opened.

BY WILLIAM CLERK, Bach. of the Civil Law.

CIC. lib. 2. Tusc. Et refellere sine pertinatia, and refelli sine iracundia,
parati sumus.

The aspersions follow in the next fol.

OPVSCVLI DICATIO: STVDIOSIS IVRISPRVDENTIAE CANDIDATIS, CVPIDAEQVE LEGVM
IVVENTVTI, HANC OPELLAM QVANTVLACVNQVE SIT, GVILILLMVS CLERK DICAT CONSECRATQVE.

THE ASPERSIONS.
1. THat the Ciuilians themselves confess, that the Civil law is a Sea full
of waves. 2. That every Doctors opinion (in that learning) is a good authority.
3. That the like may be said of the Canon law, albeit the text thereof be
scarce 400 years old. 4. That for the space of 300 years after Christ, the
distinction of Ecclesiastical and spiritual causes, from Civil and
Temporal, in point of Jurisdiction, was not known, nor heard of in the
Christian world. 5. That the Clergy, by their Jurisdiction which they had from
Caesar, got wealth, which begot pride, which begot their ingratitude to
Princes, which blotted Caesar's name out of the style of their Courts, and
called them Courts Christian. 6. That Bishops Chancellors (are of late) but
vpstarts in the world. 7. That the sloth of Bishops has brought them in.


TO THE READER.
GEntle and Judicious Reader, if the wisdom of a King and his Parliament in
England, where the Civil and Canon laws, Bishops, and their Jurisdictions were
in discussion, thought it not fit the wisdom of the King alone, nor with one,
nor two, nor ten (with him) of the wisests of the two houses upper and nether
of his Parliament, nor under two sixteens with the King, 32 in the total, the
one of Te^poralitie, the other of the Clergy, should look into these laws,
to what intent, I leave the Reader to (...) 29. H 8. (...) 19.
the Act it self, Entitled an Act of the Submissio^ of the Clergy to the King
etc. Then weigh his wisdom, and his wisdom, the two wisdoms of our two
Authors, who (alone) have looked into these laws, and discerned of them, and
adjudged them, and their professors; The Bishops their Courts and their
Chancellors with the^, who do execute the same; The theses or positions named
and numbered in the page ensewing next the title page, of this Epitome, had they
infected but some few affected to the study of this learning, and discouraged
them therein, it had been too much: But they take impression in some of our
Bishops in some of the Kings dominions (I except England) of who^ some will have
no vicars generals, but do sit (without them) in their Consistories, where,
by that occasion, whilst they determine thinking they determine (well) the
causes brought before the^, they determine (ill) many times therein; whose
owners thereby, sometimes the widow, sometimes the Orphan, sometimes both, do
suffer amongst others: And no marvel why; For though Persons, things, and
Actions, all that laws do handle, or can handle in the general, are but 3,
for whatsoever law we use, consists in one of these 3, Persons, things, or
actions; yet there is in each of these so many points of learning in the law,
that without the reading or practice thereof, or both, can no man Judge aright;
Judge he may, and Judge aright, as he that shootes and hits a mark he sees
not; so the blind man hits the Crow, as the proverb is; a fearful
adventure in Judgment; will a man adventure a river he knows not, and knows
there is a danger in it, but knows not where abouts, without a guide? A wise
man will not, some ventrous do; but die, or live, as they hit, or miss the
danger; daily experience teaches this in waters; more frequent in Judgments;
wherein the wisdom of the law, has set a guide, to guide him in Judgment, in
matters of Judgment of the Church, in who^ it invests the same in his person,
place, or dignity; and has not the law, nor the practice of it, to Judge
accordingly, by his profession, as our Reverend Fathers the Bishops mere
divines, have not; And therefore have, or ought to have their Vicars generals
to guide them in Judgment, or guide the Judgment without them, otherwise, if
they judge amiss, or proceed amiss, in Judgment, and so destroy it, though
otherwise just, as many times they do, as daily experience shows it in our
Courts of Appeals and Quarrels in Jreland, they are inexcusable before GOD,
and man.

That Appeals are made, and do lie as well from the learned and experienced
ludge, be he never so circumspect in Judgment, it is evident likewise; But not
the difference, ( Judicious Reader) these appellations do proceed from the
perverseness of the Appellant, not the unskillfulness of the ludge, as the other
do: Their causes are remissible to the Judge again, from who^ they came; and
are sent unto him back again, regularly; The other are not so, but
determinable, and determined by the Judge of Appeal, finally; had the wisdoms
of our authors of these positions attended the wisdom of the King and his
Parliament in the act above mentioned, expressed, (the act, stands still in
force) before they had divulged the^, I will not say what they had done
therein; better, or worse; but better, or worse; they have done; and I have said

THAT THE CIVILIANS THE MSELVES confess, that the Civil Law is a Sea full of
waves.
THE Author fell into In the (...) to the (...) Repoit of (...) causes and
matters in law (...) and adjudged in (...) Kings (...) in (...) fol. 4. pa
(...) printed in (...) 1615.
this dispraise of this learning, from the praise of his own, in these words,
viz. And therefore we may say for the honor of our Law, (notwithstanding that
vulgar imputation of incertainety) that the Judgment and reasons of it is more
certain, then of any other humane Law in the world; as well because the grounds
of our Common Law, have from the beginning, been laid with such deep
wisdom, policy and providence, as that they do provide for, and meet with
almost all cases that can fall out in our Commonwealth. As also because these
grounds are so plain, and so clear, as that the Professors of our Law, have
not thought it needful to make so many glosses, and interpretations thereupon,
as other Laws are perplexed and confounded withal; which glosses, as one does
well observe, do increase doubts and ignorance in all Arts and Sciences: And
therefore the Ciuilians themselves confess, (...)
that their Law is a Seafull of waves, the text whereof being digested into so
many volumes.

The Professors (says our Author) of our (...)
learning (the Common Law he means) have not thought it needful to make so
many glosses and interpretations thereupon, as other Laws (the Civil and
Canon Laws he means) are perplexed and confounded withal: As if he had said,
we gloss not, we interpret not; no, we are not sicut caeteri hominum,
Raptores, etc. velut etiam hic Publicanus; The Author could not honor his own
learning, but dishonor ours, nor extol that, but debase this. But to pass
over that: Do the Ciuilians themselves confess, (does any man think) their
Law is a Sea full of waves? believe it not judicious Reader, that it was a Sea
full of waves (as it was) digested into 2000 books or very near, before
Justinians time, all Ciuilians do confess but (since) reduced into 50 by
lustinian, as it was, which number (now) it exceedes not in books, but the
same then, and now, in number and books, that Sea stood plain, and stands
plain still; not a wave troubles it. To demo^strate this, let Justinian begin;
says the Emperor when he had accomplished the work Et cum sacratissimas
constitutiones, antea confusas, In (...) do confirm. (...)
in luculentam ereximus consonantiam, tunc nostram extendimus cur am ad immensa
veteris prudentiae volumina, and opus desperatum, quasi per medium profundum
euntes, Coelesti favore, jam adimpleuimus. Hitherto the Emperor himself. And
hereupon a famous learned Ciuilians Paraphrase Claud. (...) in tres lib (...)
iustit. (...)
is this. Quis put as labor, quae difficultas fuerit, non modd sacratissimas
superiorum principum constitutiones, sed vniversas Romanae sapientiae
sanctiones, and leges, antea, temporibus ipsis, confusas, ac (...) in vnam
cogere, velut symphoniam, and aequabilitatem? Quic quid ab vrbe condita, and
Romuleis temporibus vsque ad nostrt imperij tempora, (quae fere in mill and
quadringentos (...)) vel (...) vel (...) Reipub. moderatoribus (...), edictum,
sancitum, vel a (...) de jure responsum esc, e quibus duo pene (...) librorum
esse conseripta, and plusquam tricies centeua millia versnum effula esse
compertum est: (Haec dicimus) adeo multa legere, perscrutari, expendere, and
quod ex hijs optimum esset eligere, opus profecto immensum, and ab alijs non
vanis ex causis desperatum; Ac nos qui mentis nostrae conatus Reipub. nostrae
commodis devoveraramus, proprijs licet diffisi virihus, sed Dei omnipotentis
auxilio freti, qui (...) penitus desperatus donare, and confirmare, (...)
virtutis magnitudine potest, vastum illud profundumque pelagus ingressi sumus,
and secundo (...) superatis difficultatibus, portum quem petabamus, attigimus.
Nam and priscorum principum constitutiones, quantumlibet vagas, sparsas, and
confusas, ex densissimis tenebris, in sibi modis omnibus consentanea^ formam,
in vtrumque (...) retulimus, and immensa veteris Iurisprudentiae volumina, quae
(quot diximus erant) in paucos aliquot velut tomos, nempe in quinquaginta
libros pandectarum (sic enim ex ipsa re appellare licuit) Dei opt max. favore
suffulti, magna cura, collegimus.

To come near (a little) to this aspersion that comes so near the Civil law,
let the judicious Reader, the Common lawier especially, and more especially
those of them, and what others that look into our books, look into our Code,
and see and read the three Constitutions there, that the Emperor lustinian
sots before his entrance into that book, the I book of his Code (by way as it
were) of a Proaem, preface, or introduction thereunto: 1: de novo Codice
faciendo; 2. de Iustiniano Cod. confirmando: 3. de emendatione codicis
Iustiniani, and secunda ejus editione, which when he shall have seen, and
read, passing over the titles thereof, from the first, to the 17, de veteri
jure enucleando, let him take with the rest that title into his consideration:
And with these authorities, I leave him to discern, whether the Civil law now
is, or then was, when this aspersion was cast upon it, which was in the year
1615. (as it was 1000 years and odd before that year( a Sea full of waves.

To meet with that objection that may by drawn from the time, wherein we say
the Civil law was digested from so many books, to so few, from that confusion
to that order, the Emperor (...) it unto 1000 years, wherein it might grow to
confusion again, the same it was before; I call to witness all the manuseripts
and Impressions (since) of the Civil law, whether the Tomes there of be more
Digest or (...)
now, then the 4. Tomes they were then; these, the Digest, or Pandects, the
Code, the Authenticks, and the Feuds, whereunto the Emperor (...) entiks (...)
had brought them from 2000 books, or upon the point, as before is said: And
as all writers do agree, they were pene duo millia librorum, wherein they
write there were contained 300000 Paragraphs. Here I leave the first aspersion,
and turn to the second.

2. That every Doctors opinion (in that learning) is a good authority.
Or the second aspersion, the same Author Supradict. (...) fol. (...) page
comes unto that, from his reason for his first, this; The Text whereof
(meaning the Civil law) being digested into so many volumes. Now he goes on
with, And so many Doctors interpreting the texts, and twice as many more
commenting upon their interpretations, and so gloss upon gloss, and book
upon book, (and so he is come unto that aspersion) this, viz. And every
Doctors opinion being a Imput.
good authority, fit to be cited and vouched among them (meaning the Ciuilians)
must needs breed distraction of opinions, and uncertainty in that law.

Here he comes in with so many, and so many, Refut.
and twice so many Texts, Doctors, Co^ments, Glosses, Books, Opinions, and I
cannot tell what, one upon another: But were they more by twice so many as they
are, that write upon that law, their Glosses, Comments, Opinions, and what
else, could no more hurt or confound it, then the frogs or Grasshoppers can
the grounds, when they hop, skip and leap, one over another: For we read the
Doctors, and reverence them. But we honor, and hold the law, wherein our
reading assures us, and we may believe it, and we do believe it, nihil esse
perplexum, nihil ambiguum, nihil diminutum, nihil quod contrarium, aut simile
videri possit, nullam esse geminam legem in toto jure civilly. But to the point,
where the Author says, that every Doctors opinion is a good authority for us:
The words of this aspersion, we say the contrary: Never a Doctors opinion,
saving the commen opinion of the Doctors, is authority for us to give or take
in Judgment in our Courts; Nay the common opinion of the Doctors we receive
very sparingly, and many times we receive it not; For our Axiom which they call
their Maxim for our pleadings is, first mtentionem suam per probationes in
Iudicium deductas ostendere: Next Iuribus asseverare, not Doctortbus. For
Doctors opinions go no further then to Bartoll and Bald. Nay then to Bartoll:
is there a Doctor more famous, more worthy, or of more authority then
Bartoll: Bartolum vero quotusquisque non appellat (...) juris, and dominum, and
aurigam Doctorum: whose opinion, for an opinion, the whole World embraces,
with this applause, viz Bartolista, optimus Iurista censendus est: yet for a
Judgment or final decree, it leads our Courts no more, then the rest of the
Doctors their opinions do. From whose authorities though we may gather many
memorable matters in point of learning in law. In disputando tamen (says the
Ciuilian) non sunt alleganda, sicut nee little auctoritates opponendae
disquisitioni veritatis. Nec peraeque valent in foro, atque de legum fontibus
deducta. In a word (judicious Reader) that Doctors^ opinions or Glosses the two
strings the Author harpes so much upon to fasten this aspersion upon our
learning, as that they should be given or taken (as he writes they are) therein
for fit authorities to be vouched by us, to beget that distraction and
uncertainty in it, which he casts upon it, in this particular, believe not
me, but our Doctors, and the Glosses themselves from whom I speak; they hold
nothing more injust, nothing so inept, and foolish; whereof to give to the
Reader but some little touch. I vouch and cite only but one of our Doctors,
but one of our Glostes amongst the rest; says that Doctor, though ancient and
famous, yet not so ancient, as famous in that learning, by way of advertisement
against it: Quicunque cupit juri operam dare, sit circumspectus infrascriptis I
pass over nine notable documents of this Doctors, to come to his tenth and
last, to this purpose, wherein thus he speaks to the Ciuilian: Consulo (says
he) quod solis textuum allegationibus inhoereat: Non vt quidam inepti, aut
inexperti facinnt, qui arguendo, glossas allegant, and Doctores, absque jurium
allegatione: illo euim, nihil apud Doctores in eptius: I counsel the Ciuilian
(says this Doctor) that he stick to, in his pleading, solie, the law-texts,
or textlawes, and not as some foolish and unskillful do, who, in their
pleadings, allege the Glosses and Doctors, and leave the laws; then the which
(he says) nothing is holden more inept amongst the Doctors. John Baptist de
(...) Documento (...) Rapt. de (...) doc. (...)
decimo. Now if the Reader will have a Gloss, an exclayming gloss against
such pleaders: the gloss upon the law, sed licet, in the title de officio
Praesidis in the Digest, is the gloss: This Doctor and this gloss alone,
without the rest that has been said to this aspersion might show the
Judicious Reader, but these and the rest together with them may confirm him in
the wrong, in this aspersion, to that learning, to those Courts, to that
practice, and to those Professors in the Civil law, from whence I descend, as
the Author leads me, to the Canon law.

3. That the like may be said of the Canon law, albeit the text thereof be
scarce 400 years old.
FOr this aspersion at the Canon law, because ^
it is the aspersion the same Author cast at the Civil law before, or rather
at us who profess it, as that, touching every Doctors opinion etc. the which
has been spoken to already: for this, I refer the Reader unto that: For the
Authors addition unto this which (...)
he spared in that, the age of the Canon law, which he strains to make,
scarce to be 400 years from the year 1615, the year wherein he wrote so.
Let the Novel be believed, or (in (...)
the Novel rather) the Emperor himself Iusitnian a 1000 years before that
year 1615, or as near a 1000 as 965, the Canon law was, and in use and
practice in the Church: Nay more in difference and debate then between the
Bishops and the secular Judges of that age, touching some cognizances in some
causes, whence this Novel ((...) this Emperor) proceeded: As that act of
circumspecte agatis did upon such a difference between the Bishops and the
Judges of the Land, from King Edward I, which Act, with which Novel agreeing
in substance of matter, either arising from the same ground, and pointing at
the same end, because they be but short, I recite them both, the Reader may
observe them, said the Emperor, (first) in his ^
Novel: si delictum sit Ecclesiasticum, egens castigatione vel multa
Ecclesiastica, Deo amabiles Episcopi seopi hocdiscernant, nihil communicantibus
clarissimis provincijs judicibus, neque enim volumus talia negotia scire omnino
ciuiles judices, cum oporteat talia Ecclesiastice examinari, and emendari
secundum sacras and divinas regulas, quas etiam sequi, nostrae non dedignantur
leges. (...) 13. Ed. 1 (...)


Thus far the Novel: the Act ensues, viz. The King to his ludges sends
greeting. use your self circumspectly in all matters concerning the Bishop of
Norwich and his Clergy, not punishing them if they should plead in court
Christian of such things as be spiritual, that is to wit, of penance injoined
for deadly sin, as fornication, advowtrie, and such like, for the which many
times, corporal penance or pecuniarie is enjoined specially, if a freeman be
convict of such things. Also if Prelates do punish for leaving of Church
yeards unclosed, or for that the Church is uncovered, or nor conveniently
decked, in which cases none other penance can be enjoined but pecuniary. Item
if a Parson demand of his Parishioners, oblations and tithes due and
accustomed: Or if any Parson plead against another for tithes more or less, so
that the fourth part of the value of the benefit be not demanded. Item if a
Parson demand Mortuaries in places where a Mortuarie has used to be given.
Item if a Prelate of a Church or the Patron demand of the Parson a pension due
to themselves, all such demands are to be made in the Spiritual court: And for
laying violent hands on a Priest: And in cause of defamation; it has been
granted already, that it shall be tried in the Spiritual Court, when money is
not demanded, but the suite is prosecuted for the punishment of sin, and
likewise for breaking an oath. In all the cases before reheatsed, the Spiritual
Judge shall have power to take knowledge, notwithstanding the Kings
prohibition, Anno 13. E. 1. Our Author it seems (judicious Reader) went no
further for the age of that law, then to Clement 5. Bishop of Rome, who might
tell him (and truly) the Clementines, that volume of our Decretals, were made
and published by him in the Counsel at Vienna, but in the year 1308. Or if he
went to Boniface 8. he might tell him (and as truly) he methaded the Sext, that
volume of our Decretals, in or about the year 1298. Or Gregory 9, might tell
him, if he went to him, the volume which Raimundus Barcinonensis his Chaplen,
at his commandment had gathered, the first volume of our Deeretalls, was
published by him to be read in Schools, and practiced in Courts much about the
year 1231. Or Gratian the Monk, Pope Eugenius his confessor, who after Iuo
Bishop of Carnat, had gathered the decrees, the auncientest of our volumes in
the Canon law, might tell him (and truly) he polished and perfected the same,
and that it was allowed by Eugenius, and published by him in the year 1149. or
thereabouts, but what of these relations (...) so true, he that will be truly
informed of the Antiquity of the Canon law, must not look at the volumes
thereof Decrees or Decretals, but at the Decrees or Decretals themselves in the
volumes, for they were before their volumes were, how could they else have
been digested; Had the ^ Isidorus (...) lib. 6. (...) l. (...) 16) (...)
Consta^: (...) unt. (...) 15. (...) 1.
Author gone to Constantine, the great, the first Christian Emperor who (first)
gave leave to the christian Church to meet in counsels, to make Canons, to
govern in the Church, Or to the Commons of the first 4 general counsels, he
would never have straighted the canon law from the year 1615. to 400 years;
Hitherto this (...)

4. That for the space of 300 years after Christ the distinction of
Ecclesiesticall and Spiritual causes in point of Jurisdiction, was not known
nor heard of in the Christian world.
TO come to this distinction of Ecclesiastical In the said printed (...) in
the case of praemunire. sol. 95. page 2.
and spiritual causes, from civil and Temporal, in point of Jurisdiction, as
when it should begin, and his reasons why it was not known nor heard of in the
Christian world before, Let the Reader observe how the Author writes; first
(then) says he, let us see, when this distinction of Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual causes, from Civil and Temporal causes, did first begin in point
of Jurisdiction. Assuredly for the space of 300 years after Christ, this
Distinction was not known, nor heard of in the Christian world: For the causes
of Testaments of Matrimony, of Bastardie, of Adultery, and the rest, which are
called Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual causes, were merely civil, and subject
(only) to the Jurisdiction of the civil Magistrate, as all ciuilians will
testify with me: But after that the Emperor had received the Christian faith,
out of zeal, and desire they had to grace, and honor the learned and godly
Bishops of that time, they were pleased to single out certain special causes,
wherein they granted Jurisdiction unto the Bishops. namely in causes of tithes,
because they were paid to men of the Church: In causes of Matrimony, because
mariagas were, for the most part, solemnized in the Church; In causes
Testamentarie, because Testaments were many times made in extremis, when
Churchmen were present, giving spiritual comfort unto the Testator; and
therefore they were thought to be the fittest persons to take the probats of
such Testaments; How be it the Bishops did not Imput.
proceed in these causes, according to the decrees and Canons of the Church
for the Canon law was not (then) hatched.

For this Distinction the Authors reason for Refut.
his assurance, that it was not known nor heard of in the Christian world, in
point of Jurisdiction, for the space of 300 years, after Christ, is, (he
says) for the causes of Testaments, Matrimony, Bastardy, Adultrie and the
rest, which the Emperor (after he had received the Christian faith) had
granted to the Jurisdiction of the Bishops were merely Civil, and determined
by the rules of the Civil law, and subject (only) to the Jurisdiction of the
Civil Magistrate: As though who^ the Emperor had translated these causes and
the rest from the Jurisdiction of the Empire, to the Jurisdiction of the Church
He translated (not therewith) the laws that belonged to them, and their
Cognition or Cognizance: Or that the causes could become (when they were
translated to the Church) Ecclesiastical or spiritual causes in the Church,
and the laws that belonged to their cognizance or cognition remain ciull, and
Temporal laws in the Empire? what had the Emperor done (then) when he had
translated the causes, and not the laws? this; given the causes to the Church
without laws; And left the laws unto the Empire without causes; the causes (I
mean) whereunto these laws belonged, and the laws to the causes. Now these
Bishops (says this Author) did not proceed in the causes aforesaid according
to the Canons and Decrees of the Church, because (he says) the Canon law was
not (then) hatched. A goose reason, was not the Church (then) hatched? and were
there not (...) (then) in the Church, the (...) fesseth the translation of the
causes to the Bishops: why then Cicero tells him in his offices Libro. 1. non
remanet res apud cos, a quibus transfertur And so it holds, translato aliquo,
transfertur et lex: as in holy writ, translato (...) necesse est, vt legis
translatio fiat. But how soever Cap. (...) de coust it
Judicious Reader this distinction of Ecclesiastical and Spiritual causes,
from Civil and (...) in point of Jurisdiction. that so much has troubled the
Author, is as auneient in the courts of the kingdom, as this of the Lords
spiritual and Temporal is, in the house of Parliament, which he might have
challenged as well in the Persons, and in their actions, as in the causes (which
indeed) he has done, for the distinction is the same, in one, in all, Persons,
things and actions; touched in one, touched in all, Hero I leave him for that
distinction, from whence I am come to his next aspersion cast at the Bioshops
and their Clergy.

5. That the Clergy, by their Jurisdiction (...) bich they had from Caesar,
got wealth which begot Pride, which begot their Ingratitude to Princes, which
blotted Caesart name out of the style of their Courts, and called them Courts
Christian.
THe distinction has brought the Author to the Jurisdiction of the Church, As
great an Ei: sore to him, nay a greater the^ the distinction, (the church must
have no Jurisdiction) whereupon thus he writes; The Clergy (says Impur
he) having gotten, by this Jurisdiction, great (...) said printed re (...) eod
ca su. fell 96. p: g. 1.
wealth, their wealth begot pride, their pride begot Ingratitude toward
Princes: who (first) gave them their Jurisdiction, and then, according to the
nature of all ungrateful persons, they went about to extinguishe the memory of
the benifit: For where their Jurisdiction was first derived from caesar, in the
execution, whereof they were caesar's Judges; So as both their courts and causes
ought still to have borne Caesar's Image, and superscription, as belonging unto
caesar, they blotted caesar's name out of the style of their courts, and called
them Courts Christian, As if the Courts holden by other Magistrates had been
(in comparison) but Courts of Ethnicks: and the causes, which in their nature
were mecrely Civil, they called spiritual, and (...) So as if the Emperor
should challenge his Courts and causes again, and say Reddi te Caesari quae
sunt Cesaris, they would all crieout on the contrary part, and say, Date deo,
quae sunt dei, Our Courts bear the name and title of Christ, the
superscription of Caesar is quite worn out, and not to be found upon them.

A strange fantasy, fiction, imagination, that 5 esut.
the stiling of the one Court, the Court Christian, should hammer into any
head, such a toye, to make the other (as it were as the Author says in
comparison) Courts of Ethnicks: so the Author would insinuat; not to speak of
other kingdoms or (common wealths) then whereunto we do belong; come not
they both from one fountain, from one head? arethey not set both, and do they
not sit both Sister like, in one crown? thanked be God, they do so, hand in
hand, Christian Courts both; though not styled (both) Courts Christian, Saint
Hieromes distinction upon the point, that settled (...) q. 1. (...) 7.
his Leuite, might have settled the Author as well if he had hit upon it, as he
could not easily miss it, turning our books as it seems he did for the
hatching of the Canon law; But as he writes who has written truly of some
sort of men, Cancros prius recte ingredi facias, quam his qui non tam Iudicio,
quam proposito, et voluntate aberrant, quibusuis rationibus satisfacere possis,
quibus, Ne si persuadeas quidem, vnquam persuaser is; Touching that
distinction, thus that Father writes unto that Leuite whom he calls Leuita^
suu^; duo sunt genera christianorum; est aute^ vnum genus quod mancipatu^ est
diuino officio etc. vt sunt Clerici et deo deuosi; aliud vero genus est
Christianorum, ut sunt Laici, his temporalia etc. The Sages of the Authors
learning in the law of the land, that have been to this time, did never
stumble at that style, before, but passed (sagelie) by it: the beginning
whereof in the Courts of the church was when she was not laden with wealth,
Nec tunc diuitiae ecclesiam onerabant: Alas she was not loade^ with
persecutions, they were not Caesar's courts then, as the Author makes them,
Caesar had not (then) received the faith, But the Church held them even in the
thickest of Ethnicks who called them the Christian Courts, whence they came C
desum. (...) et sid. (...) eod. de Epis (...) Cler. etc. eod. de Episcop. and
etc. eod de Haenerman. et sam. eod de Apostat eod de Iud. et (...) eod de (...)
etc.
styled the Courts christian: under which style they came unto caesar, when
caesar came to the christian faith, And from Caesar to the church, with sundry
sacred constitutions, as of the holy (...) and catholic faith: of churchs: of
Bishops of the Bishops audience, or Jurisdiction: with sundry more, in
mayntenance of the says: as against Heretics, Maniches, Samarita^s, Apostats,
Jews, Caelicols, Pagans, and thelike, all in assistance of the Christian
faith, whereunto he added afterward, as the Author says, other Cognizances or
Cognitions of causes, as of marriages, Testaments, and the like. (...) de (...)
coal. de (...)


Now, weigh (Judicious Reader) woe things one, what the wealth could be, that
our Author dreams of, the Clergy could have gotten then, when (he writes) they
got it by their Jurisdiction which they had from Caesar, to beget their pride,
to beget their ingratitude to Princes, to blot out Caesar's name out of the
style of their Courts? Another, how they could have blotted Caesar's name out of
the style of their Courts, by stiling them, (if they had so styled them) Courts
christian? when Caesar had embraced Christ, was he less Caesar, then he was
before, with this Quere, I leave this a spersio^ with this intimatio^, that our
Author who cnvies (it seems) herein that the Courts of the Church should be
styled Courts Christian, arrogates to Caesar more then Caesar to himself and
more then Caesar would he should do, and derogates from Christ, from whom the
style (...) indeed (and rightly) how soever (so) styled under God, and whom,
Caesar, and the Bishops under him, hold the^, and whose Tribunals they are, and
not Caesar's, nor the Bishops, more then in their execution.

6. That Bishops Chancellors (are of late) but vpstarts in the world.
WHether the Author of the former aspersions cast at Ciuilians, the Civil and
Canon laws, and at the Clergy, be the Author of this aspersiou and the next
and last I find of this kind, thrown at Bishops Chancellors, or some other
vpstart Author that has gleaned after him or that went, before him in the same
field, I ca^nnot tell D. Ridley ir. his view of the (...) Sc ecl (...) law
(...) 104.
I find the^ (by relation) to be printed, as the rest but not printed with the
rest, but howsoever let the^ go together, and their Author be who^ he will be,
thus he writes: Bishops Chancellors (...)
are but vpstarts in the world. Bishops (...) (Judicious Reader) whom we call
their vicars general, (other Chancellors know we none to Bishops) saving this
vpstart opinion, are vpstarts of no less then 1200. years standing Resut.
in the world, so long have Bishops had their Episcopal audience which made
them ordinaries, and so long have (...) had their vicars generals whom we call
their Chancellors; For which audience and their beco^ming ordinaries hereupon,
and the Emperors reasons therefore: Let the reader understand that when the
Bishops consta^cie in Religion sealed with so many of their bloods, and their
Clergies, had brought the Emperors thereunto, wherein Constantine began: the
succeding Emperors thought not enough their superiority in the church, with out
power and Jurisdiction to strengthen them therein: For said the Emperor in his
Christian zeal thereunto,

Et si praecipuu^ pontificis seu Episcopi munus est doctrina verbi, populum
moderari, tamen, quia nonomnes, dicto audie^tes sunt, nec ejusmodiper suasiomad
disciplina^ perduci, vel in officio retinere possunt et superioritas in qua
sunt ecclesiastici, absque^ Imperio et Jurisdiction, non satis habet neruorum
et authoritatis, denique quonia^ ecclesia matter et cultrix est Iustitia. Ideo
Episcopis peculiaris quaedam Iurisdictio ecclesiastica Civilly dignior in
personas et causas ecclesiasticas, legibus Impp: est attributa etc. vt ius
dicant Clericis etc.

And least the Emperor in his constitution in these words vt ius dicant
Clericis etc. should seem to the Reader to straight the Bishops, in their
audience, or consistories, to Clerks only, there follows a praeterea in the
same title, in the Code de Episcop: audient: not long after: this; praeterea
(says the Emperor there) ius dicunt Laicis etc But to the point; became the
Bishops ordinaries (then) by this Jurisdiction? and the same ordinaries in the
law; that (now) they are? and if they did, did this beget their vicars
generals (then) who^ (now) we call the Bishops Chancellors necessarily, They
did so; become (by this) ordinaries then; and the same ordinaries in the law,
then (that now) they are; And from whence proceeded their vicars generals, and
the same we call the Bishops Chancellors now whom the Author calls vpstarts in
the world the laws or constitutions in the same title of the Bishops audience
in the Code do teach the same fro point to point, For not to speak out of
them, but to go on with them as they lie concatenatae in the title says
another, Ac cu^ sint ordinarij Iudices, meaning the Bishops, says a third,
semiles (...) praetorio, A fourth, ordinary quoque procedunt; These lincked
texts in that title in the Code, as they stand cited, do answer to the points
in the question (before) proposed, pu^ctually, saving to the point of the
Bishops vicars generals, whereunto, though they answer fully, yet because not
plainly to the Reader, no Ciuilian; let him be pleased but to cast his eye, a
few lines back again to the words similes praefectis praetorio, where the
Emperor paralells the Bishops having made them ordinaries, with Magistrates
called praefecti praetorio, of who^ there were but three in the wide world, one
in Asia, Praefectus praetorio orientis, Another in Europe, Praesectus praetorio
Illirici, The third in Africa, Praefectus praetorio legionibus and militiae
Africanae. These Civil Magistrates were ( respectively,) Judges of the causes
which the Emperor had translated from the Empire to the Church, whereof mention
is made in this Epitome before, of the which when the Emperor (...)
had made the (...) the same Judges in the Church, the Praefecti Praetorio were
in the Empire before; and had made them similes praefectis praetorio. who were
Illustres Iudices, and so styled in the law, with this addition of their (...)
generals. How, could the Bishops be (without their vicars generals) similes
praefectis praetorio? that they had Jurisdiction, as the praefecti had, that
they were ordinaries, as the praefecti were, and Illustres Iudices, made them
not, (as the Empevor made them) like unto them, without their vicars generals.
Now, if the Reader will have the reason why the Praefecti had their vicars (all
one binding in the Bishops;) it is this Quia illustres erant: and ante stabant
caeteris dignitatibus, Ideo habebant vicarios suos in Ciuilibus causis
audiendis, et terminandis. So were the Bishops then. and so are they now,
Illustres Iudices and antestabant ceteris dignitatibus in ecclesia: Now, if the
Praefecti praetorio, because they were Illustres Iudices and autestabant
ceteris dignitatibus in the Empire, had their vicars, as they had, why the
Bishops who^ the law paralells with the^ in the Church, should not be as like
unto the^ in their vicars generals in the Church, as in the rest of the pattes
of their honor wherewith the Emperor had honored them, and the law honors
them at this day, let the Author (if he can) show the difference, Justinians
Code has sundry laws, some, of his own, some of the Emperors before him,
even from the days of Constantine the great, that show that Bishops in their
Episcopal audience sat not without their Cha^cellors. Their Chancellors often
without the Bishops whose higher charge in CHRIST Church endured not the
Bishops presence in court causes, ordinarily. And though (likely) not under the
name and title of Chancellors, nor always Vicars generals officialls, nor
Comissaries they had other titles, but the same offices, as Ecclesiecdici, or
Episcoporum Ecdici, as much to say as Church Lawyers, or Bishops lawyers
professed Ciuilians, and Canonists, of that age, the very selfsame officers
and offices that the Bishops Vicars generals then were, and now are, who, and
the Bishops then made, and do now make but one, and the same Tribuna^ll, or
Consistory, no sooner vicurs generals, but or dinaries, their Co^missions
they hold from the Bishops: But their Jurisdiction from the law, These be the
(...) officers in the world, our vpstart Author would make; I am come to his
next aspersion, the last I find of this kind, as the root of these officers,
the Bishops vicars generals, whom we call their Chancellors, from whence (he
writes) they did proceed from the sloth of Bishops.

7. That the sloth of Bishops has brought in Chancellors.
AProper Parent ( Sloth) to breed upon. imput
could his learning which commends related by D. Ridley in his view of the
(...) and (...) law page 104.
him, find no other, or (if none but that) no other stock, to bear it then
the Bishops, The Bishops and their Chancellors both, are much beholding to him:
But let the ludicious indifferent Reader, but consider how the brother of this
aspersion can fasten it upon the Bishops, or their Chancellors, How could the
Resut
Bishops sloth bring in their Chancellors, certaynelie, the Bishops Nascentis
ecclesiae, the ancient Fathers of the Church were under persecution; no sooner
set in their Seas, but beset with Ethnicks: alas, they had no rest to beget
sloth, to beget their Chancellors: And for the Bishops Citerioris saeculi, the
later Fathers, they brought them not in, they found them in their Consistories,
when they came themselves; In a word ( Judicious Reader) The Imperial power,
th'immediat power, under GOD, and Christ. (as it is set down in what has
been said to the aspersion next before) brought them in and not the sloth of
Bishops, as the Author dreams. Now the cause why the The Imperial power
furnished the Bishops: with these officers was (indeed) the multitude and (...)
of Ecclesiastical causes, then (more now) by as many more, the decisions
whereof in their Co^sistories, left to the Bishops: the Emperor doubted might
have drawn them from prayer, and divine exercises. A second reason was, that
the causes of the Cogniza^ce of their Courts, were more likely (as they are) to
have, thereby a more speedy, ready, and Judicious trial before Judges of the
same learning, which require a whole man, then before Judges of another, though
a higher, requiring (as the Bishops pastoral office does) a whole man too. If
the Author will have a third reason, it was that Clerks, suites and quarells,
should not be divulged and spread abroad amongst the secular sort, which
trenched many times, upon the whole profession; especially in Capital matters
wherein Princes (anciently) so much tendered the clergy; that if a Clerk had^
committed an offense worthy of death, or open shame, whereby he became (
perpetually) in famous, he was not first executed or put to open shame, before
he was degraded by the Bishop, and his Clergy, and so was executed and put to
sname, not as a Clerk, but as a lay Malefactor; for the honor and dignity of
Priesthood. It were to be wished this order were retained still, that Clerks
should not pass (immediately) when they fall into such Excesses) from the Alter
to the halter, but hang, or suffer other shame without their Priest hood: which
order if it were retained still or might be restored, would much honor the
Church, and no whit derogat from the Jurisdiction of the Crown; For the second
of the foresaid reasons, as where the Bishops in their Co^sistories have not
had their vicars generals, who^ we call their Chancellors, as in many parts
in this kingdom wherein we live, they have not; how many just causes upon
grievances in proceeding before the Bishops: give^ have been appealed and
quareled, and the plaintifes in the first instances before the Bishops: the
Judge a quo, in the cause of appeal or quarrel overthro wen before the Judge
of the Appeals or quarrel, the Judge ad quem, to the insupportable travel and
expense of the subject, their transmissions in the causes in the Registries of
the Courts of Appeals, and quarrels, do show; which do cut so sore upon
the poor, many times, that (spent) by that occasion, in the second instance,
he is not able to prosecute in the principal, the first, and so loses all,
operam and oleum: To meet with this mischeife, or Inconvenience rather, the law
has provided in great wisdom, that if a Bishop will hold himself so complete
a Judge within himself, as that he needs no Chancellor, but will proceed
without him ordinarily, his Metropolita^ the Archbishop, of whose province he
is may compel him thereunto, or if he will not be compelled, may put upon him
a Chancellor, as the King the supreme ordinary may upon the Metropolitan, in
the case, and supply his neglect in the Suffragan Bishop. If the Metropolitan
supplies it not; For as, each superior ordinary over the immediate under him,
has his supplitorie power by the law, so has the King the supreme ordinary
over them all, subordinates vnderhim, his supplitorie power by the same rule;
so necessarily holds the law those officers (whom it may not be omitted)
Published by (...) of the Lords (...) and counsel: 622: (...) In his ^
his late Majesty in his late instructions for the ordering and settling the
Courts, and course of Justice, within this kingdom, has confirmed, viz. in
his 45 instruction or direction thus; That the Bishop of every (...) order to
appoint honest and sufficient (...) Chancellors and Commislaries to (...)
risdictio^ under them. Judicious Reader I (...) said, though not so much, by
much, as might be said, to this, and the rest of the (...) I have passed over,
yet more then I (...) to deal with their Authors, out of their Elements, in
this kind. Apelles sent the (...) to his last, when he gave his Judgment,
though ^
but of the foot of the picture he had (...) though a part of the body whose
picture (...) was, that belonged to his trade; Our Authors have gone as high
above the foot, as the height of the head; the Bishops of the Church: The
laws of the Church: The Courts of the Church; and the Judges of the Church,
under the Fathers, their Chancellors, when we call their vicars generals; with
whom they have dealt, as Painters use to do, with the Image of GOD whom no man
ever saw, nor that Matie seen with mortal eyes; yet they can imagine an Image
of him, as our Authors have done of the Bishops Courts, laws, and the rest:
whom, and which, though they have seen, yet not in Judgment, not prosessing
their learning, of whom, and which they have (more then boldly) written, though
of learning and Judgment, yet without learning or Judgment. Let not any Reader
therefore of their Theses or positions in the premises, if he stood, or
stands, or shall be affected to the study of that learning, in those laws, be
discouraged thereby: what the Civil and Canon laws are, and what the causes
are, of the Cognizance or Cognition of either of them in the kings dominions,
in the Church or Common wealth, the Reader might expect in the body of this
Epitome; but omitted there, th'appendix thereunto ensewing opens them,
whereunto, the Reader is referred.

AN APPENDIX. Wherein, the Civil and Canon lam, with the causes of the
Cognizance or Cognition of either of them in the Church, or Common. wealth, in
the Kings Dominions, (what they are) are opened.
What the Civil law is?
THe law of the Ancient Romans it is; the same we call the Roman Civil law,
that was reduced by Justinian, from 2000. books, or very near 2000 books, to
the 4 Tomes or Volumes mentioned before in this c de vet (...) l. 1. (...)
Epitome page 4. whereof the Digest or Pandext is the first, so called, Quia
digeritomnes disputationes legum, and in se, quasi in suoe aluo, continet.

The second, the Coae, of caudex, as much to say as plurium tabularum
contextus: vnde tabulae codices dicuntur: co^piled (as a learned Doctor D.
Ridley in his view of the Civil and (...) law page (...)
of ours related) of 56 answears of so many Emperors, with their counsel
famous learned men, to as many co^sulations: whereof, that Tome compiled, is
called the Code.

The Authenticks, the third Tome or Volume Of his (...) at large in D. Rid.
view etc, page (...)
of the Civil law, are a Tome or Volume, of new (...) of Emperors, after the
Code, brought into the body of the law, called the Authe^ticks, as authe^ticall
of themselves proceeding (as they did) from the Emperors own mouths.

The Volume is divided into 9 collations, or ^
coustitutions or Sections: and they into 168. Nouells and the Nouells into
Chapters: they were called Nouells because they were new laws, whereof, some
were general, concerning all, all alike, Persons and Places, some special or
private, unto some special or private persons, and places:

The three Volumes above mentioned were the Tomes or Volumes of Justinian the
Emperor, gathered by him, some, from some Emperors his predecessors, decrees
and constitutions, some from his own, as time and occasion had bred them, the
latest no later then 500 years after CHRIST.

The fourth and last Tome of the Civil law feuds explaned by D Rid in his view
etc to be Customs and services that the subject or vassal owes to his
Princeor Lord for such kinds or fees as he hold (...) of them page 61.
are the Feuds of Feudum, of Faedus, or fides, or (as some say) of Fidius, whom
they feign the God qui fidei praeest, by whom they used to swear per deum
Fidiu^ credis? iurato mihi. Plaut. And not unlike: For howsoever Justinian the
Emperor takes notice of them in his Nouells, he took it from the ancient
Romans before Christ, at the least from Alexander Seuerus an Ethnic Emperor
224 years after Christ, very near 400 years before Justinians time, who made
Foudataries, of who^, (likely) he took the oath of faith, and Homage (and they
yielded it) per deum Fidium etc iurabis etc. But from whence, or whomsoever
they proceeded, they became and are a particular Tome or Volume of the Civil
law, which is, as that learned Doctor in his view etc says page 3. for the
great wisdom (...) Reg. iur. Reg suae a (...) muni 28.
and equity of it, at this day, as it were the Common law of all well governed
common wealths, a very few excepted: whereof, all-be it sundry of them by the
light of nature have many rules of the Civil law, yet if all the laws, of all
other Countries were put together (none excepted saving the laws of the
Hebrews which came immediately) from God, for wisdom, gravity, law, or equity,
they come not near to the law of the Romans, whence it is, that all other
nations, (saving our own) although they receive not the Civil law (wholly) for
their law, yet they honor and admire so much the equity thereof, that they
interpret their own laws thereby. For the canon law, it follows.

What the Canon law is.
THat it is, which is concluded in the Volumes thereof mentioned in the 10 page
of the Epitome, the Decrees, Decretalls, Sect, clementines, and Extrauagants.
But let the Reader be advertised by the way, that, not all that is concluded in
those Volums, nor in the Tomes of the Civil law before, but only the laws,
constitutions and extrauagants, such as are An, (...) H 8: Cap: 19: in an (...)
England intit. An Act of the (...) of the Clergy, And (...) 8 H 8 cap (...)
Act (...) Act against the (...) of the (...) of R me an act for (...)
not crossing to the law of God, nor adverse to the 4 first general counsels
that at Nice; That at Constantinople; That at Ephesus, and that at Calcedon.
Nor contrary nor repugnant to the Royal Prerogative of the King. Nor yet to
the laws Statuts and Customs of his Kingdoms, are the laws we hold and
follow, for the Civil and Canon laws in the Kings Dominions, whereinto they
were induced out of their volumes, not the volumes themselves; where, though we
read them, because they be not volumed by themselves, but lie (dispersed)
here, and there, amongst the rest therein: we hold not the rest, amongst them,
as we hold them, for the Kings Ecclesiastical laws, no more then we hold the
Apocripha in the Bible, (though, in the Bible) for Canonical scripture; with
this intimation, I descend to the causes of ^
the Cognizance or Cognition of these laws in the Church, or Commonwealth, in
the King Dominions, what they are.

A Schedule of Such causes or actions of the Church, by the Civil and Canon
laws, as do atise between party, and party, ordinarily. (As they call them)
causes of instance, or At instance, viz.
Debates in
1 Church services withheld from their Chappells. 2 Ecclesiastical
promotions, dignities or benifices. 3 Spiritual pensions. 4 Tithes. 5 Sedile
causes, or seats in Churches. 6 Dilapidations. 7 Procurations. 8 Testaments. 9
Legacies 10 (...) 11 Divorces 12 Diffamations


With their and every of their Incidents and Emergents.

A Schedule of such causes or actions of the Church, as, by the Civil and Canon
laws, do arise by Accusation, Inquisition or Denuntiation.
Such are against
1 Offenses against the act of 20 Elizabeth. Cap. 20 for the uniformity of
Common prayer etc. 2 Pollutions of churches, and church yards. 3 Fighting or
quarrelling in Churches, or church-yardes 4 Herisies. 5 Schisms. 6 Apostasy,
7 Idolatry, 8 Violation of the Sabbath. 9 Violation of the Interdicts of the
Church. 10 Excesses in Prelates. 11 Excesses in Clarks. 12 Sacrilege. 13
Sortilege, witcheraft, Enchantment 14 Laying violent hands upon a Clerk. 15 A
Clerk a striker 16 Blasphemye. 17 Perjury ecclesiast; 18 Simonye. 19 Usury. 20
Execrations. 21 Imprecations, Impreca^tes debilitates, Naufragia. Morbos etc.
22 Incest, 23 Adultery, 24 Fornication, 25 Lenocinie, 26 Obscenitie, or
Ribaldrie. 27 Drunkenness.


Non frustra sunt instituta Regis Potestas, and Cognitoris ius; vngulae
carnificis; arma militis; disciplina dominantis, seueritas etiam boni patris.

Habent omnia ista modos, causas, rations vtilitates, Haec; cum rimentur, and
malicoercentur, and boni, quieti, inter malos viuunt.

Cap frustra. 23. q. 5.

Sundry other matters and causes there are, some, ordinary, some,
extraordinary, some, Civil some, Criminal, of the Conusance of the Civil
law, within the dominions of the King, which not of the Cognizance, of the
Church (whereunto this Appendix streights me) I set them not in the Schedules
thereof: And yet for the honor of that learning, and more satisfaction of the
Reader, I will point thereat herein, and no more, least it should exceed
compass (I mean) the compass of an Appendix to so small an (...) of which
learning let the Reader understand that (first) the Lord Admiral of the Sea:
Next the two Universities, Cambridge, and Oxford, have a larger exercise
therein, then the Church, or other places in the Commonwealth have, to season
(thereby) the professors of that learning there, with that practice thereof, to
make them the apter for such services therein, as the Prince and his Common
wealth at home, with Princes and their Common wealths abroad, may require:
Now, where the Nations round about us, far and near, are ruled by the Civil
law, wherein Princes treat with Princes, of peace, or war, or other Common
wealth-affayres, by their Ambassadors, if not Ciuilians, attended by
Ciuilians, by whom they treat, (How meanly soever the Penmen of the Theses or
positions, in the Epitome before, or their followers therein, hold the Ciuilian
and his learning) how Princes and their, Common wealths esteem of them, their
employments in their services in that learning show; But what do I point at
treaties between Princes no ordinary object of the Civil law: neither deals
it ordinarily, but incidently, therein by Commission from the Prince: So it
does in Martial affairs in an Army; So it does in Ensigns and Arms: And so
(...) does in decisions of rights in Precedencie in Place, and Honor, when
such debates do happen, as many times they do, sometimes in the Church,
sometime in the Common wealth, and so in (...) of like kind, which of the
Science of the (...) law, though not of the practice of it, ordinarily, for the
honor of that learning, I could not pass by them, and not point at them, nor
leave untouched their honoring that Science whose authorityes (for Judgment)
all the world honors. Latret igitur Criticus quisquis volet, modo nunquam
latrare desinat: (Says one of these authorityes of that law) Ea est, (meaning
the same) nobilis ^ (...) iudi. (...)
omnia, and fine (...) est (...) (...) de vas. ^
Ipsa est ^ quae (...) non est (...) A ^
third, Ipsa est quae nobilitat addiscentes: And (says a fourth, And I Cap.
(...) do (...) Cap. (...)
say no more) Conduplicat (...)


