HOLY INCENSE FOR THE CENSERS of the SAINTS.

OR, A method of Prayer, with matter, and forms in selected Sentences of
sacred Scripture.

ALSO A PRAXIS upon the HOLY OIL showing the USE of SCRIPTURE-PHRASES.

And Choice Places taken out of the singing PSALMS, digested into a Method of
Prayer and Praises.

Pray always, with all prayer, and supplication in the Spirit, and watch
thereunto, with all perseverance, and supplication for all Saints. Ephesians. 6. 18.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Milbourne, at the sign of the Greyhound in Paul's
Churchyard. 1634.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Sir EDWARD AYSCOVGH, Knight, and to his religious
and noble Lady, the best blessings of this, and the blessedness of a better
life, through JESUS CHRIST.
Right Worshipful,
IT was the Farewell-clause of HER Letter, (who is the Honor of this Country,
the Praise of her own Sex, and the Glory of your Noble family, Mistress ANNE
AYSCOVGH, Martyr,) Mr Fox Acts monum. vol. 2. page 578. col. 1. lin. 41.
Pray, Pray, Pray: and in another Letter written to JOHN LACELS, (Sacrificed
with her in the same fire, for the Word of God, and for the Testimony Rev. 6.
9.
which they held) Fox ibid. col. 2. lin. 32.
Farewell and Pray. This has been the practice of all the Saints. Bishop
Latimer is famous to Posterity for his three Grand-petitions, ( Pref. before
his Sermons.
) which God most graciously granted. Master Luther, not less powerful with
God by Praying, than prevailing with Men, by his Preaching, daily breathed his
soul herein, ( Nullus abit dies quin ^t minimum tres ^^ras, easque studijs
aptissimas in oration^m po^a^* etc. Vi^. Theodor. ad Melanc. Vid. Acts and
monum. vol. 2 page* (...) col. 1. (...) 55.
) like Jacob wrestling with God, and not letting him go without a Blessing:
and thus the Captain of our salvation, our blessed Savior, continued all
night in Prayer to God, Luk 6. 1^^
and in the days of his flesh offered up Prayers and Supplications with strong
crying and tears unto him, that was able to Acts 9. 11. Isay 38. 16.
save him, from death, and was heard -- as the Apostle tells us. Heb 5. 7.

PRAYER doubtless is the very element in which the Soul lives; the very
aliment by which it subsisteth: Saint Paul as soon as converted, Behold he
Prays -- O Lord by these, men live. Innocentius ex advoc^t. vicar.
pr^^fectur. mis^r^ lab^^ns morbo, ^^^ula and c^^^pit orare quibus modis, quo
affectu quo motu animi quo ^luvio lachrymaru^ quibus gemitibus atque
s^^gultibus-Domine quastuorum ^reces ex(...) as (...)? nihil enim mihi
vi^ebatur addi jam posse (...) ex^iraret orand^ qui miraculose a Deo sanabatur
ab illo^^n let hali morbo. Aug. li. 22. de civit. dei c. 8.
As well may a fish live out of Water, or a bird without Air, as the Christian
without Prayer, It Is the vital breath of Faith, stop it, and take away
Spiritual life. And though at sometimes, he breathes short, and hardly, and
insensibly in his deliquium animae, fits of Spiritual desertion, and
temptation, yet his life is still in him as in Epilepticks; and the man
possessed with the dum be Spirit, Mark. 9. 26. who was as one dead, yet when
Christ takes him by the hand, he arises. Sin prevailing, may tongue-tie him
a while, that he chatters not with Hezekiah, yet when his lips move not, nor
his voice is heard, his desires will beat strongly upward, his heart works,
and pants, and groans, and sighs, and breathes, and breaks in its longing,
and looking toward Heaven. O thinks he, that my sins -- such, and such --
were Pardoned! o that I had more grace to serve my God! O that I could master
such, and such, a prevailing Lust! O that I could more abound in fruits of
righteousness in my conversation! thus his heart is fired always, thus fixed.

And who can marvel that the children of God, are so much herein, seeing all
the blessings of this, and the hopes of a better life, are assured and conveyed
unto them hereby? yea, ^ooker Eccles. policy lib. 5.
and that the whole service and worship of God is in Scripture, styled a
calling upon the name of the Lord: the Church a house of Prayer, and God
himself a God that hears Prayers, O thou that hear Prayer, unto thee,
shall all flesh come, Psalm. 65. 2.

Upon this sacred subject, is the ensuing treatise, which though but now
presented to you Right Worshipful, long since was intended; in that mournful
and praying time, when Gods chastening was upon the City of my habitation, the
space of, almost two whole years together. Your noble house, K^lsey.
was then the Zoar, whither I was invited, whereto I fled, where I was (above
my deserts) freely entertained. Those and many other your favors, before, and
since, challenge my Prayers and best services. Accept of this I entreat you,
as a testimony of my thankful observance toward you: yet not as mine, but
as it has received spirit and life, from the word of life. It Is Holy Incense
for the Censers of the Saints, dropping from the Tree of Life, smelling
sweetly in the coals of the Altar, hearts enkindled with true devotion,
flaming, and blazing upward.

Prayer will make the face to shine as Moses talking with God in the Mount. The
more time we spend herein, the more heavenly is our life on earth. Godliness
has the promises; 'twill make your names to live and flourish, when other
Magnifico's, whose portion is in the huskey profits, frothie pleasures, windy
honors, etc -- empty shadows of this life, shall be written in the * earth
and rot. And Ier. 17. 13.
though now it be undervalued, and the price beaten down as a merchandise not
worth the owning, much less of buying at any low rate, yet it will quite for
cost, and be of high esteem in another world, a pearl of price, that good
part, and that one thing necessary.

You are happy ( Right Worshipful) above many, in that God has given you a
mind to know him, a heart to love him. Press on still toward the mark: study
which way to honor God most, and to live to him, this will bring you peace at
the last. It Is not a form of godliness (which even the civil gentry affect,
hereby gilding over their baser courses, rotten practices) but the power of it
in a sanctified life, which before God is much set by. Go on in that good way,
you have begun, count all things Galcacius Caracciolus son and heir apparent
to Calantonius Marquess of Vicum in Naples, bred, born, and brought up in
Popery, a Courtier to the Emperor Charles the 5. nephew to Pope Paul the 4.
being married to the Dake of Nucernes daughter, and having by her six goodly
children, at a sermon of Pet. Martyrs, was first touched: after by reading
Scripture and other good means was fully converted: labored with his Lady but
could not persuade her. Therefore that he might enjoy Christ, and serve him
with a quiet conscience, he left the lands, livings, and honors of a
Marquesdome, the comforts of his Lady and children, the pleasures of Italy, his
credit with the Emperor, his kindred with the Pope, and forsaking all for the
love of Christ -- came to Geneva, and there lived a poor and mean, but yet an
humble and holy life for forty years together. And though his Father, his
Lady, his kinsmen, yea the Emperor and the Pope did all they could to reclaim
him, yet continued he constant to the end, and lived and died the blessed
servant of God, leaving behind him a rare example to all ages -- He lived
with his wise till the year 1551. and then forsook all -- His l^^e was
translated out of Italian into Latin, by Beza, and englished by Mr. Crashaw.
1608.
but dung, that ye may win Christ, and be found in him Take up the cross
which lies in the ways of God. Deny your selves: This do, and you shall cause
the blessing to rest on your house, and posterity after you; and those Olive
plants about your table, shall become trees of righteousness, the planting of
the Lord; for so long as you hold you fast by him, you shall, you cannot but
prosper, and grow as the Lilie, as the Olive Tree, as the Vine, and spread out
your branches as the Cedars in Lebanon.

Thus praying to God for a blessing on these my prayers, and on you both, I
commend my self and them to you, Reading and meditating in this word has
been the practice of all gods saints, Marcella nunquam Hieronymum ipsum
conveniret, quin de Scripturis aliquid interrogaret tantamque sibi erudition^m
compararet ut si in aliquo testimonio scripturarum esset aborta contentio ad
illam judicem pergeretur Chamier. de canonis usu lib. 10. cap. 4. Sect. 18.
you and yours to God, and to the word of his grace, ^ which is able to build
you up further, and to give you an inheritance, among all them which are
sanctified, by faith in Christ Jesus. In whom he rests, that is,

Lincoln May 6. 1634. Your Worships in all Christian services to be commanded
JOHN CLARKE.

TO THE READER.
TO gratify the expectation of friends, and to satisfy some to whom I have
long been much obliged, rather than for any conceited worth of any thing that
is mine, in these forms and method of Prayer, are they thus now presented to
thy view ( Christian Reader.) There be many (blessed be God) in manifold
respects, far beyond these of mine. Excellent moulds and forms of prayer.
That which I here undertake, is but to gather into heaps, and heads some
grains of sweet gummes, myrrh, aloes, cassia, and frankincense (more precious
than all the perfumes, and pouders of the Merchant) out of the Spouses garden
of spices, which thou may scatter on the burning coals of thy z^alous
Devotions. If any, even the meanest that calls God Father, can make use
hereof in framing his petitions, to be put up, and presented to the high Court
of Heaven, I have my ends and desires, how ever they shall be taken, or take
others.

I prescribe no man a way, the spirit of God is not limited by me. Private
prayers may be framed, as the holy spirit gives us utterance; and it is a
vain thing when the heart is full, and boyles upward, to quench and restrain
its free operations. No, pour out thy heart in prayer as thou feel
enlargement.

Public prayers would be more composed, and set to that exact and heavenly
platform, and prayer of our Savior, that others, who pray with us, may
perceive the orderly passing from one part to another, and so be helped,
edified, and affected thereby.

For the Common Prayers in our Church Liturgy, it were to be wished, that in
great and noble families, which are more than a model of a little Church, they
would use the Common-prayer-booke, there they may have most excellent prayers,
for almost-any occasion incident and imaginable: such as both Martyrs Dr.
Taylour taking his leave of his wife, with weeping and tears, before his
Martyrdom, gave her for his Fare well and last token, a book of the
Church Service, set out by K. Edward, which in the time of his imprisonment he
daily used. Mr. Fox. Acts and Mon vol. 3. page 175 col 1. lin 10. (a) Pet.
Martyr, and the Archbishop of Canterbury offered to defend the Protestants
Common Prayer Book against Queen Mary's Religion. Acts and Mon. vol. 3. page
18 col. 2. lin. 50. The Prelates in King Edwards time, after long, learned,
wise, and deliberate advise, did finally conclude and agree upon one Uniform
order of Common Prayer, Sacraments, etc. -- vol. 2 page 659. lin. 47. And
Doctor Taylour Parson of Hadley, says thereof, that the book of Churchservice,
was so fully perfected according to the rules of our Christian religion in
every behalf, that no Christian conscience could be offended with any thing
therein contained. vol. 3 page 171. lin. 20.
and all other, peaceable and soberminded Christians have ever honored,
extolled, vindicated, and practiced. Pity it is to see some, out of I know not
what humor, to cavil, carpe at, and cry down (not only forms of private
Devotion, such as these, but) that which all antiquity has so much magnified,
and has under so gracious and pious Princes, a by public authority, so long
been established in the Church. Certes Public Prayers of the people of God,
in Churches thoroughly settled, did never use to be voluntary Dictates* M.
Hooker. lib. 5. Sect. 26. Eccles. policy.
proceeding from any man's private spirit, gift, or extemporall wit. Pause
before thou speak, Solomon's caveat Be not rash* an Extempore oration before a
Prince, becomes not, much less to open our mouths rashly before our M^ker. Mr
Harr^^ Ha* in Epist. to Peter's Enlargement.


Nu 6. 23.
God himself framed to his Priests, the very speech wherewith they were
charged to bless the people. And our Lord even of purpose to prevent this
fancy of extemporall and voluntary Prayers, has left us of his own framing,
one, which might both remain as a part of the Church-Liturgie, and serve as a
pattern whereby to frame all other Prayers, with efficacy, yet without
superfluity of words.

Prayers, doubtless, are accepted of God otherwise than being co^ceived
always anew according to the exigent of present occasions: being not actions
which ought to waste away themselves in the making; they may be resumed, and
used again as Prayers, and yet no instruments of superstition. From the
tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable errors, idolatries, and
abominations, good Lord deliver us. Acts and Mon. vol. 3. page 170. lin. 19.
Hooker ibid.
Moses has left a prayer, (for that admirable victory given them against
Pharaoh) cast into a Poetical mould which grew afterward to be a part of the
ordinary Jewish Liturgy -- etc.

The Lord grant unity, and concord to all that call upon his name, that they
may agree in the truth of his holy Word, and live in Godly love one with
another: that all unhappy differences in opinion may be composed, and those
swellings and great thoughts of heart laid down. That we may all mind one
thing, to serve our God out of a pure heart, without evil surmisings, or
making things worse by jealous, and suspicious censurings, which exasperate
rather than heal our breach. Let us pray and labor hereunto. The prayers of
the Christian Soldiers brought rain to the fainting armies of the heathen
Emperors. Elias a man subject to passions, as others be, by Prayer shut and
opened heaven. Est quaedam precum omnipotentia, one calls it, Preces hirudo
curarum, Luth Ep. ad Melan Swanus King of Denmark, to all his ou^^^ges done in
Eng. and his ^^^^ing excessive impositions upon the people, having entered the
territory of St. Edmund, spoiling the country, and despising the holy Martyr,
menacing also the place of his S^pulture, the men of that country fell to
prayer, and fasting; so that Swanus shortly after died suddenly, crying and
yelling among his Knights, See the virtue of Christian men's prayer. Acts and
Mon. vol. ^ page 208 col. 2 lin. 20. K. Ethelred, then at service, and
meditations when his bro^^er Alured was in fight with the Danes, being required
to make have, (such was his devotion) he would not star out one foot,
before their service was fully complet, his brother being in great danger then:
nevertheless the King through the gracious assistance of that God, whom he
invoked, wan the field, and the Danes lost both the victory, and their lives
Mr. Fox Acts. and Mon. vol. 1. page 182. li 58. Pious O^w^ld also, K. of
Northumberland, boat Penda and Cedwall, by the power, not so much of his sword,
as prayer. Strength of prayer overco^meth armies Act. and Mon. vol. 1. pa. 157
col. 1. lin 71. What should I speak of his Prayers, which were soardent unto
Christ that they which stood under his window, as he was praying, might see
his tears falling and aropping down. Me^a^cth. de Luthero Again with such
power he prayed, that he (as himself confesses) had obtained of the Lord,
that so long as ^el^^ed the Pope should not prevail in his country, after my
death (said he) let them pray who can M. Fox Act and Monn. vol. 2 page 88.
the wonder-working power of Prayer, able to beat back the very Ord'nance of
Hell, a spiritual Engine, able to batter down all the Bull warks of the
Devil, the most precious, and almost (if not altogether) omnipotent Grace, and
great Master of miracles wrought both in heaven and earth. Believe it, if then
were in a state more dangerous than Death, in a place worse than Hell, yet if
thou could but thence pray truly, thou should find comfort. Out of the
belly of hell cried I, Iona. 2. Hereby thou may have access to God on all
occasions; for Prayer bears about the privy Keys of heaven, yea forces
entrance, when all is locked. Be in love with this so heavenly a grace, f and
that time, and breath, and spirits which others spend in prating f. An exercise
(I can assure thee) of unspeakable strength and comfort, without which thou
can not live, and by which thou may live in the mouth of death* etc. Mr.
Harris of Han. in Epist. before Peter's enlargement.
of, and censuring the actions of superiors, do thou in praying to God, for
thy self, for the Church, for our gracious King, and all in authority under
him, that we may still lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty, which is the Prayer of thy fellow servant in Christ Jesus,

Promises made to Prayer.
EXceeding great and precious 2. Pet. 1. 4.
Promises are made by God, to his Elect; and yet how often does the poor soul
lag and droope, for not Knowing, or not Using them as need requires: living
(like some Misers) besides their hopes, besides their means. They deserve to
want, who lack supply for want of fetching. It Is not the having of wealth,
meat, or clothing, but the Using, applying, digesting, and putting on, that
does us good. Spirits and life may be in the heart, and blood may be in the
liver, yet unless these flow kindly to every part, the body is not healthful,
beautiful, or vigorous. The Promises therefore should be often chewed, sucked
and meditared on: God must be humbly, and holily remembered of them: not as if
he were not faithful and just, but because we are distrustful: he cannot lie,
and though we be weak in Faith, our unbelief cannot make his promise of none
effect: He will not falsify his covenant, nor alter the thing that is gone out
of his lips: has he said, and shall he not do it? has he spoken, and will
he not bring it to pass? -- Now as we would receive of his fullness, so the
promises must enlarge our hearts --

Promises made to Prayer in General.
Before they call I will answer, Isay 65. 24.
and whilst they are yet speaking, I will hear.

Ask, and it shall be given; Math. 7. 7.
seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

And ye shall be unto me a Exodus 19. 6.
kingdom of Priests.

-- In every place, incense shall be Mal. 1. 11.
offered in my name, and a pure offering.

We know not what to pray for Romans 8. 26.
as we ought, but the spirit it self, makes intercession for us, with groaning
which cannot be uttered

Lord, thou have heard the desire Psalm. 10. 17
of the humble, thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to
hear.

Whatsoever things ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive Mar. 11. 24.
them, and ye shall have them.

Secondly the, Parts of Prayer. 2. Promises made to each several head of
Prayer, etc. Pro. 28. 13.
1. Confession of Sin.
He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but who so Confesses and
forsakes them, shall have mercy.

If we Confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive I John 1. 9.
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Secondly to Petition, for 1 Pardon of Sin.
Though your sins be as scarlet, Isai. 1. 18.
they shall be as white as snow, though they be red like crimson, they shall
be as wool.

I, even I, am he that blotteth Isai. 43. 25.
out thy transgressions, for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.

I will forgive their iniquity, Ier. 31 34.
and remember their sin no more.

I have seen his ways, and Isay 57. 1^.
will heal him: I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to
his mourners.

If the wicked will turn from Ezekiel. 18. 21.
all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that
which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not dye.

All his transgressions which he 22
has committed they shall not be mentioned unto him: in his righteousness
that he has done, he shall live.

Have I any pleasure at all that 23.
the wicked should dye, says the Lord God? and not that he should return from
his ways and live?

Come unto me all ye that labor, Mat. 11. 28.
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

2 Power against Sins.
Who is a God like unto thee, Mic. 7. 18.
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgressions of his heritage,
etc.

He will turn again, he will 19.
have compassion on us: he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all
their sins into the depths of the Sea.

The God of peace shall bruise Romans 16. 20.
Satan under your feet shortly.

Sin shall not have dominion Romans 6. 14.
over you.

Though he fall he shall not be Psalm. 37. 24.
utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand.

3 Grace, conferred, continued, and increased.
-- I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean.

A new heart also will I give Ezech. 36. 25. 26.
you, and a new spirit will I put into you, and I will take away the stony
heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh:

And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk 27
in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

And the Lord thy God will Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live.

I will pour upon him that is Isai. 44 3.
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring.

A bruised reed shall he not Isai. 42 3.
break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench, he shall bring forth
judgment unto truth.

Blessed are they which do hunger Math. 5. 6.
and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.

He which has begun a good Phil. 1 6.
work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.

Fourthly the Means of Grace.
With joy shall ye draw waters out of the wels of salvation. Isai. 12. 3.


Ho, every one that thirsts Isai. 55. 1.
come ye to the waters.

In all places where I record Exodus 20. 24.
my name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.

5 Personal concernements, in our particular calling.
Commit thy works unto the Prove. 16. 3.
Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established.

In all thy ways acknowledge prove. 3. 6.
him, and he shall direct thy paths. -- thy ears shall hear a word behind
Isai. 30. 21.
thee saying, this is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand,
and when ye turn to the left.

The Lord shall preserve thy psalm. 121. 8.
going out, and thy coming in, from this time forth for evermore.

Blessed shall thou be when Deuteronomy. 28. 6.
thou come in and blessed shall thou be when thou go out.

The Lord thy God will make 30. 9.
thee plenteous in every work of thy hand.

The Lord, he is he, that goes 31 8.
before thee, he, will be with thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake
thee, fear not, neither be dismayed.

He shall give his Angels Psalm. 91. 11.
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways --

Thou may est in the reading of the Scriptures, find out, and add hereunto
promises made to thy more particular occasions. --

Thirdly Thansgiving.
-- The tongue of the dumb shall Isay 35. 6. 10.
sing, for in the wilderness shall waters break out -- the ransomed of the Lord
shall return and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads:
they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall fly away.

Ye shall eat in plenty and be Joel. 2. 26.
satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord your God, that has dealt
wondrously with you.

Ye shall go forth with joy, and Isai. 55. 12.
be led forth with peace, the mountains and the hills shall break forth before
you into singing, and all the trees of the fields shall clap their hands. (...)

A METHOD of PRAYER.
PRayer is a lifting up of the Psalm. 25. 1.
Soul to God.

Wherein there is to be considered the Preface to it, and the Parts of it.

The Preface to it, consists 1. Preface.


1 In a description, or compellation of God, by his glorious inajesty, terrible
names, holy nature, incommunicable attributes, strict justice, consuming wrath,
gracious promises -- etc.

2 In a craving of audience, assistance, and accceptance: we may conclude also
herewith, as Dan. 9. 17. 18.

The Parts of Prayer, are usually 2. Parts.
three.

1 Confession. 2 Petition. 3 Thanksgiving.
Though in exactnes of speech, Confession and Thanksgiving be not Prayers
formally: but commonly prefixed or annexed thereunto, as Dan. 9. Ezr. 9.

1 Confession is an humble, 1. Confession of 1 Sin.
hearty, and feeling acknowledgment, of the evil of Sin; and of punishment
done to, or due for, Sin.

1 Confession of the evil of to which is necessary
Sin, both in the Habits, Acts, Kinds thereof. Which that it may be done
effectually, and to purpose, we must

1 Labor for the particular 1 A particular knowledge of sin.
knowledge and discovery of Sin, in our own souls, which must be by looking
our selves in the glass of the Law, whereby we shall discover our Sins in
each Commandment. viz.

1 Commandment.

Atheisine, Epicurisme, Idolatry -- etc --

Atheism, in want of the Knowledge, Love, Fear of God -- Zeal, Faith --

Epicurisme, in mis-placing our affections.

Idolatry, in neglect of Gods mercies, in neglect of Gods works of Justice, in
neglect of Gods Saints, and communion with them -- etc

2 Command.

Not worshipping God by praying, reading --

Will Worship, Idol-worship.

3 Command.

Serving God hypocritically, when his Word is preached, read -- and prayer.

When his Sacraments are administered, not examining our selves, not reconciling
our selves to our brethren, not discerning the Lords body.

Luke warmenesse, Uncheerefulnesse, Unteachablenesse, Incorrigiblenesse,
Security.

4 Command.

Not remembering the Lords day, longing to have it past.

Idleness, omitting duties public or private.

5 Command.

In the Family, Wife, Husband, Children, Parents, Master, Servants --

In the Commonwealth, Subjects, Magistrates -- etc.

In the Church, Ministers, People -- etc

6 Command.

Not pitying or relieving the afflicted.

Envying, Anger, Hatred, Worldly sorrow. Cursing.

Murdering of Soul, or Body.

7 Command.

Uncleanness, Wantonness. Whoredom.

Drunkenness, Gluttony --

8 Command.

Discontentednesse, Sloth, Unthriftinesse. Oppression. Sacrilege.

9 Command.

Disgracing, and speaking evil of others, Censuring. Lying, Slandering,
Vaine-boasting. Flattering, False-witnesse --

10 Command.

Not desiring the good of others, and our selves.

Delighting in the contemplation of evil.

2 Get our hearts deeply affected 2. Sense of it, and sorrow for it.
with a true sense, and through feeling, of the haynousnesse of our Sins, a
serious detestation, and utter hatred of them, with unfeigned sorrow, and
condemning our selves, for them.

3 Then descend we to a 3. particular enumeration
particular enumeration of them, in the bitter root, spreading branches, cursed
fruits, and dangerous effects thereof --

First the Sin of our first parents, 1. Of Adams disobedience
Adam and Evah: look unto the rock whence we were hewn, and to the hole of
the pit whence we were dug, for we all sinned in their loins, and so come
short of the glory of God. Romans 3. 23. 2. Original sin.


2 Original depravation, and pollution of nature, in the corruption to be
descried in the
of the Understanding. 2 Conscience. 3 Memory. 4 Will. 5 Sensitive appetite,
and affections.

1 The corruption of the Understanding Understanding.
in 5.

1 Vanity thereof, our thoughts are vain, taken up with frothy, and fruitless
speculations.

2 Blindness, being ignorant, and impotent, not able to conceive spiritual
things.

3 Vnteachatlenesse, resisting and opposing the truth.

4 Incredulity, unapt to believe the truth of God.

5 Enmity, 1 not subject to the Law of God. 2 Not resolving to be so holy,
pure, exact as Gods Word requires. 3 but casting off Gods yoke and his coards,
with reluctancie and distaste.

2 Conscience, which is impure 1. Conscience.
and polluted, without light, and life.

1 A bad remembrancer, and false register, setting down sin by the halves;
like the unjust Steward, but fifty, where hundreds are due.

2 A slack instigatour to good, or restrayner from evil, being not clear to
discern things amiss, like a dusty looking-glass

Not sensible of sin, or tender, but brawney, past feeling.

Not active, or stirring up to good, but sleeping, drowsy, not rowsing us to
purpose, giving us no rest, but letting us sleep securely again.

3 A false accuser, or excuser, excusing for Sins: accusing for not Sins: 1
It should when the Law is preached, accuse, thou art the man: but then it
extenuates that it is no sin, or but a little sin: approving, and allowing
ways and courses which seem good to a Man, but tend to death.

2 When the Gospel is preached, it should extenuate, but then it aggravates,
crying out amain with Cain, My sin is greater than -- full of hellish and
amazing terrors.

3 Memory full of weakness, 3. Memory.
our remembrance being like unto ashes, 1. forgetting what we ought to
remember, as our Creator in the days of our youth; 2 remembering what we
should forget, as injuries and indignities.

4 Our Will is full of 4. Will.


1 Contrariety to the Will, and Word of God in every thing; refusing to do
what he commands, but wilful in doing what he forbids.

2 Pride, not dependant on, or subject unto Gods will; 'twill not stoop to
be, or to do any thing for God, 'twill be something in it self, and must be
carved to, in a good condition, as it self likes.

3 Inconstancy, unstable as water in good, peremptory and resolute in evil:
our tongues are our own, who is Lord over us? though in some good mood like
Saul to David it may weep, yet like the morning dew it vanishes presently.

4 Disobedience, when God commands apt to do the contrary.

5 Sensitive appetite, taking 5. Sensitive appetite.
pleasure in sensible things too much, our appetites and senses outray in
things lawful, which come in by the senses.

1 Eyes, to women, wine -- 2 Ears, itching after vanity. 3 Taste, meat and
drink, to Gluttony. 4 Touch, hands, etc.
6 Affections, deeply distempered, 6. Affections
being violent, turbulent, sullen, way ward, untoward* ready to be fired with
any temptation, rebellious against God: either 1. not active and lusting after
good, or 2. placed where they should not be, or 3 exceeding in measure: they
overjoy, overgrieve, over love, we humor and please them, they can but ask
and have --

This corruption is in the concupiscible and irascible faculties of the soul.

In the concupiscible faculties, 1 Love and Hatred, 2 Desire and Abomination, 3
Joy and sorrow, which has under it, Pity, Envy, Heaviness, Repentance, and
Zeal.

In the irascible faculties, 1 Hope and Despair, 2 Boldness, Anger, 3 Fear,
which has under it, Blushing, Shamefastness, Astonishment, Agony --

1 Love and hatred not of all good, not against all sin. 2 Delight, not in God,
religion, the Saints. 3 Fear, Man, the creature, poverty -- 4 Sorrow, cast
down for disgrace. 7. Body and members.

7 Body and members, Eyes Ears, Tongue, Hands, Feet. 3 Actual sin in deeds of


Thirdly, Actual transgressions, against

the

Law Gospel
of both, in our

1 Thoughts, being idle, vain, frothie, not entertaining God in them.

2 Words rotten, unseasoned, they heal not, edify not, our tongues set on
fire of hell, corrupt with lying, slander, dissembling, backbiting.

3 Deeds of

Omission, Commission,
Not husbanding the talents of 1. Omission and
grace, and nature, which we were betrusted with; which we have ill employed:
our precious time we raffle out --

Barren, unfruitful, 1 for acts D^s^^uncie
and duties.

1 Neglecting wholly, 2 intermitting, 3 slighting them.

Restreyning prayer, refuse the Sacrament, omit Fasting and Prayer.

2 Graces, want of

love to Christ and godly men. humility. faith. zeal.
3 Mis-spending our time in vanity, raffling out our precious hours, and
squandring away our talents.

4 Occasions of doing, and receiving good, not clothed, not visited, not
instructed others, or trying if at any time God would give them repentance.

2 Commission, in the rebellion, 2. Commission
and sinfulness of our lives, sinning in our general and particular calling,
confessing here the sins of our Sex, complexion, constitution, etc. those we
last of all committed, under which our consciences do yet freshly bleed: by
which God has been most dishonored -- Both for,

1 Quantity, in the greatness. frequencie.
2 Quality, in the haynousnesse. 3 Relapses, iterations. 4 Circumstances,
aggravating sin. viz.
The Person against whom: The glorious God, our most gracious and tender Father.

Against our Christian Brethren, Superiors, Inferiors, Equals, becoming
guilty of other men's sins, occasioned by our Command, Company, Counsel, Ill
example, Connivence, Silence -- etc.

Against our own souls.

Against every Creature.

The Time, when, In general, in particular.

In general before and since our Conversion -- etc. In Infancy, Childhood,
Youth, Mans-age, Old Age.

In particular, in the Day, Night -- etc.

The Place, where, at home, and abroad.

At home, the Table, Closet, Bed.

Abroad, viz. in the Church, in Company, in the Fields -- etc.

1 Against God himself. 1. Against God
2 and that against knowledge. 3 without any, or with very small Temptation. 4
against vows and covenants. 5 against means afforded, to resist sin, and
do better.

1 Hating of God, being enemies to him.

2 Denying by our works, his power, omnipresence, justice, omniscience,
setting up base lusts to be our God.

3 Despising of God, if so we can hide our sin from man, we never care though
God see it.

2 And thus not only of ignorance 2. Presumptuously.
when we-knew not, nor of infirmity being transported with passion, the Law in
our members, but even of wilfulnes, and presumption, acted with a high hand,
against Knowledge and the cries of a convinced conscience, which makes sin
rebellion; to know God, yet not to glorify him as God, not in the days of our
ignorance only, but since the light of the glorious Gospel, has shone into
our hearts.

3 Without any, or with small 3. Without, or with temptations.
temptation, resolving to sin, selling themselves with Ahab, even in cold
blood, to do wickedly. Heb. 10. 26. as in sins in which there is neither
pleasure, or profit, etc. As to swear, profane the Sabbath, refuse preaching,
praying, scorning Gods ways.

4 Against frequent purposes, 4. Against vows --
fair promises, of more holy obedience, reiterated vows and covenants.

general in

Baptism, Lords Supper.
particular on such and such an occasion.

5 Against means. 1 Blessings, coards of love. 2 Corrections, thou have
stricken us, but we have not sorrowed, Ier. 5. 3.

3 Word, early and late, all the day long.

2 Actual sins against the Gospel.
1 Not thirsting after 2. Sins against the Gospel.
Christ Jesus, nor prizing, nor loving and cleaving unto him with our dearest
affection: 2 denying him in our lives. 2 Not repenting us of our sins, though
God in mercy vouchsafe space and means, but hiding, excusing, not mourning
for, nor forsaking sin. 3 Not believing the promises of salvation, nor
relying upon Jesus Christ for justification, sanctification, and salvation,
etc. not stirring up our selves to take hold of him, but forsaking our own
mercies 4 S^^ning against the hol^ Ghost, by tempting, grieving, or quenching
the holy spirit of God, receiving the grace of God in vain, turning it into
wantonness, growing cold in religion, losing our first love.
Thus bringing our iniquities to remembrance, 1 we must acknowledge and
bewail them, not only generally, but individually also, one by one, fetching
and ferreting them out (as so many Achans) by the poll, especially those which
are naturalized, and habituated in us, our beloved and darling sins, our
dearest Dalilahs.

And that, from a
1 Trobled, broken, bleeding melting spirit, believing heart, clasping the
promises Ezr. 10. 2. yet now there is hope in Israel, etc. 2 Honest heart,
wishing the confusion, as well as making the confession of sin, meaning to leave
every wicked way* and with purpose of heart cleaving to the Lord --
2 Confession of the evil of 2. part of Confession viz. of the wages of
punishment.
punishment, acknowledging our selves, in regard of these our so many and
grievous sins, not only to be less than the least of all Gods mercies, but
most justly worthy of his most dreadful plagues, liable and obnoxious to all
evils of punishment in

Judgments

Corporal. Spiritual. Temporal. Eternal.
vid. Ezr. 9. Dan* 9.

Thus of the first part of Prayer, viz. CONFESSION.
The Second follows, The second part of prayer, which is Petition.
which is PETITION.
PEtition is either

for

Our selves. Others.
1 Our selves, and is called Supplication, consisting of two branches, viz.

Apprecation. Deprecation.
1 Apprecation, or collation of good, which also consists, in desiring;

1 Supply of all wants

Spiritual. Corporal.
2 Continuance and increase of all blessings both

Eternal. Spiritual. Corporal.
1 Apprecation, for bestowing of all good blessings, viz. 1 Supplying all our
wants of things, 1 Spiritual,

viz.

Grace. Increase of Grace. Means of Grace.
1 For the grace of free Pardon Apprecation for
for our sins, that God for his mercies, promise, Christ's sake 1. Pardon of
sin.
(even the abundant merits of our Lord Jesus his bloody passion, who has
satisfied for them to the utmost farthing, by pouring out his soul for an
oblation for the sins of the whole world) would be pleased freely to forgive,
and blot them out of his book, never laying them to our charge beforemen, to
shame us in this world; or to our everlasting confusion before men and Angels
in the world to come.

Of which that we may more 2. Faith in Christ.
fully be assured, we pray for a lively and apprehensive Faith, by which we
may be enabled to lay hold on, and apply the general and free Promises of
Salvation, to our selves in particular, that God would seal up the assurance
hereof to our consciences, by the gracious testimony of his holy spirit, giving
unto us the spirit of adoption, whereby we may with comfort and confidence cry
ABEA father, that so being justified and freed from the guilt and punishment of
all our sins we may have peace of conscience, being reconciled to him in his
Son.

2 Repentance unto life, whereby 3. Repentance.
our stony hearts may be softened and broken with godly sorrow, and our eyes run
down with rivers of tears, for our falls and faylings heretofore, and we
quickened to new obedience to serve the living God, in holiness and
righteousness all our remaining days.

3 All other sanctifying graces* 4. All sanctifying grace.
accompanying and furthering our everlasting happiness, 1. as saving
knowledge, that we may understand what the holy and acceptable will of the Lord
is. 2 Fervent love to God, our brethren, yea our very enemies, for his sake
that loved us when we were enemies. 3 Ardent zeal. 4 Lively hope* 5 Son-like
fear of God. 6 True humility and contrition of spirit. 7 Sincerity and
boldness in the profession of the truth. Perseverance, patience and strength
under the cross, Contentation in all estates, either of weal or 2. For growth
and increase of Grace.
woe, want, or abundance.

2 Increase and growth of all these graces, that the bruised reed may not be
broken, nor the smoking Flax quenched, but that our graces, like the light,
may shine more and more to the perfect day; and our works be more at last, than
at the first. 3. The means of grace continued and sanctified to us.


3 The means of grace continued and sanctified unto us: as 1 Gods Word
preached at Church. 2 Read in private, that the holy Ghost blessing it from
heaven, may bring it close home unto, and savingly work it upon our hearts,
that thus the heavenly spirit breathing on his own ordinances, they may quicken
us, and become effectual to our salvation:

2 Sacraments. 3 Sabbaths. 2. Petition for supply of temporal wants.
4 Prayer. 5 Fasting, etc.
2 Supply of wants temporal, our own personal concernements, and all outward
blessings appertayning to this present life, Health, Liberty, Friends, Raiment,
Food, giving and preserving to our use the kindly fruits of the earth, so as in
due time we may enjoy them: preservation in our persons and estates, Direction
in all our courses, thoughts, words, actions: the blessing of God upon all our
labors, a right and sanctified use of all Gods blessings, and chastisements.

2 Deprecation of Evils, personal, 2. Deprecation.
national, both of sin and punishment, either before or after it comes:
Before it comes, aversion and prevention; After it comes, ablation or removal.

1 We pray against the evil of sin, that we may be, 1 Delivered, freed and
acquitted of the guilt and danger of all our sins. 2 Endued with
watchfulness, power, and dominion over them all: in our judgments to dislike
them, in affections to hate them, in heart to bewail them, and in life to
forsake them -- 1. To be freed from the guilt of Sin.


1 From the guilt and danger, that our sin may not shame us before men, and
torture our consciences here in this life, nor condemn us body and soul in
the world to com; yt our doing evil, omitting good, particular failings,
Personal.
frailties, distractions, indisposednes to serve God, our ignorance, Atheism,
infidelity, hypocrisy, inconstancy, pride, vainglory, envy,
uncharitableness, putting off our repentance, forgetfulness,
distrustfulnesse, unthankefulnesse, dullness, unchearfulnesse, felfe-love,
strife, wrath, flattery, idleness, gluttony, uncleanness, covetousness, all
inordinate desires, and all the evil of our good works -- etc. -- may never
be imputed or laid to our charge.

As likewise the National unthankfulness, National.
heresies, schisms, swearing, oppression, security -- (which cry open*mouth'd
against us) may not enter into the ears of the Lord of hosts.

Secondly, That we may from on, high be endued with power over those
corruptions, and lusts, 2. To have power 1. Over Sin.
to which pleasure allures, profit provokes, sinful custom most of all swayes
us; the plague of our own heart, that the lusts of our flesh may be crucified,
and the whole body of sin abolished, and we lead our captivity captive.

2 Victory over all the deceits 2. The world.
of the whole world (which lies in wickedness) and all the temptations
thereof, that neither the persons, nor things therein, may become our suare.

3 Over the Devil, that archenemy 3. The Devil
of our salvation, and his fiercest and eraftiest assaults: that he may never
finally prevail over us: that the God of peace, would tread down Satan under
our feet, and so make us more than conquerors, through our Lord Jesus, who
has loved us.

Secondly, Deprecation of the 2. To he freed from the evil of punishment.
evil of Punishment: 1. All those dreadful curses due to our sins, that
they may not be inflicted on us.

2 Deliverance from all plagues, which we now feel, or hereafter may fear.
viz.

1 Judgments national, which National.
the whole Land mournes under: Plague of the pestilence, famine, war,
sedition, conspiracy --

2 Afflictions personal, that Personal.
lie on our selves, either in soul, body, or in estate; troubles and terrors
of conscience: grief of mind, scandalls and offenses, imprisonment,
banishment, sickness, poverty, disgrace, loss of friends or any other
afflictions of what kind soever: preservation from and in all dangers, Death
it self, the king of terrors, the day of judgment, from Hell, and chains of
darkness, from Gods wrath, and everlasting damnation -- etc.

Secondly, We petition for others, 2. I^tercession for the Catholic Church.
which is Intercession: and thus here, we pray for the Catholic Church of
Jesus Christ, militant every where on earth, which is either,

1 Uncalled (yet belonging to the election of grace) that they may be converted
as 1. Jews (our elder sister, which was in the covenant before us) 2 Pagans and
Infidels, that they may hear the glad tidings of salvation, and that the Sun
of righteousness may arise on them, with healing in his wings, that they may
enjoy Gods Word, Sacraments, Sabbaths, that God would bring home them that go
astray, instruct the ignorant, and forgive them that rebelliously transgress;
Heretics, yea the Enemies, and Persecutours of the Church, that they all may
be converted, or (if implacable) confounded: beseeching God to forgive our
Enemies, Persecutors, and Slanderers, and to turn their hearts --

2 Already called, that the Lord 2. Called.
would purge it from Schism, and Heresy, and appease all unhappy differences
in the Church, making all Christians keep the unity of the spirit, in the bond
of peace: and that he would warm and enliven the settling and cooled affections
of these secure and earthly-minded times. To watch over it for good, whether in
the transmarine parts, and foreign 3. In foreign arts.
countries abroad, or our own nation at home, and herein especially our
gracious sovereign King Charles, and his Highness Dominions, with all his
sacred Stock 2. Our land at home.
and Lineage, the Queen, young Prince, Princess, Duke: the Lady Elizabeth the
Kings only sister, and her Progeny. The Lords spiritual and temporal, those
of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council: the Nobility, Majestra^ie,
Ministry, the two Universities, the Gentry, and Commonalty, our Parents,
Kindred, Friends, Benefactours, all such as we stand obliged unto by nature,
desert, duty, or any special relation.

Thirdly, Afflicted in soul, 3. Afflicted.
body, or in estate, being oppressed, and persecuted under Popish tyranny, or
Mahumetan cruelty: those that be destitute of all comforts of this life, that
want food, raiment, harbor, liberty, peace, health, that groan under poverty,
famine, nakedness, etc. -- that all the Israel of God may be delivered from
all their troubles.

3. THANKSGIVING.
The third part of Prayer which is Thankesgiving for the Church in general.
THe third and last Part of our Prayers is Thankesgiving, that God would give
us thankful hearts for all his Blessings.

First, Positive.

Secondly, Privative in Temporal, spiritual, and eternal good things toward
his whole

Church
1 Triumphant, for providing for it Heaven, a place of rest and happiness: for
the glorious Martyrs, godly Bishops, Preachers, and Confessors, that out of
their ashes he has wondrously raised up believers. 2 Militant, for giving
^^^m
1 Christ to be their Savior, captain and leader. 2 Holy spirit to be their
comforter. 3 God himself to be their father. 4 His Gospel, Sacraments, -- etc.
Secondly, For his blessings to our selves, for that eternal, unchangeable, 2.
Our selves in particular. Election, etc.
infinite, everlasting, undeserved love of his to us, in our Election in, and
Redemption by Jesus Christ, our vocation, our Adoption, Justification,
Sanctification inchoate, with assured hope of future Glorification.

That we were borne of Christian and believing Parents, in a land of
righteousness, in a time of knowledge, planted in religious families and
towns, undergodly and painful Ministers, and gracious Governors, that we
enjoy Gods word and Sacraments in the power and purity of them, for the many
great and precious promises made to us therein,

Which are either performed already toward us; or shall be hereafter in due
time accomplished:

For all the Graces of the holy ^. For grace in any measure.
spirit, for the gracious and free pardon of our many sins, Faith,
Repentance, some care of sincere obedience, and tender hearts desiring to fear
God: for power against, and prevailing over any sin, that we are not given
over to Heresies, and Errors in opinion, nor to those base and fleshly Lusts
that some others are, in our lives, nor to a hard heart, reprobate mind,
benumbed conscience, and final Apostasy: for victory in any temptation, over
subtle Satan, the alluring world, and our own selfedeceiving selves.

Secondly, Temporal Blessings. 2. Thankesgiving for Temporal Blessings.


viz. of

Creation. Providence.
1 Creation after Gods own image, not being made a Beast, Toad, Fool, etc.

2 Gods providence

National Personal
in those

wonderful

Deliverances of the nation -- Preservation, peace,
plenty toward us, and fatherly care over us, in our birth and infancy, ever
since we hung upon the ^rests: in our childe-hood, youth, man's estate, unto old
age and gray hairs,; for our health continued so long, or restored of late,
for understanding* judgment, and discretion, peace, liberty, prosperity, food,
raiment, same and good esteem among Gods people: for wealth, friends Godly
parents, careful ^utours, masters, and governors: good education, quietness
of mind, contentment, etc. -- Daily preservation, manifold deliverances from
imminent and apparent, yea unseene and unfeared dangers, For his fatherly
chastisements, and corrections: for sanctifying to our everlasting good, our
afflictions, sicknesses, crosses, temptations; for ordinary and extraordinary
favors, for desired success in our labors, and vocations: for blessing the
works of our hands, upon us in the day, and for preserving and refreshing us
with sweet sleep in the night: and finally all blessings of what kind soever,
may here (as occasion is offered) yea must be remembered with thankful
acknowledgement unto God, not only verbally with our lips and tongue, but
vitally and really in a holy conversation shining in our life; lest it be
verifyed of us, which our Savior says concerning the Lepers, Were there not
ten cleansed, but where are the nine? There are not found that returned to give
glory unto God, etc. Luke 17. 17. 18.

FINIS Methodi.
Causes of Distraction in PRAYER. Ex P. M.
1. THe natural lightness of our spirits, that have much ado to stay
themselves, and keep long in one state.

2 Because divine things are far off from our senses, now they are the senses
which tie our attention, as the sight of the Preacher, works a deeper
impression in the hearers.

3 Because of our lusts, as hatred, covetousness, ambition, -- which being
bent to their natural center will be settling.

4 Because of the Devil, who stirs up our lusts, and foysteth in vain
thoughts, when we pray; because Prayer is the maine ram, that batters down the
walls of his kingdom.

Helps against it.
1 A Voice in prayer, for the Helps against Distraction in Prayer.
thought alone, is easily distracted.

2 Darkness, and the removing of all objects that may distract.

3 Be short in thy prayers, and pray the oftener, Eccles. 5.

4 Mortify our lusts, for they clip the wings of our prayers: pride,
covetousness, 1 Timothy 2. 8
wantonness, chol^er.

5 Meditate before you pray, of Gods greatness, of his judgments, of our
sins, etc. -- The godly man will be sorry for, judge and condemn himself
for, his distraction, formalitie, deadness of spirit, etc.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him
in truth, Psalm. 145 18 -- to this man will Isai. 66. 2.
I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at
my word.

Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any
thing before God, for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore let thy
words be few. -- Take heed thou give not the sacrifice of fools: if thou offer
the lame and the Eccles. 5. 2. verse. 1.
sick unto thy governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person?
Cursed be the Mal. 13. 14.
deceiver which has in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices to the
Lord, a corrupt thing. Offer incense unto Mal. 1. 11.
his name and a pure offering: whatsoever thine heart prays let it be
heartily, with all thy might, labor for the spirit of prayer; which the Lord
promises to his faithful ones, the Spirit of grace, and of supplications --
for know that: Zech. 12. 10.


1 A very hypocrite may pray and that (as one would think) very zealously,
both with others, and also apart by himself. For is the true Christian M. Dyke
on the hearts deceiptf.
sometimes hot in prayer? he will sweat: is the humbled soul sorrowful? he
will weep and blubber: does the sincere heart sigh softly? he will cry out
amain, with a great and exceeding bitter cry, as Esau, Bless Genesis 27. 34.
me, even me also O my father. It stands us therefore in hand, to look that
our hearts be right, in the sight of God.

2 For, what is the hope of the Job* 27. 8. 10.
hypocrite? will he delight himself in the Almighty, will he always call
upon God? no, for in more grievous crosses, he sometimes has not one word to
bless himself withal -- yet he sometimes may then seek God early, -- they
powered out their Hos. 5. 15. Isai. 26. 16.
prayer when thy chastning was upon them.

3 In thy Praying, seek Gods 2 Chr* 7. 14.
face; herein the hypocrite is too blame, he prays out of selferespects, for
base ends -- and out of pride, and vain glory, he prays more often, more
zealously with others, than alone by himself, to his father in secret -- not
with all manner of prayer, etc. the touchstone of prayer is giving of thanks,
in which he is seldom, about which he does but bungle.

4 Make not prayer thy end in praying, but use it in good sadness, as a means
to be enabled against corruptions, and to get grace: the hypocrites are lazy
lip-prayers, he feels not sin like a mountain of lead lying on his
conscience, he sees not a want of grace, etc. he puts not to the shoulder, he
uses not the means for the atteining of what he prays: his hands labor M.
Dyke ibid.
not, his feet bestirre them not so fast as his tongue -- he prays against
sin, yet lives wickedly: he prays for health, etc. and yet lives riotously,
intemperately, would I Our sacrifices must be offered with fire, warmth of
enflamed Zeal. Cold Prayers are to God as dead drinks be to us.
had such and such a grace, but he is not sick of love, nor earnest for those
graces: he desires, he never breaks his sleep for the matter, he hungers
not, thirsts not for righteousness; Hunger will break stone walsand the
sincere Christian, will have no nay, like Rachel, give me children, give me
this and this grace, or I die: he uses the means, O that my ways were so
directed! Like as the Heart brayeth for the water Psalm. 42. 1. Ps. 119. 20.
brooks, my soule-breaketh for the longing that it has --

5 Pray without ceasing, persevere Luke 18. 10. 1 These. 5. 17*
in prayer, and faint not; never think thy self to have too much heavenly
society, and talk with God, acquaint thy self still more with the Almighty --
The hypocrite is inconstant, fickle off and on -- Wicked men and hypocrites
have taken up a course of prayer, and breeding and custom have wrought a kind
of conscience in some: but they but lust with Balaam, let me die the death of
-- 2. They always have one pad, one form, -- 3. From the lips or brains, not
from the spirit. 4. At random, as men shoot, not minding how their arrow
lights or speeds. 5. They begin and end in themselves, with their own
strength, for their own particular ends, not for the Church.

Means of PREPARATION to Prayer.
1 Cleanse our souls from the guilt of foul sins, Isai. 1.
those lately committed. Wash Tergat speculum, mundet spiritum. Bern.
you, make you clean -- The Jews and Turks wash their bodies; wash thou thy
soul in the brinish tears of sincere sorrow.

2 Sequester our thoughts from worldly cares go up into the mount: retire thy
self some little while before thou prayest: outward things stifle our prayers,
and make them hang the wing.

3 Consider we have to do with God, come with fear and trembling into his
presence, not rushing on a consuming fire.

Three Questions to be Out of M. Byfield.
asked of our selves, the serious answer whereunto, will stir up and furnish
every babe in Christ, to cry Abba father, with faith, feeling, and fervencie.
Q. 1. What sins have 1. For confession of sin.
I committed all my life long that lie heavy on my conscience, and would
affright my soul, if I were now to die?

This Question sincerely answered, will drive thee to a scrutinie, and searching
them out: (as the Jews did Leaven before the Passover, and very seasonable
for Christians before every Communion, etc.) to a particular confession, and
bewayling of them. Thou may set them down in a paper.

Qu. 2. What would I desire 2. For petition of necessaries.
God to do for me, if I were sure to obtain my wish of him?

Thy heart will answer, O that God would please, to forgive my sins, such,
and such -- O that he would give unto

me

steadfast faith in the Lord Jesus: the grace of Perseverance -- Health, etc.
Set down the particulars.

3. Qu. What special favors 3. for thankesgiving,
and blessings has God bestowed 3 For Thankesgiving.
on me, from my infancy till now, for which I owe him all possible
thankesgiving?

Thy heart will make answer, such and such a time he delivered me from
danger, from death, etc. made such a man to be my friend -- gave me a husband,
a wife, preferment, etc.

Thus if thou signify to God

thy

hatred of those sins. want and hearty desire of those graces --
thankesgiving for those blessings.
Exercise will make this easy, and Christ's spirit (that great master of
requests) will be ready to draw thy petitions for thee, prompting thee with sit
words, and holy affections: thou shall make thy prayers unto him, and he shall
hear thee, and if thou seek him, he will be found. Job 22. 27.

Do this daily, it will be no hinderance, to thy worldly employments. No man
ever lost by serving God, Meat and Mattens hinder no man's thrift. Godliness
has the Promise; for as he rides not furthest, Practice of Christianity.
page 622.
that goes early out on a bad horse etc. or he that is early up at his business
with blunt, and dull-edged tools, but wea^ies himself and mars his work --
so he prospers not best that goes about his calling, before he has seasoned
his heart with holy meditations, reading, and prayer to God.

Exodus 40. 5. Thou shall set the Altar of Gold for the Incense before the Arc
of the Testimony, -- Exodus 30. 7. -- Aaron shall burn thereon sweet Incense
every morning -- verse. 8 and at Even he shall burn incense upon it, a
perpetual incense before the Lord. Levit. 16. 12. -- He shall take a censer
full of burning coals of fire, from off the Altar before the Lord, and his
hands full of sweet incense, beaten small, and bring it within the veil. verse.
13. And he shall put the incense upon the fire before the Lord, that the cloud
of the incense may cover the Mercie-seat, that is upon the Testimony --
Holy Incense for the To these Commonplaces, thou may in thy daily reading
the Scriptures, refer many of the like nature.
the Censers of the Saints: Or, Selected Sentences of holy Scripture,
furn^shing with materials, and serving as Forms of Prayer, according to the
heads of the former Method.
PREPARATION.
LEt us lift up our heart, with Lam. 3. 41.
our hands unto God in the heavens.

Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, Psalm. 123. 1.
O thou that dwell in the heavens.

DESCRIPTIONS of GOD.
O God, the God of the Spirits Number. 16. 22.
of all flesh --

Thou art a God ready to pardon, Nehe. 9. 17.
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness.

O thou that hear prayers -- Psalm. 75. 2. Isai. 42. 5.
-- Thou Lord that createdst the heavens, and stretchedst them out, that
spreadest forth the earth, and that which comes out of it; that give
breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein.

-- The God in whose hand our Dan. 5. 23.
breath is, and whose are all our ways.

The high and lofty One, that Isai. 57. 15.
inhabitest eternity, whose name is holy; who dwell in the high and holy
place, etc.

The living God and the everlasting Ier. 10. 10.
King.

-- Who have made the earth by 12.
thy power, and have established the world by thy wisdom, and stretched out
the heavens by thy discretion.

That formest the mountains Amos 4. 15.
and createst the wind, and declarest unto man what is his thought, that make
the morning darkness; and treadest upon the high places of the earth.

The blessed and only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6. 15.
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Who only have 16.
immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto, whom no man
has seen or can see.

-- The Lord of Hoasts, which Sam. 1. 4. 4
dwells between the Che^u^ims.

-- Behold the heaven, and the 1 King. 8. 27
heaven of heavens cannot contain thee.

-- Thine is the Kingdom, O 1 Chr. 29. 11
Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all.

Both riches and honor come 12.
of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thine hand is power and might, and
in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all.

Behold, even to the Moon, Job 25. 5.
and it shines not, yea, the Stars are not pure in his sight.

-- O Lord my God, thou art Psalm. 104. 1.
very great; thou art clothed with honor and Majesty.

Who coverest thy self with 2.
light, as with a garment: who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain.

-- The nations are as a drop of a Isai. 40. 15.
bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: he takes up the
Isles as a very little thing.

All nations before him are as 17.
nothing, and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity.

It is he that sits upon the 22.
circle of the Earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers, that
stretches out the heavens as a curtain, and spreads them out as a tent to
dwell in.

O Lord of Hoasts, that tries Ier. 20. 12.
the righteous, and see the reins and the heart.

-- The Lord which gives the Ier. 31. 35.
Sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the Moon and of the Stars,
for a light by night, which divides the Sea, when the waves thereof roar, the
Lord of Hoasts is his name.

-- Lord God behold thou have Ier. 32. 17.
made the heaven and the earth, by thy great power, and stretched out arm, and
there is nothing too hard for thee.

Thou show loving kindness 18.
unto thousands, and recompencest the iniquity of the Fathers into the bosom
of their children after them, the great, the mighty God, the Lord of hoasts is
his name.

Great in Council, and mighty 19.
in work, for thine eyes are open upon all the ways of the Sons of men, to
give every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.

-- The King whose name is the Ier. 46. 18.
Lord of Hoasts.

-- Him that makes the seven Amos 5 8.
Stars and Orion, and turns the shadow of death into the morning, and makes
the day dark with night: that calls for the waters of the Sea, and powers
them out upon the face of the earth, the Lord is his name.

-- He that builds his stories in Amos 9 6.
the heaven, and has founded his troop in the earth.

Who is a God like unto thee Mich. 7. 18.
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of
his heritage, he retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in
mercy.

He rebukes the Sea, and makes Nah. 1. 4.
it dry and dries up all the Rivers.

I hou art of purer eyes then Hab. 1. 13.
to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity.

Descriptions of God from his
Mercy and longsuffering. Exodus 34. 6. 2 Pet. 3. 9. 2 Chronicles. 30. 9. Nehem. 9.
31. Psalm. 103. 8. 11. 13. 17. Mic. 7. 18. 19. Romans 2. 4.
Gracious Promises Genesis 3 15. Psalm. 103 3. 9. Psalm. 30. 5. Psalm 126. 5. Isay. 1
18. Isay 54 8. Ezec. 18 21. 23. Ezech. 33. 11. Math. 12. 20. Math. 11. 28. Romans
8. 1.
Omnipotent goodness. Ephesians. 3. 20. Genesis 17. 1. 2 Cor. 9. 8. Romans 10. 12.

Craving of AVDIENCE, ASSISTANCE, and ACCEPTANCE.
Look down from thy holy Deuteronomy. 26. 15
habitation, from heaven.

-- have thou respect unto the 1 Reg. 8. 28.
prayer of thy servant, and to my supplication, O Lord my God, to hearken to
the cry, and to the prayer which thy servant prays before thee this day.

Thou have commanded that we should call upon thee in the Psalm. 50. 15.
day of trouble, and have promised also that thou will deliver us.

Lord bow down thine ear and hear, open Lord thine eyes 2 Reg. 19. 16.
and see, and hear the words --

Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense: and the Psalm. 141. 2.
lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.

Thou have promised that if we shall ask any thing in thy John 14. 14.
Sons name, thou will do it --

Now therefore, O our God, Dan. 9. 17.
hear the prayer of thy servants, and their supplication, and cause thy face
to shine upon us for the Lords sake, -- for we do not 18.
present our supplications before thee for our righteousness, but for thy
great mercies.

We know not what we Romans 8. 26.
should pray for as we ought, therefore let thy Spirit it self help our
infirmities, and make intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered.

It shall come to pass when Exo. 22. 27.
he cries unto me, that I will hear, for I am gracious.

-- Hearken thou to the supplication 1 Kin. 8. 30.
of thy servant, and of thy people Israel when they shall pray toward this
place, and hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place and when thou hear,
forgive. 36
-- Hear thou in heaven and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy
people Israel, that thou teach them the good way wherein they should walk, and
give rain upon thy land which thou have given to thy people for an inheritance.

Hear thou in h^eaven thy 43.
dwelling place, and do according to all that the stranger calls to thee,
for that all people of the earth may know thy name to fear thee, as do thy
people Israel.

Hear thou in heaven thy 39.
dwelling place, and forgive and do, and give to every man according to his
ways.

Let thine ear now be attentive, Nehe. 1. 6.
and thine eyes open, that thou may est hear the prayer of thy servants.

Hearken unto the voice of Psalm. 5. 2.
my cry, my King and my God: for unto thee will I pray.

-- Hear the voice of my supplication Psalm. 28. 2.
when I cry unto thee, when I lift up my hands toward thy holy Oracle.

Give ear O Lord unto my Psalm. 86. 6.
prayer: and attend to the voice of my supplication.

Let the words of my mouth, Psalm. 19. 14.
and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my
strength and my redeemer.

Unto thee lift I up mine eyes: Psalm. 123. 1
O thou that dwell in the heavens.

Hear my prayer, O Lord Psalm. 143. 1
give ear to my supplications, in thy faithfulness answer me, and in thy
righteousness.

Hear me speedily, O Lord, 7.
my spirit fails, hide not thy face from me, lest I be like unto them that
go down into the pit.

Look down from heaven, Isai. 63. 15.
and behold from the habitation of thy holiness, and of thy glory.

O Lord how long shall I cry, Hab. 1. 2. ^.
and thou will not hear, I even cry out unto thee of violence, and thou will
not save.

CONFESSION of Sin.
O my God, I am ashamed Ezra 9. 6.
and blush, to lift up my face to thee my God, for our iniquities are increased
over our heads, and our trespass is grown up unto the heavens.

Thou createdst our first Parents Gen 1. 27.
in thine own image, and breathedst into their nostrils the 2. 7. 3. 13.
breath of life: but the Serpent beguiled them, and they did eat of the
forbidden Fruit, Heb. 7. 10.
whereby all mankind (being then in their loins) also sinned: Romans 3. 23.
and now come short of the glory of God --

-- thou made man upright, but Eccles. ^. 29
they sought out many inventions.

We are risen up in our fathers Number. 32. 14
steed an increase of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the Lord
toward us.

Behold I was shapen in iniquity, ^il. ^* ^^.
and in Sin did my mother conceive me.

We know Lord that in us, Romans 7. 18.
(that is, in our flesh) dwells no good thing: for (though to will be present
with us, yet) how to perform that which is good we find not.

Thou Lord see that the wickedness Genesis 6. 5.
of man is great upon earth and that every imagination of the thoughts of his
heart is only evil continually --

If I justify my self mine Io^ 9. 20.
own mouth shall condemn me, -- the heaven shall reveal and. 20. 27.
our iniquity, and the earth shall rise up against us.

What is man that he should 15. 14.
be clean? and he which is borne of a woman, that he should be righteous?

-- abominable and filthy is (...) 6.
man, which drinks iniquity like water.

-- for mine iniquityes are Psalm. 38. 4.
grown over mine head, and as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me.

Who can say I have made my Pro. 20. 9.
heart clean? I am pure from my sins?

We are all as an unclean Isai. 64. 6.
thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags: and our iniquities
like the wind have taken us away -- and there is none 7.
of us that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up himself to take hold on
thee --

We have made thee to serve Isai. 43. 24.
with our sins, we have wearied thee with ou^ iniquities --

The show of our countenance Isai. 3. 9.
does witness against us, and we declare our sin as Sodom and hide it not:
woe unto our soul for we have rewarded evil to our selves --

If thou Lord should mark Psalm. 130. 3.
iniquities: O Lord who shall stand? But ^h^re is forgiveness with thee: that
thou may be feared.

If we should be weighed by Dan. 5. 27.
thee in the balances, we should be found wanting.

And that which makes our Rom 7. 13.
sin become exceeding sinful, in the land of uprightnes have we dealt
unjustly, and would not behold Isa. 26. 10.
the majesty of the Lord.

-- We are ashamed of the Gospel Romans 1. 16.
of Christ, though it be the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believes.

Thou have spread out thy Isa. 65. 2.
hands all the day, unto a rebellious people which have walked in a way that
was not good after their own thoughts.

Ah Lord God! we love not 1 Cor. 16. 22 Ephesians. 6. 24. Isai. 53. 3.
the Lord Jesus in sincerity.

-- We hide as it were our faces from him, and will not have him to reign over
us.

Alas! we count not all Phil. 3. 8.
things loss and doung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
our Lord.

-- That we might be found in 9.
him not having our own righteousness.

-- We take no pains to know 10.
him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings,
or to be made conformable to his death.

Thou have given us space to Rev. 2. 21.
repent of all our abominations that we have committed, but we repented not.

We confess not our transgressions Psalm. 32. 5.
unto thee Lord, that thou might forgive the iniquity of our sin.

Thou have stricken us but we Ier. 5. 3.
have not grieved, thou have consumed us but we have refused to receive
correction, we have made our faces harder than a rock, and have refused to
return.

We have received the grace of God in vain, and have neglected the great
Salvation which thou tendrest unto us in Jesus Christ.

We have grieved the holy Ephesians. 4. 30*
Spirit of God, whereby we are sealed to the day of redemption -- and have
turned the Jude 4.
grace of God into lasciviousness.

We have left our first love -- Revel. 2. 4. Psalm. 42. 2.
our soul thirsts not for God, for the living God.

-- We have even sinned wilfully, Heb. 10. 26.
since we received the knowledge of the truth: so that ( we may justly fear,)
there remains now no more sacrifice for our sins, but a certain fearful
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation -- For if 27.
he that despised Moses law died without mercy -- Of how much 28.
sorer punishment shall we be thought worthy, who have 29.
trodden under foot the Son of God, and have counted the blood of the
covenant wherewith we were sanctified, an unholy thing, and have done despite
to the Spirit of Grace.

-- Many scarlet and crimsin sins, Isai. 1. 18.
have we committed whereby great occasion has been given by us to the
enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. 2 Samuel 12. 14 Ier. 5. 28.


Yea we overpasse the deeds of the wicked.

Wherefore I abhor my Job 42. 6.
self and repent in dust and ashes.

For innumerable evils have Psalm. 40. 12.
compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not
able to look up: they are more then the hairs of my head: therefore my heart
fails me.

For thou art the God of my Psalm. 43. 2.
strength, why do thou cast me off? why go I mourning because of the
oppression of the enemy.

Thou have set our iniquitles Psalm. 90. 8.
before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.

When ye come to appear Isai 1. 12.
before me, who has required this at your hand, to tread my courts?

For Jerusalem is ruined, and Isai. 3. 8.
Judah is f^llen, because their tongues, and their doings are against the Lord,
to provoke the eyes of his glory.

Woe unto them that draw Isai. 5. 18.
injquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a Cart rope.

But your injquities have separated Isai. 59. 2.
between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you that he
will nor hear.

As a Fountain casts out Ier. 6. 7.
her waters, so she casts out her wickedness, violence and spoil is heard
in her, before me continually is grief and wounds.

Yet I had planted thee a noble Ier. 2. 21.
vine wholly a right seed: How then art thou turned into the degenerate plant
of a strange vine unto me?

For though thou wash thee Ier. 2. 22.
with niter, and take thee much soap, yet thine injquities is marked before me
says the Lord God.

The sin of Judah is written Ier. 17. 1.
with a pen of jron, and with the point of a diamond, it is graven upon the
table of their heart, and upon the horns of your altars.

Behold I am pressed under Amos. 2. 13.
you as a cart is pressed, that is full of sheaves.

For I know your manifold Amos 5. 12.
transgressions and your mighty sins.

For we know that the Law Romans 7. 14.
is spiritual but I am carnal sold under sin.

But I see another law in my 23.
members warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to
the law of sin which is in my members: O wretched man that I am who 24.
shall deliver me from the body of this death.

2. EVIL of punishment.
And for all these thou our Ezr. 9. 13.
God have punished us less than our injquities deserve.

It is of the Lords mercies Lam. 3. 22.
that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. -- If thou
should lay judgment Isay. 28. 17.
to the line, and righteousness to the plummet -- thou Deu. 29. 23.
might make thy anger and jealousy to smoke against us, and all the curses
that are written in thy book, thou might lay upon us, and blot out our name
from under heaven,

Thou might give us our Psalm. 9. 17.
portion with the wicked that are turned into hell, and all the nations that
forget God.

See the heads Plague, Punish, etc. in the Seripture Phrases.
2. PETITION for FORGIVENES.
But with thee Lord is mercy, Psalm 130. 7.
and with thee is plenteous redemption -- O therefore pardon Exodus 34. 9.
our injquities and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance.

Put away our transgressions Isai. 44. 2.
as a cloud, and our sins as a mist.

O Lord though our injquities Ier. 14. 7.
testify against us, do thou it for thy names sake: for our backslidings are
many, we have sinned against thee.

O that I might have my request, Job 6. 8.
and that God would grant me the thing that I long for! -- even that it would
please Nehe 4 5.
him to cover mine injquity, and cause my sin to be blotted out from before
him.

Remember not the sins of Psalm. 25. 7.
my youth, nor my transgressions: according to thy mercy remember thou me,
for thy goodness sake, O Lord.

For thy names sake O Lord Psalm. 25. 11.
pardon mine injquity for it is great.

O remember not against us Psalm 79. 8.
former iniquities, let thy mercies speedily prevent us. -- Take Hos. 14. 2.
away our injquitie, and receive us graciously: so will we render the calves of
our lips.

Turn again and have compassion Mic. 7. 19.
upon us; subdue our injquities, and cast all our sins into the depthes of
the Sea.

Behold the Lamb of God Ioh. 1. 29.
that takes away the sins of the world.

To this end was he borne, Ioh. 18 37.
and for this cause came he into the world, that he might save sinners, of
whom we are the chief.

He was wounded for our Isai. 53. 5.
transgressions, he was bruised for our injquities: the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed.

For his sake, and in his blood, Psalm. 57. 2.
wash me thoroughly from mine injquities, and cleanse me from Psalm. 51. 2.
my sin.

-- Purge me with Hysope and I 7.
shall be clean, wash me and I shall be whiter than snow. Hide thy face from
my sins, and blot out all mine injquities.

-- I have* sinned greatly in that 2 Samuel, 24. 10
I have done, and now I beseech thee O Lord, take away the injquitie of thy
servant, for I have done very foolishly.

Look thou upon me and be Ps. 119. 132
merciful unto me as thou usest to do unto those that love thy name.

-- Though your sins be as Isai. 1. 18.
scarlet they shall be as white as snow: though they be red like c^imson they
shall be as wool.

Behold thou art the Lord the Ier. 32. 27.
God of all flesh, there is nothing too hard for the.

For FAITH.
O we are of little faith, therefore, Math. 6. 39.
O Lord, increase our faith, though it be yet but as a grain Luke 17. 5. Math.
7. 20. Romans 5. 1.
of mustard seed, --

-- that being justified by faith, we may have peace with thee.

Work in us not a dead faith, Iam. 2. 20. Heb. 12. 14.
but that which may be rich in good works, following after peace with all
men, and holiness, without which none shall see God.

Create in me a clean heart; Psa. 51. 10.
O God: and renew a right spirit within me.

-- Not having mine own righteousness Phil. 3. 9.
which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith.

For REPENTANCE.
Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears that I might
weep day and night, for --

O that all the night I could Psa. 6. 6.
make my bed to swim! that I could water my couch with my tears! that I might
repent in sacke-cloth and ashes. -- and grant us repentance unto life -- Mat.
11. 21. Act. 11. 18.


Thou have in love to our souls vouchsafed unto us space and time to repent
in; O that Rev. 2. 21.
thou would also give us grace to repent! O that there were Deuteronomy 5. 29.
such an heart in us that we might repent, and recover our selves out of the
snare of the Devil, who have been hither* to taken captive by him at his 2 Timothy 2. 26.
will!

Do thou melt our stony 2 Cor. 7. 10.
hearts into godly sorrow, which works repentance unto salvation not to be
repented of.

SANCTIFYING GRACE.
Sprinkle clean water upon Ezekiel 37. 25.
us that we may be clean from all our filthiness, and from all our --

-- a new heart also do thou Eze. 36. 26.
give us, and a new spirit do thou put within us; and take away the stony
heart out of the midst of us, and give thou unto us an heart of flesh --

-- and put thy Spirit within 27
us, and cause thou us to walk in thy statutes, and keep thy judgments, and
do them.

KNOWLEDGE.
That the God of our Lord Ephesians. 1. 17.
Jesus Christ, the father of glory, would give unto us the spirit of wisdom
and ^evelation in the knowledge of him --

The eyes of our understanding 18.
being enlightened: that we may know what is the hope of his calling, and what
the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints.

-- that the earth may be filled Hab. 2. 14
with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the Sea. -- that all may
know thee Heb. 8. 11.
from the least to the greatest of us.

That Christ may dwell in Ephesians. 3. 17.
our hearts by faith, that we being rooted and grounded in love, -- may be able
to comprehend 18.
with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height: And
to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, -- that we might 19.
be filled with all the fullness of God.

That I may know him, and Phil. 3. 10.
the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being
made conformable unto his death --

And because it is not good Prove. 192.
that the soul be without knowledge, incline our ears to wisdom and apply
our hearts to understanding -- that we may Prove. 2. 2.
cry after knowledge, and lift up our voice for understanding, that we may
understand the 3. 5.
fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God --

-- That we may be enabled Hos. 8. 2.
to cry unto thee, Our God we know thee. Vid. Ier. 31. 33. 34.

LOVE of GOD, etc.
That we may love the Lord Mat. 22. 37.
our God with all our heart, and with all our soul, and with all our mind, --
that because our Luke 7. 47.
sins which are many are forgiven us, therefore we may love thee much.

That we may love one another John 13. 34.
as Christ has loved us -- -- that our love may abound yet Phil. 1. 9.
more and more toward all men, especially them that are of the household of
faith -- Gal. 6. 10.


That we may love our enemies, Mat. 5. 44.
bless them that curse us, do good unto them that hate us, and pray for them
that dispitefully use, and persecute us.

ZEAL.
Make us to be zealous of Tit. 2. 14.
good works, that we may not rest contented with a lukewarm profession, being
neither cold nor hot, but that our soul may break for the longing Rev. 3. 16.
that it has to thy judgments at all times, -- that the Psa. 119. 20
zeal of thine house may eat us up -- that so our zeal may John 2. 17. 2
Cor. 9. 2.
provoke very many --

SINCERITY.
Behold thou desire truth in Psalm. 51. 6.
the inward parts, O therefore make us Israelites indeed in John 1. 47.
whom there is no guile.

That in simplicity and godly 2 Cor. 1. 12.
pureness we may have our conversation in the world; because Ier. 16* 17.
thine eyes are upon all our ways: and thou understandest our thoughts a far
off, and art acquainted with all our ways: for there is not a word in our
Psalm. 139. 2
tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou 3.
know it altogether.

And thou will bring to light 1 Cor 4. 5.
the hidden things of darkness: and wilt make manifest the counsels of the
heart.

Though they dig into hell, Amos 9. 2.
thence shall my hand take them, though they climb up to heaven, thence will I
bring them down.

And though they hide themselves 3.
in the top of Carmel, I will search and take them out thence, and though they
be hid from my sight in the bottom of the Sea, thence will I command the
Serpent, and he shall bite them.

If thou say behold, we Prove. 24. 12.
knew it not, does not he that pondereth the heart, consider it, and that
keeps thy soul, does not he know it, and shall not he render to every man
according to his works?

God shall bring every work Eeles. 12. 14*
into judgment with every secret thing whether it be good, or whether it be
evil.

-- the Lord sees not as man sees: 1 Samuel 16. 7.
for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart.

I beseech thee O Lord, remember 2 Kin. 20. 3.
now how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have
done that which is good in thy sight.

-- the Lord searches all hearts, 1 Chr. 28. 2.
and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts.

Can any hide himself in secret Ier. 23. 24.
places that I shall not see him, says the Lord, do not I fill heaven and
earth says the Lord.

Shall not God know this, Psalm. 44. 21.
for he knows the secrets of the heart.

The darkness hides not Ps. 139. 12.
from thee, but the night shines as the day the darkness and the light are
both alike to thee.

The Spirit of man is the candle Prove. 20. 27.
of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly.

-- thou even thou know the 1 King. 8. 39
hearts of all the children of men.

Neither is there any creature Heb. 4. 13.
that is not manifest in his sight but all things are naked and opened to the
eyes of him, with whom they have to do.

BOLDNESS the Profession of the GOSPEL.
That we may not be ashamed Romans 1. 1^,
of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God unto salvation to every
one that believes.

-- Grant unto thy servants that Act 4. 29.
with all boldness we may speak of; and profess thy word.

-- Considering that if we shall Mark. 8. 38.
be ashamed of Our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his words in this adulterous, and
sinful generation, the Son of man also will be ashamed of us, when he
comes in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels.

PERSEVERANCE.
O that there were such an Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
heart in us that we might fear thee, and keep thy commandments always, that
it might be well with us, and with our children after us for ever!

Give us our heart and our Ier. 32. 39.
way, that we may fear thee for ever; and make thou an everlasting covenant
with us, that thou will not turn away from 40.
us, to do us good, and put thy fear in our hearts that we may not depart
from thee.

-- Let us hold fast the profession Heb. 10. 23.
of our faith without wavering.

CONTENTATION.
-- that we may learn in whatsoever Phil. 4. 11.
state we are there with to be content, knowing both how to be abased, and to
abound: every Phil 4. ^2.
where, and in all things being instructed, both to be full, and to be
hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need.

Because godliness with contentment 1 Timothy 6. 6.
is great gain: for we brought nothing into this world 7.
and it is certain we can carry nothing ou^.

-- Having therefore food and 8.
raiment, let us be therewith content.

That our conversation may Heb. 13. 5.
be without covetousness: being content with such things as we have. For
thou have said, thou will never leave us, nor forsake us.

-- Casting all our care upon thee, 1 Pet. 5. 7.
for thou carest for us.

What? shall we receive good Job. 2. 10.
the hands of the Lord, and not evil?

-- Take no thought for your Math. 6. 25.
life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body what
you shall put on.

-- the fowls of the air, they Math. 6. 26.
sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barnes, yet your heavenly
father feeds them.

Which of you by taking 2^.
thought, can add one cubite unto his stature.

Consider the Lillies of the 27.
field, how they grow: they toil not, neither do they spin.

-- If God so cloathe the grass 30.
of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he
not much more cloathe you, O ye of little faith, take no thought, saying, what
31.
shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or where withal shall we be clothed?

-- Your heavenly father knows 32.
that you have need of all these things.

-- give me neither poverty nor Prove. 30. ^.
riches; feed me with food convenient for me,

Lest I be full and deny thee, Prove. 30. 9.
and say, who is the Lord? or lest I be poor and steal, and take the name of
my God in vain.

PATIENCE under the CROSS.
Help us to deny our selves, Luke 9. 23.
and to take up our Cross daily and follow our Savior.

Thou have foretold us, that Ioh. 16. 33*
in the world we shall have tribulation. -- And that through Act. 14. 2^.
much tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of God.

Let us therefore reckon with Romans 8. 1^.
our selves that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.

-- That it may be given unto us, Phil. 1. 29.
in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for
his sake.

Let us run with patience the Heb 12. 1.
way that is set before us.

Looking unto Jesus the author 2.
and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him endured the
cross.

Consider him that endured 3.
such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest you be wearied and faint
in your minds.

Think it not strange concerning 1 Pet. 4. 12.
the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened
unto you.

Rejoice in as much as ye are 13
partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may
be glad also with exceeding joy.

If ye be reproched for the 14.
name of Christ, happy are ye, for the spirit of glory, and of God rests upon
you.

GODS WORD.
Let thy word be a lamp unto (...) 119. 105
my feet: and a light unto our path.

O make it unto us a word of Psalm. 16. 7.
power, converting the soul, quick and powerful, and sharper than any two
edged sword, Heb. 4. 12.
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints
and marrow.

Give us the hearing ear, and Pro 20. 12.
the seeing eye*make thy word Ier. 23. 29.
like fire, and like a hammer that breaks the rocks in pieces.

-- and as the rain comes Isai. 55. 10.
down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not thither but waters the
earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower,
and bread to the ea^er: so let 11.
thy word be, that goes forth out of thy mouth, let it not return unto thee
void, but accomplish that which thou please, and prosper in the thing whither
thou sendest it.

Lord give the Preacher the Isai. 50. 4.
tongue of the learned, that he may know how to speak a word in season to him
that is weary, and create the fruit of his lips peace -- and let the work of
the Lord prosper in Isai. 53. 10.
his hand.

They shall be abundantly satisfied Psalm. 36. 8.
with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them drink of thy
pleasures.

For with thee is the fountain 9.
of life; in thy light shall we see light.

We will go into his tabernacles; Psalm. 132. 7.
we will worship at his foot stool.

Open thou mine eyes, that I Psa. 119. 18
may behold wondrous things out of thy Law.

In the way of thy judgments, Isai. 26. 8.
O Lord, have I waited for thee, the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to
the remembrance of thee.

Come let us go up to the Mic. 4. 2.
mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths.

-- thine ears shall hear a word Isai. 30. 21.
behind thee, saying, this is the way, walk in it.

Blessed is the man whom Psalm. 65. 4.
thou chusest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy
courts: we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy
Temple.

And in this mountain shall Isai. 25. 6.
the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines
on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined.
Vid. verse. 7. 8.

Even them will I bring to ^^. 7.
my holy mountain and make them joyful in my house of prayer; their burnt
offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar: for mine house
shall be called a house of prayer unto all people.

SACRAMENTS in Special. (...)
-- let a man examine himself 1 Cor. 11. 28.
and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup --

-- my father gives you the loh. 6. 32.
true bread from heaven, for the 35.
bread of God is he which comes 36.
down from heaven, and gives life unto the world. 37.


As the Heart pants after the Psalm. 42. 1.
water-brookes, so pants my soul after thee O God.

O God thou art my God, Psalm. 63. 2.
early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for
thee in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is.

-- what shall I render unto the Psa. 126. 12. 13.
Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and
call upon the name of the Lord --

Personal Concernments, and special employments in our particular calling:
Lord be thou with me, and Genesis 28. 20.
keep me in this way that I go, and give me bread to eat, and raiment to
put on, so that I may come again to my fathers house in peace.

O Lord God I pray thee send 21.
me good speed this day, and show kindness unto

God Almighty give you 43. 14.
mercy before the man, that he may

And thou who preservest the Prove. 2. 8.
way of thy Saints hold up my Psalm. 17. 5.
goings in thy paths that my foot steps slip not

Give thine Angels charge Psalm. 91. 11
over us, to keep us in all our 12.
ways: that they may bear us up in their hands lest at any time we dash our
foot.

O be thou with us, and keep Genesis 28 15.
us in all places whither we go, and bring us again, and leave us not until
thou have done that which thou have spoken to us of.

O that thou would bless 1 Chr. 4. 10.
me indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that thine hand might be with me, and
that thou would keep me from evil that it may not grieve me.

Prosper now I pray thee thy Neh. 1. 11.
servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of the man. -- and let the
beauty of the Lord Psalm. 90. 17.
our God be upon us, and establish thou the work of our hands upon us: yea
the work of our hands establish thou it.

We know not what to do, 2 Chr. 20. 12
but our eyes are upon thee -- thou also must work all our Isai. 26. 12.
works in us.

It is in vain for us to rise up Psalm. 127. 2.
early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows.

O Lord I know that the way Ier. 10. 23.
of man is not in himself: it is not in man that walks to direct his steps

-- neither is he that planteth 1 Cor. 2. 3.
any thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the increase.

Deliverance from Evil. 1. Of SIN.
Let not sin reign in our Romans 6. 12.
mortal bodies, that we should obey it in the lusts thereof.

-- neither suffer us to yield 12.
our members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: but unto God as
those that are alive from the deast, and our members as instruments of
righteousness unto God, --

-- looking diligently, lest any Heb. 12. 15.
man fail of the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness springing up
trouble us, and thereby we be deluded.

-- that being now made free Romans 6. 22.
from sin, and become the servants of God, we may have our fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life.

But I see another law in my Rom 7 23.
members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity
to the law of Sin which is in my members.

O wretched man that I am, 24
who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

-- Cleanse thou me from secret Psalm. 19. 12.
faults. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins, let them not
have dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent 13.
from the great transgression.

Subdue the pride of our nature, 2 Cor. 10. 5.
cast down every imagination, and every high thing that exalts it self
against thee, and bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

Let not my heart be haughty Ps. 131. 1. 2.
nor my eyes lofty, neither suffer me to exercise my self in great matters or
in things too high for me, but behave and quiet my self as a child that is
weaned by his mother --

-- Order my steps in thy word, Psa. 119 33
and let none in^quity have donion over me --

-- make me also to be upright Psalm. 8. 23.
before thee, and to keep my self from mine in^quity.

Let us lay aside every weight, Heb. 12. 1 2.
and the sin that does so easily beset us, that we may run with patience the
race that is set before us --

-- that we may not love the 1 Ioh. 2 15. 16.
world, nor the things in the world, because all that is in the world, the lust
of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the
Father, but of the world.

-- that denying ungodlines and Tit. 2. 12.
worldly lusts, we may live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world --

That we may walk circumspectly Ephesians. 5. 15.
not as fools but as wise -- giving none occasion to 1 Timothy 5. 14.
the adversary to speak reproachfully.

-- Mortifying our members Col. 3. 5.
which are on the earth fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate affection,
evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is idolatry

-- Putting off all these, anger, Col. 3. 8.
wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communication --

-- That we may resist unto Heb. 12. 4.
blood, striving against sin, taking Heb. 3. 12.
heed lest there be in any of us an evil heart of unbelief in departing from
the living God

-- taking heed to our selves, Luke 21. 34.
lest at any time our hearts be overcharged with suffering and drunkenness,
and cares of this life --

That we may be sober and 1 Pet. 5. 8.
vigilant, because our adversary the devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about,
seeking whom he may devour, whom that we may resist, steadfast in the Ephesians. 6.
11.
faith, let us take unto us the whole armor of God, that we may be able to
stand against all his wiles, being strong in the 10.
Lord, and in the power of his might.

2. PUNISHMENT.
Let no evil befall us, neither Psalm 91. 10.
let any plague come nigh our dwelling,

Send from heaven and save Psalm. 57 ^.
me from the reproach of him that would swallow me up. My soul is among
Lions, and I lie even among them that are set on fire; even the sons of men,
whose teeth are spears, and arrows, 4.
and their tongue a sharp sword.

Plead my cause O Lord, with Psalm. 35. 1.
them that strive with me, fight thou against them that fight against me --

Have mercy upon me O Lord, Psalm. 6. 2.
for I am weak, O Lord heal me for my bones are vexed -- My soul also is
sore vexed, etc. 3 4.


Return O Lord, deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake

For in death there is no remembrance 5.
of thee: in the grave who shall give thee thanks

I am weary with my groaning, 6.
all the night make I my bed to swim: I water my couch with my tears

Mine eye is consumed because 7.
of grief, it waxes old because of all mine enemies.

Turn thee unto me, and Psalm 25. 16.
have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and afflicted. The 17.
troubles of my heart are enlarged; O bring thou me out of my 18.
distresses. Look upon mine affliction and my pain, and forgive all my sins.

O my Father if it be possible Mat. 26. 39
let this affliction pass from me; nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will.

Lord make me to know Psalm. 39. 4.
mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is: that I may know how frail
I am. Behold 5.
thou have made my days as an hand-breadth, and mine age is as nothing before
thee: verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity.

So teach us to number our Psalm. 90. 12.
days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

The HOLY CATHOLIC Intercession, or the Prayer of Charity.
CHVRCH of JESUS CHRIST.
Preserve that little flock to Luke 12. 32.
whom thou have promised, and reserved the Kingdom.

Be unto it a wall of fire, round Zech. 2. 5.
about.

Let thy delight be to Mount Isai. 49. 16.
Sion, grave her on the palms of thy hands, let her walls be continually
before thee: Let her builders make haste, and 17.
cause her destroyers, and such as would lay her wast to depart from her --

Feed them that oppress her 26.
with their own flesh, and make them drunken with their own blood, as with
sweet wine --

Look down from heaven, Isal. 63. 15.
and behold from the habitation of thy holiness, and of thy glory: where is
thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels; and of thy mercies
toward me? are they restrained?

Doubelesse thou art our father, 16.
though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledges us not; thou O Lord
art our father, our Redeemer, thy name is from everlasting. Awake, awake, put
on strength, Isai. 51. 9.
O arm of the Lord, awake as in the ancient days, in the generations of old:
Art thou not it that has cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon? thou art King of
Kings and Lord of Lords.

Show thy marveilous loving Psalm. 17. 7.
kindness, O thou that savest by thy right hand, those which put their trust
in thee, from those that rise up against them, etc --

Awake, why sleep thou O Psa. 44. 23. 24. 25. 26
Lord? arise cast us not off for ever. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and
forgettest our affliction, and oppression?

Let them all be confounded, Ps. 129. 5. 6.
and turned back that hate Zion, etc. Let their flesh consume away while they
stand upon their feet, and their eyes consume away in their holes, and their
tongues consume away in their mouth, Ezekiel. 11. 16. Isay 40. 11.

Bless every member of the Catholic Church in what place, in what case
soever; women with child, bless them with safe deliverie, make them joyful
mothers of children -- young children bless them, with religious education;
Seafarring men, bless them with prosperous navigation; Husbandmen, bless thou
them with plentiful harvests and increase; Captives, bless thou with
enlargement; Prisoners with repentance and amendment. M. Valent.

UNCALLED.
Raise up the Tabernacle of Amos 9. 11. and 5. 15.
David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and be gracious to
the remnant of Joseph --

-- that the Dayspring from Lukh 1. 78.
on high, may visit, and give light, to them that sit in darkness and in the
shadow of death, to guide their feet into 79.
the way of peace --

Those other sheep which Ioh. 10. 16.
thou have, which are not yet of thy fold, them also do thou bring in, and
make them to hear thy voice --

A a shepherd seeks out his Eze. 34. 12.
flock in the day that he is among his sheep that are scattered: so will I
seek out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all places where they have
been scattered in the cloudy and dark day.

And I will bring them out 13.
from the people, and gather them from the countries, and I will bring them to
their own land, and feed them upon the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and
in all the inhabited places of the country -- vid. Ezekiel. 37. 21. 22.

I will surely assemble, O Jacob, Mich. 2. 12.
all of thee, I will surely gather the remnant of Israel, I will put them
together as the sheep of Bozrah, as the flock in the midst of their fold:
they shall make great noise, by reason of the multitude of men.

CALLED.
Keep them as the apple of Deu. 32. 10. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
an eye -- though Satan like a roaring Lion go about seeking whom he may
devour: yet Psalm. 31. 8.
give them not over unto the will of their enemy, but upon Isai. 4. 5.
all the glory let there be thy defense.

Lord bless this land, compass Psalm. 5. 12.
it with thy favor, as with a shield. -- Lord do thou keep Isai. 27. 3.
it, and water it every moment* lest any hurt it, keep thou it night and day.

The KINGS most excellent Majesty.
Let the soul of my Lord be 2 Samuel 25. 19
bound in the bundle of life with thee, and the souls of his enemies, them
cast out as from the middle of a sling --

Make his seed to endure for Psalm. 89. 29.
ever, and his throne as the days of heaven --

Prolong the Kings life, and Psalm. 61. 6.
his years, as many generations; and that he may abide 7.
with thee for ever, O prepare mercy, and truth, which may preserve him!

Our renowned and gracious Lam. 4. 20.
Sovereign, the breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Psalm. 21. 6.
Lord, let his house, and throne be established for ever, and set him as
blessings unto his people.

Keep him as the apple of Psa. 17. 8.
thine eye, hide him under the^ shadow of thy wings

From the wicked that oppress 9.
him, from his deadly enemies that compass him about.

His seed do thou establish Psalm. 89. 4.
for ever and build up his throne to a^^ generations

Let his seed endure for ever; Ps. 89. 36.
and his throane as the Sun before thee -- give him a long life, a prosperous
reign, that none of all the Kings may be like him.

-- His enemies cloth with Ps. 132. 18.
shame, but on himself let his Crown flourish -- Let his glory be great in
thy salvation -- crown him with outward blessings, with inward graces

-- with long life satisfy thou Ps. 91. 16.
him, and show him thy salvation -- give him riches and glory, that none of the
Kings may be like him.

As thou have anointed him 2 Samuel 7. 8.
to be ruler of thy people, so give him a wise and understanding 1 Kin. 3. 12.
heart, to go out and come in, before this great people, that 7.
he may govern over them inthy 2 Samuel 23. 3.
fear, serving thee with a 1 Chr. 2^. 9.
willing mind.

Be thou unto him a father, 2 Samuel 7. 14.
and make him unto the^^ thy son -- Bless also thy servants house, and let
it be established before thee -- make a covenant with him as thou did with
David -- let the Angel of the Lord pitch round about him -- let 26.
not the sons of wickedness approach near to hurt him.

Bless his Counsel with wisdom, his Judges with integrity, his Magistrates
with courage, his people with obedience, his Armies with victory, his reign
with peace -- M. Val.

The LORDS of the Privy Council.
Inform thon his Councellers Ps. 105. 22.
after thy will, and teach his Senators wisdom* that judgment Amos 5. 24.
may run down as waters; and righteousness as a mighty stream -- -- that
they Isa. 30. 2.
may ask at thy mouth that counsel which they shall mister unto their
Sovereign -- that they may be to us in Number. 10. 31
stead of eyes -- filled with the Exodus 31. 3.
spirit of God in wisdom.

-- As they be famous in the congregation Number. 16. 2.
and men of renown, so they may be as Gods knowing good and evil.

-- that all the counsel which 2 Samuel 16. 23
they counsel, may be as if a man should enquire at the Oracle of God.

MAGISTRACY.
And that judgment may not Amos. 6. 12.
be turned into gall, nor the fruit of righteousness into hemlocke, give
courage to our rulers, that they may execute justice truly in the gates -- 1 Timothy 2. 2.
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. --

MINISTRY.
And thou who art the Lord Math. 2. 38.
of the harvest send our laborers into thy harvest, that those which are
ordained to eternal Acts 13. 48.
life may be saved --

-- and let the work of the Isai. 53. 10.
Lord, prosper in their hand -- The Chariots of Israel and the horsemen
thereof --

Let thy Thummim, and thy Deuteronomy. 33. 8
Urime be with thy holy one -- -- who observe thy word, and 9. 10.
keep thy Covenant -- that they may teach Iaeob thy judgments, and Israel thy
Law: they shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine
Altar.

Bless Lord their substance, 11.
and accept the work of their hands, smite through the loins of them that
rise against them, and of them that hate them that they rise not again.

-- Make them like John, burning Ioh. 5. 35.
and shining lights -- that they may be holiness to the Lord --

Whom thou have set as watchmen over thy people, make them instant in season,
and out of season -- that they may give warning from thee -- -- that they may
cry aloud and Isai. 58. 1.
not spare, lifting up their voice like a trumpet, and show thy people their
transgressions.

COMMONALTIE.
Bless all Israel from Dan to 2 San. 17. 11
Beershebah, make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field, and with
the fowls of heaven: break the bow and the sword, and the battle out of Hos.
2. 18.
the earth, and make them to lie down safely --

For the AFFLICTED.
And thou Lord who give Isai. 10. 29.
power to the faint, and to them that have no might encreasest Psalm. 41. 3.
strength, comfort them that lie upon beds of languishing, make all their beds
in their sickness -- for unto thee Lord, belong the Psa. 68 20.
issues from death --

Behold the tears of such as Eccles. 4. 1.
are oppressed and have no comforter.

Lord remember them that Heb. 13. 2.
are in bonds, that are tried in Isai. 48. 10.
the furnace of affliction.

Bind up the breach of thy Isai. 30. 26.
people, heal the stroke of their wound.

Let the sighing of the prisoners Psalm. 79. 11.
come before thee; according to the greatness of thy power, preserve thou
those that are appointed to dye.

-- Be thou a strength to the Isai. 25. 4.
poor, a strength to the needy in their distress, a refuge from the storm, a
shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible Ones is a storm against
the wall.

-- His place of defense shall be 33. 16.
the munition of rocks, bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure --

THANKS GIVING for Blessings Spiritual and Eternal.
And now our God we thank 1 Chr. 29. 13
thee, and praise thy glorious name, for blessing us with all Ephesians. 1. 3.
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ, for delivering us Col. 1. 3.
from the power of darkness, and translating us into the Kingdom of thy dear
Son.

Blessed be God even the Father 2 Cor. 1. 3.
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort,
who when we were sometimes aliens, and Col. 1. 21.
enemies in our mind by wicked works, and were by nature, the Ephesians. 2. 4.
children of wrath, as well as others, 1.
out of his rich mercy, for 2.
the great love where with he loved us, even when we were dead in trespasses,
and sins, and Col. 2. 13.
the uncircumcision of our flesh has quickened us. together with Christ, having
forgiven us all trespasses, Blotting out the handwriting 14.
of Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary unto us, and took it
out of the way, nayling it to his Cross.

Blessed be thy glorious Nehe. 9. 5.
Name, which is exalted above all blessing, and praise; for great Psalm. 86. 12.
is thy mercy toward us, and thou have delivered our soul from the lowest
hell -- and have Col. 1. 12.
made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

3. For TEMPORAL blessings, of Creation and Providence.
I thank thee Father, Lord Mat. 11. 25.
of heaven and earth, that --

Bless the Lord, O my soul, Ps. 103. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
and all that is within me bless his holy name, etc.

For thou art he that tookest Psalm. 22. 9.
me out of the womb; thou 10.
did make me hope, when I was upon my mothers breasts -- I was cast upon thee
from the womb; thou art my God from my mothers belly.

-- We have been borne by Isai. 46. 3.
thee from the belly, and are carried from the womb -- And even 4.
to our old age be thou he, and even to hoarie hairs do thou carry us --

-- Thou have covered me in Psa. 139. 13
my mothers womb,

-- I will praise thee, for I am 14.
fearfully and wonderfully made marveilous are thy works, and that my soul
knows right well.

How precious are thy Psa. 139. 17
thoughts unto me O God? how great is the sum of them? If 18.
I should count them they are more in number than the sand --

Thy hands have made me, and Psa. 119. 73
fashioned me --

I am not worthy of the least Genesis 32. 10.
of all thy mercies, and of all the truth, which thou have showed nuto thy
servant.

Thus will I bless thee while Psalm. 63. 4.
I live, I will lift up my hands in thy name. My soul shall be satisfied 5.
as with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips,
when I 6.
remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches. etc --

I know Lord that thy judgments Psa. 119 75.
are right, and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me.

Before I was afflicted I went 67.
astry, but now I have kept thy word --

O Lord my God I cried unto Psalm. 30. 2.
thee, and thou have healed me; O Lord thou have brought 3.
up my soul from the grave: thou have kept me alive, that I should not go
down to the pit, etc.

Thou have delivered me in Job 5. 19.
six troubles, yea in seven, there has no evil touched me, etc.

There has no evil befallen me, neither has any plague come near my
dwelling --

-- Thou have delivered my Psalm. 116. 8.
soul from death, my eyes from tears, and my feet from falling --

-- What shall I render unto the 12.
Lord, for all his benefits toward me? I will take the cup 13.
of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.

Thou have extended peace Isai. 68. 12.
unto us like a river, and prosperity like a flowing stream; we drink waters
out of our own Wells.

Thou have strengthened the Psa 147. 13. 14.
bars of our gates, and blessed our children within us etc. --

Thou have given us bread to Genesis 28. 10.
eat and raiment to put on, yea our bread like Ashurs is fat, and Genesis 49. 20.
we have pleasures which even Ps. 147. 20.
Kings do want.

Thou have not dealt so with Ps. 107. 21.
any nation -- O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness; and for his
wonderful Ps. 147. 20.
works to the children of men!

CONCLUSION with a craving of Audience.
Two things have I required Pro. 30. 7.
of thee, deny me them not, before I depart.

Thy Son our Savior has Mar. 11. 24.
promised, that What things soever we desire when we pray, if we believe we
shall receive them.

Lord we believe, help thou Mar. 9. 24.
our unbelief.

Now unto him that is able Ephe. 3. 20.
to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or think according to
the power that works in us, unto him be glory 21.
in the Church of Christ throughout all ages, world without end, Amen.

Now the God of Peace, that Heb. 23. 20.
brought again from the dead, our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the
Sheep, through the the blood of the everlasting covenant; Make us perfect in
every Heb. 13. 21.
good work, to do his will, working in us that which is well pleasing in his
sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

REVEL. 5 13. Blessing, honor, glory, and power, be unto him that sits upon
the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. Reve. 7. 12. Amen, Blessing,
and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might be
unto our God, for ever and ever. Amen.
MEDITATIONS for the Morning.
My soul waits on thee, O Psa. 130. 6.
Lord, more than the morning watch, watches for the morning. O God be
merciful unto me, and bless me, and cause thy 67. 1.
upon face to shine upon me: O fill me Psa. 90. 14
with thy mercy this morning so shall I rejoice and be glad all my days.

O God thou art my God earwill 63. 1.
I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee in a dry
and thirsty land, where no wattr is.

O Sun of righteousness shine upon me --

My voice shall thou hear in 5. 3.
the morning O Lord, in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will
look up.

Unto thee have I cried O 88 13.
Lord, and in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee.

Awake, thou that sleep, Ephe. 5. 14.
and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.

The night is past, the day is at Romans 13. 11. 12
hand --

-- work while it is called day, John 9. 4.
the night comes when no man can work.

MEDITATIONS for the Evening.
Thou know my down sitting, Psalm. 139. 2.
and mine up rising thou understandest my thought a far off.

Thou compassest my path, and 3.
my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways.

Let my prayer be set forth 141. 2.
before thee as incense, and the lifting up of my hands, as the evening
Sacrifice.

Let tears run down like a Lam. 2. 18.
river, day and night, give thy self no rest: let not the Apple of thine eye
cease: Arise, cry out in the night, in the beginning of the watches power out
19.
thy heart like water before the face of the Lord, lift up thy hands toward
him.

Lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death --

He that keeps Israel neither slumbreth nor sleeps --

-- the day is thine, the night Psa. 74. 16.
also is thine --

-- the darkness hides not 139. 12.
from thee, but the night shines as the day, the darkness and the light to
thee are both alike.

I will lay me down in peace Psalm. 4. 8.
take my rest, etc.

-- when thou lie down thou Prove. 3. 24.
shall not be afraid, yea thou shall lie etc.

MEDITATIONS for thee as thou go into Bed.
-- Think with thy self, that --

1 Thou art one day nearer end, than thou were in the morning.

2 Consider what thou have seen, heard, or read that day, worth the
remembering: and make use thereof.

3 Seriously examine thy self what Sin thou have committed, what duty thou
have omitted, how thou have failed, and lament them, on thy knees, begging
pardon in thy Saviors Name.

4 Consider that many go well to bed, and never rise again till the day of
Judgment, therefore say, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit.

5 Let thy stripping thee naked, put thee in mind of thy death, thy bed, of thy
grave, thy coverings of the moulds, and worms of the earth: thy sheets of thy
winding sheet, thy sleep of thy death, thy waking of thy resurrection.

In the night when thou awakest, say,
With my soul have I desired Isai. 26. 9.
thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee early.

Thus will I bless thee while Psalm. 63. 4.
I live, I will lift up my hands in thy name; my soul shall be satisfied 5.
as with marrow, and fatness, and my mouth shall praise Psalm. 63. 5.
thee with joyful lips -- when I remember thee upon my bed, 6.
and meditate on thee in the night watches.

MEDITATIONS for the Lords day in the Morning.
It is a good thing, to give Psalm. 92. 1.
thanks, unto thee, O Lord, and to sing praises to thy name, O thou most high:
to show forth 2.
thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night.

This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice, and be glad in it.

Blessed is the man that does Isai. 56. 2.
thi^, and the Son of man that lays hold on it, that keeps the Sabbath
from polluting it, and keeps his hands from doing any evil:

-- they that be planted in the Psalm. 92. 13.
house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our God: they Psa. 92. 14.
shall still bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing.

As thou go to the Church meditate thus --
One thing have I desired of Psalm. 27. 4.
the Lord, that I will seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord
all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in
his temple.

My soul longs, yea even 84. 2.
faints for the courts of the Lord, my heart and my flesh cries out for the
living God.

At the Church think with thy self that --
The place where thou stand Exodus 3. 5.
is Holy ground -- none other Genesis 28. 17.
but the house of God --

How amiable are thy Tabernacles Ps. 84. 14.
O Lord of Hoasts!

Blessed are they that dwell in 4.
thy house, they will be still praising thee.

For a day in thy court, is better 10.
than a thousand:

I had rather be a doore-keeper 11.
in the house of my God, then dwell in the tents of wickedness.

They that join themselves Isai. 56. 6.
to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the name of the Lord, to be his
servants: every one that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, and takes hold
of my covenant -- Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, 7.
and make them joyful in my house of prayer.

-- the like course thou may take in other places of Scripture which thou
may make use of for all kind of meditations, at home, abroad, in field,
town, journeyes, etc --

Matter for Graces before meat.
O Lord our God, the only giver of all good gifts, thou feedest the young
ravens when they cry -- they have their meat of God --

-- the eyes of all wait upon thee -- thou openest thy hand, and fillest with
thy blessing every living thing -- thou lovedst us before we were, thou have
kept us from our birth -- supply all our wants, sanctify all thy dealings
toward us, and let thy blessing be on the food which we are now to receive --
Speak a word of blessing to it from heaven, that it may nourish and strengthen
us -- comfort and do us good -- let us taste and see how gracious the Lord is
-- let us feel the sweetness of that love, with which thou have loved us in
Christ -- man lives not by bread alone -- it is by thy word of blessing, not
our meats alone, that we are nourished and preserved --

-- which satisfiest our mouth with good things -- thou shall eat and bless
the name of the Lord thy God -- Let not these creatures turn to the hurt of
our souls, which thou have given us for good of our bodies, -- I am not worthy
of the least morsel of thy good creatures, unworthy of the crumbs which fall
under thy table. -- Let not our table Graces.
become a snare unto us -- break not the staff of our bread -- curse not unto
us any blessing --

Good Lord forgive us all our 1.
sins, and bless at this time these good creatures to our nourishment,
through Jesus Christ, our Lord, Amen.

O Lord it is not by bread alone 2.
that man lives, it is thy blessing upon the creatures that they sustain us. O
draw up our hearts and eyes to heaven, to acknowledge thy providence in them;
to praise thy goodness for them, that we may receive them as pledges of thy
favor, and gracious assurances of thine everlasting love, through Jesus, etc
--

Matter for Graces after meat.
Blessed be thy name for health, life, strength, and for all the blessings of
this, and the blessed hopes of a better life -- make it our meat, and drink,
to do the will of thee our heavenly father -- make us to hunger after that
bread which endures to everlasting life --

-- Provide daily bread for all thy poor servants, till thou bring us to that
place where we shall never hunger, nor thirst any more -- thy loving kindness
is better than life --

-- that I may labor not so much for this meat that perishes, but for that
meat which endures to everlasting life -- the body and blood of our Savior
which is meat indeed, and drink indeed. -- Keep us in thy fear while we
live on earth and afterward receive us to glory in thy kingdom --

We thank thee O Lord, for the comfortable use of these good blessings, we
beseech thee also feed our souls to everlasting life, with the meat that
perishes not, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Blessed be thy name O Lord God, for thus opening thy hand, and filling us at
this time with thy good creatures, vouchsafe still to be our God, withold no
good thing from our soul, or body. Save all thy Church, protect our King,
Queen, Prince, Royal Progeny and Realm; Grant free passage to to thy Gospel,
comfort to thy Servants, and peace of conscience to us all, through Jesus
Christ our Lord,

Amen.
An EPITOME of a Christians Conversation and Religious course of life, gathered
out of some Godly Practical Divines etc.
Every day bestow half an 1. Daily.
hour in reading the Scriptures, and Prayer: Gods word, will not only show
thee what to do, what to pray, but will work a secret power to accomplish the
same --

Appoint and set a part some time once every day, seriously and solemnly to
cast up the eye of thy Faith, on that never-fading crown of life, which after
an inch of time shall for ever rest upon thy head. The comforts hereof will
make a man live almost without a soul, and sweeten all the troubles of this
life --

Set one hour in the week 2. Weekly.
a part ( Saturday in the afternone is more fit, by reason of the approaching
day, to consider of, search, and try thy ways: this will snub and keep down,
the weeds of corruptions, from overspreading thy soul. Thou bestowed an hour
on thy body every day, in dressing it, and look thy self in a glass to
attire thy outward sheath, and will thou not once a week do as much for thy
soul? thy body must one day rot and turn to dust, perhaps to morrow: thy
soul must live ever either in weal or woe: Life and death, are now in thy
choice -- choose then that good part --

-- Give God the honor of thy In particular for thy Thoughts.
thoughts, as well as of thy words and actions: often think how all the
glistering shows of this whole world must and do vanish and moulder into
vanity, and nothing -- very smoke.

As soon as thou have broken of sleep, set God before thee and think -- What
shall I do? what course shall I take, that I may bring glory to God, that I
may not sin, this day, -- O that my ways were so directed -- -- Never speak
the evil which Words.
thou too certainly know by others, but with fearfulness, (as it were)
and some kind of enforcement, being sure thou have a calling to it, and then
do it

seasonably, charitably, discreetly,
and not in

humor, spleen, imperiousness
It Is the humor of Hypocritts to be supercilious and censorious: but for

Gods glory. thy own discharge.
-- use no more words against m^ns sins, than thou will make prayers for
their souls in secret.

Be bold, yet wise in speaking for Christ, and with height of resolution, go
through all the disgraces that the sinful times, lay in the ways of God. In
Actions

civil -- Do as thou would be done to. religious, Strive to
live by faith: because faith is the soul of all our actions, our prayers will
be cold unless this warm them.

-- Take heed of falling from thy first love.

-- Serve not God for by-respects, but only for himself.

-- So long as thou art unfeinedly displeased with, and sorry for, all thy
sins, and do mortify the deeds of thy body by the spirit, thy cafe is the
state of salvation.

Let thy whole conversation favor of the Lord.

Be always bemoaning thy spiritual pride, known hypocrisy, covetousness,
perf^^ctorinesse and formality in Gods service.

Give not way to a heartlesse neglect of the use of Gods holy ordinances,
reading, prayer, fasting, private humiliation; for this is the forerunner to
some fearful sin, or fiery temptation, to some heavy judgment, or
dangerous apostasy.

Seek not thy self in any of thy actions.

Look to thy repentance, that it be sincere, universal, constant, from the
heart root, for all sin.

Incorporate thy self into the Company.
Communion of Saints, be intimate only with them: such an holy and humble
majesty is in their carriage, such a deal of heaven is in their countenances,
such spiritual ravishments is in their hearts, such grace and powerful
piercings in their speeches, such zeal and hearty melting is in their prayers,
that they cannot but work upon thy heart, if thou converse with them.

Look well to thy carriage, that thou leave not an ill savor behind thee in
any company. Wait for occasions to do good, Act. 26. 28. In bad company give
them apparent signs of thy dislike: Unless you give some kind of real, or
verbal reproof, they will be hardened.

Often withdraw your self Solitariness.
apart, imparting unto God your griefs, wants, desires. Walk with God on the
top of Mount Tabor once a day -- Prayer in Prayer.
secret will be unto thee an unspeakeable comfort, a testimony that thou art
not left to thy self, if words will not come, sigh, God hears the sighing of
his servants: if thou can not sigh, breath, God has an care for that, thou
have heard my voice, hide not thine ear at my breathing, at my cry. -- yea
Lam. 3. 56.
speak with thy countenance, be humbled for thy unfitness, dullness -- etc.
Then we pray most happily, when we arise M. Harris.
from prayer most humbled. After prayer thou shall carry thy self in thy
vocation with much more zeal, and standing thus upright with God, thou will
not fear the world, thou shall have rest and peace within, what ever stirs
be without.

-- Have a special eve to a sincere, constant and fruitful performance of
holy duties, take heed of customarinesse and Formality, which cuts out the
heart and draws the very lifeblood from them.

-- Strive by all means for attainment of what thou prayest for, by all
occasions, helps and heavenly offers.

Be diligent in thy personal Vocation and particular calling.
employments, and take heed of idleness.

2 Have an eye to Gods glory in all thy undertakings.

3 Go about earthly business, with an heavenly mind.

4 Let not any unrighteous gain entice thee to sin, or belime thee.

5 Set not thy delight on any earthly thing, for nothing brings true content to
the soul but God.

Delight thy self in him, this will both purify thy heart and assure it
before God.

In thy carnal delight there are or may be loss of crosses in curses for them.

They are broken cisternes --

In the end of every day, ask thy self

What have I done? Evening.
What have I done amiss? What have I left undone?
Thus sum up thy accounts, and make all straight twixt* For more solemn
^u^i(...) and preparation ^^ the (...)a(...), etc.
God and thee.

Keep a Catalogue of all thy g(...) known sins, nor balking any, but
dealing truly with thy self, and then falling down on thy knees disburden
thy conscience of them by humble confession to God, carrying this thy own
indictment and spreading it before the Lord and pleading guilty, drag thy
sinful lusts to the cross of thy Savior, and there crucify them. 2 Pray for
a soft and tender heart, as for life; Lord thou have promised to take out the
heart of stone -- to give an heart of flesh -- 3 Get the particular promises,
which thou desire to have fulfilled to thy soul without book, yea into thy
heart as well as thy head. Mr. Byfield.

Mr. GEORGE FLETCHER, in Christ's victory and triumph -- page 50.
Who is it sees not, that he nothing is,
But he that nothing sees? what vveker breast,
Since Adams armor faild, dares warrant his?
That made by God of all his creatures best,
Strait made himself the worst of all the rest:
If any strength we have, it is to ill,
But all the good is Gods, both povv'r and will:
The dead man, cannot rise, though he himself may kill.
Mr. QVARLES History of SAMPSON.
Medit. 21. LOrd if our Father Adam could not stay
In his upright perfection one poor day,
How can it be expected we have power
To hold out siege one scruple of an hour?
Our arms are bound with too unequal bands;
We cannot strive, we cannot loose our hands:
Great Nazarite, awake; and look upon us;
Make haste to help; the Philistims are on us.
Medit. 22. ibid. Lord should thou punish every part in me
That does offend, what member would be free?
Each member acts his part; they never lin
Until they join, and make a body of sin:
Make sin my burden; let it never please me;
And thou have promised when I come, to ease me.
Medit. 19. idem. ibid. Thou great Surgeon of a bleeding soul,
Whose sovereign balm is able to make whole
The deepest wound, thy sacred salve is sure;
We cannot bleed so fast as thou can cure:
Heal thou our wounds, that having salv'd the sore,
Our hearts may fear, and learn to sin no more;
And let our hands be strangers to those knives
That wound not fingers only, but our lives.
Some particular forms of PRAYER.
1. For the Sacrament of the LORDS Supper.
Wonderful art thou, O Lord, in all thy works toward the sons of men, but
more especially, wonderful in that great work of our redemption, by the death
of thy Son; Had thou left us to have perished, in that estate of damnation,
into which we, desperately had implunged our selves, by the wilful
disobedience of our first parents, it had been but just with thee so to have
done: for we were the clay, thou wast our Potter, and we all are the work of
thine own hands; and had thou taken no delight in us, to do us good, thou
might easily have made us dishonorable vessels of thy wrath, as well as
thou did the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, whom thou have reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness,
under the judgment of the great day. But thou, in love to our souls, would
not that we should perish, and therefore out of thine own incomprehensible
wisdom, foundest out a means of rasoming and redeeming man from hell, by
causing thine own son (God equal for ever with thy blessed self) to be
made sin for us, that so we might be made the righteousness of God in him:
who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree; and the more to
confirm us in the assured hope of everlasting salvation, which he once
purchased for us, by his bloody passion, did institute for his Church the
blessed Sacrament of his body and blood, in which I see him again crucified,
and freshly bleeding before mine eyes in the outward elements of bread and
wine, which he has appointed to be often celebrated in remembrance of him.

Blessed be thy holy name therefore; my daily sins have made me unworthy of
daily bread, much more of this bread of life; yet seeing thou call and
invitest me at this time to the Supper of the Lamb to eat of that Manna that
came down from heaven, to partake of those divine mysteries. O let not me
suffer my self to be needlessly detained from so blessed a feast, by any
pretended occasions whatsoever (as those did that made excuses and set light by
their invitation to the marriage of the Kings son, Math. 22. 5.) left thou
swear in thy wrath that I shall never taste of thy Supper, nor enter into that
rest, which my Savior is gone to prepare for thy beloved ones,

For if those in the law that did neglect to eat the Passover, and to worship
at Jerusalem at the times appointed, were to be cut off from the number of
thy people: of how much sorer punishment shall I be worthy, if I refuse to
partake in thy blessed Sacrament, and neglect so great salvation which thou
tenderest unto me hereby? O therefore make me to come as a guest invited,
coming prepared unto thy table, having on my wedding garment, because thou thy
self, the great master of this feast, art present in the assembly, eying and
observing thy guests. Let me therefore first wash my hands in innocence, my
heart from wickedness, and so compass thine Altar O Lord: that seeing Christ
my Passover is sacrificed for me, I may purge out the old leaven, and become
a new lump, keeping this feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth, feeding on him with the sour herbs of godly sorrow, and unfeigned
repentance for all my former sins: O make the very remembrance of them to be
grievous, and the burden of them intolerable unto me. O wash me Lord, wash
me, not only the feet, but even the hands also, and the head; for I am
unclean, I am unclean, a very Leper, a sink of sin, whom thou mighest shut
out of the congregation of thy people for ever; but yet O Lord if thou will,
thou can make me clean; Thy blood (O sweet Jesus) is able to cleanse more
thoroughly than the waters of Jordan did Naomans leprosy, and to wash away all
my pollutions, and make my Ethiopian skin, my leopards spots to be white as
snow in Salmon. Now the good Lord pardon me, and every one, that prepares
himself to seek thee in the truth of his heart, though we be not cleansed
and prepared according to that exact purification of thy Sanctuary. O Lord make
me to search and try my ways, to look back upon all the ungodly actions and
aberrations of my fore-past life, to view my sinne-deformed soul in the clear
glass of thy undefiled ^aw, that so I may judge and abhor my self in dust
and ashes, and be still more vile in mine own esteem: make me to examine my
self, and so eat of that bread and drink of that cup knowing that if I eat
and drink thereof unworthily, I eat and drink damnation to my self, because
I discern not the Lords body. Teach me to try my self whether I be in the
faith or no, for without faith it is impossible to please thee in any service.
It Is my faith in the death of my Savior that is the hand and mouth by which I
must apply him, and make him mine in this Sacrament. Assure me by these broad
seals annexed to the covenant of grace, and letters patents of thy holy word,
that thou will make good what thou have promised, that as thou have called, Ho,
every one that thirsts come to the waters; -- so thou will refresh this my
gasping and thirsting soul; as thou call all that be weary and heavy laden
to come unto thee; so thou will in no wise send me empty away that cast my
self into the bleeding arms of my dying Savior.

Persuade my unbeleeving and doubting heart, that as thy Minister takes, and
blesses, and breaks, and pours out, and gives, and says, Take and eat,
the bread, take and drink the wine of the Sacrament; so thou from everlasting
have separated, consecrated, and ordained Jesus Christ to be a Sacrifice for my
sins, have poured out his blood to be a satisfaction to thy offended justice
for my sinful soul, and that hereby I shall continue in communion with him,
my head, and his mystical body my fellow members. Thy flesh, O sweet Savior,
is meat indeed, and thy blood is drink indeed. O let me I beseeth thee find
it so in my fainting soul that I may be ravished with thy love, that I may
taste and see how gracious the Lord is, and find thy free promises, and pledges
of thy grace to be better than wine, sweeter also than the honey and the honey
comb. Let thy holy spirit set to his privy seal on my heart inwardly, by the
secret and sweet refreshment of his blessed testimony, that I am my well
beloveds, and my well beloved is mine -- establishing my heart in thy love, and
knitting my soul unto thee for ever. O draw me, and I shall run after thee,
show me the light of thy countenance and I shall be saved.

And Lord make me to love my brethren, as thou have loved me, yea to love my
very enemies for thy names sake, reconciling my self to those whom I have
offended, following peace with all men, and forgiving Mat. 18. 23.
them their hundred pence, 28.
as thou have freely forgiven me my ten thousand talents -- Vouchsafe me this,
and all other graces which may fit me for thy service in thy kingdom of
grace, and prepare me for the enjoyment of everlasting glory, through my Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
After the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
O Lord, what shall I render unto thee, for all the benefits which thou have
bestowed upon me, and daily ladest me withal, a most unworthy sinner? how
shall I be sufficiently thankful unto thee for them, when they be more than
I can reckon up unto thee, more then my heart is able to conceive or
comprehend? Should I offer up unto thee, thousands of rams, or ten thousand
rivers of oil, they all would come far short of thy most free, eternal,
undeserved, infinite love. Lebanon it self is not sufficient for wood, nor the
beasts upon a thousand hills for a burnt offering. What shall I then do unto
thee, O thou Preserver of men, or what recompense shall I make thee? I will
even take the cup of salvation, and give thanks to thy name, O Lord. I will
offer up my soul and body for a holy, living and acceptable sacrifice unto
thee; this will please thee better than* bullock that has horns and hoofes.
--

Thou O Lord in the beginning, did make me to be, when I was not before;
and when I had lost my self, and forfeited my being, and life, and happiness,
did in Christ, restore me to a more blessed estate, than at my Primitive
integrity. Thou thy self art become my Father, thy son my Savior, thy holy
Spirit my Sanctifier, thy word my Instructor, thy Sacraments the food to
refresh, satisfy, and feed my poor hungry soul to everlasting life.

This day thou have called me to thy holy Mountain, and made me joyful in thy
house of prayer, this day have thou invited me to sit down at thy table, and
made unto me a feast of fat things full of marrow, a feast of wines on the
lees well refined; thou have abundantly satisfied me with the f^^nesse of thy
house, and have made me to drink of the river of thy pleasures. Blessed be
thy glorious name for ever and ever, which is above all thankesgiving and
praise of mine! O that I could be indeed thankful unto thee as thou art
gracious unto me! If I should open my mouth never so wide thou would fill
it, thy favors to my poor soul are more than all tongues of men and Angels
can worthily magnify. And now O Lord accept, I beseech thee, the free
will-offering of thy servant, that desires to fear thy name, and to make a
covenant with thee never to be broken, that my soul shall cleave close unto
thee, and avouch thee this day to be my God and Savior for ever more. Here I
do resign myself, soul and body, all that is in me, and all that belongs
unto me, to be wholly thine, and that I will never wickedly depart from thee,
my God, as I have done. O that my ways were so directed, that I might keep
thy commandments always!

Never let me with the disgorged dog, return any more to my former vomit; nor
with the washed sow to wallow in the mire: but as I have now washed my feet,
so suffer me no more again to defile them: as I have put off the filthy rags
of my old conversation, so I may never again put them on, but become a new
creature. That seeing the expiation of my sins cost my Savior so dear, as the
shedding of his precious blood, and that thy wrath lay so heavy upon him who
was our surety only, being innocent in himself; I may hence conceive how
heinous a thing sin is, how abhorred by thee, and so hate it in my self with
a perfect hatred, and resist it even to blood; and not crucify again hereby,
the Lord of life and glory.

O make me thankefully to remember that bitter passion of his, and thy love (
O Father) unto me, in that thou have accepted me to life in him, and have
brought salvation this day home to my house, to my heart. Lord enter in, abide
with, and dwell in my soul for ever. Take not thy holy spirit from me, make
me one with Christ my head, flesh of his flesh, bone of his bone; make me one
with the mystical body of thine Elect, that I may have my part in the prayers
of the Church, in the Communion of Saints, here on earth, in the kingdom of
grace, and may enjoy thee, and them, face to face, and sit down and eat and
drink with thee, in thy kingdom of glory.

Amen.
For the Sacrament of Baptism.
O Lord our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God, who keep
covenant and mercy with all them that fear thy name, and trust upon thee, even
to a thousand generations, thou have promised to be our God, and the God of
our seed, to enter into covenant with us, that we should be thine; O Lord I
come to thy throne of grace at this time, to lay claim to my interest in that
new covenant, sealed unto thy Church in the blood of Jesus, that thou would
perform the same unto me, and mine also: have not thou said, thou will
circumcise mine heart and the heart of my seed, to love the Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
Lord our God with all our heart, and with all our soul? -- that thou will put
thy Law in our inward parts, and write it in our hearts, and that thou will be
our God, and we shall be thy Ier. 31. 34.
people, that thou will forgive our injquity, and wilt remember our sin no
more? O Lord have thou said it, and wilt not thou also do it? By faith I plead
my interest thereunto, not for my self alone, but for mine also, with whom I
beseech thee to make an everlasting covenant of life and peace, that being
baptized into Jesus Christ, they may be sanctified and cleansed with the
washing of water by the word. O Lord we are all borne the children of wrath,
and there is no way for us to escape the damnation of hell, except we be
borne again of water and of the Spirit. O Lord do thou sprinkle clean water
upon us, wash away the filth of Zion, and purge the blood of Jerusalem from the
midst thereof: Baptize us with the Holy Ghost, that having our hearts sprinkled
from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water, we may be
new creatures, fit to be an habitation of God through the spirit.

O blessed be thy goodness for ever, which have given us this seal of thy
rich promise; this is that Arc in and through which thou savest thine Elect:
thou dalliest not with us herein, it is no idle ceremony; thou art present in
thy own ordinance to fulfill that which thou have promised. O wash our souls
with the baptism of Repentance, as thou do our bodies with the outward
element of water. Let the virtue of Christ's death kill sin in us, for how
shall we that are buried with Christ by baptism, and thereby dead to sin,
live yet therein? Do not we herein vow to forsake the Devil, the Pomps and
vanities of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh, and shall
we break our vow, and transgress the covenant? O let this be far from us,
teach us therefore to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, deliver us from every
evil work that we may serve the living God; Sprinkle clean water upon us,
that we may be clean from our natural filthiness, and from all our
uncleanness. Wash us, O wash us thoroughly from our iniquities, and cleanse us
from our sins. Make our hearts to be steadfast in thy love, and never to
forget this covenant of our God: thy mercy do thou keep for us, and ours for
evermore, and let thy covenant stand fast with us, and be established for ever
as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven. And as thou have thus
brought us into the bond of the covenant, so let us never depart from thee. Be
thou unto us a God, and let us be thy people for evermore, even till thou
bring us unto Mount Sion, and to the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an inumerable company of Angels, to the general assembly and
Church of the first borne which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of
all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect: and to Jesus the Mediator of
the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better than
that of Abel. Make me to be thine my self, be thou my Father and make me to be
thy Son: for if the first fruit be holy, the lump also shall be holy; and if
the root be holy, so also shall the branches be. This mercy I beg of thee in
his name, merits, and mediation, out of whose pierced side, issued forth water
and blood, for the sanctifying, and justifying, of thine Elect. To whom, with
thee, and the Holy Spirit, be all glory, service, thanksgiving, and dominion,
through all the Churches of the Saints, for ever,

Amen.
For Regeneration, Sanctification, and grace to serve God.
O Lord, thou God of truth, who have sworn in thy faithfulness, that as thou
live thou have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that he should
turn from his way and live: and therefore command thy people, saying, Turn
ye, turn ye from your evil Ezekiel. 33. 11.
ways, for why will ye dye, O house of Israel? and have enjoined, that I
should wash me, and make me clean, and put away the evil of my doings from
before thine eyes: promising moreover, that though my sins be as scarlet, they
shall be as white as Snow, though they be red like crimson, they shall be as
wool: I that am a wicked and miserable caitiffe, a sinner before the Lord
exceedingly, even as the men of Sodom, that have done abominable works, and
denied the God that is above, wilfully sinning after I had received the
knowledge of the truth, and treading under foot the Son of God, counting the
blood of Heb. 10. 26. 29.
the covenant, wherewith I was sanctified an unholy thing, and having done
de^pi^e to the spirit of grace; O Lord, even out of the deepes do I call unto
thee for help, yea out of the belly of hell do I earnestly cry for thy
mercy: O cast not out my prayer. Though mine iniquities be more than the
hairs of my head and my transgressions heavier than the sand, yet is there
forgiveness with thee: and although my sins have reached up to heaven, yet
thy mercy is above the heavens: mine are, at the most, but the sins of a
man: but thine, at the least, are the mercies of an infinite God, yea thou have
the relenting bowels of a most tender Father.

O spread the robe of thy Sons righteousness over me, that so thou may
not behold my nakedness, cloth me with* the garments of his salvation, say
unto my soul, Live: cause breath to enter into my dry E^^. 37. 3. 6.
bones, lay sinews upon them, and bring flesh upon them, and cover them with
skin, that I may know that thou art the Lord. And albeit I be dead in
trespasses and sins, yet open my grave and cause me to come out of it: yea
though with Lazarus I stink already, yet roll away the stone, and speak thou
by thy all-powerfull word, and I shall come forth and live. O purge my
conscience from dead works, redeem me from death, ransom me from power of
the grave: and though I be less than the least of all Saints, less than the
least of all thy mercies, yet make me a prisoner of hope, and by the blood of
thy covenant send forth my soul, out of the pit wherein is no water. Wash my
robes and make them white in the blood of the Lamb: Create in me a clean
heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Make thy word to be unto me,
like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap, cleansing me from all filthiness
of flesh and spirit, that so I may be meet to be a partaker of the inheritance
of the Saints in light, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but holy
and without blemish, the son of thy love, through Christ.

Thou have promised that if I Pro. 8. 17.
return unto thee, thou will receive me, and that if I seek thee early, I
shall find thee, that thou will have mercy upon me, and wilt abundantly
pardon all my sins, heal my backeslidings, and love me freely. O Lord, it is
not sin in the highest degree, when it is out of measure sinful, and is come
to the full, that can hinder the Sun of righteousness from arising, with
healing in his wings, on any humbled soul: no, for where Sin abounded, Grace
does much more superabound: and where shall, or can the skill of thee, our
heavenly Physician, be so much seen, so much adored, and magnified, as in
healing a poor soul, weltring and wallowing in its blood, and desperately
wounded unto everlasting death? O speak thou the word and my soul shall live.
Subdue mine iniquities, and cast all my sins into the depths of the Sea.

O redeem me from my former vain conversation, that I may renounce the hidden
things of dishonesty: turn thou me and I shall be turned, betroth my soul
unto thee in faithfulness, make with me a covenant of peace. And because no
man can come to thee, except the father which sent thee draw him; O draw me;
and I will run after thee; open my blind eyes, say Epphata to my deaf ears,
touch my lips with a coal from thy Altar, that my iniquity may be taken away,
and my sin purged, then shall my lame feet leap as an Heart, and my dumb
tongue shall sing forth thy praise.

A new heart do thou also Eze. 36. 27.
give me, and a new spirit do thou put within me, and take away the stony
heart out of the Eze. 36. 27
midst of me, and bestow upon me an heart of flesh: and put thy spirit within
me (as thou have promised) and cause me to walk in thy statutes, and to keep
thy judgments and do them. And for the time to come, Lord make me more
zealous of thy glory, more profitable in ways of my calling, more careful to
do and receive all possible good that I can. Alas I have been a barren tree,
thou have planted me near the rivers of water, have dug about me, and
taken much pains with me, but I am still unfruitful, thy glory is not so
dear unto me as it ought to be; nor is my own salvation, or the edification
of others, so sincerely indevoured by me, as was meet.

O turn me into another man, circumcise the foreskinne of my heart, let the
time past of my life suffice to have served, and live in sin. Give me grace
now in this my day, to know the things that belong to my peace, to make use of
this time of my visitation, to lay hold on eternal life, to take the kingdom
of heaven by violence: now thou stand at the door and knockest, O let me
open unto thee, that thou may enter in, and sup with me. Give me grace to
work out my salvation with fear and trembling, to be often in calling upon
thee in prayer, and lifting mine eyes up to the hills from whence both pardon
of sin, and power over sin must be expected. Make me often search and
try my ways, and examine my self, whether I be in the faith or no. Now I
beseech thee to hear me, and help me; do away the iniquity of thy servant,
cover my transgressions, and let my sins be blotted out from before thee,
for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen. Amen.
Some particular forms of PRAYER.
For the English Colonies and Plantations in New England, Virginia, etc.
O Most high God, Possessor Genesis 14. 19. Deuteronomy. 10 14 Isai. 63. 15.
of heaven and earth, the heaven, and the heaven of heavens, is the habitation
of thy Psalm. 90. 2.
holiness and of thy glory; by thee the Mountains were 115. 16.
brought forth, and thou have formed the earth, and the would, and have given
it to the children of men for a possession; And by thy word of blessing Genesis 9.
7.
have commanded man, to increase and multiply, and replenish the face of the
earth: We in this nation have found thy gracious Providence over us, in thy
continual protection and preservation; for thou have Psa. 147. 13
strengthened the bars of our gates, and blessed our children within us, thou
have set peace in our borders, and have abundantly 14.
given us blessings of the Genesis 49. 25.
breast, and of the womb: insomuch that we are exceedingly 2 Kin. 6. 1
multiplied, so that the place where we dwell is too narrow for us, for our
seed is become as Isai. 48. 19.
the sand, and the offspring of our bowels, as the gravel thereof: And now O
Lord, thou of Number. 14. 7.
thy good providence, have espied out for us, an exceeding good land, watered
with the dew of Genesis 27. 39.
heaven from above, blessed with the farnesse of the earth Psalm. 80. 9.
from beneath, and have made room for us to be planted therein, that we who
are Deuteronomy. 4. 7.
grown into so great a nation, and are thronged at home, may swarm out, and
be gathered thither, for the glory of thy great name, the honor of this
Kingdom, and the further enlargement of our Kings dominions. O let their
design be Exodus 28. 36
holiness to the Lord, honor and wealth to our nation, and enlargement also
to the kingdom of thy Christ, who are transplanted into those remoter parts of
the world. Build a 2 Samuel 7. 10. 1 Chr. 28. 2.
place of rest for thy tabernacle among them, that the heathen that have not
known thee, and the families that have not called Ier. 10. 25.
on thy name, may by this means be delivered from the power of darkness,
and translated Coll. 1. 13.
into the kingdom of thy dear son. Be thou a wall of Zech. 2. 5.
fire round about our people, and a little Sanctuary unto them: Let Eze. 11. 16.
no son of wickedness approach Psa. 89. 22.
near, to hurt them, build them up into a nation; there plant them, and make
Deuteronomy. 33. 28 2 Samuel 20. 1.
them to dwell in safety: Let no seditious Sheba be author of faction or
schism among them

And as thou causest the Sun to arise upon all the earth, so that nothing is
hid from the heat thereof, so le^ there be no speech, nor language, where the
voice of thy Gospel is not heard. Let thy way be known upon earth, and thy
saving health among all nations: cause the Sun of righteousness to arise
with healing in his wings, upon all those that sit in darkness, and the
shadow of death, to guide their feet into the way of peace: Give thy son
Jesus the heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for
his possession. Make all the Kings of the earth to fall down before him, and
all nations to do him reverence. That his dominion may be from Sea even to
Sea, and from the rivers even to the ends of the earth. That Tarshish, Pull, and
Lud that draw the bow, Tuball, and Iavan, and the Isles afar off, that have
not heard thy ^ame, neither have seen thy glory, may be brought into the
household of faith, and be joined to the people of the God of Abraham, and so
be made one fold under that great shepherd and Bishop of their souls.

Those sinners of the Gentiles, O Lord draw them out of the darkness of
Paganism, Idolatry, ignorance, and superstition; and though they now be
wallowing in their blood, yet let it be the time of love with thee, and say
unto them live: spread thy skirt, over them. Let the light of the glorious
Gospel of Jesus Christ shine unto them, that they may turn from the service
of dumb Idols, yea, of very Devils, to thee the living God. Teach them to know
thee the only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ; open the door
of faith unto them that they may believe in the name of thy Son; grant them
repentance unto life, that they may be saved; light up among them, some burning
and shining lamps, to bear thy name among them, that the grace of God which
brings salvation, may appear unto all men: that so they which are without
Christ, being aliens from the Common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the
covenants of Promise, that have no hope, and are without God in the world, may
hear the voice of the Son of God, and live.

To this end, plant thy grace, and fear, in their hearts, who are of that
Colonie and Plantation: make them wise to win those poor souls, by their
unblameable conversation, being zealous for thee, gentle toward them, apt to
teach them, patient* in meekness instructing them, if God peradventure will
give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and that they may
recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him
at his will.

O Lord this is a worthy work, and who is sufficient for these things!
therefore do thou make bare thine own almighty arm, bring in the fullness of
the Gentiles, give them where Satan's throne is, an heart to perceive, and eyes
to see, and ears to hear the word of thy grace; that the ends of the earth
may see the salvation of God, and they that dwell in the uttermost parts
thereof may be converted unto thee: then shall the earth be filled with the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea, and they shall fear the
name of the Lord from the West, and his glory from the rising of the Sun.

Amen.
A Prayer to be prepared against Death, etc.
O Thou eternal, immortal, invisible, and only wise God, who stretchedst
forth the heavens, and laidst the foundations of the earth, and formedst the
spirit of man within him; thou art the former of al things, thy spirit did at
the first make me, and the breath of the Almighty has given me life: thou
have clothed me with skin and flesh, and fenced me with bones and s^^ewes, my
substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously
wrought in the lowest parts of the earth: thine eyes did see me when I was yet
unperfect, and in thy book all my members were written, which in continuance
were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them before. And thou Lord
tookest me out of the womb, thou did make me hope when I was upon my mothers
breasts, thou have fed me, and led me all my life long unto this day: when I
have passed through the waters, thou have been with me, and through the
rivers, they have not overflowed me; thou have carried me on Eagles wings, and
in the time of trouble have preserved me safely under thy feathers, and there
has not one hair of mine head fallen to the ground, without thy Providence?

But what man is he that lives, and shall not see death? our days on the
earth are as a shadow, and there is none abiding; we spend our years as a tale
that is told: our life is even as a Vapor that appears for a little time,
th^n vanishes away: we build our house as a moth, and as a booth that the
Keeper makes. We have here no continuing City, all flesh is grass, and all
the goodlinesse thereof as the flower of grass. Man that is borne of a woman,
is of few days, and full of trouble, he comes forth like a flower and is cut
down; he flees also as a shadow, and continues not.

O Lord my times are in thy hand, all my days are determined, the number of my
months are with thee, thou have appointed my bounds which I cannot pass, I
must one day return to the ground, for dust I am, and to dust I must return:
thou will bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all living, where I
shall make my bed in darkness, and must say to corruption, thou art my
father, and to the worms, thou art my mother and my sisters. O that I were
wise and did understand this! that I could consider my latter end! that whether
I live, I might live unto the Lord, or whether I dye, I might dye unto the
Lord; that both living and dying I might be the Lords! then should I use the
world, as if I used it not, then would I not be conformed to the men of this
world, who have their portion in this life, whose God is their belly, who make
pleasures, and honor, and riches their God, and mind only earthly things. But
by that irreversible sentence of thine, In the day thou eatest thereof thou
shall dye the death, it is appointed unto all men once to dye our fathers where
are they? and the Prophets, do they live for ever? they all are gone down
into the chambers of death, there they rest together in their beds, till the
heavens be no more, they shall not wake nor be raised out of their sleep: and
I my self also who am a son of Adam, and formed out of the same clay, I must
(when my days be fulfilled) sleep with my fathers, and go the way whence I
shall not return.

Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold
the Sun, and yet thy favor, presence, and light of thy countenance is better
than life: whilst I am in the flesh, I am absent from thee, and thou have
taught me, that the day of death is better than the day when I was borne:
Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors,
and their works follow them. And that I may dye in thee, O make me to live to
thee, O teach me so to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto
wisdom; that all the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my
nostrills, I may glorify thee on earth, and finish that work thou give me
to do; because there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge in the grave
whither I am going. O make me to pass the Eccles. 9. 10
time of my Sojourning here in thy fear, because the night comes, in which
I cannot work: So long as this my day lasts, let me live as a child of the
light, let my behavior be, as becomes holiness, adorning the doctrine of
God my Savior in all things, that I may praise thee my God whilst I have my
being, and my conversation may be in heaven, even whilst I Sojourne here on
earth: and the life which I now live in the flesh, I may live by the faith of
the Son of God, that the world may be crucified unto me, and I unto the
world. For to this end, our Savior Jesus once tasted death for every man, and
humbled himself, and became obedient, even to the death of the cross, that
they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves but unto him, which
dyed for them, and rose again. When therefore my race is finished, and I have
served out my time.

O let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end, be like his!
Let my soul be bound up in the bundle of life with the Lord my God, show me
the path of life, In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand there
are pleasures for evermore.

Pardon all my Sins, heal my backe-slidings love me freely, subdue mine
iniquities, and cast all my Sins into the depths of the Sea. Give me peace of
conscience, and joy in thee, that when dust shall return again to the earth
as it was, my spirit may return to God who gave it.

Amen.
A Prayer for a Scholar.
O Lord, thou art the Father of lights, every good gift, and every perfect gift
is from above, and comes down from thee; thou have commanded that if any
lack wisdom, he should ask it of thee; thou it is that give to the simple
sharpness of wit, and to the child knowledge and understanding. O give unto me
thy servant, a wise and understanding heart, and make learning delightful unto
my soul, that I giving attendance unto reading, may meditate upon the things
that shall be taught me, and give my self wholly thereunto, that so my
profiting may appear unto all. O make me also to learn Christ, in whom are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; that I may grow up before thee
as a plant of righteousness.

And because Paul may plant, and Appollos water, but it is thou alone that
can give the increase, command thy blessing from heaven that it may rest upon
my studies. It will be in vain for me to rise early, and to sit up late,
unless it please thee to prosper mine endeavors. O do thou bestow on me
knowledge and skill, in all learning and wisdom, as thou did on Daniel and
his three companions. And as Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, so also incline mine ear to wisdom, and apply mine heart unto
understanding, that I may say unto wisdom, thou art my Sister, and call
understanding my Kinswoman: make me to seek her, as silver, and to search for
her as hidden treasures, to be instant in season, and out of season, in labors
more abundant, in watchings often, applying my heart to know, to search, and
seek out wisdom and the reason of things. O make me in the morning to sow my
seed, and in the evening not to withhold mine hand, that I may take hold of
instruction and not let her go, but keep her, for she is my life. Make me
swift to hear, careful to redeem the time, wisely husbanding those
opportunities I have to learn, that with all my getting I may get
understanding, and may not only learn the wisdom of heathen, and profane
Authors, but that wisdom also which is from above, and heavenly, which may
give me an inheritance among all them that are sanctified.

Lord set thy stamp on this my pliable and waxie youth, that it may be
holiness unto thee, season my heart with thy fear betimes, let me set thee
always before mine eyes, that as Samuel, Josiah, and Solomon, I may learn to
know thee the Lord God of my Fathers, and serve thee with a willing mind, make
me to give to thee the first fruits of my years, and to remember thee my
creator in the days of my youth, whilst the evil days come not, thus
laying up a good foundation for the time to come.

Thou have promised that if I seek thee, thou will be found of me, but if I
forsake thee, thou will cast me off for ever; make me therefore diligent to
know the Scriptures of a child, which are able to make me wise unto salvation;
let thy glory be the end, thy word the rule, thy spirit the guide, thy will the
law, thy promises the comforts of my life, that thus acquainting my self with
thee betimes, and abhorring all profane and Atheistical conceits of thee, thy
ways, and worship, I may by thy grace suppress all filthy and unholy
thoughts, fancies and desires, and so fly the lusts of youth.

Thou have made me to be borne into thy Church, and have even from my infancy
received me into thy covenant, O that there were such an heart in me, that I
might serve thee always! Give me patient, obedient, humble, dutiful, and
discreet carriage, to all my Supiriours: to him especially at whose feet, as
Saint Paul at Gamaliels, I now sit: make me painful, and industrious, careful
to please him, reverencing his authority. Make me affable, loving, courteous,
harmless, and of winning behavior toward my Equals and Inferiors, being
gentle, and easy to be entreated by them all. Pardon and heal the frailties,
follies and infirmities of my youth, give me understanding to conceive,
largeness of heart, and capacity to apprehend; confirm my memory to retain,
my invention to find out, and attain to humane literature. Prosper all my
labors, and make me wise, to understand mine own ways, to save mine own
soul, that I may be a comfort to my Parents, and honor to thy Gospel, an
example of Learning, Piety, and virtue to all my Equals: that so I may
hereafter become a profitable instrument of thy glory either in the church or
common wealth, as thou shall see it best in thine heavenly wisdom, and most
agreeable to mine own disposition, that thus glorifying thee in my life, I may
be blessed of thee in my death, and glorified for ever with thee in the world
to come,

Amen.
A Prayer for a Tradesman, Merchant, etc.
O Lord, the righteous God, that triest the reins and the heart, thou love
truth in the inward parts, and have commanded all those that call upon thy name
to depart from iniquity, and to put away lying, speaking the truth from his
heart, every man unto his neighbor, not using false weights, deceitful
balances, or unjust measures: and would that no man should go beyond, and
defraud his brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the avenger of all
such.

O Lord, the heart of man is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked, and in nothing more discovers it self, than in the gain of
unrighteousness. The love of money is the root of all evil, which while some
have coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves
through with many sorrows. Thus in buying, and selling, and trading with each
other, so they may lade themselves with thick clay, they care not to load
their consciences with heavy Sin. Thus it often is, as with the buyer, so
with the seller: It Is naught, it is naught, says the buyer, but when he is gone
his way he boasts: and how many several tricks of deceit, and sleights,
there are practiced by the cunning craftiness of men that lie in wait to
deceive, which the false and dissembling heart of man is guilty of, thou only
know, who searchest the heart, and tryest the reins, and wilt one day bring
to light the hidden things of dishonesty and darkness: so that as a nail
sticks fast between the joining Eccles 27. 2.
of stones, so does Sin stick close between buying and selling.

O Lord what shall it profit me to win the whole world and to lose mine own
soul? could I rejoice because my wealth was great, or because my hand had
gotten much? If I should get my house full of silver, and gold, heaping up
silver as dust, and fine gold as the mire in the streets, or prepare raiment as
the clay, being filled with all precious and pleasant riches; yet thou that
hate false balances, and the bag of deceitful weights, can blow upon all
my substance, that it shall melt away, by thy blast it would perish; a fire not
blown should consume it suddenly: thou could make my riches to take them
wings and fly away as an Eagle toward heaven, to vanish as a dream, and not
be found, or chased away as a vision of the night. And thou have in thy
assured me, that he that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them
in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool: and howsoever
bread of deceit may be sweet to a man, yet afterward his mouth shall be
filled with gravel.

O let me never be given over to that reprobate mind, supposing that gain i^
godliness; Let me not grind the face of my brother, or pant after the dust of
the earth, on the head of the poor, making the Ephah small, and the shekell
great, and falsifying the balances by deceit. Never let me be so greedy of
gain, that in the seeking thereof I should enlarge my desire as hell, or as
death, that cannot be satisfied. O make me to hate and take heed of guile: Let
not my soul be poisoned with the mammon of unrighteousness, that I should by
lying and fraud, obtrude bad wares on the men I trade withal, for hereby I
should take the name of my God in vain, and cause thy Gospel to be evil
spoken of* Wicked balances and the bag of deceitful weights are an
abomination unto thee, and much better will a dry morsel be, or a dinner of
green herbs gotten by honest dealing, then a stalled Ox by coozening and
deceit: Godliness with contentment is great gain, but they that will be rich
fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts,
which drown men in destruction, and perdition.

O Lord, faith and a good conscience are special jewels, a precious treasure:
Let not me make shipwreck of them for every trifle; how ever profane and
godless men may disesteeme them, they are not to be valued with the gold of
Ophir, with the precious Onyx or the Sapphire. Let me ever remember that golden
rule, to do unto other men as I would they should do unto me. And if by my
industry, thou do please to bless my estate, that my riches do increase, O
let me not set my heart upon them, making gold my hope, or saying to fine gold,
thou art my confidence; or if I shall wax poor, and fall into decay through
crosses, and losses by thy hand of providence, and not by mine own negligence,
sloth, or ill husbandry, yet make me to learn in whatsoever state I am,
therewith to be content, and may know both how to be abased, and how to
abound, to be full, and to be hungry, which grace I beseech thee to grant me
for Christ Jesus sake.

Amen.
A Servants Prayer.
MOst holy and great God, thou have commanded servants to be obedient to them
which are their masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in
singleness of heart, as unto Christ: not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but
as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart. Therefore as
thy good hand of providence has placed me in this condition, so I beseech
thee, give me thy grace, that with good will I may do service, as to the Lord
and not unto men, knowing that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same
shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. O teach me
therefore, first to serve, and to fear thee; for thy service is perfect
freedom; thus being the Lords free man, I shall no more be a Servant but a
Son, and heir of God through Christ. To this end make thy face to shine upon
thy servant, be thou with me in all that I do, and let the beauty of the Lord
my God be upon me and establish thou the work of my hands upon me, that thy
blessing may be upon all that my master has in the house, and in the field:
make thou a hedge about him, and about all that he has on every side, and
bless thou the work of his hands, that his substance may be increased in the
Land. And as thou blessedst Laban for Jacobs sake, Potiphar for Joseph's sake,
Obed Edom for the Arkes sake, Ahab for Obadiahs sake, so also I beseech thee to
bless me and all the things that are under my hand: cause thy blessing to rest
in my masters house, prevent him daily with blessings of goodness, that he may
learn by experience, that thou Lord, have blessed him since my coming. O make
me a faithful and a wise servant as Eliezer unto Abraham, that if my master
commit his goods into my hand, and make me ruler over his household, to appoint
them their work, to give them their meat in due season, I may with all my
power serve him therein, not eating the bread of idleness, nor brawling nor
quarrelling with my fellow servants, but make me to be peaceable, gentle, easy
to be entreated. Let me not be sloathfull in business, or indammage my master
by my neglect, but desirous to promote his good, and to please him in all
things; not answering again, not purloyning, but showing all good fidelity,
that I may adorn the doctrine of God my Savior in all things.

And though my master should become a hard man, and should make my life bitter
with sore bondage, making me serve with rigor, yea though he make me a hewer of
wood, or drawer of water, or employ me even to the basest offices, yet let not
my proud heart swell and repine hereat. Grant that I may submit my self under
his hand, not only when he is good, and gentle, but also when he is froward,
even when I am bu^feted for my faults; remembering my blessed Savior, that
took on him the form of a servant, who though he was our Lord and Master, yet
willingly gave himself an example and pattern of all patience, and humility.

And although with One simus, I have been sometimes unfaithful and
unprofitable heretofore, yet make me profitable to my master for the time to
come: that he may receive me, not now as a servant, but above a servant: never
suffer me like Judas in a religious family, to be ungodly, to betray my master,
or bewray his secrets, nor a lying, covetous, and dissembling servant as
Gehezi, nor as Ziba, slandering my master: but counting him worthy of all
honor, that he being a believer, I may not despise him because he is a
brother, but rather do him service because he is faithful and beloved,
pertaker of the benefit of thy Sons redemption. Let my behavior be as
becomes holiness, grant that with patience I may bear his threatenings,
chidings, revilings, because thou have taught me, that a soft tongue breaks
the bones. Make me wisely to forbear, and in my patience to possess my
soul, referring all my wrongs, and injuries to thee, though he should not do
unto me that which is just and equal; knowing that even he also has a
Master in heaven, neither is there respect of persons with thee.

O Lord I beseech thee, let now thy ear be attentive to the prayer of me thy
servant, who desires to fear thy name, and prosper I pray thee thy servant
this day, and grant me grace instantly to serve thee, that so thou who have the
hearts of all men in thy hands, as the rivers of water, may give me favor in
the sight of my master, that my work and labor may be accepted. O Lord I
beseech thee free me from sin, that I may become a servant of righteousness
^ alas I have made thee too long, to serve with my sins, I have wearied
thee with mine iniquities: pardon I pray thee all my transgressions, and enter
not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight no flesh living shall be
justified: let me not henceforth serve sin any longer, but grant that I may
serve thee in holiness, and righteousness all the days of my life. Amen.
Lord Jesus

Amen.
A thankesgiving to our Savior Jesus Christ.
MOst loving Lord, and blessed Savior, the mighty God, everlasting Father,
Prince of peace and life, the rock of my salvation, the fountain opened to
the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for
uncleanness, the Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world, who
now art set down at the right hand of the Majesty on high, and yet have
respect unto thy poor members here on earth. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O
Lord accept the groanings of my humbled soul, (...). 63 8. 63. 1.
which follows ^a^d after thee, which thirsts and longs for thee in a
dry, and barren land where no water is.

O my sweet Savior, very loving have thou been to me, thy love to me was
wonderful, passing the love of women: at the which so infinite, so
unconceivable, unchangable, everlasting and undeserved love of thine to me a
miserable sinner, the very Angels stand amazed, desiring to pry into the
mystery of thy incarnation, and admire to see thee (the brightness of thy
Fathers glory, and the express image of his person) assuming a nature
inferior to theirs: who though thou were Lord of Lords, King of Kings, the
image of the invisible God, the first borne of every creature, heir appointed
of all things, by whom also the worlds were made, yet tookest upon thee, the
form of a servant, and wast made in the likeness of men, being delivered to
death for my sins, and made a curse for me. Was there ever love like this
love of thine, that one should die for his enemies? from the beginning of the
world was it ever heard before, that God should become man, to save man from
the wrath of God due to man's sin? But thou art that good Shepherd that give
thy life for thy Sheep, and thou have loved me, and washed me from my sins
in thy own blood, and delivered me from the wrath to come.

O Lord Jesus Christ, thou, thou only art the hope of Israel, the Savior
thereof in the time of trouble; whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is
none upon earth that I desire besides thee: without thee, and out of thee,
there is nothing amiable, worthy the setting my heart upon. Let the world love
it self, let men be Idolaters of their own concupiscences, of their goods,
lives, wisdom, reputation, etc but cause thou me to forsake, and to hate all
things for thee, and to count them dung, that I may win Christ. Let my heart
take no greater pleasure than to see thee glorified in the world, and
enthronized in my own soul. Thou art my portion for ever, he whom my soul
loves, whose love to me is better than wine, the Lord my righteousness. Who
shall now lay any thing to the charge of thine Elect? seeing thou do
justify, who can condemn?

I desire to know nothing but thee crucified, to love nothing more than thy
sacred self, I desire only to be found in thee, not having mine own
righteousness (which indeed is none) but to be clad with the garments of thy
salvation. O sweet Jesus spread thy skirt over me, for thou art my near
kinsman, true Immanuel, God with us, God for us. Never, I beseech thee, suffer
me to be unmindfull of, unthankful for that wonder of all thy wondrous
works, my eternal redemption, and salvation by thy precious blood.

Order my conversation aright, to the pleasing of thee in all my desires,
thoughts, words, and actions, that I may not henceforth live to my self, but
unto thee, which have dyed for me and rose again. Guide me Lord with thy
counsel whiles I live on earth, and afterward, receive me to thy glory.

Amen.
A thankesgiving to God for his wonderful deliverance of our King and state
from the Gunpowder Treason, Novem. 5. 1605.
LOrd God Almighty, glorious in holiness, working wonders always for thy poor
Church, and in the greatness of thine excellency, confounding all those that
are implacable enemies to thine elect: we the people of this land (who have, at
this day, tasted and seen how gracious thou art in saving us by so great a
deliverance, as the like was never heard of, since man dwelt upon the fa^e of
the earth) do with all humble and hearty acknowledgement, praise and blesse^
thy glorious name, for that admirable and strange deliverance which thou
graciously vouchsafedst to our King, Prince, Nobles, and the whole body of this
Kingdom, and state assembled together in the high-court of Parliament. How
great a cause have we to praise thee day by day, and to bless thy name for
ever and ever who have given us such deliverance as this? which if ever we
forget, let our tongues cleave to the roof of our mouth: Doubtless unto God
the Lord belong the issues from death; it was thou that said hither to shall
ye go and no further, here shall the proud waves of your hellish attempts
stop themselves, O ye popish conspiratours, your mischief shall return upon
your own head, and your violent dealing shall come down upon your own pate:
and all that see it shall say this has God done, for they shall perceive it
was thy work. Blessed be thy name O Lord, who have not given us as a prey unto
their teeth, that kept the proud waters from going over our soul, and
deliveredst us from so great a death, thou have broken the jaw bone of those
ravening Lions, and have plucked us as a prey out of their teeth: our soul is
escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler, the snare is broken and we
are delivered.

Not unto us O Lord, not to us but to thy name, be the praise for ever given,
that thus savedst thy people with an outstretched hand, and watchedst betwixt
our enemies and us: they thought to have cut off head and tail, branch and
rush in one day, to have swallowed us up alive as the grave, and whole as those
that go down into the pit: but themselves are salne into the pit which they
dug for us: Righteous art thou O Lord God of recompenses, just and true are
thy judgments, who maintainedst our right and our cause, and gave not the
soul of thy turtle into their hands, but gave them blood to drink for they
were worthy. Blessed be thy name, who redeemedst our life from destruction, and
thus crownest us with loving kindness: thou satest in heaven and laughedst
them to scorn, thou Lord had them in derision, and though they cursed, yet
thou did bless us, yea thou did curse them, and did blow upon them in
the fire of thy wrath, and dashedst them in pieces like a Potters vessel.

They dug deep to hide their counsel from thee, but the darkness ^ideth
not from thee, thou broughtest to light their works of darkness, thou
causedst their own tongus to ma^e them to fall -- thus when thou please to
work for thy Church -- a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that
which has wings shall discover the matter: and in the thing wherein they deal
proudly thou will be above them. They took crafty counsel against thy
Saints, and were mad against thy people, and sworn together against us and had
their mischievous device not been defeated by thee, our land had been as
Sodom, our people as Gomorrah a desolation, our Cities Golgotha, our fields
Aceldama. Cursed be their anger for it was fierce, and their wrath for it
Exodus 12. Ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and thy sons
for ever. Verse 24. When your children shall say unto you, What mean you b^ th^^
service?
was cruel: but blessed be thou O Lord, who savedst us by a great
deliverance, and gave us not over to the will of our enemies into the hands
of brutish men, and skillful to dust oy, more fierce then the Evening Woulues,
bloody, and breathing out cruelty. This was none other but the finger of God,
this was thy doing O Lord, and it is mavelous in our eyes; this is the day
which thou have m^de to be unto us, a good day, a day of blessings and praises,
we will Verse. 26. -- that ye shall say, It is the day of thankesgiving for --
it is a day to be much observed unto the Lord, for delivering us from --. Verse.
42.
rejoice and be glad in it, yea and the children which are yet unborne shall
arise, and for it praise thy name, and tell it also unto their children, that
even to perpetual generations, we all may remember this day (as the Jews did
their feast of Purim) and keep it throughout every generation, every Family,
every Province, and every City, that it may not fail from among the people of
this land, nor the memorial of it perish from our seed.

Still confound all their devilish practices, blast their purposes, infatuate
their policies, as many as have evil will to Zion. Let the ravens of the
valies pick out those eyes, and the young Eagles eat them, as many as rejoice
not to see thy Gospel flourish, nor thy Saints prosper, nor the welfare of
this state and Church all their days. So let all thine enemies perish O Lord!
but let them that love thee be as the Sun when he goes forth in his might
-- Amen.

Deuteronomy. 4. 7. What nation is there so great who has God so nigh unto them, as
the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for?

Happy art thou O Israel, Deuteronomy. 33. 20.
who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help,
and who is the sword of thy excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars
unto thee --

A Praxis upon the Holy Oil, Printed for Robert Milbourne 1632.
showing the Use of the Scripture Phrases, In Praying, meditating, writing
Letters, exhorting, comforting, reproving, etc. yea in any Christian duty, on
any occasion to be performed.
For Example. Would thou in the time of dearth, and famine, insert a
seasonable petition or two, into thy prayers, that God would please to provide
for thee, thy family -- and the poor -- etc. to remove this judgment, and
send plenty -- Turn then to the Heads, Famine, Poor, Plenty, provide -- etc.

Let me (if thou will) spell thee out this lesson, and show thee the way-thus
then-

O Lord, the God of the Spirits cry -- the God which now from thy holy
habitation, from heaven, and bread in all our palaces -- O Lord the Land

Our bread formerly eaten bread without scarsenesse -- in now for our sins
thou have called for a Famine, hither to been in the fullness of sufficiency,
are likely now to be in straits -- some that Many their brethren --
distributing to the themselves waxen poor and fallen into decay -- and are

Lord open unto of thy people with good things -- - that there may be

Thou have promised thou will abundantly now unto us the windows portions unto
them for whom nothing is prepared -- and O make them put all, eat in plenty,

In the time of Drought thou may thus pour out thy soul to God in prayer.
O Lord, thou art the father of We bese^ch thee to open now unto us thy good
treasure, the heaven to give us rain unto our land in his season -- because In
our wants heretofore thou O God did send a plentiful Rain, whereby thou
did confirm thine inheritance when it was weary -- but now thou stayest Thus
for our sins thou have made our heaven as iron, and our earth as brass --
and have commanded the

How do the now therefore O Lord the clouds from above, and open the doors of
heaven -- and water Lord why bindest be showers of blessing -- that the earth
Amen.

Do thou go to visit some sick friend, with whom thou shall happily be
desired to pray; and would thou be able to speak a word in season to him --
Run over with thine eye some of these heads -- Pardon, Sin, Sick, Die, Death
-- Heaven, etc. and some choice phrases of more special note and use, will
offer themselves, which thou occasionally may turn into Petitions -- or make
matter of comfortable meditation and discourse. Yea suppose thou thy self,
were fallen sick of the sickness whereof thou may die -- having received the
sentence of death in thy self, -- and that some friend (as Isaiah to King
Hezekiah) should advise thee to set thine house, and heart in order, for thou
must dye and not live, -- thou might weep out (with Hezekiah) this
comfortable meditation- under these Heads, Heaven. Desire. Glorified. Death.
Grave. Resurrection.

O Heaven, the city of our solemnities, a quiet habitation, a tabernacle the
cords thereof be broken! -- O O blessed day! thrice welcome news!) -- the

1. And shall I so -- the world looking longly for this happy day, when one
sweet gale of wind, my last breath, should wast me over

2. Alas! I am but a Stranger on this earth -- and woe is Mesech, that I dwell
in the tents of Kedar -- my soul I have been long House

3. I dwell now moaths -- But ( blessed be God) now I am ^^itting to an House,

4. Why should I then fear death, ^o^, All the days of a-Change, yea and a
Change, also for the better -- for thereby, Change our vile body, that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious body -- swallowed up of life -- then I
shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more -- nor sin any more, O blessed
Change! (for my sinning against my God, has grieved me sore -- has even

5 What is Death, a putting off the rags of mortality? put off this
corruptible, yea rather why should I not be gla^ when I can find the grave? For
6 -- Now I shall Sleep in the dust -- I shall lie down, and not rise again,
till the heavens be no more -- I shall make bed in darkness -- I shall fall
asleep in JESUS, and be laid to my Fathers -- where though worms be spread
under me, and worms cover me, and though after this skin, they this body,

Therefore as the Heart pants after the water-brookes, so pants my soul
after thee O God -- My soul thirsts, God, when shall I come and appear Lord
at first, the breath of life -- command therefore, my Spirit to be taken from
me, that I may be dissolved and become earth -- and my soul return to God
that gave it. Father into thy hands I commend thou have redeemed me, O Lord
thou God of truth --

Amen.
An humble Soul, bemoaning it self under its many Sins, may thus pray.
O My God I am ashamed, and suffer me, O thou Holy Israel -- suffer me (who am
even unto hell -- because of my manifold

Father I have sinned thee the God exceeding sinful) I have added rebellion
my

And as if it had before me -- drinking iniquity like water -- Alas! marked
before theeyea the heaven shall evil unto my self.

But if thou Lord be extreme to mark iniquities, if thou enter into judgment
with the servant, Lord who who shall stand? -- for so detestable and that for
the ^einousnesse thereof thou might let death seize upon me behind thy back
-- thou have ransomed Jesus -- who me, and given himself for me, and has
washed me from my sins in his blood and delivered me from the wrath to come
-- O that I as the dragons and mourning as the owls -- because I have sinned
against the Lord, and have

A Letter consolatorie to his friend, persuading to patience in his afflictions.
Faithful and beloved brother
he has torn, and he has smitten, and he only can bind you up -- I indeed
feign But alas! miserable

It grieveth me so very bitterly with you -- making ^ase, but he has broken
you asunder, he has also taken Jeremy) that he bear the yoke in his youth --
for whom the Lord loves, Assure yourselfe when God shall have purged away your
dross, and taken away al your tin -- when he has tried you, you shall come
forth as gold.

Therefore in your Jesus the author and finisher of your faith -- He was
oppressed, Christ's sake -- for this light affliction now pressed out of measure
above strength, insomuch that you despair even of life -- yet unto

Wherefore lift Holy one of Israel -- and thy mourning into dancing, he will
Amen. The Lord do Farewell, and

Your Brother and Companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of
Jesus Christ. L. M.


If thou were to dissuade thy friend from keeping bad company, thou might
find here happily some prevailing arguments: nay, were I to preach on such a
text as I might find sufficient footing to ground this point of Doctrine -- that

A godly man must avoid the company of the wicked.

If I do but turn to some of these heads: Godly, Regenerate, Righteous,
Christian, live Godly, Sanctify -- Hate, Fly, Abborre -- Wicked, Ungodly,
Profane, live Wickedly -- Company -- etc. I shall, it is likely, in ^t with good
matter, and savourie expressions suiting to my purpose -- for example, suppose
my text were -- Psalm. 26. 5. -- I have hated the congregation of evil doors --
and, -- It might be confirmed by Pro. 1. 10. 15. Psalm. 97. 10. or 2 Cor. 6.
14. or Ephesians. 5. 7. 11. -- etc. -- For what should a godly man do in the wickeds
company, seeing --

1 Ungodly men are Gods enemies, Psalm. 92 9. for lo thine enemies O Lord --
God himself says of them, Zech. 11. 8. -- my soul loathed them and their
soul also abhorred me -- Now every Godly man is on the Lords side -- Exodus 32.
26. -- yea are the friends of God, Ioh. 15. 15. Lam. 2 23. Should thou then
help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? (as Iehu the Seer reproved
Iehoshaphat. ^ Chron. 19. 2.) -- Surely there will be wrath upon us from the
Lord, for so doing.

2 Wicked men are Sons of Belial, 1 Samuel 2. 12. -- of their father the
Devil, Ioh. 8. 44. -- servants of ^inne, Romans 6. 20. -- now the Godly are
borne of God -- Sons of God -- 1 Ioh. 3. 9. heirs of God, Gal. 4. 7. the
servants of God, 1 Pet. 2. 16. -- who have fellowship with the Father and with
his Son Jesus Christ, 1 Ioh. 1. 3. -- and shall such keep company with
profane wretches, uncircumcised in the heart? Ier. 9. 26.

3 Wicked men are of the Synagogue of Satan, Rev. 3. 9, the Godly are the
Temple of the living God -- 2 Cor. 6. 16. -- of the household of Faith, Gal. 6.
10. -- Besides the Godly fear the Lord, and think upon his name, Malch. 3.
16. Wicked men forget God, neither is God in all their thoughts, -- theirs are
the paths of all that forget God. Job. 8. 13.

4 What communion has light with darkness? now wicked men walk in
darkness. 1 Ioh. 1. 6. nay, are darkness, Ephe. 5. 8. But the Godly are
light in the Lord, 1 These. 5. 5. ye are all the children of the light --
Again Godly men are Wise men, Math. 7. 24. wicked men Fools, Psalm. 14. 1.
and what credit shall a Wise man have by keeping Fools company? --

5 What should living men do among the dead? Luke 24. 5. why seek ye the
living among the dead? -- None but L^gion a mad man possessed of the Devil,
lived among the tombs -- But all ungodly men are dead in trespasses and
sins, Ephe. 2. 1. Dead while they live, 1 Timothy 5. 6. -- yea they seek death,
Pro. 21. 6. -- Now the Godly are quickened together with Christ* Ephesians. 2. 5. and
therefore should arise from the dead -- Ephesians. 5. 14.

Use. -- Exhort. -- Therefore have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness all ye that know righteousness, Isay 51. 7.
the people in whose heart is Gods law -- order your conversation aright, and
walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, behave your selves holily, justly,
and unblameably -- say with David, Psalm. 139 ^2. Do not I hate them that hate
thee O Lord? -- And as inducements --

Fear, lest ye perish in the Rev. 18. 4.
sins of the ungodly men, and partake of their Plagues -- for consider I
pray, that among profane ungodly men, the best of them are as a Bryer, and the
most upright of them are like a thorn hedge -- Briars and Thorns be with
thee, and thou dwell among scorpions -- a generation of vipers -- that will
sting the conscience, scratch and tear your flesh --

2 Wicked men pervert their Ier. 50. 5.
ways -- are out of the way, but the Godly walk in the way of the Lord --
they walk with God, their faces are to Zionward -- what then should they do
in such company as turn their backs on heaven? -- they have turned away their
faces from the habitation of the Lord, and turned their backs -- 2 Chr. 29. 6.

3 Consider your own dignity -- you are Saints on earth, and excellent. Psalm.
16. 3. Gods jewels -- Mal. 3. 17. -- wicked men make themselves vile -- very
swine, dogs that love the mire. 2 Pet. 2. 22.

4 The Godly are trees of righteousness, the planting of sai 61. 3.
the Lord -- wicked men are roots that bear gall and wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29. 18.

5 The shame and discredit will light on your self -- If you follow vain
persons, you will get to your self a blot. Prove. 9. 7. -- Its a shame for
Christ's Spouse, whom he has married to himself, Hos. 9. 1. to keep strumpets
company -- they are a wicked and adulterous generation, Math. 12. 39. -- that
go a whoriug from the Lord, Psalm. 37. 24. -- and will you associate your self
with such? --

This for a taste -- I meant not to handle the Point exactly -- but only to
point to a way -- in which there may be use of these Phrases -- for who sees
not that Reasons, Uses, Motives, Means, Marks -- etc. may from hence as a
Sacrum pena -- be drawn, which have a special weight, Emphasis, and (...) in
them? -- and surely the Spirit and blessing of God goes along with his Word, --
even those expressions which it pleased the Holy Ghost to utter himself in at
the first, carry with them an heat and warmth, to the soul of a believer --
And why may not the most able memory, and best versed in Scripture, be helped
hereby, to find readily some apt expressions, which memory could not command
presently. What disparagement, to any man's Prayers -- Meditations --
Exhortations -- to have a help at hand? --

In the time of Pestilence, thou may thus order thy complaint, and meditate
--
RIghteous art thou, O Lord, to drink the wine of astonishment? why have thou
smitten, for thou persecutest us with thy tempest and make^^ us afraid with thy
storms -- The arrows of the against us.

For ( Lo!) Death is come up Country, the hand of the Lord is very heavy
there, upon us -- The open held -- the valliant men are swept

Surely for the heart aright, and Plague breaks in upon us -- thou for surely
destruction

O that we would know every man the plague of his own are many, we have
sinned against thee -- Amen --

Would thou pray against Hypocrisy, and for Sincerity -- turn to those
Heads, Hypocrite -- Sincere. etc.

SO for any other request -- resolve it briefly into a Proposition -- as thus,
Lord bless unto me thy Holy Word -- Here, look but compellations and titles
of God -- 2 Bless Sanctify, Prosper, etc. the ministry of thy Gospel,
Scriptures, -- etc -- So, Lord grant me Pardon of my Sins: Look, Grant --
Pardon -- Sin -- etc -- there thou shall find words and matter.

Good Lord preserve me this day, or night, etc -- See, God, Protect, Day --
Night -- prosper my labors -- -- Bless -- Success -- Labor -- Pains --

And thus even any mean Christian, of ordinary parts, and invention, may be
able soon to spinne, and draw out from many of those Heads (which He
occasionally shall have need to use) much heavenly matter and words, sweet
Metaphors, Allegories -- etc. delightful, and of good use, in Prayer,
Conference, Meditation, Thanksgiving, -- Writing, etc. and on any Subject
whatsoever. --

I have here ranked into several heads some choice phrases and passages of
Scripture, to which thou may add many like, and contrive them into prayers
or meditations, etc -- as thy occasion shall require.

O Lord every man that is Job 14. 1.
borne of a woman is of few days and full of trouble -- thou have caught us
that we must take up our cross daily -- many are the troubles of the Iam. 5.
10.
righteous, we have the Prophets an ensample of suffering adversity; the same
afflictions 1 Pet. 5. 9.
are accomplished in our brethren which are in the world -- there has nothing
befalne us, but what is common to man -- O 1 Cor. 10. 13
Lord all my desires are before thee, my groaning is not hid from thee -- thou
do not willingly afflict, nor punish the children of men -- yea in all our
affliction thou art afflicted -- should we then refuse thy chaftning? do thou
not offer thy self to us, as to sons? what son is there whom the father
chasteneth not? As our afflictions abound, shall not our consolation 2 Cor. 1.
5.
much more abound? Light is sown for the righteous -- heaviness Psalm. 97. 11.
may endure in the night, but joy comes in the morning -- in thy favor is
Isai. 54. 7. 8.
life -- thou will not cast off for ever, though for a small moment, thou
may seem to forsake us, yet with great mercy thou will gather us, in a
little wrath, thou may hide thy face -- thou will lay no more upon us than
we are able to bear, but wilt give an issue out of every temptation, -- thou will correct us in measure -- and do wait that thou may est be gracious --
we may be troubled 2 Cor. 4. 8.
on every side, but not distressed, perplexed, yet not in despair.

Do not all things work together for the best to them that fear God? Make
these like fire to purge out our dross and tin, thou do now refine us in
the furnesse of affliction, this is the fruit of our trouble, the taking away
of our sin, -- should Isai. 27. 9.
we not then count it all joy when we fall into diverse temptations? knowing
that the trial 1 Pet. 1. 7.
of our faith is much more precious than that of gold -- therefore let us in
nothing be careful, but in all things make our requests known to God. -- Give
thou us help against trouble, for vain is the help of man -- See Afflict.
Deliver. Sin. etc. in the Scripture-phrases.

Aged.
O Lord, the almond tree now begins to flourish, grey-heires are here, and
there upon me, they begin to be dark that look out at the windows, thou have
filled me with wrinkles, O leave me not in the time of old age, forsake me
not when my strength fails me. Even to my old age do thou preserve me, and
even to hoarie hairs do thou carry me: let me bring forth more fruit in my
age, that it may be a crown of glory to me: I walking before thee in the way
of righteousness -- And seeing all these are monitours from thee, to tell me
of my approaching end, and that the time draws near in which I must die:
grant that as my outward man decays, so my inward man may be renewed daily --

Amen.
Against Anger.
O Lord thou have taught me in thy holy word, that Pro. 16. 32.
He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty man: and he that rules his
spirit, than he that takes a City. Among all those fleshly lusts that war
in my members, and too often (alas!) lead me captive unto Sin, there is
hardly one, that more tyrannizeth over my poor soul, than this of hastiness
of spirit, and pronenesse to be rashly and unadvisedly angry; this is that
reigning lust, that eats out the heart of all grace, that makes me that I
cannot do that good to the souls and bodies of my Christian brethren, as my
place and calling bind me: neither do I receive that good from others as I
might by their wholesome counsel, and admonitions toward me; yea, Lord, I
cannot lift up pure hands without wrath unto thee, but my prayers, are quelled,
quenched, and interrupted hereby.

O Lord help me I beseech thee against this masterfull Sin: suffer me not to
be hasty in my Eccles. 7. 9.
spirit to be angry; because anger rests in the bosom of fools, and if I
be sometimes provoked to speak unadvisedly with my lips, or to do things that
are not comely, yet never let me suffer the Sun to go down upon my wrath,
or so far to give place to the Devil, that my countenance should fall (as
Cains) that it Genesis 4. 5.
should not be toward my brethren -- 31. 5.
as before, that I cannot -- 37. 4.
speak peaceably unto them. Let me take thy Saints to be an ensample unto me
herein. Was not thy servant Moses a Numb. 12. 3
very meek man, above all the men that were on the earth? Does not my blessed
Savior command me to learn of ^i^ Math. 11. 29.
who was meek and lowly in heart? he was oppressed and he was afflicted, yet
he opened not Isai. 53.
his mouth he was led as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her
sherer, he was dumb; and can all the indignities offered to me, be comparable
to all those shameful spittings, and revilings, that he for my sake, was
exposed unto? alas no. O teach me therefore to bring down my swelling and
proud heart, to suffer patiently for his sake: the servant of God must not
strive, but be patient toward all men, why do I not then, rather take wrong
and suffer injury? why do I not take up my Cross daily and follow him, that
endured such contradiction of sinners, Laboring for -- A meek and quiet spirit
1 Pet 34.
which is in the sight of God of great price, but he that is soon angry
deals foolishly. Pro. 14. 17.
O make me therefore wise in watching over mine own heart, in keeping down
mine own unmortified spirit, to restrain my mouth with a bridle, seeing the
discretion of a man deferreth his anger, Pro. 19. 11.
and it is his glory to pass over a transgression -- vouchsafe me thy grace
for Jesus Christ his sake -- To whom with thee and -- etc --

Against Apostacy and Backsliding in religion.
O Lord my God never I beseech thee, let there be in me an evil heart of
unbelief to depart from thee, the living God: let me never be of the number
of them that draw back unto perdition; leaving my first love, casting off my
first faith to embrace this present world, or to enjoy the pleasures of sin,
which are but for a season. O Lord though some fall away, and are already
turned after Satan, even denying the Lord that bought them, and so bring upon
themselves swift destruction: yet do thou please so to establish my heart with
grace that I may continue to the end, in that good way, in which I have begun:
let me not leave the paths of righteousness, to walk again in the ways of
darkness, or with the dog return to my former vomit, and with the sow that
was washed to my wallowing in the mire. O Lord there is in me by nature, a
revolting and rebellious heart, I am bent to backsliding from thee; unless
thou do draw me, I shall settle and lag; O teach me to look to my self, to
keep my heart with all diligence, 2 John 8.
that I lose not those things which I have wrought, but that I may receive a
full reward; 2 Ioh. 8.
make me to run with patience the race that is set before me, and to be
faithful unto the death, that thou may give me a crown of life. As thou
have given me a little strength, to keep thy word, and not to deny thy name:
so establish O God the thing that thou have wrought in me? '^ is he that
continues to the end that shall be saved, not he that begins well, that
puts his hand to the plough and looks back; O let me hold Faith and a
good conscience, that my last works, may be better, and more than at first:
thou art able to keep me from falling, and to preserve me faultlesse, before
the presence of thy glory, with exceeding joy. O do it I beseech thee for thy
names sake. Even so Lord Jesus. Amen.

See, Apostate, Backslide, Persevere, etc. in the Scripture phrases.

Against distrustful Cares.
O Lord have not thou commanded me, to cast all my care upon thee, because thou
carest for me? have not thou said thou will never leave me, nor for sake me?
art not thou God all-sufficient? Thy Son my Savior Math. 6. 25.
has also bidden me to take no thought for my life, what I shall eat, or
what I shall drink, nor yet for my body what I should put on. Do not thou
feed the fowls of the air, which sow not, neither reap, nor gather into
barnes? By taking thought I cannot add one cubit unto my stature: and thou (my
heavenly father) know what things I want, what things are best for me, and
have promised rather to starve the Lions, than to let thy children want any
thing that is good for them. O let me believe thy gracious promise, to live by
Faith, to be content with those things that I have, yea to receive evil at thy
hands, as well as good. I am yet in better condition to the world-ward, than
many of thy dearest Saints, and (now-glorious) Heb. 11. 37.
Martyrs, that wandered up and down, in sheepe-skins, and goat^-skins, being
destitute, afflicted, and tormented: of whom the world was not worthy: yea I
have more worldly riches than the Lord of the whole world my blessed Savior,
who Math. 17. 27.
had not whereon to rest his head: who when he was to pay tribute-money, had
never a penny, but sent his Disciple Peter to the Sea, to cast in a hook, and
to take up the first Fish, and there found to supply his present necessity. O
let not me expect to be carved to, in a better condition, than my Lord and
Master; But to wait on thee my God continually. Teach me first to seek the
Kingdom of heaven, and the righneousnesse thereof, then have thou promised
that all other things shall be added unto me.

Amen.
Vid. Care, Providence etc. For Mariners or Seafaring men, etc.
O Lord the great and dreadful ^er. 5 22.
God, which have placed the sand from the bound of the Sea, by a perpetual
decree, that it cannot pass it; and though the waves thereof toss themselves,
yet can they not prevail, though they roar, yet can they not pass over it,
for thou shuttest Job* ^. 8.
up the Sea with doors and bars, and say to the waves, hither shall ye
come, and no further. Thou art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of
such as abide in the broad Sea, we O Lord, whose employment and calling is in
the deep, in this heap of great waters, in the ^sal. ^07. 23.
midst of the Seas, that go down to the Sea in ships, and do business in
great waters, we see thy 24
works and wonders in the deep. For thou command and raisest the stormy
wind, which lifts Psalm. ^0* 7. 25
up the waves thereof. We mount up to the heaven, we go down again to the
depths, our 26.
soul is melted because of trouble, we reele too and fro, and 27.
stagger like a drunken man, and are at our wits end. O teach us to 28
cry unto thee in our trouble, and do thou bring us out of our distresses:
make thou (we beseech thee) the storm a calm, that the 29
waves thereof may be still, and so bring us to the desired haven, then shall we
praise thee Lord 30
for thy goodness, and for thy wonderful works, toward the 31
children of men.

Thou art our refuge and strength, a very present help in Psalm. 46. 1.
trouble, therefore will we not fear though the earth be removed: 2
and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea: though the
waters thereof roar, and be troubled; though Psalm.. 46. 3.
the mountains shake with the swelling thereof: for unto thee, O Lord belong
the issues from death. O make us to cast the anchor of our hope still on thee,
who have hitherto mercifully delivered us from so great a death, and do
deliver us, in whom we trust that thou will yet deliver us. Let not the depths,
we pray thee cover us, neither let us sink into the bottom as a stone, though
the floods compass us about, yet let not the waves and billows pass over us:
thou make a way in the Sea, and a path in the mighty waters, thou art the God
that have made the Sea and the dry Land, do not thou suffer that there be the
loss of any man's life among us, let not a Acts 27. 22.
hair of our heads perish. Appease the mighty tempest when it arises, that
our Ship may not be broken, rebuke the wind, and say unto the waves peace, and
be still. O teach every Ship-master, and all the company in Ships, Ezekiel. 27. 29.
those that handle the Oar, the Mariners, and all the Pilots of the Sea, and
as many as trade by Rev. 18. 17.
Sea, to trust in the saving help Mar. 6. 48.
of thy right hand, when we be toyled in rowing, and the wind is contrary unto
us, and not to rely on our own skill: take from us that desperate boldness,
fearelesnesse of thee and danger, that Atheism, Swearing, and Profaneness,
and notorious Ungodliness, which is too often found in many of us: Make us to
be at peace with thee, in the blood of thy Son, that he may be advantage unto
us both in life and death. There is continually but a step betwixt us and
death, yea even but an hand-breadth, Psalm. 39. 5.
for thou have made all men's days as an hand-breadth, and our age is as
nothing before thee; Be thou our life in death, and to trust thee with our
bodies and souls, knowing that the Sea shall at the last day, give up the dead
that are in it, and our spirits shall return unto God that gave them. If thou
please to bring us safely to land, O make us to remember our vows, which we
uttered with our-lips when we were in trouble, lest otherwise thou should
Judge. 10. 13.
deliver us no more -- Grant this grace unto us for Jesus sake, to whom with
thee, etc.

Amen.
Husbandman in Seed time.
O Lord, do thou teach me to ^say 28.
cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast in the principal
wheat, and the appointed barley, and rye in their places, and that I may plough
and ^i^. verse. 24 d^s^^em. capit.
sow in hope make me to break up the fallow ground of mine own heart: that
the earth bring not forth briars and thorns, and thist^es unto me, when it is
tilled, neither be cursed for my Sin. Make me to sow to my self in
righteousness.

2 Springtime.
BLessed be thy name that Psalm. 65. 11
thus renewest the face of the earth, that crownest the year with thy goodness,
and thy steps drop fatness -- the winter is past, the rain is over, the time
of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our
Land -- the pastures are clothed with flocks, the valleys also are covered
over with corn, they shout for joy and sing. O make my barren heart to
flourish in grace, to abound in the fruits of righteousness.

For Seasonable weather, Plenty -- etc.
O Lord give us the rain of Isay 30. 23.
our seed, that we have sowed the ground withal, and bread of the increase of
the earth, that it may be sat and plenteous. Let not the Locust, Catterpillar,
Cankerworme, Blasting, Mildew, or unseasonable weather, deprive us of the
fruits of the earth, but bless them, and bring them to maturity, that our
garners may be full, abounding in all manner of store, let our oxen be strong
to labor, let the mower fill his hand, and he that gathers up the sheaves,
his bosom, that our barnes may Pro. 3.
be filled with plenty* and our presses burst with new wine. Reserve for us
the appointed weeks of harvest, and though we deserve not the least morsel of
bread we eat, yet thou that art goodness it self, and can not but put on
bowels of pity, wilt fulfill thine own gracious promise, that Seed-time and
Harvest, summer and winter, may not cease: true it is Lord, we deserve not
only that the fruits of the earth, but even that our selves also should be
swept away like dung from off the earth; for thou art pressed under us as a
cart is pressed that is full of sheaves, -- thou changest the seasons, because
we change our obedience; our hearts are stony, and the heavens weep for their
hardness, yet we lay not all this to heart. --

-- teach me to provide my meat in summer as a Son of wisdom -- and
although the Hab. 3. 17.
fig tree shall not blossom, neither fruit be in the vine, though the Labor
of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall
be cut off from the fold, and there shall be 18.
no herd in the stalls: yet that I may rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God
of my salvation --

Amen.
FINIS.
Some Choice places taken out of the singing PSALMS: Digested into a method of
PRAYER. And PRAISES.

Per hujusmodi aurium oblectamenta quae pietatis doctrinam continent, saepe
infirmior animus in affectum pietatis assurgit. Theodoret.

Printed at London for Rob. Milbourne.

1634.

To the Christian READER.
AThanasius in his Treatise upon the Psalms to Marcelinus, reports, that the
ancient old Father Philoponus, in a learned discourse which he vouchsafed once
to make to him, did evidently demonstrate, that whatsoever was contained abroad
in the whole Scriptures, was fully reported in the Book of Psalms: It
contains (says he) the motions, the mutations, the alterations of every
Christians heart and conscience* described and lively painted to his own
sight, so that if a man list, he may easily gather out thereof, certain
considerations of himself, as out of a bright glass and plain pattern set
before his face; so thereby to reform himself. He may have a very good form
of Prayer meet to be said, and presently at hand, in every case and Vide
Athanas* ad Marcellin, and his Treatise before the Psalms.
state: The words here delivered in the Psalms, are as it were his own,
spoken in his own person, and is so affected with them, as if they were first
by him conceived, and pronounced, etc.

Liber Psalmorum est ars rite precandi, and Oratorium, ut ita dicam,
divinisssimum.

(...) Basil. Magn.

Veteres vocarunt librum Psalmorum Augustine.
PARVA BIBLIA, quia breviter omnia quae in Biblijs habentur continet, ut
historias, legem, promissiones, fidem, consolationes, poenitentiam, bona opera.

Antiquitus, hic liber vocatus Alsted. praecognit. Theolog. page 598.
est Soliloquium, quia solius hominis Christiani cum solo Deo colloquium
habetur. Est anatome conscientiarum. Nullum in Calvin in praesat. Psalmor.
se affectum quisquam reperiet, cujus in hoc speculo non reluceat imago. -- Ab
alijs recte appellatur Panacea, instructa officina remediorum omnium. (...)
Basil. Magn. de libr. Psalm.


Coloss. 3. 16.Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.
A PRAYER gathered out of the PSALMS.
O Lord that Heaven docst possess, 1 Preparation. Psalm. 123. 1.

I lift mine eyes to thee:
Even as the servant lifts his,
His masters hands to see.
Thou the foundations of the earth 2 description of God. ^ sa. 102. 25*

Before all times have laid;
And Lord the heavens are the work
Which thine own hand has made.
Thou Lord I say, whose seat is set Psalm. 80. ^*

On Cher^bins most bright:
Show forth thy self, and do not let,
Send down thy beams of light.
Incline thine ear unto my words, 3 Craving of audience and acceptance. Psalm.
141* 2.

O Lord my plaint consider:
And hear my voice, my King, my God,
To thee I make my prayer.
As incenso let my prayers be Psalm. 141 2

Directed in thine eyes,
And the up-lifting of my hands
As evening sacrifice.
FOr lo, my wicked doings Lord, Secondly, parts. I Confession of sins. Psalm.
38. 4.

Above my head are gone;
A greater load than I can bear,
They lie me sore upon:
O Lord our God, if thou shall weigh Psalm. 130. 3

Our sins, and them poruse,
What one shall then escape and say,
I can my self excuse?
Thou Lord do know the thoughts of man, Original Psalm. 94. 11

His heart thou see full plain:
Thou Lord, I say, man's thoughts do scan
And find'st them all but vain.
The wicked works that we have wrought, Actual. Psalm. 90. 8

Thou se^'st before thine eye:
Our privy faults, yea eke our thoughts,
Thy countenance does spy.
Both we, and eke our fathers all, Psalm. 106 6.

Have sinned every one:
We have committed wickedness,
And lewdly we have done.
Our wicked life so far exceedes, Psalm. 65. 3

That we should fall therein,
But Lord forgive our great misdeeds,
And purge us from our sin.
IN judgment with thy servants, Lord, 2 Petition for forgiveness of sin.
Psalm. 143. 2

O enter not at all,
For justified be in thy sight
Not one that lives shall.
From the beholding of my sin, Psalm. 51. 9

Lord turn away thy face:
And all my deeds of wickedness,
Do utterly deface.
Lord turn thee to thy wonted grace, Psalm. 6. 4.

My ^illy soul up take,
O save me, not for my deserts,
But for thy mercies sake.
Have mercy on me Lord, after Psalm. 51. 1

Thy great abundant grace,
After thy mercies multitude,
Do thou my sins deface.
Yea Lord remove our sins from us, Psa 103. 12

And our offenses all,
As far as is the Sun rising,
Full distant from his fall.
The man is blessed whose wickedness Psalm. 32. 1.

Thou Lord have clean remitted:
And he whose sin and wickedness
His hid and also covered.
And blessed is he to whom the Lord 2.

Imputes not his sin,
Which in his heart has hid no guile,
Nor fraud is found therein.
O Lord, create in me a heart 2 For sanctifying grace Psalm 51. 10

Unspotted in thy sight:
And eke with in my bowels Lord,
Renew a stable spirit.
With Hysope, Lord, besprinkle me, Psalm. 51. 7

I shall be cleansed so,
Yea, wash thou me, and so I shall
Be whiter than the Snow.
Of joy and gladness make thou me
To hear the pleasant voice, 8

That so the bruised bones which thou
Have broken may rejoice.
For thy Names sake, with quickening grace Psalm 143 5

Alive do thou me make;
And out of trouble bring my soul,
Even for thy justice sake.
O God my God, I watch betime
To come to thee in haste, 3 For Faith* Psalm. 63. 1

For why, my soul and body both
Do thirst of thee to taste.
And in this barren wilderness 2

Where waters there are none.
My flesh is parcht for thought of thee,
For thee I wish alone.
Direct our hearts unto thy grace, Psalm. 80. 4.

Convert us Lord to thee,
Show us the brightness of thy face,
And then full safe are we.
Gods promise I do mind and praise, Psalm. 56 4

O Lord I stick to thee,
I do not care at all assayes,
What flesh can do to me.
I still depend with all my heart Psalm. 89. 27

On thee, and thus will say,
My Father and my God thou art,
My rock of health and stay.
O blessed is he whose hope and heart, Psalm 40 5.

Does in thee Lord remain!
That with the proud does take no part,
Nor such as lie and feign.
My heart does knowledge unto thee, Psalm. 27 10

I sue to have thy grace;
Then, seek my face, say thou to me,
Lord I will seek thy face.
In wrath turn not thy face away, 11

Nor suffer me to slide,
Thou art my help still to this day,
Be still my God and guide.
SO grievous is my plaint and moan, 4 Sorrow for sin. Psalm. 6. 6.

That I wax wondrous ^aint:
All the night long I wash my bed,
With tears of my complaint.
Thou see my sins that many be, Psalm 56. 8.

Thou on my tears do look,
Reserve them in a glass by thee,
And write them in thy book.
Burnt offerings thou delight'st not in, Psalm 40. 8.

I know thy whole desire,
With sacrifice to purge his sin
Thou do no man require.
A troubled spirit is sacrifice Psalm. 51. 16

Delightful in Gods eyes,
A broken and an humble heart
God thou will not despise.
Surely with ashes as with bread Psalm 102 9

My hunger I have filled,
And mingled have my drink with tears
That from mine eyes have stilled*
The Lord is high, and yet he does* 5 Humility. Psalm. 138 6

Behold the lowly sp'rite:
But he contemning knows afar
The proud and lofty wight.
O Would to God it might thee please 6 Sincerity. Psalm. 119. 5

My ways so to address,
That I might both in heart and voice
Thy laws keep and confess.
I have both sworn and will perform Psalm. 119. 147.

Most certainly doubtless,
That I will keep thy judgments just,
And them in life express.
Prove me my God I thee desire, Psalm. 26. 2.

My ways to search and try,
As men do prove their gold with fire,
My reins and heart epsy.
O Lord thou have me tried and known, Psalm 139. 2

My sitting thou do know,
And rising, eke my thoughts a far
Thou understandst also.
My paths yea and my lying down 3

Thou compassest always,
And by familiar custom, art
Acquainted with my ways.
THen in thy paths that be most pure 7 Perseverance. Psalm. 17. 5

Stay me, Lord, and preserve,
That from thy way wherein I walk,
My steps may never swerve.
And whilst that breath within my breast, Psa. ^^9 44

Does natural life preserve,
Yea, till this world shall be dissolved,
Thy law will I observe.
From such as thee desire to know* Psalm. 36. 10*

Let not thy grace depart,
Thy tighteousnesse declare and show
To men of upright heart.
Thy tender mercies Lord from me Psalm. 40. 15

Withdraw thou not away,
But let thy love and verity
Preserve me still for aye.
And whiles I live I will not fail Psalm. 63 4.

To worship thee always,
And in thy name I shall lift up
My hands when I do pray.
As thou have given power to me, Psalm. 68. 28*

So Lord make firm and sure
The thing that thou have wrought in me,
For ever to endure.
O Teach me Lord thy ways, and I 7 Fear of God. Psalm 86. 11.

Shall in thy truth proceed:
O join my heart to thee so nigh,
That I thy name may dreed.
WHat thing is there that I can wish 8 Love of God. Psalm. 73. 25

But thee in heaven above,
And in the earth there is no thing
Like thee that I can love?
HAte I not them that hate thee Lord, 9 Zeal. Psalm. 139. 21.

And that in earnest wise?
Contend I not against them all
Against thee that arise?
I hate them with unfeigned hate 22.

Even as my utter foes.
Try me O God and know my heart, 23.

My thoughts prove and disclose.
I will not stay nor linger long, Psalm. 119. 60.

As they that slothful are,
But hastily thy laws to keep
I will my self prepare.
THe greater fort crave worldly goods,
And riches do embrace: 10 Contentation. Psalm. 4. 7

But Lord grant us thy countenance
Thy favor and thy grace.
For thou thereby shall* make my heart 8

More joyful and more glad,
Than they that of their corn and wine
Full great increase have had.
LOrd lead me in thy righteousness 11 Direction in our calling. Psalm. 5. 8.
Psalm 143 8

For to confound my foes,
And eke the ways that I shall walk
Before my face disclose.
Let me thy loving kindness in
The morning hear and know;
For in thee is my trust; show me
The way where I should go.
That folk is blessed that knows aright Psa. 89. 15

Thy present power O God,
For in the favor of thy sight
They walk full safe abroad.
Give us O Lord thy saving health Psalm. 108 12.

When troubles do assail,
For all the help of man is vain,
And can no whit avail.
Lord let thy grace and glory stand Psalm 90 18

On us thy servants thus,
Confirm the works we take in hand,
Lord prosper them to us.
O God thy house I love most dear, Gods Word. Psalm 26 8.

To me it does excel,
I have delight and would be near Gods word

Whereas thy grace does dwell.
Send out thy light and eke thy truth, Psalm. ^^. 3*

And lead me with thy grace,
Which may conduct me to thy hill,
And to thy dwelling place.
I will hark what God says, for he Psalm. 85. 8.

Speaks to his people peace,
And to his Saints, that never they
Return to foolishness.
The righteousness of thy judgments Psalm. 119 144.

Does la^t for evermore.
Then teach them me, for even in them,
My life lies up in store.
Therefore will I come to thine house Psalm. 5. 7.

Trusting upon thy grace,
And reverently will worship thee
Toward thy holy place -- etc. vi. Ps. 84.
IT is a thing both good and mee^e Lords day. Psalm. 92. 1.

To praise the highest Lord,
And to thy name, O thou most high*
To sing with one accord.
This is the joyful day indeed
Which God himself has wrought, Psalm. 118. 24

Let us be glad and joy therein
In heart, in mind, in thought.
Fall down and worship ye the Lord Psalm. 96. 9

Within his Temple bright,
Let all the people of the world
Be fearful at his sight.
Let all thy Priests be clothed, Lord, Psalm. 132. 9

With truth and righteousness:
Let all thy Saints and holy men
Sing all with joyfulnesse.
The man is blessed whom thou do choose Psalm. 65. 4

Within thy courts to dwell,
Thy house and Temple he shall use,
With pleasures that excel.
Unto thy house resort will I, Psalm. 66. 13

To offer and to pray,
And there will I my self apply
My vows to thee to pay.
O come let us lift up our voice, Psalm. 95. 1.

And sing unto the Lord,
In him our rock of health, rejoice
Let us with one accord.
Yea let us come before his face
To give him thanks and praise, 2

In singing Psalms unto his grace,
Let us be glad always.
MY hands I wash, and do proceed Sacraments Psalm. 26. 6.

In works to walk upright,
And to thine altar I make speed
To offer there in sight.
That I may speak and preach the praise 7

That does belong to thee:
And so declare how wondrous ways
Thou have been good to me.
Within thy house they shall be fed Psalm. ^6. 8

With plenty at their will:
Of all delights they shall be sped,
And take thereof their fill.
For why? the well of life so pure 9

Does ever flow from thee,
And in thy ^ight we are full sure
The lasting light to see.
But as for me I am but poor, 2

Oppressed, and brought full low: Supply of all wants temporal. Psalm 40. 22.
Psalm 41 3. Health.

Yet thou O Lord wilt me restore
To health, full well I know.
And in my bed while I lie sick,
The Lord will me restore:
And thou O Lord wilt turn to health
My sickness and my sore.
Then in my sickness thus say I, 4

Have mercy Lord on me,
And heal my soul which is full woe
That I offended thee.
Refuse me not O Lord I pray, Psa. 71. 9.

When age my limbs does take,
And when my strength does waste away,
Do not my soul forsake.
Cast thou thy care upon the Lord, Psalm. 55. 24

And he shall nourish thee:
For in no wise will he accord
The just in th^all to see.
FOr neither from the Eastern parts, Preferment. Psalm. 75. 5.

Nor from the Western side,
Nor from forsaken wilderness
Protection does proceed:
For why? the Lord our God he is 6

The righteous Judge alone:
He puts down the one, and sets
Another in the throne.
But yet the poor he raises up Psalm. 107 41.

Out of their troubles deep,
And oft-times does their train augment
Much like a flock of sheep.
FOr why the Lord the portion is Maintenance. Psalm 16 5

Of mine inheritance,
And thou art he that do maintain
My rent, my lot, my chance.
The place wherein my lot did fall, Dwelling. 6

In beauty did excel,
Mine heritage assigned to me,
Does please me wondrous well.
THou give to beasts their food, and to Food. Psalm. 147. 9 10

Young ravens when they cry.
Thy pleasure not in strength of horse,
Nor in man's legs does lie:
But in all those that fear the Lord, 11

The Lord has his delight,
And such as do attend upon
His mercies shining light
The mighty mountains of his land, Plenty. Psalm. 72. 16

Of corn shall bear such throng,
That it like Cedar trees shall stand
In Libanus full long.
He covers Heaven with clouds, and for Psalm. 147 8

The earth prepares rain,
And on the mountains he does make
The grass to grow again.
THou make our sons to be as plants, Prosperity Psalm. 144. 12.

Whom growing youth does rear:
Our daughters like carved corner stones,
Like to a Palace fair.
Our garners full, and plenty may 13

With sundry sorts be found:
Our sheep bring thousands in our streets,
Ten thousand may abound.
THy promise which thou made to me Trust in Gods deliverance. Psalm. 119. 49.

Thy servant, Lord remember,
For therein do I put my trust,
And confidence for ever.
It is my comfort and my joy, 50.

When troubles me assail:
For were my life not by thy word,
My life would soon me fail.
THough the earth remove, we will not fear, Psalm. 46* 2

Though hills so high and steep,
Be thrust and hurled here and there,
Within the sea so deep.
No though the waves do rage so sore,
That all the banks it spils,
And though it overflow the shore,
And beat down mighty hills.
The Lord of hosts does take our part, 7.

To us he has an eye:
Our hope of health with all our heart,
On Jacobs God does lie.
The strength that does our fo^s withstand, Psa. 59. 9.

O Lord does come from thee:
My God he is my help at hand,
A fort of fence to me.
Thou art my strength, thou have me stayed, 17.

O Lord I sing to thee:
Thou art my fort, my strength, and aid,
A loving God to me.
Then Lord depart not now from me, Psalm. 22. 1^*

In this my present grief,
Since I have none to be my help,
My succor and releife.
Thy mercy Lord endures for aye, Psalm. 138 ^

Lord do me not forsake:
Forsake me not, that am the work
Which thine own hand did make.
O keep me as thou would keep Preservation I. sal. 17. 8.

The apple of thine eye,
And under covert of thy wings
Defend me secretly.
For I do call to thee O Lord, Psalm. 17. 6.

Surely thou will me aid;
Then hear my prayer, and weigh right well
The words that I have said.
Into thy hands Lord I commit Psalm. 31. 5

My spirit, which is thy due;
For why? thou have redeemed it
O Lord my God most true.
The length of all my life and age 15.

O Lord is in thy hand:
Defend me from the wrath and rage
Of them that me with-stand.
Preserve my soul, because my ways Psalm. 86. 2.

And doings holy be,
And save thy servant O my Lord,
That puts his trust in thee.
I laid me down, and quietly Psalm. 3. 5.

I slept and rose again,
For why? I know assuredly
The Lord will me sustain.
In peace therefore lie down will I, Psalm. 4. 9.

Taking my rest and sleep,
For thou only wilt me O Lord,
Alone in safety keep.
Within thy Tent I lust to dwell Psalm. 61. 4.

For ever to endure,
Under thy wings I know right well*
I shall be safe and sure.
I set the Lord still in my sight, Psalm. 16. 8.

And trust him over all,
For he does stand on my right hand,
Therefore I shall not fall.
He the desires which they require, Psalm. 145. 19

That fear him will fulfill,
And he will hear them when they cry,
And save them all he will.
For why, our glory, strength, and aid Psalm. 86.7.

In thee alone does lie:
Thy goodness eke that has us stayed,
Shall lift our horns on hie.
Our strength that does defend us well, 18.

The Lord to us does bring,
The holy one of Israel,
He is our guide and King.
Therefore let thy goodness O Lord Psalm. 33 22

Still present with us be,
As we always with one accord
Do only trust in thee.
2. Deprecation, aversion, and ablation of the evil of sin and punishment..
MY Lord, for guiding of my mouth, 2 Deprecation against the evil of sin.
Psalm. 141. 3. Psalm. 119. 133.

Set thou a watch before:
And also of my moving lips,
O Lord, keep thou the door.
Direct my footsteps by thy word,
That I thy will may know,
And never let iniquity
Thy servant overthrow.
Thy countenance, which does surmount 135.

The Sun in his bright hew,
Let shine on me, and by thy Law
Teach me what to eschew.
That I should wicked works commit, Psalm. 141. 4.

Incline thou not my heart,
With ill men of their delicates,
Lord let me eat no part.
O shut not up my soul with them, Psalm. 26. 9.

In sin that take their fill:
Nor yet my life among those men,
That seek much blood to spill.
All ye that love the Lord, do this; Psalm. 97. 11*

Hate all things that are ill:
For he does keep the souls of his,
From such as would them spill.
Out of mine eyes great floods gush out, Psalm. 119. 136.

Of dreary tears and fell,
When I behold how wicked men,
Thy laws keep never a dell.
But I in righteousness intend, Psalm. 26. 11.

My time and days to serve:
Have mercy Lord, and me defend,
So that I do not swerve.
THine arrows do stick fast in me, 2. Against the evil of punishment in
body. Psalm. 38. 2

Thine hand does press me sore:
And in my flesh no health at all,
Appears any more.
My wounds stink, and are festred so,
As loathsome is to see: 5.

Which all through mine own foolishness
Betideth unto me.
And I in careful wise am brought
In trouble and distress, Psalm. 38. 6.

That I go wailing all the day,
In doleful heaviness.
My loins are filled with sore disease, 7.

My flesh has no whole part:
I feeble am and broken sore, 8.

I roar for grief of heart.
Thou know Lord my desire, my groans, 9.

Are open in thy sight:
My heart does pant, my strength does fail,
Mine eyes have lost their light:
One grief another in does call, Psalm. 42. 7

As clouds burst out their voice:
The floods of evil that do fall,
Run over me with noise.
And as an harth my bones are burnt, Psalm. 102. 4.

My heart is smitten dead,
And withers like the grass, that I
Forget to eat my bread.
By reason of my groaning voice, 5.

My bones cleave to my skin:
As Pelican in wilderness,
Such case now am I in.
And as an Owl in desert is, 6.

Lo, I am such a one:
I watch, and as a Sparrow on
The housetop am alone.
Lord take from me thy scourge and plague, Psalm. 39. 11.

I can them not withstand:
I faint and pine away for fear
Of thy most heavy hand.
Wherefore my God, some pity take, Psalm. 30. 10.

O Lord I thee desire:
Do not this simple soul forsake,
Of help I thee require.
Then did thou turn my grief and woe Psalm. 30. 11

Into a cheerful voice:
The mourning weed thou took'st me fro,
And made me to rejoice.
For why, his anger but a space Psalm. 30. 5.

Does last, and slack again:
But in his favor and his grace,
Always does life remain.
Trust still in God, whose whole thou art, Psalm. 27. 16.

His will abide thou must:
And he shall ease and strength thy heart,
If thou in him do trust.
HOw ev'er it be, yet God is good, Estate. Psalm. 73. 1

And kind to Israel:
And to all such as safely keep,
Their conscience pure and well:
For when I saw such foolish men, 3.

I grudged and did disdain,
That wicked men all things should have
Without turmoile and pain.
And though I be nothing set by, Psalm. 119. 141.

As one of base degree:
Yet do I not thy laws forget,
Nor shrink away from thee.
TRouble and grief have seaz'd on me, Conscience troubled. 143.

And brought me wondrous low;
Yet do I still of thy precepts,
Delight to hear and know.
When with my self I mused much, Psalm. 94. 19.

And could no comfort find,
Then Lord thy goodness did me touch,
And that did ease my mind.
How long will thou forget me Lord, Psalm. 13. 1

Shall I never be remembered?
How long will thou thy visage hide,
As though thou were offended?
In heart and mind how long shall I 2.

With care tormented be?
How long eke shall my deadly foe
Thus triumph over me?
THou art my hope and my strong hold, Death. Psalm. 91. 2

I to the Lord will say,
My God he is, in him will I
My whole affiance stay.
What gain is in my blood, said I* Psalm. 30. 9

If death destroy my days?
Does dust declare thy Majesty,
Or yet thy truth does praise?
The Lord himself has chastened, Psalm. 118. 18.

And has corrected me:
But has not given me over, yet
To death, as ye may see.
Even when the snares of cruel death, Psalm. 116. 3.

About beset me round.
When pains of hell me caught, and when
I woe and sorrow found.
They that be dead, do not with praise Psalm. 115. 17.

Set forth the Lords renown:
Nor any that into the place*
Of silence do go down.
For why? thy mercy showed to me, Hell. Psalm. 86. 13.

Is great, and does excel:
Thou setst my soul at liberty,
Out from the lower hell.
The pangs of death did compass me, Satan. Psalm. 18. 3

And bound me every where:
The flowing waves of wickedness
Did put me in great fear.
The fly and subtle snares of hell 4.

Were round about me set:
And for my death there was prepared
A deadly trapping net.
How long away from me O Lord, Psalm. 89. 47.

For ever will thou turn?
And shall thine anger still always
As fire consume and burn?
But sure the Lord will not forget Psalm. ^. 18

The poor man's grief and pain:
The patient people never look
For help of God in vain.
Therefore I pray thee be not far, Psalm. 22. 19

From me at my great need,
But rather, sich thou art my strength, World.

To help me, Lord make speed.
And from the sword Lord save my soul, 20.

By thy might and thy power:
And keep my soul, thy darling dear,
From dogs that would devour.
And from the Lions mouth, that would 21.

Me all in sunder shiver*
And from the horns of Unicorns,
Lord safely me deliver.
Then shall I to my brethren all, Psalm. 2^. 22

Thy Majesty record:
And in the Church shall praise the Name
Of thee the living Lord.
O Lord my God, thou only art War and all Enemies. Psalm. 140. 7

The strength that saves me:
My head in day of battle has
Been covered still by thee.
Often they, now Israel may say,
Me from my youth assailed: Psalm. 129. 1

Often they assailed me from my youth, 2

Yet never they prevailed.
The Lord himself is on my side,
I will not stand in doubt: Psalm 118. 6.

Nor fear what man can do to me,
When God stands me about.
The Lord does take my part, with them 7.

That help to succor me:
Therefore I shall see my desire
Upon mine enemy.
The Lord is my defense and strength, 14.

My joy, my mirth, my song:
He is become for me indeed,
A Savior most strong.
The Lord is both my health and light, Psalm. 27. 1

Shall man make me dismayed?
Since God does give me strength and might,
Why should I be afraid?
While that my foes with all their strength, 2.

Begin with me to brawle:
And think to eat me up, at length
Themselves have caught the fall.
Though they in camp against me lie, 3.

My heart is not affraide:
In battle pight if they will try,
I trust in God for aid.
Lord plead my cause against my foes, Psalm. 35. 1

Confound their force and might:
Fight on my part against all those,
That seek with me to fight.
Lay hand upon the spear and shield, 2.

Thy self in armor dress:
Stand up for me, and fight the field,
And help me from distress.
Gird on thy sword, and stop the way, 3.

Mine enemies to withstand,
That thou unto my soul may say,
Lo I thy help at hand.
Confound them with rebuke and blame, 4.

That seek my soul to spill:
Let them turn back, and fly with shame,
That think to work me ill.
When they think least and have no care, 8.

O Lord destroy them all:
Let them be trap't in their own snare,
And in their mischief fall.
Awake, arise, nnd stir abroad, 24.

Defend me in my right:
Revenge my cause my Lord, my God,
And aid me with thy might.
Let not their heart rejoice, and cry,
There, there, this gear goes trim: 26.

Nor give them cause to say on hie,
We have our will on him.
Hear me O Lord, and that anon
To help me make good speed: Ps(...) 31 2

Be thou my rock and house of stone,
My fence in time of need:
Pluck thou my feet out of the snare
Which they for me have laid: 4.

Thou art my strength, and all my care
Is for thy might and aid.
Pluck thou my feet out of the mire, Psalm. 69 16.

From drowning do me keep:
From such as owe me wrath and ire,
And from the waters deep.
Lest with the waves I should be drowned, 17.

And depth my soul devour.
And that the pit should me confound,
And shut me in her power.
Have mercy Lord on me I pray, Psalm. 56. 1.

For man would me devour:
He fights with me day by day,
And troubles me each hour.
Send aid, and save me from my foes, Psalm. 59. 1

O Lord I pray to thee:
Defend and keep me from all those,
That rise and strive with me.
O Lord preserve me from those men, 2.

Whose doings are not good:
And set me sure and safe from them
That thirst still after blood.
For lo, they wait my soul to take, 3.

They rage against me still,
Yea for no fault that I did make,
I never did them ill.
Have mercy Lord on me poor wretch, Psalm. 9. 13.

Whose enemies still remain:
Which from the gates of death are wont
To raise me up again.
Alas how long shall I yet live, Psalm. 119. 84.

Before I see the hour,
I hat on my foes which me torment,
Thy vengeance thou will pour!
Arise O Lord, O God, in whom Psalm. 10. 1^

The poor man's hope does rest:
Lift up thy hand, forget not Lord,
The poor that be oppressed.
What blasphemy is this, to thee 14.

Lord do thou not abhor it:
To hear the wicked in their hearts,
Say; tush, thou ear'st not for it?
Loc, daily in reproachful wise, Psalm. 102. 7

Mine enemies do me scorn:
And they that do against me rage,
Against me they have sworn.
Although they curse with spite, yet thou Psalm. 109. 28.

Shall bless with loving voice:
They shall arise, and come to shame,
Thy servant shall rejoice.
Let them be clothed all with shame, ^ 29.

That enemies are to me:
And with confusion as a cloak,
Eke covered let them be.
LOrd save me from the evil man, Reproach and slander. Psalm. 140. 1

And from the cruel wight:
And from all those which evil do
Imagine in their spirit.
Which make on me continual war, ^.

Their tongues lo they have whet
Like Serpents, un derne ath their lips,
Is Adders poison set.
They mock the doeings of the poor, Psalm. 14. 6.

To their reproach and shame:
Because they put their trust in God,
And call upon his name.
The drunkards which in wine delight, Psalm. 69. 14.

It is their chief pastime,
To seek which way to work me spite,
Of me they sing and rhyme.
O God of Hosts, defend and stay, Psalm. 69. 7

All those that trust in thee:
Let no man doubt, or shrink away
For ought that chances me.
The wicked and the bloody men, Psalm. 139. 19.

O that thou would slay:
Even those O God, to whom depart,
Depart from me, I say.
Even those of thee O Lord my God, 20.

That speak full wickedly:
Those that are lifted up in vain,
Being enemies to thee.
O Lord, thou do revenge all wrong, Psalm. 94. 1.

That office longs to thee:
Since vengeance to thee does belong,
Declare that all may see.
Set forth thy self; for thou of right, 2.

The earth do judge and guide:
Reward the proud and men of might,
According to their pride.
For they consent against the life 21.

Of righteous men and good,
And in their counsels they are rise,
To shed the guiltless blood.
And he shall cause their mischiefs all 23.

Themselves for to annoy:
And in their malice they shall fall,
Our God shall them destroy.
Let them sustain rebuke and shame Psalm. 40. 19

That seek my soul to spill:
Drive back my foes, and them defame,
That wish and would me ill.
For their ill feats do them descry, 20.

That would deface my name:
Always on me they rail and cry,
Fie on him, fie for shame.
Confound them with rebuke and shame, Psalm. 35. 27

That joy when I do mourn:
And pay hem home with spite and blame,
That brag at me with scorn.
WHy are thou Lord so long from us Against evils national. Psalm. 74. 1.

In all these dangers deep?
Why does thine anger kindle thus,
At thine own pasture sheep?
Lord call the people to thy thought, 2.

Which have been thine so long,
The which thou have redeemed and brought,
From bondage sore and strong.
Have mind therefore and think upon, 3.

Remember it full well:
The pleasant place thy Mount Zion,
Where thou was wont to dwell.
Lift up thy foot and come in haste, 4.

and all my soesdeface,
Which now at pleasure rob and waste,
Within thy holy place.
Rise Lord, let be by thee maintained, 23.

The cause that is thine own:
Remember how that thou blasphemed
Art, by the foolish one.
The voyee forget not of thy foes, 24.

For the presumption hie,
Is more and more increast of those,
That hate thee spitefully.
Give aid O Lord, and us relieve, Psalm. 60. 11

From them that us disdain:
The help that Hoasts of men can give,
It is but all in vain.
Except the Lord had been mine aid, Psalm. 94. 17.

Mine enemies to repel,
My soul and life had now been laid
Almost as low as hell.
When I did say, my foot did slide, 18.

I now am like to fall:
Thy goodness Lord did so provide,
To stay me up withal.
In Chariots some put confidence, Psalm. 20. 7.

And some in horses trust:
But we remember God our Lord,
That keeps promise just.
They fall down flat, but we do rise, 8.

And stand up steadfastly:
Now save and help us Lord and King,
On thee when we do cry.
IN thy good will deal geutly Lord Church of Christ. Psalm. 51. 17

To Sion, and withal;
Grant that of thy Jerusalem
Vprear'd may be the wall.
O Lord, give thou thy people health, Psalm. 53. 8.

And thou O Lord fulfill,
Thy promise made to Israel.
From out of Sion hill.
Thy people and thine heritage, Psalm. ^8. 9.

Lord bless, guide, and preserve:
Increase them Lord, and rule their hearts,
That they may never swerve.
The Lord will give his people power, Psalm. 29. 1^.

In virtue to increase:
The Lord will bless his chosen flock
With everlasting peace.
Let them in thee have joy and wealth, Psalm. 40. 21

That seek to thee always:
That such as love thy saving health,
May say, to God be praise.
God loves the Gates of Sion best, Psalm. 87. 2.

His grace does there abide:
He loves them more than all the rest
Of Jacobs tents besides.
Though Basan be a fruitful hill, Psalm. 68. 15

And in hight others pass:
Yet Sion, Gods most holy hill,
Does far excel in grace.
From such as thee desire to know, Psalm. 36. 10

Let not thy grace depart:
Thy righteousness declare and show,
To men of upright heart.
O Thou the Savior of all them, Confusion to the enemies of the Church. Psalm.
17. 7. Psalm. 59. 1^.

That put their trust in thee,
Declare thy strength on them that spurn,
Against thy Majesty.
Destroy them not at once O Lord,
Lest it from mind do fall:
But with thy strength drive them abroad,
And so consume them all.
For their ill words and truthlesse tongues, 12.

Confound them in their pride:
Their wicked Oaths, with lies and wrongs,
Let all the world deride.
And as the fire does melt the wax, Psalm. 68. 2.

And vvinde blows smoke away:
So in the presence of the Lord,
The wicked shall decay.
Our God will vvound his enemies head, Psalm. 68. 21

And break the hairy sealpe,
Of those that in their wickedness
Continually do walk.
Lord turn their table to a snare, Psalm. 69. 24

To take themselves therein:
And when they think full well to fare,
Then trap them in the gin.
The third head of Prayer, is Thankesgiving.
TO sing the mercies of the Lord, ^. Thankesgiving. Psalm. 89. 1.

My tongue shall never spare:
And with my lips from age to age
Thy truth I will declare.
The Heavens do show with joy and mirth, 5. 4*

Thy vvondrous works O Lord:
Thy Saints within thy Church on earth,
Thy Faith and Truth record.
O how great good have thou in store, For our Election, etc. Psalm. 31 19*

Laid up full safe for them
That fear and trust in thee, therefore,
Before the sons of men!
Thou will them teach the way to life,
For all treasure and store, Psalm. 16. 11*

Of perfect joy, are in thy face
And power for evermore.
O Lord my God, thy vvondrous deeds
In greatness far do pass: Psalm. 40. 6. 7.

Thy favor toward us, exceedes
All things that ever was.
When I intend, and do devise,
Thy works abroad to shovv,
To such ^ reckoning they do rise,
Thereof no end I know.
My soul from death thou do defend, Psalm. 5^. 13*

And keep'st my feet upright,
That I before thee may ascend,
With such as live in light.
COme forth and hearken here full soon, Psalm. 66. 16*

All ye that fear the Lord,
What he for my poor soul has done,
To you I will record.
Full often I call to mind his grace, 17.

This mouth to him does cry:
And thou my tongue make speed apace,
To praise him by and by.
THe doctrine of his holy Word, For Gods Word Psalm. 147. 19.

To Jacob he does show:
His Statutes and his Judgments, he
Gives Israel to know.
With every Nation has he not 20.

So dealt, nor they have known
His secret judgments; ye therefore
Praise ye the Lord alone,
O Lord out of my mothers womb, Temporal blessings. 1. ^ Creation. Psalm 22. 9.

I came by thy request:
Thou did preserve me still in hope,
While I did suck her breast.
I was committed from my birth, 10.

With thee to have abode:
Since I was in my mothers womb.
Thou have been e're my God.
FOr why, the eyes of God above, Providence Psalm. 34. 15

Upon the just are bent:
His ears likewise do hear the plaint
Of the poor innocent.
What thou commandedst, wrought it was Psalm. 33. 8.

At once with present speed:
What thou do will, is brought to pass
With full effect indeed.
Know that the Lord our God, he is, Pres rvation. Psalm. 100. 2.

He did us make and keep:
Not we our selves; for we are his
Own flock and pasture sheep.
The Lord of Hoasts does take our part, Psalm. 46. 7.

To us he has an eye:
Our hope of health with all our heart,
On Jacobs God does lie.
Thou openest thy plenteous hand, Plenty. Psalm. 145. 16*

And bounteously do fill
All things whatsoever do live,
With gifts of thy good will.
O praise the Lord Jerusalem, Prosperity Psalm. 147. 12. 13.

Thy God O Sion praise:
For he the bars has forged strong,
Wherewith thy Gates he stays.
Thy children he has blessed in thee, Safety* 14.

And in thy borders ^e
Does settle peace, and with the flower
Of wheat ^e fills thee.
But Lord, that man is happy sure, Afflictions. Psalm ^4. 12

Whom thou do keep in awe:
And through correction do procure
To teach him in thy Law.
ALl praise to thee O Lord of Hoasts, Conclusion with thankesgiving. Psalm. 89.
53

Both now, and eke for aye:
Through sky, and earth, and all the coasts,
Amen, Amen I say.
FINIS.
THis for an Essay, I desired to show on every head of Prayer, that some place
or other in the Psalms might be made use of, on several occasions, which a
Christian has to do about. There may be diverse added, and but for pe^^^ring
this Book, I had added all those which I have lying by me thus digested: but
these may suffice, to show thee ( Christian Reader) my meaning, who may as
thy need requires, supply what is now wanting in this.

Sing with the Spirit, and sing with the understanding also.
Master QVARLES on Jonah, in the general use of the STORY.
MAl^^do, rouse thy leaden spirit, bestirre thee,
Hold up thy drousie head, here is comfort for thee:
What if thy Zeal be frozen hard? what then?
Thy Saviors blood will thaw that frost again.
Thy Prayers that should be fervent, hot as fire,
Proceed but coldly from a d^ll desire:
What then? grieve in'ly; but do not dismay,
Who hears thy Prayers, will give thee strength to pray,
Though left avvhile, thou art not quite given over:
Where Sin abounds, there Grace abounds more.
Medit. 7. on Jonah. Let Prayer be fervent, and thy Faith entire,
And Heaven at last will grant thee thy desire.

A Table whereby readily to find the principal things in the whole Book.
A
Page Actions of Christians how to be ordered. Page 143 Actual sins the
several sorts. Page 23 -- forms of confessing them. Page 242 Advise for a
Christians carriage, daily, weekly, how. Page 140 Affections how disordered.
Page 21 Afflicted. Page 120 Afflictions. Page 270 Aged man's prayer. Page 271
Aggravations of sin. Page 23 Anger. Page 272 Apostasy. Page 275 Apprecation,
Page 31 Audience, assistance, acceptance how to be craved. Page 99
B.
Backsliding, in godly courses, a prayer against it. Page 275 Baptism, a
prayer for it. Page 165 Bed, meditations for it. Page 132 Blessings temporal,
spiritual, eternal. Page 122 Body and all the members corrupt. Page 22
Boldness in witnessing to Gods truth. Page 91
C
Called Church of Christ. Page 114 Calling of the Jews, Gentiles: Page 102 --
to be blessed in our calling. ibid. Cares, and distrust in Gods providence.
Page 274 Catholic Church of Christ. Page 109 Causes of distraction in Prayer.
Page 47 Christ Jesus, a thankesgiving to him. Page 210 Christian conversation
how to be ordered. Page 140 Church of God: Page 39 -- How to meditate as thou
go to Church. Page 134 Colony, or plantations in New England, Virgi. Page
178 Commission, how many sorts of those sins. Page 24 Commonalty. Page 120
Company of ungodly ones to be avoided. Page 254 -- how to carry our selves in
company. Page 144 Concernements personal. Page 101 Conclusions of Prayer. Page
127 Confession of sin. Page 14. 58. 70 -- promise made to it. Page 2 --
punishment deserved by sin. Page 79 Confession of an humbled soul, etc: Page
242 Confusion to Gods and his Churches enemies. Page 125 Conscience how defiled
with sin. Page 18 -- Afflicted in conscience. Page 120 Consolatory Letter*
Page 248 Contentation. Page 92 Council, the Lords of his Majesty's privy
Council. Page 117 Craving audience, assistance, and acceptance. Page 127
Creation. ibid.
D
Death, to be prepared for it. Page 185 Dearth. Page 223 Deliverance from the
Gunpowder Treason. Page 215 -- Sin and punishment. Page 103. 107 Deprecation
of evil of sin, and punishment. Page 35 Descriptions of God. Page 59
Devotion no hinderance to any man's particular calling. Page 57 Dying man's
meditations. Page 234 Difference of praying in Hypocrites and godly men. Page
49 Directions for Christians, walking with God. Page 140 Direction in our
calling. Page 101 Distraction in prayer, how to be helped against it. Page 47
Distrustful cares. Page 274 Drought, in time thereof a prayer for rain. Page
230
E
Enemies of God and his Church. Page 112 English Colonies in New England,
Virginia, etc. Page 178 Evening meditations. Page 130 Excellency of the
Psalms. Praef.
F
Faith. Page 83 Famine. Page 223 Forms of prayer. Page 151
G
Gods promises made to prayer. Page 2 Gods Word. Page 96 Godly men must avoid
the company of the wicked. Page 254 Graces, or thankesgiving before and after
meat* -- matter for etc. Page 135. 138 Growth of grace, continued, increased,
begotten. Page 34. 84 Gunpowder Treason, and a thankesgiving for our
deliverance. Page 215
H
Health. Page 105 Helps against distraction in prayer. Page 48 Holy Oil, or
Scripture phrases, how to make use of them. Page 223 Humble confession of
sin. Page 81. 3. 7 Humiliatio^, solemnly how to be done. Page 147 Humility.
Page 100 Husband man. Page 280 Hypocrites praying differs from the true
Christians. Page 49
I
Intercession for the Church. Page 109
K
Kings Majesty, a prayer for him, his seed, etc. Page 114 Knowledge. Page 85
L
Letter consolatory. Page 248 Lord Jesus Christ, a thankesgiving to. ib. Lords
day, or Sunday mornings Meditation. Page 133 Lords Supper, a prayer for that
Sacrament, before and after. Page 55 Love of God. Page 87
M
Magistrates. Page 118 Maintenance. Page 34. 36. 105 Mariners prayer. Page 276
Matter for Graces before meat and after. Page 135. 138 Means to prepare us
for prayer. Page 54 Means of grace; prayer that God would bless them. Page 97
Meditations for several occasions. Page 128 -- For a dying man. Page 234
Memory corrupted. Page 20 Merchants prayer. Page 198 Method of prayer. Page 13
Ministers of Gods Word. Page 118 Morning-meditations for etc. Page 128
N
Night-thoughts. Page 133
O
Omission, sins of omission. Page 23
P
Pardon of sin. Page 31 Parts of prayer. Page 13 Patience. Page 95
Perseverance. Page 92 Personal concernements. Page 101 Pestilence. Page 261
Petition. Page 29. 30. 97 Plenty that God would grant. Page 281 Power over
sin. Page 37 Preface to prayer. Page 13 Preparation to prayer. Page 52
Praxis, showing how to make use of Scripture phrase. Page 223 Prayer what it
is. Page 13 Privy Council, the Lords thereof. Page 117 Promises of God made to
prayer. Page 1. 2. 3 Prosperity. Page 123 Providence of God over us. Page 12
Punishment inflicted for sin. Page 79
Q
Questions which may help us with matter for prayer. Page 54
R
Rain. Page 230 Regeneration. Page 170 Repentance. Page 83
S
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper. Page 100. 165 Sanctifying grace.
Page 170 Seasonable weather. Page 281 Seafaring men. Page 276 Seed-time. Page
280 Sensitive appetite corrupt. Page 21 Servants prayer. Page 204 Scholars or
Students prayer. Page 192 Sincerity. Page 88 Sin, how to know it, and find it
out. Page 18 -- How manifold. ibid. Solemn humiliation, how it may be done.
Page 147 Solitariness. Page 145 Sorrow for sin. Page 242 Spiritual
blessings. Page 31 Springtime. Page 281 Supply of wants temporal. Page 123
T
Temporal blessings. Page 34. 44. 123 Thankesgiving for blessings. Page 122.
210 -- deliverances, etc. ^bid. Thoughts how to order them. Page 141 Tradesmans
prayer. Page 198 Trouble in conscience, estate. Page 268
V
Uncalled, that God would convert the^. Page 112 Understanding corrupt through
sin. Page 18 Vocation, our duties in it, not hindered by Devotion. Page 57
W
Wages of sin. Page 38 Will of man corrupted. Page 20 Words, how to order them.
Page 141 Word of God and Sacraments. Page 96 World. Page 37
Z
Zeal for God in matters of Religion. Page 52
A Table of the Psalms in Meeter.
Page. PReparation to prayer, description of God, craving of audience and
acceptance. Page. 1 Confession of sins, original, actual. Page. 2 Petition
for forgiveness of sin. Page. 3 For sanctifying grace, for Faith. Page. 4
Sorrow for sin. Page. 5 Humility and Sincerity. Page. 6 Perseverance. Page. 7
Fear of God, love of God, and Contentation. Page. 8 Direction in our calling,
Gods Word. Page. 9 Lords day. Page. 10 Sacraments. Page. 11 Supply of all wants
temporal, health. Page. 12 Preferment, maintenance, dwelling, food. Page. 13
Plenty, prosperity, trust in Gods deliverance. Page. 14 Preservation. Page. 16
Deprecation against the evil of sin. Page. 18 Against the evil of punishment
in body. Page. 19 Estate, conscience troubled. Page. 21 Death. Page. 22 Hell
and Satan. Page. 23 World, War and all enemies. Page. 24 Reproach and
slander. Page. 28 Against evils national. Page. 31 Church of Christ. Page. 32
Confusion to the enemies of the Church. Page. 33 Thankesgiving for our
Election, etc. Page. 35 For Gods Word, temporal blessings, and creation. Page.
36 Providence, preservation, plenty, and prosperity. Page. 37 Safety,
afflictions, Conclusion with thankesgiving. Page. 38
FINIS.
Recensui hunc librum, cui titulus, Holy Incense, etc. nihilque in eo inveni
quod Christianos mores ac pietatem non redoleat. Ac ob id dignum existimo, ut
Typis mandetur.

Ex aedibus Fulham. Iun 17. 1634. Thomas Weeks R-P D. Episc. Land. Cap. domest.


