A TRACT OF PRAYER.

By He. Clapham.

AT LONDON Printed by W. White, dwelling in Cowlane. 1602.

To the Right Woo. Mris. Grissell Sheffeild, all true happiness here, and in
the world to come.
RIght Woo. as I am much to praise God for your vn-uariable Christian favors
(from the very entrance of my service) vouchsafed still unto me: So, I have
never since lacked Will, though destitute of Means, whereby to testify my
summisse duty. But having experienced the fruits of that divine spirit
(which from Infancy is reported to have held his succession in you) I have
adventured to offer some sign of gratitude. Homely is the Form, but heavenly
is the Subject whereon my Pen runs. What is lacking in the Manner, is
countenanced in the Matter. And so this 2. of December 1602. I end: remaining

Your Woo. wherein he shall be able, Henoch Clapham.

A TRACT OF PRAYER.
An Introduction.
What Prayer is.
PRayer, is nothing else but a pouring forth of the soules-sense according to
the instinct and motion of GOD his holy Spirit. And hereupon it is, that Moses
is said to cry ( Exodus 14. 15.) though he uttered no word: and Hannah to pray
( 1. Sam. 1. 12.) though she spoke only in her heart. And this is called Prayer
Mental; as that which is by mouths utterance, is called Prayer Vocal.

That I say this speech of the Soul must be according to the motion of God his
Spirit: it is, because no vtteraunce mental or vocal is true Prayer,
otherwise then it is uttered by the Holy Ghostes direction: For his office it
is to teach us what to pray. And hereupon it is, that the Apostle teaches, not
only that God sendes forth his Sons spirit into our hearts upon the very
first action of our Adoption, ( Gal. 4. 6. 9.) for teaching us to Cry; that is,
earnestly to Pray: but also to deny, that the most learned is able to pray
without the direction of that Spirit. For thus he says: The Spirit helps our
infirmities: for we know not what to pray as we ought, but the Spirit it self
makes request for us, with sighs which cannot be expressed. Romans 8. 26.

And least any should object: Alas, we speak imperfectly, or sigh confusedly;
he adds: But he that searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning of
that Spirit: for he makes request for the Saints, according to the will of
God. So that no words or sighinges are here reputed Prayer, otherwise then
they receive their character of Christ's Spirit.

Which observed, it conuineeth the Papist and Brownist (two extremes) of
extreme ignorance. The Papist thinks, The Papists error for Prayer.
if so he say over some certain form of words prescribed in his Jesus or
Ladies Psalter; or her etofore drawn by Pope Sixtus or some other idolatrous
Worthy, he has done very well; though (God knows) he is so far from
following the instinct of Christ's Spirit therein, as ordinarily he Apishly
imitateth some brutish invention: and (if it be Latin) his own Spirit (he
being a common Papist) ignorant what his lips utters. For the Brownist, The
Brownistes error for Prayer.
he thinks on the other hand, that if he have uttered a number of words, not
according to any written form, but of the abundance of his own heart, then he
has performed a worthy work: for no words borrowed from else where, he
holds can be delivered for Prayer. And hereupon it is, that he denies to
utter the words in Namely, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc
Mat. 6. 9. etc. for Prays: as if the same words could not be used for
Doctrine and Prayer. Thus condemning all the World for ignorance in Prayer,
he shows himself to be ignorant what is Prayer.

Prayer (as before) receives not his Being from Words: for one can pray
truly that is dombe with Zachary: but be they words or sighs, or Souls
breathinges; they be then true Prayer, when God his Spirit is one with our
Spirit in the use thereof: And therefore to impute any thing to Words in that
manner as they do, is flat Merit-mongry.

And because in vocal Prayer, the self same words may again be used in the
same and like case, our Savior (who had more variety of words then any
Brownist) he repeated the same words again, Namely, Abba, Father all things
are posible. etc.
Mark. 14. 39. And the Apostle again and again in the entrance of his
Epistles, Namely, Grace be with you and peace from God. etc.
Romans 1. 7. 1. Cor. 1. 3. 2. Cor. 1. 2. Galat. 1. 3. Ephess. 1. 2. Philip. 1.
2. Coloss. 1. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 2. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 2. 1. Tim. 1. 2. 2. Tim. 1. 2.
Philem. 3. Thus far was S. Paul from acquaintance with Brownisme. And yet I
could prove unto them, that some of themselves both publicly and privately,
have usually used a flat Form of Prayer cond by heart. But who will easily
dispute with Spirits of private interpretation?

Nothing now said, that has not been said before.
Prayer consisting in Sighs new or accustomed: in words old or new ( Etiamsi
nihil dictum quod non dictum prius) provided the same be formed by the Holy
spirit. Some ignorauntly (it may be) will infer: Then the unsanctified (with
Judas Iscariot) pray not truly, seeing the Holy Ghost is not given them. I
answer: the unsanctified person praying with and for others, may (as did
Judas Iscariot) pray truly; and may have glorious effects following the same,
(as followed Iscariots ministry, so well as the others, Mark. 6. 13. and Luke
9. 10.) and this, because he prays according to the motion of the Holy
spirit, though he enjoy not the same Spirit. For great is the difference
between being Acted by him, (as Balaam was in his ministry) and having the
Spirit dwelling in one; as he does in the sanctified, Romans 8. 9.

This remembered, I will (as God shall enable) in the next place, deliver unto
you an Exposition of the Lords Prayer, and that also in form of prayer.

AN EXPLICATION OF THE Lords Prayer.
The first Branch of the Introduction to Prayer.
OUr Father: Our Father. For further explication hereof, the wise-spirited may
under them words, relate to the first Commandment: Thou shall not have other
Gods before my face.
Father by creation, as we were set out of thine hands in our fore-parents Adam
and Heuah: but more specially a Father through the work of Redemption: who as
we voluntarily were cast away of the first man, have recovered us to thy self
again by the second Man, Christ Jesus his glorious obedience. Twice a Father,
(by Nature, and Grace:) but we utterly unworthy once of the name of Children:
so great has been our transgression, both against Nature and Grace.

As thou teach me not to cry My Father, as minding either my own
particular only: or heretically judging better of my self then any others:
but have commanded me to cry, Our Father, as a feeling member of that
Catholic Church, sparsed over the earth, to whom Christ Jesus is only Head:
so hereby thou call me to join with Faith, Love: that so my Faith in thy
promises, may declare it self to be true Faith by the works that issue
therefrom: as in other things, so in the action of Prayer. For thou would
have us to know, that all Faith is but dead, which works not by Love: First
toward the head of our Head, Christ Jesus: Secondly, toward our fellow
members, which is the corporation of true believers.

The second branch of the Introduction.
Our Father, Which art in Heaven: Which art in Heaven. This may relate to the
second Co^mundement. Thou shall not make to thy self a graven thing, nor, etc.
and because in Heaven, therefore Almighty and All-sufficient for thy children.
Being a Father, thou art willing: and being in Heaven, thou art able to effect
whatsoever thou willest: and thou willest only that which shall be good for thy
children. This we believe; Lord help our unbelief. And as thou specially
declarest thy glory in the Heavens, (for otherwise thy Essence and Being is
beyond all place) because there are the Spirits Angelical; who are more
capable of thy glory: so vouchsafe o heavenly Father, (for the sake of thy
Son, through whom thou art become our Father) to enrich our hearts now and
for ever with divine thoughts, beseeming the presenting our selves before such
a heavenly Father: That so by thy grace, we may pray in Faith: even in that
Faith which works by Love, the bond of Peace, the fulfilling of thy Law, the
external badge of thy Sons disciples.

The first direct Petition,
Heavenly Father, Hallowed be thy name. Hereto the third Commandment may be
applied: Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for, etc.
thy name in propriety, is thine own self: and so thou art JEHOVAH, the
being of all beeings, deryuing thine own being from none: in which respect
it is easier to say what thou art not, then what thou art: for being Infinite,
thou so can not in propriety fall within the compass of Definition. But as
thou first assumedst the name Creator, in respect of the Creature: so
therewithal thou after a sort, did make thy self Comprehensible, who
otherwise art Incomprehensible: which thou secretly taughtest Moses, when (for
that he was in conceit finite) thou declardst thy self unto him by thy
Back-parts: for none can behold thy Face, and live. And hereupon it is, that
thou declarest thy self; first in the common Creature (for the Heavens declare
thy glory, the Firmament shows thy handie work; and the visible creature
makes seen thy inuisibles, as thine eternal power and Godhead:) Secondly,
thou do make thy self known by thy Written Word and Sacraments: In thy
Word, declaring thy self by that name of names, Father of our Lord Christ
Jesus: sealing up the same in the blessed Sacraments of Baptism and our Lords
Supper.

Be it thy name essential or relative, (declaring thy Being, or the Divine
properties in thy Being) vouchsafe the Grace unto us, of hallowing the same:
for, though earthly Powers wincke at it, thou will not hold him guiltless
that takes thy name in vain. We were first Created into thy name, and secondly
have been Baptized into the same: But we lost thy Image in the first, and have
recovered in the second (by thy Grace) a new stamp thereof. Heavenly Father,
infuse thy sanctifying grace into the hearts of all thy Children, that of the
abundance of such a sanctified heart, the mouth may speak holyly to the praise
of thy name, and the edification of many. And so shall the pure sacrifice of
Prayer and Praise, be offered up unto thee in all places.

The second Petition.
That thy Name may be so hallowed, Let Thy Kingdom come. Thy Kingdom come.
This casts eye back to the fourth Commandment. Remember thou keep holy
the Sabbath day, to sanctify i^. etc.
Thy Kingdom is of another nature then the worlds Kingdoms be. They be as
Nebuchadnetsars Image, made of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron and Clay: all which,
the Cornerstone of our Salvation, ( Christ Jesus) dasheth to powder; melting
before his Kingdom, as Wax before the Sun. Thy Kingdom is Spiritual, and
specially inward: and therefore to the world invisible. This Kingdom of thine,
thou do stablish in the Body of thy Church: thy Holy Spirit taking up the
Conscience for his Throne, there governing the Heart of Man, by the Scepter of
thy Word. Thence thou never departest, making whatsoever is at enmity with
thee, thy footestoole: casting down the haughty imaginations of men, and
whatsoever is within, exalted against thee.

Lord, let this Kingdom come? this Kingdom of Light, for chasing away the
power of darkness: this Kingdom of Grace, for dryuing every vile Canaanite
forth of our Land. Let the strong man Sin, be taken and bound by Him that
is stronger: and so take us up wholly, for thine own Glory.

Unto which good purpose, vouchsafe (o heavenly Father) to bless thine own
Ordinances Civil and Ecclesiastical. The Civil thou have given specially
for keeping the Body and Flesh of Mankind in due order: The Ecclesiasticke,
specially for subduing the Soul and Spirit. In the first, thou have these
forty four years and upward, ^endred our good, in the happy and blessed
regiment of our dread Sovereign Elizabeth, deputed over us in all causes
Civil and Ecclesiastical, our supreme Gouernesse. In the second, thou have
for all the time of her gracious regiment, sought our salvation, coming unto
us early and late by the ministry of thy Prophets: For all which, thy name be
ever blessed.

Heavenly Father, vouchsafe accordingly to continue the same mercy by Civil
and Ecclesiasticke government, not only to us, but also to our posterity. Dash
the Image of Romes Nebuchadnetsar a pieces. Let his union with Spain, prove
but as a mixture of Iron and Clay: and his mixed Idolatrous government, let it
quickly be consumed. Thou who in thy Word have promised to stir up all these
Kings against that Bomish Harlot, who first subjected Crown and dignity
thereto: Lord hasten the perfecting of that promise. Through thy blessing, it
has come so to pass with us, and some other our neighbors. Lord hasten the
conversion of other Kings, (and namely of the King of Spain) that with a
right royal resolution, they may arise, and like true Christian Princes,
labor to consume that harlotry Synagogue, which before has consumed them and
their Kingdoms.

Destroy the Turkish tyranny: Let the Kingdom of thy Son in his Dominious
more and more flourish. Remove the ceremonial Veil of Moses from before the
eyes of thy natural Israel. Gather into subjection all of Jews and Gentiles,
that appartaine unto thy Kingdom: That so thy Son Christ Jesus may come unto
Judgment; he may so deliver the Kingdom into thine hands, and so GOD may be
all in all.

The third Petition.
In the mean time, Thy Will be done in the Earth: Thy Will be done in Earth,
etc. This relates to the fifth Com. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that
[Iaaricun] they may prolong thy days upon y^ earth which y^ Lo. thy GOD gives
thee.
and that in such sort, as it is done in the Heavens. The Angelical Spirits in
the Heavens, are faithful and flightie in their Obedience: whereas they were
created but once, retayning still their first state. And we, besides our
natural creation, have put thee to a second business, to the re-creating of us
again by thy Spirit and Word: by so much the more we owe unto thee a greater
obedience; Give us the grace therefore, together with the knowledge of thy Will,
to be Doers thereof: that others so seeing our good works, they may thereby
take occasion to glorify thee our Father which art in heaven. But when ( by
thy Grace) we shall have done any part of thy Will, let us not be destitute of
that Grace, which is declared in thy Angels by covering their Face and Feet.
Let us be humble in our own eyes, acknowledging our insufficiency for
contemplating thy glory: the insufficiency of our affections for doing thy
Will. Let us never be left to our selves, that so we should forget the darkness
of our Senses, the lamenes of our Affections. With which consideration, give us
not only therefore not to be idle, but also wynged and speedy executors of thy
gracious Will, revealed to us from thine own Word.

And besides the common duties of Christianity, vouchsafe the grace unto us,
duly to consider our particular place and calling: that so the Maiestrate may
have grace to govern rightly with his Sword: the Minister may be faithful in
ruling by the Word: the Artificer and Tradesman may show himself a true
Christian in the very particulars of their vocation: that Fathers and Masters,
to children and servants: servants, children, and subjects to their superiors,
may all be careful in these very places, to be faithful doers of thy Will; as
the heavenly powers in their rooms, are ever pressed to act thy divine pleasure.
Heavenly Father, vouchsafe us the grace always to make such holy use of the
Angels their glorious example, that so in word and deed, we may ever glorify
thy name put upon us: first in Creation: secondly in Baptism: lastly in our
Profession.

The fourth Petition.
Unto the ( Father) it is best known what is necessary for the Day: to thee
therefore we cry: Give unto us this day, our dayly-bread. Give us this day,
our, etc. Hereto the sixth Commandment. Thou shall not murder.
If thou give it, it shall be good for us, be it more or less, (for it is not in
the quantity, but in thy blessing) and with little thou would have us
contented; in teaching us to crave only Bread. Nor can it be so little as the
best of us deserve (for we merit not the Crummes that fall from thy Table,) o
how large then is thy mercy, who besides Bread, have affoorded many other
Creatures often for our Tables, with variety of Raiment for our Bodies: Yea,
how great is thy mercy, seeing we may say particulerly with David: Thou have
prepared a table before me in the sight of mine adversaries: thou have
anointed mine Head with Oil, my Cup running over: For often the adversaries of
Godlynes have labored (so much as in them was) to deprive us of Natures
sustentation: but in mercy thou have annulled their devises, giving us in
their very sight (to the grief of their hearts) not only Food, but also
sovereign delights of Nature, and that with inundation.

Thou in mercy having given it, thou so (in Christ Jesus) have sealed it up
for our own. Whereby has fallen out, that in our much and little, we have a
true peace-able conscience: Otherwise (O Lord) if we eat, drink, and clothed
our selves in judgment, what better were we, though we gained the world thereby?

And the providence (o heavenly Father) which watches over our bodies
nouriture by this Bread, vouchsafe it may watch over our souls, by
administering the Bread of eternal life, which is the Merits of thy Son,
offered in thy Word, and sealed up in the Sacraments. That being so fed in
body and soul, we may both in body and soul cheerfully praise thee.

The fifth Petition.
We have trespassed against thee o heavenly Father: And forgive us our
trespasses, etc. Herto the breach of all the Commandments may be referred.
first, in not having Belief in thy Promises, who notwithstanding have
declared thy self to be not only a Father; but also, an Heavenly,
all-sufficient Father. We have secondly sinned against thee, in not declaring
the truth of our Faith by the wotkes of Love toward our fellow members. We
have thirdly trespassed against thee in taking thy name in vain. We have
trespassed fourthly against thee in setting our selves against the things of
thy Kingdom. We have transgressed fifthly against thee in not doing thy will,
when once it has been revealed unto us. We have sinned against thee also in
the abuse of Bread, and all other external necessaries. Our trespasses against
thee are innumerable: neither are we able to answer for one sin amongst a
thousand. Good Lord therefore be merciful unto us in the remission of all our
sins: which remission, proceeds of thine own free Grace, sealed up in
Christ Jesus: whereto man is not able to add one farthing by way of
satisfaction.

Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. To
whom thou sealest (by the testimony of thy Spirit) the forgiveness of sin, to
them thou give a true gift (though not absolute) of willingness to pardon the
trespasses of their brethren. So that by our readiness to remit the offenses
of others, thou would have us to take knowledge of the forgiveness of our
sins, which thou have remitted unto us. And seeing thou in the first place
have been willing to pass by our Offenses, compared unto Talents: What are we
in the second place, that we should take our brother by the throat for a few
Pence, (trifles unto us, in regard of our debtes to thy infinite Majesty) and
so call upon him for satisfaction to the uttermost farthing? No (o heavenly
Father) do rather vouchsafe unto us, a gentle, meek, humble, and loving heart,
by the which we may be ready to loose much of our external right for Peace
sake, rather then (by seeking our own) to kindle contention: by the which we
may be willing to deal mercifully with others, even as we would be glad to
receive mercy at thy hands.

The sixth Petition.
Finally, we beseech thee, not to lead us into tentation, but deliver us from
evil. And lead us not into tentation, but. etc. Hereto all: but specially the
tenth com. Thou shall not covet. etc.
It shall be necessary (o Lord) that sometimes we be tempted inwardly (as were
thy servants David, Jeremy, and others:) but in such time of tentation, sweet
Father deliver us from evil: Give us (as thou did to thy servant Paul) a
happy is^ue out of that tentation. Sometimes it shall be necessare, that thou
tempts us outwardly, as thou did Abraham in offering his only beloved Son
Isaac: as thou did Job in the loss of his Substance, Children, and bodies
health. Yet (Heavenly Father) we beseech thee in such Tentation, to be
merciful unto us, to rid us from the power of the Tentation, to deliver us
from Evil.

The Reason of offering Prayer only to GOD: The first branch.
These our Petitions we offer up only to thee: because, Thine is the kingdom.
For thine is ye Kingdom. Here may be remembered the kingdom of Aegipt, from
whence Israel is fetched.
Scepter, Government, Regiment, are all thine. As in the Church where every
soul willingly bows before thee, as their fatherly King: so, in swaying of
every creature, (even reprobate Men and Angels) causing them will they, nill
they, to execute thy divine pleasure. In the first, for the declaration of thy
mercy: in the second, for the manifestation of thy exact justice.

The second branch of the Reason.
Nor is it any marvel, seeing thine is The Power. The Power. Hereby that Power
whereby that Church was delivered.
All Power in Heaven and Earth is thine. Power of Devils and their
instruments, is nothing else but a sparckle of thy Power, borrowed of thee,
what time thou meanest to correct thy Children, or else to judge transgression
in the reprobate. Till thou granted such Power, Satan could not touch Job,
either in his substance, children, or person: no, nor being discharged, could
he enter so much as into a Swine. Thou only have the Power to help us; to thee
therefore we direct our Prayers.

The third Branch.
And this the rather, because Thine is the Glory. And the Glory. Here may be
r^^^rdated the glory which God gained in overthrowing Aegipt in the red Sea.
And all this intimated in that preface to the Commandments. Exodus 20. 2.
Part thy Glory with any other thou o God) wilt not. And this is a great part
of thy Glory to have Prayer offered up unto thee: as being HE, who only can
search the Heart, can give to every one the thing is necessary, and gain
Glory to thy self in all thy actions.

The fourth branch in common with the third
And this For ever and ever. And because Kingdom, Power, and Glory, is thine
always: therefore at no time to be given wholly, or in part, to any Angel,
Saint, or other Creature, be it otherwise never so excellent in our eyes: of
never so high estimate in our mind.

The subscription of Faith.
Amen. Amen. This may relate to Isreal's subscription unto the Law. Thus the Law
sent people to Prayer: and Prayer respects the observation of the law, and
the fulfilling of all in Christ through whom God is become Our Father.
So it is: and, So be it (o Father of Heaven) for the sake of thy Son our
only savior and redeemer Christ Jesus. To whom, together with thee and the
sanctifying Spirit, be all kingdom, Power, and Glory: henceforth and for
ever: Amen.

A brief example how it may be reduced to the 10. Commandments.
OUR Father:: and therefore a transgression for any of us To have any other
Gods before thy face. Which art in Heaven: and therefore, not to be fashioned
by or to any thing above or below, that has existence amongst the Creatures.
For as thou art a Jealous GOD, so thou must needs punish thoroughly all such
Idolatire. Hallowed be thy Name of all thy people: who have commanded them at
no hand To take thy name in vain. Thy Kingdom come: as, in the due
sanctifying of the ancient Sabbath day in Israel, till Christ his Kingdom
was established to all nations: so now, in the holy observance of our Lords
day, the day of our Saviors resurrection; the day wherein at several times,
on several persons, (from morning to late night) he powered forth abundantly
the first fruits of his Spirit. Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is done in
Heaven; by all sorts of Fathers and Mothers Civil and Ecclesiasticke: with due
referrence of duty from inferiors to such superiors; that so a better
Blessing then that of Canaan (even of Heavens Rest) it may be given unto them.
Give us this day, our dayly-bread: that so by thy Grace, we may not only not
murder, but also truly mayntaine life in our selves and others. Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. We have trespassed in
thought, word, and deed, against all the former and other thy Commandments.
Lord vouchsafe to seal perfectly to our souls the remission of them all, even
as (by thy Grace) we find a true (though not perfect) readiness to forgive to
others the^r trespasses. Lead us not into tentation, but deliver us from
evil.. Tempted we shall be to break all thy Ten Laws: specially the very
tenth, in coveting things which appertain to others. For thy Sons sake
deliver us from all such evil. For thine is the Kingdom, Power, and Glory,
for ever and ever. Kingdom is thine, and therefore thou call people out of
the servitude of sin, to serve thee. Power is thine, and this thou show by
pulling thy Israel out of the hands of Hels Pharaoh: and the Glory due to
thee in all our obedience, thou will not part it with any other. For all homage
of body and soul is due to thee; who have purchased us, to the praise and
glory of thy name. And this for Ever and ever. Amen. Heavenly father, It is so:
and ever grant Grace to us all, that it may be so. Amen.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Pray continually.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by William White. 1602.


