THE Approved order of Martial discipline, with every particular Offycer his
office and duty: with many other stratagemes adjoining to the same. (*)

Whereunto is adjoined a second book, for the true ordering and imbattelling
of any number so ever, with the proportions of every Battle, which best
serves in these our days of service. ()

Newly written by Gyles Clayton.

Printed at London, by I. C. for Abraham Kitsonne, dwelling in Paul's Church
yard, at the sign of the Sun. Anno 1591.



VIrtutis Custos, verae pietatis alumna,
Insignita viges Relligione, fide.
Quae pacem patriae, meditaris, vt omnia recte,
Hostibus externis, praelia dura parans.
Vnde parens patriae vocitabere virgo, sed hosti,
perpetuus terror, dum timet ipse sibi.
Alma licet regno sit pax optanda quiesque,
Non tamen armorum reiiciendus amor.
Bella parant nobis pacem, placidamque quietem,
Et pax alma vigens praelia iusta iuuat.
Viue, vale, patriae Custos, and amica bonorum,
Et semper florens sis decus ipsa tuis.
TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCESS, ELIZABETH BY THE GRACE of God: Queen
of England, France, and Irelande: Defendresse of the Faith. etc.
HAVING HAD Opportunity, (most gracious and mighty Princess) since my last
service in the Low Countries, I thought it good to betake me to my pen, in
setting forth this approved order of Martial Discipline. And for that your
princely love and good will, has always been great and favorable, to all
true and faithful Soldiers and Seruitors: it has the more imboldened me, to
present to your most gracious view, this little labor, best befitting to come
from a Martial mind. The circumstaunces very necessary to be considered of
by those which are in authority. And although commonly, every man (most
worthy and renowned Sovereign) seeks specially to commend and extol the
thing, whereunto he feels himself naturally bent and inclined. Yet all such
partiality and private affection laid aside: it is to be thought, that for
the defense, maintenance, and advancement of a Kingdom, or Commonweal: or
for the good and due observation of peace, and administration of justice in the
same, no one thing to be more profitable, necessary, or more honorable, then
the knowledge of service in war or deeds of Arms. Considering the ambition
of the world is such, that it is impossible for any Realm, Kingdom, or
Dominion, long to continue free in quietness and sauegard, where the defense of
the sword is not always in a readiness. For as Valerius Maximus says, the
safe keeping of this blessed peace, consists in the knowledge of war, and
deeds of Arms.

Plato praising the art, commands that children should learn it so soon
as they were able. Cyrus said it was as necessary as Husbandry. Augustine and
Bernard, both grave Catholic Doctors of the Church, does approve the same.
Many more, and infinite examples might be alleged, and all against those
which disaloweth of this most famous and honorable exercise of Martial
discipline, and renowned orders of the Law of Arms, which has always
heretofore been the purchaser of Empires: Kingdoms has been enlarged:
Princes preserved: justice maintained: good Laws protected: and the
Commonwealth defended. So in laying aside the exercise of warlike weapons and
Martial discipline, how many Kingdoms has been overthrown, how many
Countries ruinated, and how many flourishing Cities sacked and beaten down
flat to the ground.

But as your Highness, having most sufficiently furnished every part of your
Realm, with all manner of warlike provision, in such sort, as never any of
your Predicessors has heretofore come near: even so could I wish in heart,
that England were as well furnished with Seruitours of experience and
knowledge, in this most honorable exercise of Martial discipline. But the
stars run their course contrary to the world, and the learned judge
otherwise then the Idiote. The Cranes, when they fly out of Cicilia over the
Mountains, carry in their mouths a peble stone, least by their chattering,
they should be seized upon by the Eagles: which byrds, (most gracious and
renowned Princess) teaches me silence, least my ignorance be perceived by
your most excellent and learned mind. The consideration of the which, drove me
first into doubtfulnes, whether it were best to write, and so show my good
will, or to suspend my pen, and so to hide the same.

But then I considered, that the stone Perites burns not the fingers, except
it be broken: nor the love and hearty affection of the mind, is not known,
except by words that be opened. Jupiter has not made man's body like a
Lattesse, that the heart might be seen through the holes: but has shut up
the same close, that the tongue and pen might be the organes and instruments
of the thought. I having served your Majesty in Irelande and in the Low
Countries these sixteen years, yet not worthy the favor of so mighty and
gracious a Princess.

Thus most humbly craving pardon for this my presumptuous enterprise, most
humbly beseeching your Highness, so to accept my labor herein, as the first
fruits of a poor Seruitours study, who to the uttermost of his small power,
in the service of your Majesty, and his Country, will at all times, according
to his bounden duty and allegiance, resolutely and willingly yield himself
to any labor, travail, or danger what soever shall happen. Praying in the
mean season the Almighty God, to give your highness a long and prosperous
reign over us: and as he has heretofore wonderfully preserved you, in most
magnificent and princely regalitie, in the despite of all your envious foes: so
he to have a merciful and loving eye continually upon you, to the great
comfort of all your loving Subjects: and against all your enemies, most happy
and joyful victory.

Your Majesty's Seruitour, most humble and dutiful to be commanded. Gyles
Clayton.

To the freendly Readers in general, and specially to all young Gentlemen of
England, which most honorably attempteth to get renown and honor, in this
most famous and renowned exercise: Gyles Clayton sends greeting, health to
your persons, and happiness to all your honorable attempts.
ALthough (friendly Readers,) you think my labors might have been very
well spared, in writing any matters appertayning unto wars, for that every
man is desirous to live in security of peace: but freendly Readers, you are to
understand, that this blessed peace cannot be maintained and kept secure,
without the use and practice of warlike weapons, and Martial discipline. For
we are to consider, the ambition of the world is such, that it is impossible
for a Realm or Dominion, long to continue in quietness and safeguard, where the
defense of the sword and Mtiarall feats of war is not exercised and
practiced with discipline. For as the Greckes thinking themselves to be in
peace and secure, applied themselves in tryfling matters, taking pleasure in
Comaedies, and such like toys, altogether laying aside Martial discipline and
the exercise of warlike weapons: which gave occasion to Phillip King of
Macaedonia, father to Alexander the great, to oppress and to bring them in
servitude under his subjection. I could allege many more which has been
suppressed, only for lack of the use of warlike weapons, and thinking
themselves to be in most security and peace, as the Assirians, Persians,
Athenians, and such like. And the City of Rome, which might have been
perpetual, but thought themselves in peace, and fell to inordinate riot and
pastimes, not doubting nor fearing any thing which was hurtful unto them or
their Commonweal: which thing was to their great ruin and overthrow. Even so
where overmuch liberty is given, men may be trodden down under foot, and
brought to most horrible misery and calamity: if they give themselves only to
pastimes and pleasures, and forsake the use and exercise of warlike weapons,
which are the defense both of Prince, Country, Religion, justice, laws, and
subjects: the which are altogether maintained, and protected by Arms only.
And therefore the most famous Conquerers and mighty Captains did devise, with
most diligence, all manner of ways, to bring their men to be perfect in the
knowledge of all manner of things appertayning to the wars. As manifestly
appears, by the warlike Games which the Princes of Grecia ordained upon the
Mount Olimpus. And also by the orders and exercise that the ancient Romans
used in sundry places, and specially in Campo Martio, and in their sumptuous
Theaters, which chiefly they builded for that purpose: whereby they made their
Soldiers of such experience, that they obtained with small company in fight,
against a great multitude of enemies, such wonderful and marvelous victories,
as in many credible Histories are mentioned. And also by the same means, their
straggling people which followed the Camps, got such understanding in those
actions of Arms, that they in the day of battle, being lest destitute of
succor, were able without any other help, to set themselves in good order
of battle, for their own defense against the enemy, and in such times of
service, they have done their Country great service. So that the antiquity
esteemed nothing more happy, then to have the Country full of men of
understanding and knowledge, in warlike actions, and Martial discipline. Which
thing is least regarded in this Realm, and most need of it: for that we have
so many evil and pestiferous enemies round about us: which are ready
continually, if opportunity serve the^, to work our ruin and decay. Wherefore
stir up your selves every man with courage, and boldness of mind, to the
exercise of your warlike weapons, which is honorable, and most worthy to be
preferred before all exercises. For the use here of being laid aside, breeds
more sedicions and wars, then if they were daily had in use, and so perfectly
practiced: for experience in service, does much more prevail, then many
multitudes of people, being without understanding and knowledge in this most
honorable service. Wherefore, since the necessity of this service of war, and
Martial exercise is so great, and also the necessary use of them so manifest,
that even peace herself, in manner, does challenge her chief defense and
protection, such is the worthiness of Martial exercises: for as by proof we
see, that the glory thereof cannot easily find root, but in the hearts of such
most worthy men, which continually exercises themselves in these warlike
weapons, for the glory of their Prince and Country, and also for their own
honor and magnanimity. Wherefore these exercises being of such force, which
brings all those that exercise the same to such honor and fame, both of
Prince and Country, that I would in heart, that all English men, might show
their good will in the exercise thereof. But having so few men of experience
in these days, we see that every one having served but a year or two, it is a
great matter. Nay, if he but cross the Seas, and make his abode but one month,
he is accounted a Soldier. But for my part, I have served these sixteen
years in Ireland, and in the Low Countries, and have seen many pieces of
service in both places, and yet I dare not account my self a Soldier. For
the name of a Soldier is most honorable, and those that bear the name or
title thereof, should be men of understanding and knowledge, and well
experienced in war, and Martial discipline.

Do we not find in many places of the holy Scripture, both in the books of
Moses, in the book Numbers, in the book of Joshua, and in diverse other places
of the Scripture, where they used no little regard, not only in choosing of
their Captains and leaders, but as well in prescribing of Laws and Martial
discipline of wars, the which in times past were appointed by the Almighty
God himself: moreover promised gyfts to those which could persuade the
children of Israel. As by example, in the book of Numbers, as I remember, in
the fourteen chapter, how God promised with his own mouth to reward Caleb,
for his constancy, and courageous persuasion to the children of Israel. And
David being a man of small account among the great Warriors, yet for his
worthiness and famous behavior, in killing and overthrowing Goliath: what great
riches and rewards received he, with the Daughter of King Saul? But in
England, we never consider, neither of his actions, nor of his knowledge and
experience: but most commonly, our Captains are chosen, more for favor then
for knowledge: more for freendship, then for experience: for if they have a
good opinion in him, they never consider his desert, whether he be a man able
to discharge his place or no. But I have no doubt, that every manshalbe
hereafter better looked unto, both for their knowledge, as also for their
experience and desert. And Varro says, there be three things not to be
suffered, a wise man under the governance of a fool: a liberal man in
subjection to a caytife: and a fool set in authority. Wherefore it is most
commonly seen, where good order and governance fails, obedience decays,
boldness increases, deceit escapes, injuries prevails, avarice corrupts,
and the estate of a Weal public soon after decays. But least I should
offend, I will conclude with a few other examples, as in Spain, in France,
in the Low Countries, and many other places, what great intentions are among
their Princes and Governors, the which is a great perrill, and an endangering
to their Princes and their Common wealth and Country, in an evil and dangerous
estate. Wherefore let us be thankful to God, for giving us so loving and
gracious a Princess, who foreseeth such evil intentions, least they should
breed to such inconvenient sores which may not be cured. For her Majesty
considers, that the strength of her Realm, is the freendship and love of her
people. And Marcus Aurelius says, that Princes live more safely, in gathering
to them men of good understanding and knowledge, then with their treasures of
money: for the love of a Princes Subjects to their Prince, is the whole
strength of the Land. And as Hermes says, unhappy is that Prince, that
esteems himself happy, to have his Cofers full of treasure, and his
counsel full of men of evil and corrupt living. Also let us remember the
worthy saying of Socrates, who says, that if a Prince be merciful, liberal,
and loving, his estate shall prosper, and his wisdom shall help him in his
need. If he be just, his subjects shall rejoice in him, his Realm shall
prosper, and his estate continue: for glorious is that Country and Common
wealth, and fortunate is that Prince, that is Lord of young men to travail,
and old sage persons at home, to give grave and wise counsel.

Thus having spoken sufficient, I will conclude, most humbly beseeching God, so
to bless her Majesty, with long life to reign over us, that we may by her
gracious proceedings be long governed. God confound her foes, and bring to
light all traitorous Conspiratours against her most excellent Majesty. God so
bless her honorable Counsel with increase of wisdom, that all their
consultations, may redownd to the safe keeping and honor of this most famous
England. Amen.

Gyles Clayton.

THE ORDER OF MARTIAL DISCIPLINE: AND FIRST, OF THE ELECTION OF A Lord
Lieuetennaunt, or a General for the Prince.
AS the entrance into wars and martial discipline, is of great charge and
importance, as whereunto requires no small regard and consideration to be
admitted, for in this blessed peace we have continued a great time, for the
which we think our selves in a most happy and blessed estate, which is true:
but let us not flatter our selves too much in this security of life, and so lay
away the use of warlike weapons, the which is the only preserver and maintayner
of that blessed peace, for as Valerius Maximus says: without the use and
knowledge of wars and the exercise thereof, this blessed peace cannot be
maintained and preserved. And Augustine and Barnard, both Catholic Doctors of
the Church) affyrmeth, that this sweet and quiet peace cannot be maintained
and kept, without the use of war and Martial exercise, with such policies as
is possible to be used, for the defense of his Country and Commonweal, and
especially, for the maintenance of true Religion: wherefore it shall first and
principally be considered, that Officers be chosen therein of all degrees to
serve in the same, and those also that be men of godly conversation, great
wisdom, expert and politic in Martial affairs, faithful and loyal to
their Prince and Country, and of such magnanimity and courage, as rather
covet to climb to honor by desert, then to live a cowardish life with shame.
These Officers ought also, to be of ripeness of wit, at a sudden to
persuade and diswade as the cause shall require: of great lenity in their
speech and actions, whereby to win the love and liking both of enemies and
friends.

A Camp, Leagar, or Garrison, furnished with such Officers, cannot but flourish
as the Laurel in all behauiours: in so much, as the Officers being themselves
faithful, expert, and godly, the common Soldiers must needs be the better,
both by instruction, and example of life, and know how to live in all duty
and obedience: so that virtue thus bearing sway on every side, unity thence
immediately springs, wherein they all in one lincke: being knitte together,
there is no doubt but they must needs prevail against their enemies, for love
and concord in Camp or Leagar, is a discouragement to the enemies, and an
encouragement to themselves. Who by such means are led, do suppose and
think no toil paynefull, to win honor, so forceable is love, virtue, and
obedience, in all kinds of government. But on the contrary part, where
corrupt, greedy, and churlishe Officers are, who seeking nothing more, then
their own private gain and commodity, not regarding at al, the poor
soldier, whose life for his wages and honor of his Country, is solie
adventured: but what ensues of such Officers, but mutinies and discords, and
in fine, by such only occasions, comes the utter rain and confusion of an
whole Army.

But the Officers be diverse, for so it is needful: for, the government of a
Camp or Leagar, is as the government of a Realm or Country, and requires
like Officers, to minister justice and to suppres wrongs and injuries: and as
that Commonwealth (though the Law be never so pure) cannot long continue in
security, where the Magistrates be ignorant of the same: so that Camp or
Leagar, not having good, skillful, and politic Officers, to rule, place,
govern, and defend their Soldiers, to order their Camp, to make their
battles of diverse sorts, for the best advantage against their enemies, and
for the greatest strength to place Ambushes. To endomage the enemy by
advantage, and also by politic foresight to foresee the traps, snares, and
Engines of the enemy, and thereby to prevent the same cannot long endure.

But to conclude, a General must have an especial care to be well provided,
for the true payment of his Army: for the want of pay does not only infeeble
and abate the courage of Soldiers, when they shall be pincht both with
hunger and cold: but it breeds mutinies, it causes discordes, it neglects
service, and lets slip opportunities. To set down in particulars what
great dangers has happened for want of pay, would ask a longer discourse
then were requisite: wherefore, maintain discipline, and see your Soldiers
be well paid and well punished.

The Office and duty of a Colonel general.
WHen this Colonel is chosen of his Lord General, and receives his aucthory
from him, he shall choose his Captains, Lieuetennants, and Sargeants,
Harbengers, Ensigns, Drums, and Phifes, and that his special care be in
choosing of good Captains, Lieuetennants, and Sargeantes, and that they been
men of government, expert and skillful in service, of such ripenes of wit,
which may upon the sudden persuade and diswade as the cause shall require. He
shall also examine his Captains, what choice they have made of their Officers,
whether they be men of sufficient knowledge or no, if he finds them to be
good, then he is to assign every Captain what weapon his Soldiers shall
use.

He is to have an especial and great care, in choosing of his Lieuetennant, for
that he ought to be a man of great experience and knowledge in service: for it
appertains to him only, if occasion serves, to inrancke men in time of
service, to alter and change them, as best serves for their advantage. And
lastly, he shall give great attendaunce on his General, that he may be ready
at his commandment to know his pleasure, for that pains is honorable and of
great credit, a place best fitting a man of countenance and credit, whose
experience ought to be great, and to exceed the knowledge and experience of
all other Lieuetennants.

The high Treasurers Office.
YOU ought also to choose unto you an high Treasurer, which is an Office of
great reputation, and therefore he ought to be a man of wisdom, and expert in
Martial affairs: for, he is to speak his opinion in all Offices, as well
concerning other offices as his own, otherwise committed to his charge: for
the payment of all high Officers appertains unto him, as to the Colonelles
and Captains.

Likewise he shall receive from the General, the true note of horsemen and
footmen within the Army, and to make a perfect book cuery month, that he may
know what is due to every Officer and Soldier. He is also to confer with
the Master of the Ordenance for the provision of Municion of all sorts, and
likewise with the prouante Master, or Master of the victualles, to foresee
that they be well provided of victuals for the Camp, that the Soldiers may
have no want thereof. There be many other things which might be spoken of, as
concerning his Office, but I will refer them unto the good opinions of those
which be wisemen, and sufficiently instructed in this Martial exercise.

The Office of the Lord high Marshall of the field.
WHen the high Marshall is appointed, and for every battle, one provost
Marshall with his under Marshall, which ought to be men of good understanding
and judgment, both wise and grave, for yt matters of great weight, bependeth
only upon them. Likewise they shall have all things necessary, for the
punishment of all disordered persons according to justice: that is to say a
Hal with yrons, for the safe keeping of their prisoners, and carriages for the
same, a sufficient number of Tipstaues under them, which are inferior Officers
for the reprehension of Offenders, and for the safe-keeping of the^. A Clarke
of the Market, and an Execucioner: also, at the remove of your Camp or
Leagar, the high Marshall is to give an order to every Officer in the Camp, to
have special care for the conueying of their carriages.

Likewise he is to have special care for the placing of the Scoutes, at that
time of remove, and at all other times. Finally, he ought to be a man of
sound judgment, and experienced in the knowledge of Martial discipline, for
that his office especially depends thereon.

Also he is to foresee, that every inferior Officer not doing his duty, to
be corrected and reformed, that discipline may be used, as well to inferior
Officers, as to the common Soldier: thus ordering his Leagar or Camp without
parciallity, shall not only win love and fouour of the Camp or Leagar, but
also reap to him self honor and renemue.

The Office and duty of a Sargeant Mayor.
LIkewise you are to elect and choose a Sargeant Mayor, whose office is great,
therefore you ought to have an especial care in choosing of him: for he ought
to be a man of great courage, for that his office is always to be in the face
of the enemy. In time of battiale he ought to be a man of singular invention,
at a sudden to perceive and prevent the situation, terror and pretense of the
enemy.

Likewise, he is to appointe what sorts of weapons shall be used in every
battle, and to see there be no want thereof in time of need. He is to have a
special care, to for-see that the Army be perfectly instructed, that they may
know and understand, the true order and meaning of your battles, as well in
time of peace as otherwise: also, he is to appointe the battle, and of such
sort, as he thinks best befitting the ground. He is to appoint every Captain
his place, and to give them their several charge, which they ought to
perform. He is to appoint them, what kind of weapons shall be used in the
time of battle: finally, his Officers ought under him, to be very good and
sufficient Seruitors, sound in understanding and knowledge in Martial
exercise: for they ought to take pains in setting of battles, if occasion
serve, for that their Sargeant Mayor cannot be always in one place of the
battle.

The Master of the Ordenance.
THE Master of the Ordenance, ought to be a man expert and skillfull in all
points of Cannonry, also in those arts which to that office belongs, able
to instruct and reform his Lieuetennants, Controulers, Clerks, Conductors,
Cannoners, and all other Artificers, teaching them the best he can. To convey
their charges to ye place of service, be it in time of marching, in time of
Camping, battering, imbattailling, or retyring: regarding as well, that every
piece of Ordenance be well and strongly stocked, and mounted upon strong
Axeltrees, and their wheels well shooed, and strongly bound with iron, in all
points as to the same belongs, placing and giving to every Cannoner his
charge, as to his place appertains: and also, it belongs unto him to have
in regard and in readiness, all things fit for the making of fire works:
that is to say, Saltpeter or quickesiluer, Rosen, Linseede oil, and common
Lamp oil, Pitch, wexe, Aquauite, Camphere, Tutia, Arsenicke, Calx viue, and
great store of Sulphur, of al these frame balls to burn in the water.

He shall have special regard for ye placing of his Ordenance for the best
advantage against the enemies, and to have a regard to see that every Officer
do their duty in time of battle: and to conclude, he is in great
reputation in the field, for upon him depends the performing of great
exploytes, and that all other Officers under him be men of understanding, and
experienced in Cannonry, and that they taking wages under him to be occupied in
and about such things, as to their duties belongs.

The Lieuetennat of the Ordenance, his duty and charge.
THis Lieuetennant of the Ordenance, ought to be a man well practiced in
service, and skillful in Cannonry, and to be in all points as skillful as the
Master of the Ordenance: so that he may at all times in his absence, be able to
instruct, reform, and correct, able to give a charge unto all men under their
leading, as to the same appertains, examining and tr^ing their Cannoners,
Municioners, and Artificers in their several sciences: and finding them
necessary and able, shall instracte the Master of the Artillarie, who may
allow and place them at his pleasure.

But if in the viewing the Artillarie and Municion, and finding them unready
and not serviceable, shall cause it to be amended forthwith, or else to
complain to the Master of the Ordenance, who shall see present redress for
the amendment thereof.

The Master Gunners charge.
THe Master Gunner must be a man of great experience in that science in all
points, placing and appointing such men under him to be Cannoners, as have
like experience, which shall see that every Cannoner, appointed to any Piece of
Ordenance, be able to govern the same, as to that service appertains.

Likewise he shall see all inferionr Gunners do their duties, and that they be
skilful incharging and discharging, and to have in a readiness all things
belonging to his office, and to foresee that their Pieces be kept clean, to
have in store all kind of shot and fire works: these and such like matters
appertains to the Master Gunners charge and duty, the which he ought to
have a special care unto, for his own advancement and credit, during the
time of his charge: and that he be skillful in the height and weight of his
shot and powder, also in the height of the month of his Piece, and that he
see his shot ready in the bear of his Piece, and powder in bags, touch
powder in his horn, Lint and Lintstocke ready. That he be skillful in the
receipt of his powder, and know the authority of the same: and when soever he
reciueth charge of his Piece, he ought to be dilligent in trying and searching
of the same, that she be clean within, for honny Combs right bored, and to
the same a close cover, with Ladies and Spunges fit for the same.

Thus furnished and strongely mounted upon strong wheels well shooed, strong
Axeltrees well clowted, often greased, with Lins-pins of iron, a strong back
well bounds with iron plates well nailed, and reueted boultes, Lins-pins to the
same stocks, two Boxes, one of powder in bags, the other for shot, and some
hayle shot according to his Piece, with mouldes for the same, with many other
necessaries vnrehearsed.

The Office and duty of a quarter Master.
THeir ought to be appointed one quarter Master, whose experience ought to be
great, for that he is to place and lodge an whole Army, either in field or
Garrison, as it seems best to the high Marshal: for that he ought to appoint
the ground for Leagar, or place for Garrison. This quarter Master ought to
appoint convenient ways or streets for men to pass through, either in Leagar
or Garrison: and that he have a special regard to foresee, that the ways
be fair and easy for men to pass to the place of Artillarie, where men most
commonly do assemble together in time of Alarm, or in time of battle.

This quarter Master ought to have four quarter masters under him, which ought
to be ancient Seruitors, and men of good behavior and understanding in this
service: and that they may at all times give dilligent attendance on him, to
know his pleasure, and what best is to be done in that service.

The Office and duty of the Scoute Masters.
ALso there ought to be certain Scoute Masters, elected and chosen of the
high Marshall and provost Marshall: they must see that every Officer do their
duties in time of their watch, and to be careful for the preventing of any
mischief that may happen by their negligence: Wherefore, he ought dilligently
to veiw and walk the roundes euerynight, be it in Leagar or Garrison. If he
find any place of suspicion, where the enemy may take any advantage: then
shall he in that place, plant certain Scoutes for the defense thereof.

These Scoute masters shall attend upon the high Marshall, and ought to be
both diligent and painful, for that the preservation and destruction of the
whole Army consists in them only: wherefore the high Marshall ought of his
own person, to have a special care and regard thereof, and diligently to try
and examine the trusty and careful ordering of the Scoutes, if any fault be
in them, and to see that present reformation be made thereof, for they be all
of the office of the Marshall, and counted all as Marshalls in that time of
service. As for Forage masters, carriage masters, and such like Officers,
which are very necessary, are hereafter to be spoken of, as you shall find
them in their several places of service.

The Office and duty of the Muster Master.
THis Muster master ought to be a man of great credit and trust, for that he
is to give true information unto the Lord General or high Treasurer, what
strenght they are of able men, both of horsemen and footmen: also, he shall in
taking Muster have a special eye and regard, unto those Officers appointed
for the leading of men: that they be men of service, and not chosen without
regard, but be men of experience and knowledge, and to see that the Soldiers
be well furnished with Armor and weapons, and either to pass or defaute the^
as he shall find reasonable cause, and to make present certificat to the high
Treasurer, that he may stop such defaultes of their pay. Also, they are
truly to keep all such Laws and Ordinances, as by the said General or his
said Counsel shall be set down, and appointed by his or their authorities.

The Office and duty of the Corporalles of the field.
IT is most necessary and needful, that there be chosen 4. Corporals of the
field, though not in ancient service they have been used, but as our service
stands in these days, they are most needful and profitable, for that they
are as eyes and a right hand to the General, Marshall, and other head
Officers in the field.

These men ought to be of good understanding and knowledge, well experienced in
the orders of Martial discipline, and the ordering of companies, in marching
by degrees in the field, that of a sudden they may be brought into a
battle, or battles, as occasion best serves. It were good that these
Officers might not be chosen, neither for favor nor affection, but by desert:
either to be Captains of experience, which are discharged of their companies,
or to prefer such Liuetennants as be of good government and knowledge, well
experienced in these exercises of Martiallity, for yt they are to discharge the
head Governors of the field, of many travails and pains. When they are
commanded, then one or two ought dilligently to give good attendance of the
General and Marshall, to know their pleasures: the place is painful, yet
honorable, and therefore duly to be considered of.

Also they ought to have a special regard to every Colonelles and Captains
companies, that they march in good order, as best befitteth the way they march
in: and as it may seem best to the General, Marshall, or other head Officers,
to alter and change as time and place serves in that journey.

The Office of a Forage Master.
A Forage Master is to have and receive from the Leiuetennant of the horse, an
able company of horsemen for the guarde of their Forrages, and such as shall
fetch in necessaries, the which must give dilligent attendance on the sound of
the Trumpet: for that they are to go all together, and not suffering them to
straggle out of his company, further then he is able to reskue them. And if
they be far from the Camp or Leagar, not to suffer any to depart homeward,
until they are all provided: and as they came forth, so to return all
together.

The carriage Master.
THis Carriage Master ought to be of good credit and trusty, for that he is
to take great charge of carriages upon him: for the safe conduct thereof, he
is to have a Cornette of horse, from the Lieuetennant of horse for his guide,
and also lose short from the General, or else to march with all his
carriages, between the troops of footmen, for his better securitye in his
journey.

The election of a Captain, his Office and duty
THE place of a Captain is not lightly to be considered of, for that upon
his skill and knoweledge depends the safety or loss of many men's lives:
wherefore he ought to be well experienced, and of great wisdom and policy,
to be chosen for his own worthiness of service and not for favor. But I wonder
how so many insufficient men, dare oppose themselves to undertake a matter of
so great importance: whose inexperience, besides many circumstances,
concerns the loss of a Country, or at the least, the hazard of many men's
lives.

But a good Captain will have a great regard to foresee, that his Soldiers
be well trained, and make them men of war, meet for service, within a short
time, thoughy the never saw wars before, in taking a little pains with
them. A Captain ought to see his Soldiers serving under him, to be well
furnished with all things needful for the service, and to see them truly
paid their wages. Every Captain ought to have under him one Lieuetennant, one
Ensign bearer, two Sargeants, five Corporals: one of the said Corporals for
his pikes, to see their Armor and pikes be well kept and serviceable, the
other four Corporalles, to have the shot divided between them as his
company is.

He is to have one Surgeon, one Drum and Phife: it were not amiss that a
Preacher and a Physician, were provided for every two thousand of men, to
minister remedy, the one to the Soul, and the other to the body. But no
Captain that has but four shillinges a day, shall be able to furnish
himself to his calling, and the healping of his Soldiers, except he rob his
Prince and poule his Soldiers of their pay: wherefore it were very good, that
every Captain should have in his charge and leading, ij. hundred men to his
Ensign: for without doubt, the charge for the carrieng of such necessaries as
he ought to have comes to four shillings a day, wherefore he can have no less
then eight shillinges a day. Thus having two hundred men to his Ensign, the
Prince thereby shall never the more be charged: then she was before: so may
they be able to furnish their band with many things needful, as meat,
drink, Armor, weapons, carriages for sick and hurt Soldiers, his Surgeons
cheste, and other tools very necessary: also, he may relieve the Soldiers
of his own table. Yet shall the Prince be at no more charge then she was
before, when they had but four shillings a day, which was then more like to
hinder himself and his Soldiers, then to give them any thing besides their
pay, which thing is very needful, at all times to give to such as be weak
and sickely.

It were not amiss to have a priest under him, which might supply the place of
a Clarke, and to have the calling of his bill under his Ensign: also, he shall
have the choice of his Lieuetennants, and all other Officers under him, and to
for-see that they be sufficient Seruitors, and expert in Martial exercises,
always ready and painful to discharge their duties, for the honor of their
Captain, and that it may redownd to their own credites and discharge of their
duetyes.

Likewise it appertains to him, to be present with the General at all times,
to know his pleasure and determined mind, for the exployting of any piece of
service committed to his charge: and the same shall he faithfully prosecute, to
the uttermost of his power, for his own credit and advancement. Wherefore he
ought to be skillful in making of Trenches and Ramparts, as well for his own
defense as for any assault: also he is to appoint his Sargeants to receive the
watch word every night, and the same to keep very carefully, and to use all
the devices he can possibly make or frame for the annoyance of the enemies,
and the same continually to follow and practice with all diligence: not to be
timorous, but always bearing a valiant heart, and never cease to encourage his
soldiers, which may win him credit for ever, both of his Prince and
Country.

The Office and duty of a Leiuetennant.
THe Lieuetennant of a Band, ought to be a man of knowledge and experience in
this service, for that he is diverse times to discharge his Captain of many and
sundry trauails and pains, which to him belongs. Yet notwithstanding, he is
not to take any more authority then to him belongs: but faithfully and
willingly to advertise his Captain, what time soever he shall be demanded any
question of him, and shall show and instruct to the uttermost of his power.

He is to see the Sargeants and Corporalles do their duties, in time of
setting the watch, and to see that other inferior Officers be obedient and
careful in their charge: for the furnishing and providing of Armor and
weapons of all sorts: and in his Captains absence to apply his authority, and
that with great diligence, and especial care during the time of his absence.

Finally, he shall instruct the Soldiers, and give them to understand, what
they have to do at any time of exployt, with the best and surest way he can
for their advantage: and therein not to fail, but franckly and freely to
perform the same with all diligence possible, for his own advancement and
credit.

The Ensigns charge and duty.
FOR that the Ensign in the field is to be honored of all men, so ye Bearer
thereof ought to be a man of good courage knowledge, sufficient to discharge
his duty. He ought to be sworn to be faithful and loyal to his Prince and
Captain, professing rather to die, then to be dishonored with the loss of
his Colors: but with courage to advance them* in the sight of his enemies.

He must be of able personage, secret, silent, zealous, wise to persuade and
animate the Soldiers: whose resolute mind ought to be showed in time of any
distres, to the encouragement of all the Soldiers about him.

The Sargeants of the Bands charge.
THese Sargeants of Bands, should be men of great experience, well known to
be sufficiently instructed in these Martial exercises: both secret and
silent, for that they are to put their men into goodorder of array at every
sudden, to teach them the use of their weapons whatsoever, in the best and
seruiceablest manner, practicing the same in Garrison or in time of Musters, or
trayning, marching, and retyring, until they be perfect, that every man in
time of battle may be able to discharge his duty.

Also to see them furnished with Armours and weapons, to them most fit and
agreeable, ready by the Ensign at every calling, be it by sound of drum or
secret calling, either by night or day: who so refuses their authority in such
behalf, shall be punished as disobedient persons: for the assurance of the
whole company consists in the same.

He shall assign every Soldier to his place most fittest for him, suffering
them not to strive the one with the other, for any place: but every one to be
placed according to his service and skill. Also, he is to see there be no want
of victualles, powder, shot, or match: if any such things be wanting, he is
to assign it to his Captain or Leiuetenant, who shall see it provided for
them, in a readiness at all times. He is to accompany the watch to place of
stand, either to market place, or to watch Hill, and at the breaking up to take
the watch word of the Sargeant Mayor or high Marshall: wherefore he ought
carefully to give attendaunce on the Sargeant Mayor and his Captain, to be
ready at his commandment. For good Sargeants in a disordered company, shall
find toil more then enough, until such time as they have well trained them:
and therefore, his Captain is to have great regard and consideration of him.

Corporalles and Launcespazadoes charge.
IT is necessary for the readiness of service, that five Corporals be chosen,
which ought to men of honest behavior and experience, every Corporal having
his squadron appointed to him: who is not only to exercise them in the use of
their weapons, to see them that they be well furnished with all necessaries, as
shot, powder, match, bullets, and such like: but to have a special care in
keeping their furniture clean and serviceable.

If any defaults be found, they are to complain, if amendment be not found
presently, to the Sargeant or Leiuetennaunt, who shall see it presently
reformed, be it in Garrison or Camp. Thus, justice and aucthortie shall be
mayntayned, and faults amended.

Also, the Launcespazadoes shall supply the charge of the Corporals in their
absence, if occasion at any time call them.

The Clarke of a Bands charge.
Clerks of Bands ought to be men of sober and wise behavior, perfect in
accounts: for that he is to take the names of every Soldier, serving under
his Captains colors. He is to be careful in keeping of his accounts, between
his Captain and the Soldiers, and to see that every Soldier have his pay
well and truly paid, and to provide them all things necessary, and especially
in time of sickness: the which will be a great credit, both to himself and his
Captain, and the only way to win the hearts of his Soldiers.

Also, he must be present at every turn, as watch, Musters, and other meetings
and assemblings, with his bill of names, to call his Captains Soldiers, and
of every one being absent, to make certificat thereof. Many other things might
be spoken of touching his Office, which for breuity I ommitte.

A Chirurgions Office and duty.
THose Chirurgions should be men of honest and good conscience, and such as
should work according to art, not practicing new experiments upon poor
soldiers, by means whereof many have been utterly maimed: wherefore, the
Captains are to have a special care in choosing their Chirurgions, that they
be skillful in their science or art, and to see them have all things
necessary: as Oils, Balmes, salues, and Instruments sufficient for his turn,
allowing and sparing carriages for the same.

Also, that every Soldier shall give to the foresaid Surgeon, every
month two pence, as in times past has been accustomed, to the augmentation
of his wages: in consideration whereof, he ought readily to employ his industry
upon the sore and wounded Soldiers, not intermodling with any other cures to
them noisome, regarding always that he be truly paid his wages, and all
duties to him belonging, that he may be able to provide al such stuff as to
him belongs. It serves his turn at needful times in the night, to go
through the watch without the word, when upon straight occasions he is to go
to his cures.

Drums and Phifes duty.
IT is necessary that every Captain have two Drums, the one to be resident
with the colors, the other to march with the Troops, as upon occasion they
shall be drawn forth: also, it were not amiss to have one Phise, for that it
is a good lightsomnes to the Soldiers.

Those Drumers ought to be men of personage, faithful, secret and trusty: they
ought to have sundry languages, and to know the sound and call of all marches,
charges, retreites, alarums, and such like points of war: for many times
they are sent to parlie with the enemy, to summon their Fortes or Towns, to
redeem and conducte prisoners, and diverse other messages. If such Drums or
Phifes fortune to fall into the hands of the enemy, no gift, no fair
speeches, neither force nor terror, shall cause them to bewray any secrets
known to them. They must often times practice their Instruments and teach the
company the sound of march, charge, retreit, alarums, and such like, that is
necessary to be known: They must be obedient to their Captains,
Lieuetennants, and other Officers, when soever they command them either to go
or stand, or to sound any point of war, what they think best: many other
things belongs to their office and duty, as in diverse places in this book
you shall find.

Furnishing of Soldiers to the Field.
FIrst, that all Corporalles and Launcespazadoes, leading of shot, shall in
his own person, see them to be well furnished in all points, as follows:
that they have their full number of Soldiers, and every Soldier to have a
sufficient Caliuer, Flaske, and Touch box, powder, bullets, mould, priming
iron, match, rammer, worm, burgenet, and one sword and dagger, to teach them
to march, to charge and discharge with a fair retreit, not touching one an
other, keeping their faces upon the enemies: and in rain or moist weather, to
hold their Piece under their arm, with the touchhole of their Piece, close
under their armehole, their match being fyred between their fingers in the
palm of their hand, so shall they be ready at every sudden. Provided
always, they keep their match and powder dry, their Piece clean scoured
within and without: if any fault be found therein, immediately to be amended.

The Corporal of the pikemen, his Office and duty.
A Captain should choose a sufficient man, strong and expert in the handling
of his Pike, to be Corporal of his company of Pikes: for that it is a most
strong and warlike weapon. This Corporal shall teach the Soldier often
times to use his Pike, in pushing and trayling the same in good order, both for
the beauty of the battle, and for the necessity thereof: and to see them have
sufficient and good Corslets, for they be the greatest strength of your
battle, and a terror to the enemies, and in any wise see them fit and easy
for their bodies, that they may be able to use their weapons in time of fight,
which is a great defense in a Camp, and chosen cheefely for the battle.

They must have Morions Swords and Daggers, their Pikes of usual length,
sharp pointed, and well nailed: and cause them in time of marching, to lay
their Pikes on their shoulders, and their thums under the same, the but end on
the outside of his leads man's Leg. After this sort to march to Muster, to
retire, and Imbattaile as aforesaid: having a great care and regard, that no
Soldier of spite or negligence do cut the same, or any way impair it, for
the greatest strength of the battle consists therein.

Of Holberders to guard the Ensign.
THese Holberders should be men of good stature and courage, for that they are
to beautify the company and guarde the Ensign, wearing Curites on their
bodies, with swords and daggers, usually called Executioners of the battle:
which ought to be always ready at the sound of Drum or secret call, to attend
upon the Colors, and never to depart from the same till it be brought into
place of good security.

Provision to be foreseen by the Lord Lieuetenaunt.
WHen all needful Officers be thus chosen, it then behooves that a
convenient place be appointed, where all Captains may gather their men
together in several companies, where the Lieuetenant general, and other
warlike counsel ought to be present, to take the musters of them, and
substantially to foresee, that every man be well provided of his furniture,
according to his place of service, also to foresee there be no lack of
Munition of all sorts, both small and great, also powder and bullets, both
small and great, Caliuers, Muskets, Holberds, Pykes, Armor, Scaling ladders,
short laders to fill Maundes, for the safeguard of the Ordenaunce and Gunners at
time of battery or battle, small handbaskettes, ropes, and all other
earthware: to have sufficient tools meet for the Laborers and Myners to
work withal, if occasion serve, Carts, Cart-wheeles, and Axeltrees, both for
the Ordenaunce and other carriages, and that there be store of them in time of
need. Also provision for bridges if need be, as boordes, boats, and
Anckers, other plancks and pillars fastened together with ropes and Cables:
also to be provided of all manner Artificers, with their necessaries meet for
the wars, as Smithes, Masons, Carpenters, and Armorers, with other such like.

And above all things to foresee there be sufficient store of victuals, for all
things may be beter endured then hunger, for hunger overcomes without stroke
of enemies, and one other like provision, which is, money sufficient, that your
Soldiers may be well paid: for oftentimes money gives courage, and reuiueth
the spyrits of your Soldiers, for a Souldior without meat, and especially
without money, is as a man without a soul: but if your Soldiers have money,
and be well paid, then shall your Camp flourish like a City, with all manner
of victuals, and other necessaries most meet for your Soldiers.

The choosing of Guides.
AND when all your provisions necessary be made, and set in good order, and
that you be ready to invade your enemies Country, then ere you begin your
journey, you must be sure that you be well provided of a sufficient number of
men of the same Country, that knows all manner of ways of that Country, to
ye intent they may be your guides, whereby you may the easier convey your Army
and Carriages, the which Guides must be carefully looked unto by the High
Marshall, and the said Guides must be under the safe keeping of the foresaid
High Marshall, being always gently entreated, to the intent they may have no
occasion to steal away.

These Guides, in their examination must be promised large rewards, if they do
well and truly: also they must have great threatenings of cruel punishment, if
they deal not truly. And when examination is made, you shall examine them
severally, every one by himself, to feel whether they agree all in one tale
or no: thus shall you understand whether they be perfect in the ways of the
Country or no. And although you be determined to go one way, yet must you
examine the^ of diverse other ways, which you intend not to go, to the intent
they shall not know, but be uncertain of your determination, until such time
as you set forth your journey, least that your determination might be
discovered to your enemies by your said Guides.

The Captains care for provision for their Soldiers.
ALthough these necessary provisions be made by ye Prince, or Lord Lieuetenant
general, yet notwithstanding, it shall be needful for every good Captain,
to make as much provision for victuals as he can for his Company upon his
own charges, for oftentimes victuals decays before a man be aware, likewise
every good Captain must be provided of all manner of tools meet to make
Lodgings and Cabines for his Soldiers, and for the setting up of Pauillions
or Tents, and in general to provide all other needful and necessary things,
for the succor and relief of his Soldiers.

Here follows many stratagemes and obseruatitions very necessary to be used
for diverse good causes which may not be forgotten.
AND when all things is thus provided and furnished as I have spoken of before,
and then appointed to serve in Camp or Garrison, you shall choose out some
convenient place to muster in, and being their assembled, it shall be
necessary to publish unto the Soldiers these observations, stratagemes and
statuts, set forth by the Marshall: and whosoever offends or breaks any
of them, is not worthy the name of a Soldier: for in silence, obedience and
truth, consists the whole sum and effect of Martial discipline in the
wars.

Silence.
THey shall use silence, to the intent that they may hear and well understand
any precept, commandment or point, of discipline given unto them by the
Officers in any authority from the Prince, and in time of service by night or
by day, that they may hear their enemies, but not be heard of them: Many
other virtues belongs unto silence, which for brevity I omit.

Obedience
THis Obedience is of great force, and works in the hearts of all true
Subjects, for it proceeds from God, that the Princes themselves, or any
other, speaking in their names and authority, must be obedient, although the
precepts be contrary to the minds of some Soldiers, who be not worthy to
know the secrets of the Officers in their authority: yet must they in all
points obey them, both by the Laws of God and their Prince, though the things
be both painful and perrilous unto them.

Truth.
IN this truth is contained so many virtues, that they cannot be written in a
whole book: for as faithfulness proceeds, and has his reward of God, so
has the unfaithful and unjust, their reward of the devil: so Soldiers shall
be sometimes tempted by the enemies to be corrupted with money, and great
promises of living, to be false to their Prince and Country, which things
done before God, is condemned to perdition, and before man has lost his good
name and fame for ever, and all other things wherein they should rejoice:
wherefore all good Soldiers esteem more of their truth and loyalty, the^
of their lives: for they be full assured of double reward both of God and man,
whether they live or die.

Captains bills called by the Clarke.
IT is convenient and needful, that at every muster or assembly, the
Captains bill shall be called by the Clarke, every man aunswering to his own
name: so marching forth as he is called, that no man unto two names make
answer. If any Soldier be sick or hurt, being not serviceable, pay him his
wages, and send him home with a pasport into his own Country, then
immediately furnish his room with an able Soldier. If any Souldior having his
health and limbs, absent himself at such times, let him be punished, as in
the statutes here following is mentioned, to the example of the rest.

The burial of the dead.
WHen as any Soldier is slain, or otherwise dead, the Company shall bring
the dead body to the ground, with the sound of the Drum, and such solemnity as
his scruice meriteth and deserves, if conveniently you may.

The Soldiers duty in keeping clean his furniture.
Every Soldier must keep clean his Armor and furniture, always placing
the same in his Tent, Cabben, or Lodging, in such a readiness, as he may
presently, and on a sudden find the same, either by night or by day, ready
to attend on the Ensign if occasion serves of a sudden, and that no other
take any part thereof.

The advancement of a Soldier.
ALso every Soldier shall help to Arm the one the other, so that they may
with diligence resort to their Ensign, and whosoever comes first, and shows
himself in best readiness, with honest and good behavior in the use of his
weapon and array, shall not only merit thanks and reward of his Captain, but
shall be advanced by degree of office, as it falls in the Company.

Punishments for not keeping clean their furnitures.
IF any Soldier be negligent in the keeping clean of his Armor or other
Furniture, or neglect his duty as aforesaid, after once warning thereof, he
shall be punished as for that offense is most meet, which is a great dysgrace
and discredit, and not worthy the name of a Souldior, but to be banished as an
idle person, and never to come in place of service any more.

Trayning your Soldiers in time of Musters.
YOU shall first make division of your weapons, and let every kind by
himself in like Companies, which in the opinion of diverse notable Warriors
will be a great strength to your band: for if you have too many of one sort,
and too few of another: when you shall come to the setting of a battle, you
shall find a great weakness by reason thereof, but the remedy is easy. For
let every Ensign be like provided, and appointed, so many Shot, so many
Pykes, and so many Bills or Holberds: then shall your company of Footmen be in
good order. Likewise for your Gydorne of Horsemen, cause every Gydorne to have
so many Lances, and as many Light horse, all well furnished, as they do use
in these days of service, then shall you have good order of battle
throughout your whole Army.

You are further to consider how many sorts of weapons will serve, viz. What,
shot, what Pykes, and what Holberds will serve: and to appoint necessary
shot, is one of the hardest things that belongs to the wars, because it
is so uncertain, for ever as your number increases, so your shot
diminishes, according to the number, for in a small number, you shall have
need of the third part of shot, and in the bigger number, the fourth part of
shot serve, and in the greater number, the fifth part of shot will serve,
and so upwards.

Marching your men by degrees.
ALL these things finished accordingly, then march forth your Soldiers with
their several weapons, first your Mus-kets, then your Caliuers, your Pykes,
and in the midst of your Pykes, put your Holberds or Eyls, with your Ensign in
the midst thereof, so march them about awhile, till you may view your whole
company, to see whether they be of like strength, and in good order in every
place, both your Uoward and Rereward, keeping good order in their array.

The Almaines trusted much in the push of the Pykes, therefore they will in no
wise have more shot then Pykes, for overmuch weakening of the body of the
Battle: the more shot you appoint for the body of the Battle, the weaker is
the Battle when it shall come to the push of the Pykes, or fight, and yet not
in any wise to lack shot sufficient, for many times it has been seen, that
battles has been gotten by shot only, without push of Pyke, or stroke of
weapons.

Augmenting your ranckes in time of battle.
WHen you are ready and determined what battle to make, if it be a Quadrent
battle, then you may augment your rancks, from three to five, and so to
seven, then to nine and eleven, and so on till you have brought them to a
Squadrant. Proportion always your Holberds and Ensign in the midst of your
Pykes, then shall ye know the strength and force of your battle, place your
shot on the flancks of your battle by themselves, a good space of, and
there let the^ shoot, skyrmage, and retire, with their faces always upon the
Enemies, till they be perfect, and so learned to retire to some place of
safety, which place is hereafter more plainly declared.

Captains, Lieuetenants, and Sergiants charge, in dividing their weapons.
Every Lieuetenant or Sargiant of a Band, shall usually suit the Company
every weapon by himself, and when they shall march with ye Ensign, whether it
be to muster, or place of assembly to be imbattailed, or in any other time of
service, they shall furnish them as they be accustomed in these days in the
Low Countries, that is to say, with Targetors, Muskets, Caliuers, Pykes, and
then your Holberds and Bylles in the mids of your Pykes, with your Ensign,
Drum and Phife, then the rest of your shot and such like, that you may be of
like strength, both Foreward and Rerewarde, so march your men, and sometimes
cast them in a King, which is very necessary for young Soldiers, to know
the order thereof, for it is a most needful thing, as hereafter shall be
more plainly showed unto you.

Furnishing Launses, Light Horse, or Carbines to the field.
IN like manner, troops of Horsemen being furnished, with Carbines, Lances,
and Light Horse, shall in like strength march or imbattaile, so that their
Gydron may be guarded in the Uowards and Rerewards of like strength, so that
they need no more but turn their faces toward their Enemies, to skyrmage at
every sudden.

Rules to be observed and showed unto young Soldiers in time of Musters or
other times convenient.
SOmetimes being imbattailed, they shall wade from the one end of the battle
to the other, to strengthen the same with so many rancks of Soldiers as they
shall command, leaving one rank of men, which is called the man of advantage,
standing still on the out side: thus using them, you shall find your battle
in like strength every where.

Receiving a word to go through the battle.
AT times they shall receive a word to go through the battle, from the one
end to the other, which shall pass from man to man, till it come to the end
of the same, which word must be spoken with soft speech, as it shall not be
heard but amongst themselves being in battle, in like manner they may
perform the same by a sign given them of the Marshal, Captains, or other
like Officer.

To march stooping.
SOmetimes the whole Company shall march stooping, as under a hedge or hill,
or such like, and suddenly shall fall flat on the ground as in Ambush,
which shall suddenly rise again, and set upon their Enemies in good order
of array, the which may astonish the Enemy, your assaulting the^ so suddenly.

Keeping of array in the dark.
AT such times, every Soldier shall carry the end of his leadesmans weapon
for making any noise, and by that means they shall keep their array in dark
nights, or marching through straights or woods, or such like.

Marching and retyring.
SOmetimes marching toward the Enemies and retyring again, they shall
always keep their faces upon their Enemies, and their Pykes couched, ready
to encounter with their Enemies.

Trayling your Pykes.
SOmetimes trayling your Pykes on the ground, the Uoward bearing their heads
of Pykes in their hands, and the Rereward trayling the heads on the ground,
ready to receive the Enemy.

A show as if men were slain.
SOmetimes marching in order of battle, certain of the Company shall fall,
here some, and there some, as if they were slain with shot, the next man
following shall step in the place of his leadesman, so that there be no place
left for the Enemy to enter in: if any rank be not full, let it be in the
body of your battle.

A sudden Allarum.
Many times it has been used among Soldiers of experience, to give
Allarums to their friends, as among themselves, to foresee whom they might
praise or discommend, according to their readiness found in them, and although
they used this as a necessary mean, to the intent their Soldiers should be
the more careful, yet still to deceive them, is a mean to make secure and not
careful, if they be oftentimes mocked: wherefore to use it is good at times
convenient, but not too often. But most commonly, when the enemy makes any
Allarum, it is to accomplish some exployt, either to lie in Ambush, to cast a
bridge, to plant Ordenaunce, to entrench, or to break up some passage, or
viewing your numbers and strength, or such like, but when any Allarom is given
in the night, change the word.

Points of a good Captain.
AT times convenient train your Soldiers, and pitch them in square
battles, round or bread battles, and other strengthes, which good
Captains and Officers will use at times convenient: which will be a great ease
to the Soldiers, at what time soever they be called to imbattaile, and a
profit to the whole Camp in time of need.

No brunt to be made in time of Muster or Camp.
NO man shall make any brunt or noise, upon the sight of any Hare, Dear, or
Fore, neither break his array to stay the same, if it be in Muster or March,
less in Camping, or in time of service.

Spoils or booties to be divided.
YOU shall give the company to understand and know, that if any exployte or
enterprise be executed and done, the victory overcome, the enemies taken or
slain: all such spoils or booties as is gotten, shall be brought to the
colors and there showed, and a noate taken of the same, and at convenient time
to be sold by the sound, as a general booty, and so divided in equal
portions to every man his part, as well them that keep the field in order of
battle, as to them that entered the fight and brought the said booty away.

Care in carrying bagages.
YOU shall have a great regard, that no Soldier take any booty or pillage
to hinder himself, or annoy his company, but as he may be discharged of the
same at every sudden, ready to his weapon or place: for the practice of the
enemy, is to set suddenly upon such men so laden with baggages, a great
hinderance to the Soldier, and an encouragement to the enemy.

Hurt Soldiers to be considered.
IF any Soldier be hurt in this time of fight, of body or Limbs, spent his
weapon, broken his Armor, or such like loss, he shall be considered of, out
of the said booty, and the rest to be equally divided.

Soldiers charge for entreating Messengers.
IF any man or woman, what Nation soever they be, friend or foe, come to speak
with any of the high Officers of the Camp or Garrison: it shall be convenient,
for any such Soldier, to bring them into such a place as they shall see but
little, and send word to the said Officers, keeping them safe until the
said Officers pleasure be to send for them, or to know in that behalf, and
in the mean space to entreat them gently with good words, what Nation soever
they be: For such persons are not known to most Soldiers.

Soldiers charge in travailing.
THat no Soldier in time of traveling, within ye Realm of England, or other
dominions under our Prince, shall allure any woman, maid or widdowe, to follow
the Camp unhonestly, neither shall have any, without the license of the
Marshall: they shall not spoil nor destroy any cattle, Pulline, or such like
victualles, he shall not stray out of his way, to filch or steal any manner of
thing whatsoever, neither commit any other outrage: but shall keep the high
ways appointed for them to journey in, accompaning their Ensign, and honesily
regarding the saftie of the same.

The cousaile of old Soldiers.
Captains having any old Soldiers serving under them, shall give ear unto
them speaking of experience or service, with discreet policy, and shall
reward them and advance the^ to the uttermost of his power, and according to
the value of their good counsel: for such men sometimes, be unto a Captain
and his company, much available. So must he punish busy bodies, thereunto
presuming without experience or discretion.

Captains, Lieuetennants, and Officers, with Soldiers charge.
IT is convenient and a most necessary point of the Captain, Lieuetennant, or
Sargeant, to frequent oftentimes with the Soldiers in their Lodgings, Tents,
or Cabins, to veiw how they be provided and furnished of all manner of things
to them needful, and that they live an honest, civil, and Christian life, as
Christian men ought to do, not presuming by means of wars, to use such
liberty, as if Gods Laws and our Princes were forgotten, as some Soldiers of
diverse Nations in times past have done: in using the vices of great oaths, in
swearing to the blaspheaming of the almighty God: also in the excess of
drunkenness, bringing themselves into the likeness of brute beasts, to their
great dispraise before God and man: also, in vicious living, contrary to the
Law of God, which may not be unpunished: also in fighting and quarelling,
living in malice with his fellows, which is vile, or in any other vice used,
amongst the company. Such persons must be sharply punished, for God is well
pleased therewich, and sends the company good successes, that serves him and
lives in his Laws.

These be the Articles which shall appertain to the oath of every Soldier,
as follows.
Every private Captain shall swear his Soldiers one by one, and the
Soldier shall lay his hand upon the Ensign, and make his oath to God, that
by the faith he bears unto God and his Sovereign, he will observe and keep
all these Marshall Laws, statutes, and Ordinances, during the said journey, or
else to be accounted not only a forsworn person, but to be punished at the
discretions of the Lord Lieuetennant or Marshal.

The charge of all Soldiers and Officers generally.
ALso the whole company of every Captain, shall bring their Ensign with
every Officer and Soldier, to the place of assembly, be it in Camp or in
Garrison, by night or by day, and there shall dilligentlie become in order of
battle by the Sargeants so placed: they shall there tarry and abide attending
their Colors, till commandment be given to break up, by the Lord
Lieuetennant of the field, and then the whole company shall return with their
Ensign to their Lodging, with the sound of Drums and Phiffe. If any fail in
this behalf, they shall be punished as to the offense belongs.

Also, it behooves all good Captains, to gratify the good industry and
diligence of Soldiers in that behalf: yea, a very good policy to assemble
by night, without cause of enemies, to teach the Soldiers the order of
battle, and to reprove their negligence in such behalf offending.

Certain rules of Arms pertaining to Marshall Discipline: set forth and
proclaimed by the Lord Marshall, who shall see the offenders thereof punished.
FIrst, that all men whomsoever, as well head Officers as inferior Officers
and Soldiers, shall be true and faithful Subjects, unto our most gracious
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, her crown and dignity, and truly to serve
her, under her Lieuetenant general appointed in that journey.

Also they shall obey all head Officers, which be appointed to serve under the
said L. Lieuetenant, as his Captains, and all such Officers as are appointed
under the said Captains, to serve and govern them, as his Lieuetenant, his
Ensign, his Sargiants, and the Corporals and Lance spazadoes, following,
defending, supporting and maintaining their own Ensign, and never to leave
the same till it be always in safety, be it in times of assault, allarum,
battle, skyrmage, connoy, watch, ward, or time of service. And to these
points all Soldiers shall be sworn, as I have before mentioned and set
down.

All men shall gently and honestly entreat, and suffer in general, all
Victualers, be they friends or foes, bringing victuales to the place appointed
for the same by the Marshall or Coronell: suffering them to pass and return
with their money, or any other things, which they are suffered to buy, or
exchange for their victuals by the Clarke of the Market, or other Officers
appointed for that purpose.

It were very good at such times, having foreign Victualers coming into your
Camp, Leaguor, or Town of garrison, at their return homewards, to send some
Soldier of discretion with them, to bring them on the way so far as they
may, without danger to themselves, giving them good words, with fair and
gentle language, and wise questions, most necessary, for that time to be
known, which sometimes may prevail to learn the intent of the Enemies.

Also if any offend the said Victualers, they shall be punished as to the Law
appertains: no man shall take any thing from them by force, or without any
money, nor under the price set by the Clarke of the Market, or any other
bringing any other necessaries, as wollin cloth, Linin cloth, shoes, hose, or
weapons, with such like, being permitted by the said Officers.

You shall relieve poor Soldiers, which by sickness or imprisonment amongst
the Enemies, is fallen in decay, and lacks meat, drinck, weapons, or Armor,
and being a serviceable Soldier, shall by his Captain be restored, and
shall deduct the same in his wages or booties taken of the Enemy, which
sometime ought to be divided, for Captains in times past, has not regarded
the poor Soldiers, so that some has perrished for want of relief and
succor.

All Captains who has any man enrowled in his book, whatsoever he be,
Soldier, Corporal, Victualor, Pioner, Carior, or any other, and be taken
prisoner of the Enemy, the said prisoner shall not be suffered in their hands,
which may be ransomed either by exchange of prisoners, or otherwise, but with
diligence shall they be redeemed and brought home to their Colors.

In lik manner, if any Soldier be taken prisoner, and sent home upon his
faith and credit, the Captain shall see that they either pay such raunsomes
as they are agreed of, or else to send them back again to their takers by the
day appointed, till some other remedy be found, which thing redowneth to the
only credit and faith of a true Soldier.

So shall they correct and reprove diligently all outrages, riotous persons,
quarrellors, fighters, whoremungers, murderers, and robbers, according to
their offenses committed.

Other penal statutes, to be executed by the Marshall.
FIrst, that no man make any fray within the Camp, Leguor, or Garrison, nor
appoint any place without the same for that purpose, to take any parts, or
carry any tale, to attempt the same upon pain.

That no man killing any Cattaile within the said Camp or Leaguor, do leave
the garbidge above the ground, or if any man or beast die within the said
Leaguor, it shall be conuaied out of the same, a certain space of, and there
to be buried, except the Leaguor remove ye same day, upon pain.

That no man shall water their horses, or cast any filth into any part of the
water which adioyneth to the said Leaguor, but in the lowest parts appointed
for that purpose, upon pain.

That no woman follow the Camp or Leaguor but such as be by the Marshall
appointed, victualers or Laundresses, which shall be licenced by the Marshals
byll, and in his book so recorded upon pain.

That no Captain receive any Soldier into wages, which is put away for any
notable or criminal cause, upon pain.

That no Captain entice any Soldier unto him, from any other Captains
Band, nor no Soldier shall depart without the good will of his Captain
having a pasport, upon pain.

That no Soldier take any weapons or Armours, Garments, or any other thing
whatsoever, which to another man appertains, nor come within any other man's
lodging, except the owner or Keeper thereof be within, upon pain.

That all men shall be lodged by the quarter Master, and being so lodged,
shall be contented with the same, be it in Town, Leaguor or Camp, upon pain.

That no man make any brunt or noise after the watch be set, and the warning
piece shot off, so that all allarums may be heard and brought in by the
Skowtes, or otherwise, upon pain.

That no Captain send forth any Company about any enterprise or exploite,
without the license of the Lord Lieuetenant, upon pain.

That no man go a forraging, further then they be appointed by the forage
Master, which is guarded by the Marshals appointment, upon pain.

That all private Captains being no head Officers of the Leaguor or Camp,
which must be continually busied, do watch and ward with their Colors
themselves, upon pain.

That all Soldiers, Horsemen and Footmen, learn the sound of both Trumpets
and Drums, which serves to call as the mouth of Man, and that they be ready at
all such calls, either on Horse or Foot, upon pain.

That no man do his natural easement within the Leaguor, nor within certain
space of the same, for anoying the Skowtes or standing watch, except the same
be buried three foot within the ground immediately, upon pain.

That no man go out of his array, either in day of battle, or in marching, upon
pain.

That no man carry any woman to the Leaguor, or keep her in the Town, except
she be his lawful wife, upon pain to be punished as a vile person, or a
vagabond, and never to be accounted a Soldier in any service.

Also if any Soldier being a common swearer, and leaves it not after once
warning of his Captain or Lieuetenant, shall be punished as a slave or
villain, to the example of others.

Also that no man take any thing of the Princes subjects, without he pay truly
for it, or it be given him, upon pain.

Also that no man be lodged in Garrison or Leaguor, but only by the Quarter
Master appointed for the same, upon pain.

Also that all Soldiers entreat their Hostis and their family well, being
the Princes Subjects, to the intent they may be welcome if they come again, or
others in their places, for else we should not only make war with our
Enemies, but also upon Princes friends, upon pain.

Also that no Soldier be a common dicer or drunkarde, which is the only way
to wast his wages, which should be his maintenance otherwise, to go like a
slave, upon pain.

Also that no private Captain nor others, come from his watch or ward, being
appointed to the same in Leaguor or Garrison, till they be released by other
Companies, or else dyscharged: for what a shame is it to a Captain, when his
company does not their duty for want of his presence, and be distressed by
the means thereof: what account is such a Captain able to make to his Prince
or Lord Lieuetenant, that will come away, leaving his Ensign and Company
behind him: in like manner to any other man. Wherefore no man shall depart from
his Company upon pain.

Also in times of lodging the Leaguor, all Horsemen shall keep on horseback,
until such time as all footmen be entered into the Leaguor or Camp, and
every man appointed the quarter or place of assembly, upon pain.

Also those Horsemen shall see the Skowtes set forth, to skowte upon the
high grounds on all sides of the Leaguor, and to see all Cariages, Ordenaunce,
and Municions, clearly entered into the Leaguor or Camp, before they enter or
dysmount, they shall remain in their Armours till the place of encamping be
made, upon pain.

Also if any allarum be made, the Sargiant Mayor shall resort to the place of
assembly, dilligently there to place every Soldier in good order of battle,
and in the strongest manner to be devised, upon pain.

The cause of allarums or show of Enemies to the Leaguor, either by night or
by day.
SOmetimes to view your order of array, and to discover your numbers.

Sometimes to view your Horsemen, how they be appointed with great horse for
the battle, and light horse, and such like.

Sometimes to view your Ordenaunces, what store of Cannons you have for
battery, field Pieces for the battle, and such like.

Sometimes to view the situation of your Leaguor, how they may best bring the
allarum in the night, by Canuisado, or otherwise.

Sometimes to view the placing of your victuals or powder, and how they may
best take or destroy the same.

Sometimes to train men out of the Leaguor, to bring them into the place or
lappes of their ambush.

Sometimes to keep men waking, and so to weary them with allarums, whereby
they shall not be able to appear in their places at time of need.

Sometimes to keep in Skowtes or Forragers, until they do some exployt,
either in victualing some hold, or else making some breach or such like.

Sometimes they will mount as many Footmen as they can, upon baggage horse,
to make a great show of Horsemen.

Here follows the poynters of the Leaguor or Camp, which shall take view of
the place appointed.
THE High Marshall, the Quarter Master, the Master of the Ordenaunce, the
Captains of the Pyoners, or french Masters, and diverse other Officers, with
certain Lieuetenants of every ward, to view the place appointed, which
Officers shall be well and strongly guarded, with one or two thousand horse at
the least, for great honor consists in the safe keeping of your Marshall and
other head Officers, also they be a good asiuraunce for the rest of the Army
which follows.

It behooves them to have circumspect Skowtes, which shall march before them
strongly guarded, with a company of Pykes and shot, or troops of Light
Horsemen, least your enemies lie in ambush, or devise some other engine when you
think least of them, how to overthrow your Marshal, which were a great
discomfort in a field to your Soldiers, and a greater encouragement to the
Enemies. Wherefore make your Marshall strong that goes before, and he shall
be a good strength to them that follow, and when the Marshall is arrived at
the place appointed for the Army where they shall lodge, and that he and the
rest of his company have viewed round about the same, then it shall be meet
for the Captain of the Pyoners, and the Carriage Masters, to return to the
Army, to see their Company and carriages conveyed to the place before
appointed: and to lead them as in times past have been used, which is, to
march but five or six miles in four hours, so your Arinie shall come at time
convenient to their lodging, to provide forage and such necessaries, and not
to be ouertoyled and made weary, for a weary man being assailed in time of
his wearines, is half overcome by the reason of his wearines.

In lodging the Army aforesaid.
YOU shall lodge the Army where they may be Lords of their commodities, which
may not be spared, as Wood, water, and pastures, which must be good and sweet,
always kept clean: being thus furnished, the Marshall and quarter Master,
shall appoint to place the Arinie on the higher ground, where they may have the
most advantage against the enemies, if they should approache them.

The Master of the Ordenance, shall place his charge to the most advantage of
the hill, where they may best discover and shoot to those parts, where the
enemies might best approach. Also if your enemies assault, they shall climb
up to you, whereby their strength is deminished and their breath shortened.
Also, if you will meet with your enemies, descending from your Leagar, which
is on an hill, your force and strength is the more, (for a man going downward
is of more force then he that goes upward.

And when he has found out such a commodious ground as best befitteth him,
and looks for the coming of his enemies, then it is good to lodge your Army
both horse and foot, all in one Leagar or Camp, unless it be before a Town
or Castle, that you mind to besiege and enclose on every side: but for a
remoouing Leagar, or a Leagar lying still, and is not at the stege of neither
Town nor Castle, and looks for the coming of their enemies: then I think in
my opinion, that men be of more force, lying together in one Leagar or Camp,
then to lodge in several companies.

The proportion of your Leagar or Camp.
YOU shall make your Leagar or Camp large, according to the number of your
Army, neither bigger nor less then your company serves thereto: Pitch your
Leagar four square, dividing the same into four parts, by two great streets
reaching cross through your Leagar or Camp, from the one side to the other,
two parts for horsemen, and two parts for footmen. Point the place of
assembly on the highest part thereof, and make the same so large, as to
imbattaile your number of footmen, and in such order as men may pass with
ease to the same, by the streets appointed.

You shall point your Market place, in the midst of your four streets,
whereas your horsemen shall assemble in time of allarams by night, where they
shall both arm themselves and keep on horseback, ready to issue forth if
need be. Lodge your General near the place of assembly, upon some
commodious ground.

Your streets are to be made as most commonly is used, iij. score and tenpaces
broad, without any annoyance of tentcordes or stakes, so may men march in good
order with their Ensign, to the place of assembly: but in any wise, look that
your Leagar be neither too large nor too little for your companies, for by
either of them you are the weaker: and point the Artillarie places in such
sort and places, as may be most dangerous to your enemies, whenever they
assail you, and near unto the Artillarie, leave some void place to assemble
your men together in battles, at time of alarm. And if your strength be
great, so that you make more battles then one, then you must have more places
of assembly then one, for every battle would have a place of assebly, and so
to make a stand til occasion serves, with the Artillarie before them in time
of allarum, besides the horsemen: so shall you be sure, if your men be well
placed, that your Leagar or Camp shall be well warded and defended, for a man
know eth not on which side the enemies will come, wherefore it is good to place
your men every way for your best advantage.

Also, I would wish (as I have said before) that every horseman should be
ready at the sound of such allarums, and to resort with speed, to the said
assembly there to do any service if need shall require at any such times.

Intrenching your Camp or Leagar.
ALso if you intend to stay in your enemies Land, specially knowing your
enemies to be at hand, then it shall be needful, by the opinion of diverse old
Seruitors, to entrench your Camp or Leagar with a Trench of twelve foot
deep, and fifteen foot broad, and as we use now in these days, which
shall have small Ordenance in them, and small shot to flancke your Trenches,
and one bastian to be level within compass of your shot: and if you look
not for many enemies to assail you, then it shall be sufficient to make the
The plat for Incamping. Place this battle 268 folio, at this mark ******
Trenches of your Leagar, but eight or nine foot deep, and seven foot
broad, and at such times all men shall help the best they can.

But if you have not many enemies at hand, and intend to remove daily, till
opportunity serves: then it shall be sufficient to make your King or Pale
with your carriages, placing your Ordenances amongst the same to your best
advantage, with your stand watch in the midst, and your Scout watch without the
same, both on horseback and on foot, for your better security.

Intrenching your powder and Treasure.
ALso it behooves you to have a special care, in bringing your carriages laden
with Powder and Treasure, to the Master of Artillarie his lodging, where you
shall safely entrench and watch the same, with good and strong watches, and
none to come near the same, but his Officers and the watch who has the same
in charge.

Commandment to be given to the troops of horsemen at your first arrival
at the Camp or Leagar.
AT your arrival at any Camp or Leagar, you are to give commandment to
every horseman, that no man shall dismount from his horse back, until such
time as every footeman be quietly lodged, and that at such times, good and sure
Scoutes be set forth toward the enemies, so farrre as you can learn: for
upon those Scoutes, at such times, depends the wealth and euerthrow of your
Army, for when footmen be busy in making their Lodging and Cabines, then
they be out of array and strength, and if then they should be supprised of the
enemies, it were enough to cast away the whole Army.

But a good Scoute will repair ever to the highest places of ground, where
they may see on every side of the Leagar, and especially toward the enemies,
so may they be sure to discover on every side, both on high grounds and
valies: and if they list to discover farther, let part of the same company
remain still on the high ground where they be, which shall not stir until
they make their return back again: So shall your Leagar or Camp be sure to
have advertisement, though the former Scoutes were overthrown and taken,
wherefore be sure to have always good and sufficient Scoutes, for your better
security.

Scoute watch on foot.
YOU are also to place your Scoute watch on foot, round about the Leagar or
Camp, six score with out the Ring of the same, by five men in a company,
being so near together, as one may see another in a light night: in a dark
night, the one to send to the other every half quarter of an hour, to know
what brunts or noise they hear. And if the Scouts on horse were so used, five
in a company, and to send the one to the other as I have said before, I am in
that opinion, it would be of more force, then the body of a watch standing
still, me thinks this were great safty to the Leagar: Likewise every fifth man
to have the watch word, and no more.

Those which watch shall use great silence, without great occasion given by the
enemies coming, then to make allarum with the usual word, arm, arm, then
every man shall make haste the one helping the other, and be in a readiness
with his weapons for their best defense, till they be retired to the stand
watch of the Leagar, whereby they may fight, and be reskued of all the Soldiers
of the Leagar or Camp: wherefore, they shall have great regard, that they
make no allarums, but upon just occasiion.

Every fifth man shall have the watch word for that night, so watching, for at
that time they are as Scoute Masters: also, the chief Scoute Masters, are
appointed to set the watch, and at certain times to bring them relief, and
to search and examine the same, both on horseback and foot: also, the stand
watch should have great care in hurting the Scoutes, when as at any time they
make their retire.

Special care to be foreseen both in watching and warding.
ALso the Lord Liuetennant, the high Marshall, with the rest of the Counsel,
must appoint a sufficient number of men, both on horseback and foot, to watch
and ward the Leagar or Camp: in the which appointment, they ought to use
great discretion, to foresee that there be no want of men for the furnishing
thereof. Also, that no man be ouertoyled or wearyed either in watching or
warding, for according to the number of your strength, so you are to divide
your companies, that no man shall watch but every fourth night, which will be
very well, both for the Soldiers and for the strength of your Army: for by
the ouerwatching of your men, may be a great heaviness and dulnes unto them,
and a great weakening unto your whole Army.

And for the appointment of the body of the watch, at the Artillarie you must
in any wise appoint that very strong, as your number will serve, for the safe
keeping of your Artillarie and the wealth of your Leagar. Also, it appertains
to the provost Marshall at such times, to set the stand watch and Scoutes, both
on horseback and on foot: but the watching of the place of Artillarie,
belongs unto the Officers thereof, which are appointed by the high Marshall
and the Master of the Ordenance, as I have before set down.

How the Sargeant Mayor, Captain, and simple Sargeant are to govern
themselves, when their battle shall chance to be assaulted, on foot and on
horseback.
IN sundry and diverse manners, and moreover in diverse places of grounds,
battles are fought, according to the occasions and accidents, that in
Millitarie occurrents do chance at unawares, in time of warfare, abroad in
the plains, in Towns and in Fortresses: for which causes it is necessary,
that the wit of those which have the managing thereof, be prompt and ready,
as well in this, as moreover in finding out a good party for himself, all for
the honor and safety of the Prince whom he serves, joining to his courageous
heart, wit, experience, policy, and each advantage that is possible to be
used against his enemy, therefore in two fortes do arise the means to fight:
one is, when he does seek to fight with his enemy, and the other when he is
sought of the enemy, in such sort that it is needful to defend himself. And
therefore I say, when the first occasion does rise, and that he seeks the
enemy, speaking here of striking battle in the playnes, it is requisite
first he consider, how the enemies Army is furnished with horsemen and
footmen, and if he look to fight with horsemen that are to come to break his
battle, in this case he is to be advertised, that he suffer himself not to
be found (if it be possible) in the open fields, or in the playnes, but
rather must accomodate his battle in some place of a hill or a mountain, or
upon some seat of ground, which has upon one side, either River or ditch,
or some other impediment against ye enemies horsemen, which on some side may be
a defense, as in some places be Trees, Vines, and diverse other such like, as
nature brings forth in diverse places, which are of great impediment unto the
enemies horsemen, and unto foot battles are very profitable, and although
the number of Soldiers are very small, yet oftentimes by much advantage
remain victorious. But aduertisment is to be had, that in such cases it is
requisite, that there be accomodated many Hargabuziers in the battle, and
many Pikes, for they be good against the enemies horsemen: Having to fight with
footmen, the open fields is the best, with a square battle and many Pikes,
placing Hargabuziers according to his discretion.

Since I have spoken of the first manner of fight, I will speak of the second,
which is, when the enemy deoth assault at unawares, it is necessary then
courageously not to loose any point of courage, to place his people in square
battle, for that it is the most ready and most sure way that is, making
himself good slanckes with the Hargabuziers of the band, afterward expecting
the assault, cause his battle to shut and close it self well, causing them
to couch and abase, 4. or 5. or sometimes 6. ranckes of Pikes in that case,
round about all the sides of the battle, and the others to stand upright
until time of need: and the Hargabuziers are to hold their Pieces upon their
thighs, with their matches in their cocks, a morce in their pan, and all
vigilant in a readiness. And the Captain before the battle, valiantly
giving courage to his Soldiers, to perform the duty of a leader:
aduertising, that when the assault is given by horsemen, that the Pikemen
couching and abasing themselves, do hold the great end of their pikes
fastened hard in strong earth, to the end the Pike may have the greater force.

THE SECOND PART.

With a Calendar, containing the square of any number, from one hundred, to ten
1000. serving for the ordering of just squares, bastard squares, and broad
Squares: and most sufficient for the imbattailing of any number. (*)

With certain rules of marching by degrees, the which of a sudden you may
with ease bring them into a Square battle, or a broad Square, of what number
soever.

By Gyles Clayton, seruitour and late Lieuetenant to the Right honorable the
Lord North, Lord Lieuetenant General of Cambridgeshyre.

AT LONDON

Printed, Anno. Domini.

M. D. XCI.

To the Right honorable and his very good Lord, the Lord of Hunsdon, Lord
Chamberlain of her Majesty's household, and Governor of her Town of Barwicke:
G. C. wishes increase of all honorable virtues.
RIght honorable and my very good Lord, having received so many bountiful
rewards, with an infinite number of good words, for other of his writings, the
which it has pleased your good Lordship so favorably to accept, is not
thereby only encouraged now once again, to betake himself to his pen, but
also he is emboldened, to present to your L. view this his small labor, which
contains the approved order of Martial Discipline. And as it is the common
opinion of all worthy men, (right honorable and my very good Lord) that among
all things that is to be preferred, war is the one: and that because
whosoever behaueth himself honorably in the exercise thereof, represents
the true Image of the most great and omnipotent God, because among the high
titles attributed according to his will and divine Majesty in the old and
holy Law, he has always been content to be reverenced and called by the
name of the GOD of hosts: so if this worthy exercise of Martial Discipline be
used, and had in practice for the glory of God, and the defense of Christ his
Gospel, or for the defense of a Kingdom or Commonweal, no doubt there is,
but that the great GOD of Hosts is our chief General, and most worthy
Captain.

And as your honor, being not inferior to any in the exercise hereof, not
only for your own honor and magnanimity, but for the better upholding of
Christ's Gospel, for the defense of our gracious Sovereign, her Laws and
loving Subjects, for the exercising of warlike weapons, and the often using of
them breeds peace, but if warlike weapons should be laid aside, and Martial
discipline forgotten, then would it be with us, as it was with the Romans. For
as Scipio says, after the Romans laid aside the use of their warlike weapons,
and Martial exercises, they fell into great idleness, outrages, riot, and
wantonness; for more hurtful was this time of peace to Rome, then during the
whole course and season of the wars, for that whilst they had enemies in
Afric, they knew not what vices and inordinate riot meant in Rome.

Wherefore, may it please your good Lordship, in this time of peace, there must
be had special regard, to see these warlike weapons used and practiced, and
not that every common fellow be set in authority, but those which be men of
experience and knowledge, for what profits these Companies here in England
with all their muster and traynings? May I speak it without offense, there is
not in conscience two Companies among twenty, which has men of experience to
instruct them in the exercise of their weapons. For it is not sufficient to
have store of Arms, weapons, Munitions, and furniture, but also to have men of
experience to use them, and good Governors in the knowledge of Martial
discipline to lead the^.

The Realm thus governed with men of experience and knowledge, there is no
doubt but it will continue and flourish. For as Varro says, exercise of warlike
weapons, and rumors of wars, breeds peace. And for that your Lordship,
being a most loyal and faithful friend to her Majesty, and a most worthy
and famous General, best befitting your honorable estate, for the better safe
keeping of this little England, I have thought it good, for to discover this
brief discourse of Martial discipline unto your good Lordship, having not any
better thing to bestow of you whereby to witness my good will, for if I had, I
would with all willingness impart the same. And for that your Lordship knows,
the earth which yeldeth salt bears no other thing, and the ground that
hides gold, will bear no kind of grain, so from a slender wit, exercised
in Martial discipline, your Lordship will look for no gyfts, but fruits of a
most willing mind. And albeit they are many, who allured by your manifold
virtues regard you, and moved through your true nobleness of mind to honor
you, yet as one not inferior in affection to any, but in good will surmounting
many, thus I boldly presume, leaving it to your honorable humanity: as a
personage most meet, and bulwark most sufficient, against the barking impes
of the envious, and blunt hasty bolts of the foolish, whose eyes being sore,
cannot behold the Sun, and their wits so weak, are not able to penetrate
the subtlety of Martial experiences: and therefore as slothful neglect them,
or as malicious, wholly contemn them. But proceeding too far in these
speeches, peradventure I may be misliked, and therefore least I should seem
entered so far, that I cannot find the way out, I will conclude.

Thus beseeching your good Lordshippe to pardon me in discharging my duty,
and to receive with cheerfulness, defend with willingness, and to read with
friendlines this rude work which I offer to your good L. as an outward sign
of my inward good will. Thus beseeching God, most earnestly to bless and
prosper, both you and yours here on this earth, with health, and increase of
honor, and magnanimity, and send you in heaven most assured happiness.

Your Lordships most humble in all dutiful service to be commanded. Gyles
Clayton.

THE SECOND PART.
Forms of Battles very necessary to be used in place of service, every Battle
best befitting the place of ground.
FOR as much as I have undertaken to set down the ordering of certain
Battles, with the ordering of your men to march by degrees, so that on a
sudden you may bring them into a Square battle, of what number soever they
be: and to the intent that such as read this Book, may without difficulty
understand the ordering of every Battle and place of service, according as
they in the description are appointed, I thought it good to show you the
figure of every one in his place. Wherefore I will first declare unto you, by
what figure and Letters you shall find the Footmen, the Horsemen, and ever
other Officer in his place of service.

The Letters and Characters.
T for Targetters. O for Musketters. o for Caliuers. P for Pykes. H for
Holberders.

G for General. M for Marshall. T for Treasurer. C for Captains. L for
Lieueten.

B for Bylles. n for Carbines. m for Light horse. M for Launseares. c for
Cariages.

S for Sargiants. E for Ensigns. D for Drumes. F for Fifes.

The sum and contents of the Figures following.
1. In the figure following, is described the marching of your men into a ring,
the meaning whereof is more plainly set down as follows. 2. In the second
figure is showed how to order a Battle, or bond of men, and to bring their
men into a Square battle, with their Pykes on the front of the said battle.
3. In the third figure is described the manner of marching by degrees, of what
number soever, and at the first sight of your enemies, to bring the^ into a
just Square battle, so that your Ensigns may be in the midst. 4. In the
fourth figure is showed, the ordering of three square battles of Pykes, and to
what use they serve. 5. In the fifth figure is signified, the ordering of the
four Squadrons of Pykes, and to what use they serve. 6. In the sixth figure is
declared the ordering of a Cross battle. 7. In the seventh figure is showed,
the ordering of a base Cross battle, and wherefore it best serves. 8. In the
eight figure is showed, the ordering of a base Square battle, and to what use
it best serves. 9. In the ninth figure is declared, a perfect Square battle
of four hundred Pykes. 10. In the tenth figure is showed, the form of a
battle on foot, without Horsemen, employed with Shot, ready the fight. 11.
In the eleventh figure is plainly showed, the order and form of a Square
battle, ready the fight in Field, impayled both with Carbines, Light Horse,
and Lances, as in these days we use.
The order of Imbattayling.
Although these things being first set down, as marching by degrees, and
casting of a Ring, extends not to old Captains, and Seruitors of
experience, yet it is not hurtefull to such as be young Seruitors, which would
be glad to learn experience and knowledge in these Martial exercises, which
is a most honorable life so used.

FIrst you shall understand, that if two or three Captains, having under their
leading two or three hundred men to each Captain, and be sent into the
enemies Country to do some notable exployte, or to conduct any Conuoy through
the same: then, they shall march three or five in a rank, as is most commonly
used, when they be few in number, for the speedines of their way and passing
through streights, for in such ways a man may not march above 385. at the
most, for few men being not strengthened with horse, cannot long endure in the
enemies Country.

But say it happens, that their enemies come suddenly upon them, so that
they rannot set their men in order of battle as they would: then it shall be
good for those Captains to cast their men in a Ring, as they marched before,
five or three in a rank, with the greatest part of their shot in the midst
of their Pikes, your Holbards or Bills next the Ensign, being placed in the
midst of all, and those shot which be in the Rereward of your company, if
occasion serves, shall be delivered to certain of your Corporalles, which shall
lead them in wings to skirmish with the enemy: but of all things have a care
to take all advantages that may be, both of wind, ground, and Sun, and be
sure that your Corporals be men of knowledge, and able to discharge their
duties and charge committed unto them. If they be not so skillful as you would

The plat for Incamping.


The Battle called a Cross, very excellent both for night and day.


A twofold Battle of 2000 men These Charecters are to be used in the place of
the other, where this letter H was placed for B as here you may see. These
Characters. S Signify Shot. or this P Signify Pikes. or this B Signify
Halberds. E Signify Ensigns. ^ Signify Lances. D Signify Light horsemen. *
Signify Argoletteares.


wish them to be, then send out with them one or two Sargeants, if you can
spare them from the battle, for they ought to be skillful Soldiers, and to
know how to bring their companies to the face of their enemies, and how to
charge and retire with the best advantage.

And if your place of meeting be large, it were good to appoint many of your
Corporals, with several companies of shot to meet your enemies in the face:
and when they have delivered their powder and shot, they shall make their
retreite to the battle, and then certain other shot which are within the
battle, shall issue forth and reskue them, and to supply their place of
service, till such times as they have furnished themselves, and being thus
furnished and refreshed, are ready to make a new supply, if needed shall
require. Thus may they continue a long time, and maintain your battle.

But if you meet your enemies upon the plains, then must you appoint certain
of your Pikes with Halbards or bills to defend your shot from the charge of
horsemen: thus doing, you shall be able to defend your selves in all places,
and to encounter with the enemies, though they assault you on every side, and
were more in number by three parts. These premises considered, and so
performed as before mentioned, may redownd to the great credit and magnanimity
of such Captains, as performs such an exployt, and also honor and renown
to their Soldiers, which were so resolute in their service: for a Soldier
or Seruitor had rather choose to dye with honor in the field, then to be any
way or means dishonored in service. This (Gentlemen) is my opinion, and the
good opinion of diverse old Soldiers and Seruitors, if you be assaulted on a
sudden, which sometimes happens.

This is the King which I have declared unto you, which King is very necessary
to be used as I have declared be fore, so that you cast and divide your men
with their several weapons as aforesaid, and shall be more plainly seen in
the next Figure following.

A Corporal with shot.
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o

A Corporal with shot.
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o

For the straites.

Corporal.
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o

In this order for the playnes.


o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o



A perfect rule to bring your men into a square battle on a sudden, with
their Pikes in the Front, the which at times were very good, if by chance you
meet with your enemies in any broad way: thus march your men by degrees five
in a rank, every Captain by himself, with their pikes on the front of their
array, so, every Captain marching with their several companies, may on a
sudden bring their men into a square battle, with their pikes on the Front
of the said battle, the which is very good, if by broad ways or woods they
happen to meet with their enemies, for the defense of their horsemen: and for
your better understanding thereof, I have here in Figure more plainly set
it down, to show you the meaning thereof.





Thus is the foresaid marching by degrees five in a rank, brought into a
Square battle, with their Dykes on the front, so also you may order your
Companies, and bring them into this proportion, of what number so ever they be
if need requires.

Here you shall further understand, how many men may march in a rank, and
on a sudden to bring them into a just Square battle, of what number soever
they be, so that your Ensigns may be in the midst thereof.
IF you happen to espy your enemies, and are driven to make a square battle
with speed, then divide the root of your Company of what number soever they
be, into three equal parts, and the third part of your men ought to march by
the way, as by this figure more plainly appears. Say there be but 2. hundred
forty five men to march through the Enemies Country, the root of those two
hundred forty five must be taken, which is fifteen, which number may be
equally divided into three parts, being five in front, fifteen in flanck, so
marching five in a rank, there shall be forty five rancks, five to a rank,
as by the figure next following more plainly appears.



Thus marching with your men by degrees five in a rank or more, what number
soever, if the company may equally be divided into three parts, the^ they may
be brought into a Square battle, so that you divide the^ by C. and L. as this
figure signifies, so that every part hereof is fifteen rancks, five to a
rank, and when you will have them brought into a just Square battle, make a
stand, and cause the front of your Company to stand, that done proceed
forward with the second, and so with the third, until they become up to the
front, the which three parts so placed, will make a just square battle, 15.
both in front and flancke, as the example following more plainly shows unto
you.







These are the three parts which I spoke of before, and now bringing them up
in order, as you see, they shall make a just Square battle, with all their
Ensigns in the midst thereof, which shall be more plainly seen unto you, by
figure of these three parts brought into a square battle.



Also there are a great number of good battles, which have been used among
old Seruitors, and men of experience, which are very good to be used against
the Enemies, and as they are good, so they are dangerous, for they will be
soon disordered where Soldiers are not thoroughly experienced and trained up
in services: but the fight in these days, are clean contrary to the fight in
times past, for we use altogether Shot, Pykes and Horse, with a few Holberds
and Targets, for the which weapons, there is no better order of imbattelling,
then the square battle: also if there be 20000. or 30000. in the field, then
to divide them into three or four squadrons, which is a most strong way, if
occasion serve, as this figure more plainly shows.



The fore Front of the four Squadrons.


THese square platformes, being well and strongly impayled with shot, (as
most commonly we use in the field) is the most strong way and best to be
used, if that you have any great number, as ten, twenty, or thirty thousand in
field, for then you may divide your pikes, as you find your self best
aduantaged against your enemies, either in 2. 3. or 4. squadrons, as best
serves for the ground where you make your stand: but if your commpany be
small, as 2. or 3. thousand pikes in the field, then it were not good to
divide them, but upon some great advantage of ground, or stopping of a
straight way or some gap, which occasions ought most chiefly to be foreseen:
for it has ever been observed for a principle, amongst ancient Soldiers
and Seruitors of experience, that the stronger your Pikes are together, the
more of force is your battle accounted, and the more companies your shot
be deuieed into, the better they may maintain the skirmish with their
enemies, and the apter for service.

These premises considered as before mentioned, you will of your selves
confess, that the square battles are best to be used in these days, for
that we use not the weapons which has been used in old time, as Cros-bowes,
long bows, black Bills, with such other like weapons: but if you happen to
meet with your enemies, in any Country full of hills or Mountains, then
your Cross battle is very good, or a base cross bataile, as by Figure I
have set down in most plain manner and form following.

The form of a Cross Battle.
o o o o o o o p p p p p p p o o o o o o o o o o o o o o p p p p p p p o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o p p p p p p p o o o o o o o o o o o o o o p p p p p p p o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o p p p p p p p o o o o o o o o o o o o o o p p p p p p p
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o p p p p p p p o o o o o o o p p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p h h h p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p D
E F p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p h h h p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
p h h h p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p o o o o o o o p p p p p p p o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o p p p p p p p o o o o o o o o o o o o o o p p p p p p p o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o p p p p p p p o o o o o o o o o o o o o o p p p p p p p o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o p p p p p p p o o o o o o o o o o o o o o p p p p p p p o o o o o
o o

The form of a base Cross battle. Place this battle at folio 68. after
the Cross battle.


These are the forms before spoken of, both of the Cross battle, as also of
the base Cross battle, which are very good to be used, as aforesaid, for the
defending of your shot from the Horsemens descending down either hill or
Mountain.

How to make a battle called the broad Square.
THis broad square battle is very good to be used if you be but of small
strength, for that it makes a fair show in the sight of your Enemies, and in
time of fight uses many hands more then the just squares: for if his enemies
be before him, he is like to do great slaughter, for it will inuiron his
enemies round about. But there be some of a contrary opinion, the which I
yield unto, for in mine own opinion the just square is best, because it
serves most commonly in most places of grounds, but this broad square serves
as the grounds will serve, for we be not sure always of a place fit for the
square battle: and also their strength may be such, by woods, waters, or false
grounds, or such like, that the broad battle is much the better, if helped by
these advantages. But howsoever you make your battle, you must have a great
regard to the situation of your ground, and the strengthes about the same.

The order and form of a broad square battle, which is very good to be used,
if so aduantaged with strengthes, as I have before spoken of, as woods, waters
and false grounds. with such other like.

The fore Front.


A perfect rule to bring your men into a square battle, of what number soever
they be, so that their Ensign may be in the midst thereof, as by example,
with a small company, so you have but four hundred Pikes in the field: the 4.
square root whereof is 20. then putting 20. men into a rank, there will be
20. ranckes, 20. men to a rank, the which 20. ranckes being orderly placed
the one behind the other, will make a just square battle, if so placed as by
this Figure more plainly is showed unto you.



The order of a square battle, impayled with wings and troops of shot, as
in the field is used in these days.


Certain Rules of Arms, very needful and necessary to be foreseen, both of
General and Captains. (*)
ALthough it be not needful, yet I will put you in mind of the great
incombraunces, which may happen in the fight of a battle, wherefore be sure
that your Horsemen in charging the Enemy, be as much distante from the maine
battle as may be: or else it may be an occasion in retyring from the Enemy, to
break the rancks of your men, and so disorder the whole maine battle, for
sometimes it is policy to make a retreite, as occasion shall serve. Also you
are to lodge your Horsemen in time of Leaguor or Camp, within the palle or
quarters of your footmen, because they are not so soon Armed and mounted,
ready to defend as the footmen.

Also you ought to know, how that the Towns and Fortresses be strengthened,
either by nature or by industry: by nature those are strong, which are
compassed round about with Rivers or with Fennes, by industry those which stand
upon hyls or Rocks: those likewise may be strong, which stand on the plains,
either by Castle, Turrets, turnings, or crookednes thereof, with many other
such like, which may endanger the Enemy on every side both on front and flanck.

Also when you are minded to besiedge any strong Town or Hold, you shall
first suffer them to sow their seed and fields, and so stay a time till it
be green above the ground, to the intent they should lack the same grain
which they have sown, and that you may the better hope to reap the same for
your commodity.

Also you are to exercise and practice your Soldiers in actiuitie and deeds
of Arms, when as you are not in any great danger of the Enemy, for the
perfectnes thereof, and in time of service for renown and honor.

Also if any General, Colonels or Captains, being in Leaguor or Camp, and
has any want of victuals, let him then feign himself to make a composition or
agreement with his Enemies: and during some process of time in this practice,
you may be either provided of their victuals, or others at the least. And when
you have by this policy and means gotten away their victuals and grain, then
you may with ease keep them short and famish them.

Also if you be minded to win any City or strong Hold, then you shall first
foresee which way is best to overcome all the small Towns round about the
same, and so ouercomming them with violence, shall drive them into the City
or strong Hold, for succor at their friends and Countrimens hands, the which
multitude of people being driven into the City, you may with more ease
famish and overcome them.

Also if you be minded to make an assault, first and chiefly you ought to
have a care in giving the first onsette, wherein you shall be valiant and
courageous, and very hotely to assault them on every side, the which has
oftentimes gotten many victories.

Also he that will be counted a man at Arms and service, must be valiant and
courageous, most vigilant to observe the devises of the Enemy, and in taking
some pains to exercise his Company, such Seruitors shall incur least perils:
and may hope most of victory.

Also there is no purpose better then that which is hid from the Enemy, until
such time as you have executed the same.

Also to know in the wars how to understand occasions, and in the taking
thereof, helps more at such times, then any other thing.

Also nature breeds many lusty and strong men, but practice and exercise
makes many.

Also you are to understand that where discipline is used with lenity and
courtesy, more prevails then fury and rashness, without discretion or wisdom.

Also you shall understand, that the valiantness of your Soldiers, more
prevails then the multitude, and sometime the situation helps more then the
valiantnes.

Also you may understand, that new and sudden things, makes many Armies
amazed and feared, and accustomed things daily used, are little regarded.
Wherefore make your Army to practice, and to know with small fights a new
Enemy before you enter the fight with him.

Also he that with disorder follows the Enemy, after that he is broken, he
will do no other but become of a Conqueror in the field the looser thereof.

Also he that prepares not sufficient and necessary victuals to live upon,
both for himself and for his Company, may soon be ouercomewith stroke of
weapons.

Also he that trusts more in Horsemen then in Footmen, or more in Footmen,
then in Horsemen. Must first accommodate himself with the ground and situation.

Also when you perceive in the day, that there be any coming to espy your
Leaguor, then cause every man to go into his Tent or Cabin, and change your
purpose if you perceive he has fooreseene your Leaguor or Camp.

Also you may consult with many, things which you ought to do, but the same
thing which you do, confer with few.

Also you shall use such means, that the Enemies may not by any means know
how you will order your battles in fight: and in what manner soever you order
them, make that the first may be received of the second, and so of the third.

Also if you will make a set battle, never change to any other purpose, but
to the same for which you have appointed it, for if you do, it will breed
discention and discord.

Also you shall accustom your Soldiers to despise and hate delicate lodging,
great fare, and cut apparel, for that it is dangerous unto them in time of
service.

Also I will put you in mind of a saying, which has been used in times past,
and most needful to be observed in these days. Whereas they said that men,
iron, money and bread was the strength of the wars, they said true, but of
those four, the first two be best, and most necessary, because men and iron,
find money and bread, and not money and bread to find men and iron. For men
with iron may provide both for bread, money, and all such like necessaries as
to the wars belongs.

And lastly, I would wish you not to be slow in the exercising of your
Soldiers in actiuitie when time and place serves, for that is your greatest
strength in service, for if your men have not practice in their weapons, and so
be expert and cunning in the use thereof, your Companies shall be much weaker
then those which are practiced and perfect.

Not to give battle without the advice and counsel of diverse old Seruitors
and men of experience.
THere be many men of good service and experience, says it is not good for a
General or Leader of an Army, to be over hasty in gyuing battle to the
Enemies, except it be upon some great advantage: for that it is a matter of
weight, and ought very wisely and carefully to be foreseen, for that his
honor and wealth of a Realm lies thereon.

Wherefore first you are to consider and to examine the estate and strength of
the enemies, how they be furnished with men of service and experience, also
with Armor and weapons both for Horsemen and footmen, as also with other
strengthes. Then you are to consider with your selves of your own strength,
and what number of men you have, likewise how expert they be in their weapons,
and whether they be well appointed for such service or no.

Then if you find your own party good, you may proceed, if but indifferent,
then it is the opinion of old Seruitors of experience, not to be too hasty to
give the battle, if you may otherwise choose, although it has been
oftentimes seen that a few in number, has forced to fight or else to retire:
and if that small company do tarry and fight it out, then they do determine
with themselves every man to be resolute, that one man is worth two at such
times, and commonly it is seen, that the greatest number is careless, and
think themselves most sure of the victory, but victory is uncertain, for God
gives victory where he pleases. Wherefore I would wish all Leaders, though
they be more in number then their Enemies, not to be too hasty, but keep
themselves strongly together: and if in case you give the battle, then do
it with courage and resolute minds, determined to abide the time of good
fortune and victory, and doubtless one of those men so determined, is worth
three others.

A way to march and conduct forth the Army. Place this battle 293. fallio at
this mark ******


A brief Calendar for the better understanding how to augment your Companies
by degrees, and in marching either by 3. 5. or 7. to bring them into a square
battle, as to say in the first number, add three times 1. is 3. three times
2. is 6. three times 3. is 9. And so forth for the first Table, the second,
and the third.
Numb. Addit. 1 3 2 6 3 9 4 12 5 15 6 18 7 21 8 24 9 27 10 30 11 33 12 36 13 39
14 42 15 45 16 48 17 51 18 54 19 57 20 60 21 63 22 66 23 69 24 72 25 75 26 78
27 81 28 84 29 87 30 90 31 93 32 96 33 99 34 102 35 105 36 108 37 111 38 114 39
117 40 120 41 123 42 126 43 129 44 132 45 135 46 138 47 141 48 144 49 147 50
150 51 153 52 156 53 159 54 162 55 165 56 168 57 171 58 174 59 177 60 180 61
183 62 186 63 189 64 192 65 195 66 198 67 201 68 204 69 207 70 210 71 213 72
216 73 219 74 222 75 225 76 228 77 231 78 234 79 237 80 240 81 243 82 246 83
249 84 252 85 255 86 258 87 261 88 264 89 267 90 270 91 273 92 276 93 279 94
282 95 285 96 288 97 291 98 294 99 297 100 300

The square root of this 300. is 17. vnplaced 11.

FINIS.
The second Table.
Numb. Addit. 1 5 2 10 3 15 4 20 5 25 6 30 7 35 8 40 9 45 10 50 11 55 12 60 13
65 14 70 15 75 16 80 17 85 18 90 19 95 20 100 21 105 22 110 23 115 24 120 25
125 26 130 27 135 28 140 29 145 30 150 31 155 32 160 33 165 34 170 35 175 36
180 37 185 38 190 39 195 40 200 41 205 42 210 43 215 44 220 45 225 46 230 47
235 48 240 49 245 50 250 51 255 52 260 53 265 54 270 55 275 56 280 57 285 58
290 59 295 60 300 61 305 62 310 63 315 64 320 65 325 66 330 67 335 68 340 69
345 70 350 71 355 72 360 73 365 74 370 75 375 76 380 77 385 78 390 79 395 80
400 81 405 82 410 83 415 84 420 85 425 86 430 87 435 88 440 89 445 90 450 91
455 92 460 93 465 94 470 95 475 96 480 97 485 98 490 99 495 100 500

The square root of this 500. is 22. vnplaced. 11.

FINIS.
The third Table.
Numb. Addit. 1 7 2 14 3 21 4 28 5 35 6 42 7 49 8 56 9 63 10 70 11 77 12 84 13
91 14 98 15 105 16 112 17 119 18 126 19 133 20 140 21 147 22 154 23 161 24 168
25 175 26 182 27 189 28 196 29 203 30 210 31 217 32 224 33 231 34 238 35 245 36
252 37 259 38 266 39 273 40 280 41 287 42 294 43 301 44 308 45 315 46 322 47
329 48 335 49 342 50 350 51 357 52 364 53 371 54 378 55 385 56 392 57 399 58
406 59 413 60 420 61 427 62 434 63 441 64 448 65 455 66 462 67 469 68 476 69
483 70 490 71 497 72 504 73 511 74 518 75 525 76 532 77 539 78 546 79 553 80
560 81 567 82 574 83 581 84 588 85 595 86 6^2 87 609 88 616 89 623 90 630 91
637 92 644 93 651 94 658 95 665 96 672 97 679 98 686 99 693 100 700

The square root of this 700. is 26. vnplaced. 24

FINIS.
Heerefolloweth a brief discovery of every battle before figured, the
square roots whereof, I have most plainly set down in Figure following,
which serves to imbattaile from 100. to 1000, and so you may proceed on
forward as before, to 10. 20. or 30. thousand: For such occasions of business at
this present, drives me to conclude with more breuity, then at the first I
determined.
100.
FIrst you shall understand, the square root of 100. is 10. none vnplaced:
bastard square 11. in Front, 9. in flanck 1. vnplaced: broad square 14. in
Front, 7. in flancke, 2. vnplaced.

200.
The square root of 200. is 14. 4. vnplaced: bastard square 15. in Front, 13.
in flancke, 5. vnplaced: broad square 20. in front, 10. in flancke, none
vnplaced.

300.
The square root is 17. 11. vnplaced: bastard square 18. in front, 16. in
flancke 12. vnplaced: broad square, 25. in front, 12. in flancke none vnplaced.

400.
The square root is 20. none vnplaced: bastard square, 21 in front, 19. in
flancke, one vnplaced: broad square, 28. in front, 14. in flancke, 8. vnplaced.

500.
The square root is 22. 16. vnplaced: bastard square, 23. in front, 21. in
flancke, 17. vnplaced: broad square, 31. in front, 16 in flancke, 4. vnplaced.

600.
The square root is 24. 24. vnplaced: bastard square, 25. in front, 24 in
flancke, none vnplaced: broad square, 35. in front 17. in flancke, 12.
vnplaced.

700.
The square root is 26. 24. vnplaced: bastard square, 27. in front, 25. in
flancke, 25. vnplaced: broad square, 38. in front, 18. in flancke, 16. vplaced.

800
The square root is 28. 16. vnplaced: bastard square, 29. in front, 27. in
flanck, 17. vnplaced: broad square, 40. in front, 20. in flancke, none vnplaced.

900.
The square root is 30. none vnplaced: bastard square 31. in front, 26. in
flancke, 1. vnplaced: broad square, 42. in front, 21. in flancke, 18. vnplaced.

1000.
The square root is 31. 39. vnplaced: bastard square, 40. in front, 25. in
flancke, none vnplaced: broad square, 45. in front 22. in flanck, 10. vnplaced.

FINIS.
COurteous Gentlemen, great occasions of present business calls me from my
pen, which drives me to conclude in more brief manner, then I was
determined. Wherein I have erred through ignorance, I have no doubt but you
will pardon of courtesy: may opportunity serve, I will proceed further. In the
mean time, I beseech you accept of this my good meaning unto you; so shall I
with all willingness, rest thankful unto you, most loving and courteous
Gentlemen.

G. C.


