An Almond for a Parrat, Or Cutbert Curry-knaues Alms.

Fit for the knave Martin, and the rest of those impudent Beggars, that can not
be content to stay their stomakes with a Benefice, but they will needs break
their fastes with our Bishops.

Rimarum sum plenus.

Therefore beware (gentle Reader) you catch not the hicket with laughing.

Imprinted at a Place, not far from a Place by the Assigns of Signior
Somebody, and are to be sold at his shop in Trouble-knaue Street, at the
sign of the Standish.

TO THAT MOST Comicall and conceited Caualeire Monsieur du Kempe, Iestmonger
and Vicegerent general to the Ghost of Dicke Tarlton.
His loving brother Cutbert Curry-knaue sends Greeting.
BRrother Kempe, as many alhailes to thy person as there be haicocks in July at
Pancredge: So it is, that what for old acquaintance, and some other respects
of my pleasure, I have thought good to offer here certain spare stuff to your
protection, which if your sublimitie accept in good part, or vouchsafe to
shadow with the curtain of your countenance, I am yours till fatal destiny
two years after doomes day. Many write books to knights and men of great
place, and have thanks, with promise of a further reward for their pains:
others come of with a long Epistle to some rufling Courtier, that swears
swoundes and blood as soon as ever their back is turned, a man can not go in
the streets for these impudent beggars. To avoid therefore as well the
worthless attendance on the one, as the usual scorn of the other, I have
made choice of thy amorous self to be the pleasant patron of my papers. If
thou will not accept of it in regard of the envy of some Citizens, that can not
away with argument, I Will prefer it to the soul of Dick Tarlton, who I know
will entertain it with thanks, imitating herein that merry man Rablays, who
dedicated most of his works to the soul of the old Queen of Navarre many
years after her death, for that she was a maintainer of mirth in her life.
Marry God send us more of her making, and then some of us should not live so
disconte^ted as we do: for now a days, a man can not have about with a
Balletter, or write Midas habet aures asininas in great Roman letters, but
he shall be in danger of a further displeasure. Well, come on it what will,
Martin and I will allow of no such doings, we can crack half a score blades
in a backe-lane though a Constable come not to part us. Neither must you think
his worship is to pure to be such a swasher, for as Scipio was called
Africanus, not for relieuing and restoring, but for subuerting and destroying
of Africa: so he and his companions are called Puritans, not for advancing or
supporting of purity, by their unspotted integrity, but of their undermining
and supplanting it by their manifold heresies. And in deed therein he does but
apply himself to that hope which his holiness the Pope and other confederate
forriners, have conceived of his towardness. For coming from Venice the last
Summer, and taking Bergamo in my way homeward to England, It was my hap
soiourning there some four or five days, to light in fellowship with that
famous Francattip' Harlicken, who perceiving me to be an English man by my
habit and speech, asked me many particulars, of the order and manner of our
plays, which he termed by the name of representations: amongst other talk he
enquired of me if I knew any such Parabolano here in London, as Signior
Chiarlatano Kempino. Very well (quoth I,) and have been often in his company. He
hearing me say so, began to embrace me a new, and offered me all the courtesy
he cold for his sake, saying, although he knew him not, yet for the report he
had hard of his pleasance, he cold not but be in love with his perfections
being absent. As we were thus discoursing, I hard such ringing of belles, such
singing, such shouting, as though Rhodes had been recovered, or the Turk
quite driven out of Christendom, therewithal I might behold an hundredth
bonefiers together, tables spread in the open streets, and banquets brought in
of all hands. Demanding the reason of him that was next me, he told the news
was there (thanks be to God,) that there was a famous Schismatike one Martin
new sprung up in England, who by his books, libels, and writings, had brought
that to pass, which neither the Pope by his Seminaries, Philip by his power,
nor all the holy League by their underhand practices and policies could at any
time effect: for whereas they lived at unity before, and might by no means be
drawn unto discord, he has invented such quiddities to set them together by
the ears, that now the temporaltie is ready to pluck out the throtes of the
Clergy, and subjects to withdraw their allegiance from their Sovereign: so
that in short time, it is hoped they will be up in arms one against another,
whiles we aduantaged by this domestical envy, may invade them unawares, when
they shall not be able to resist. If ory to hear of these triumphs, could
not rest till I had related these tidinges to my countrymen. If thou have them
at the second hand, (fellow Kempe) impute it to the intercepting of my papers,
that have stayed for a good wind, ever since the beginning of winter. Now they
are arrived, make much of them and with the credit of thy clownery, protect thy
Cutbert from Carpers.

Thine in the way of brotherhood, Cutbert Curry-knaue.

An Almond for a Parrat.
WElcome Master Martin from the dead, and much good joy may you have of your
stage-like resurrection. It was told me by the undaunted purseuants of your
sons, and credibly believed in regard of your sins, that your grout-headed
holiness had turned up your heels like a tired jade in a meadow, and snorted
out your scornful soul, like a mesled hog on a mucke-hill, which had it
not been false as the devil would have it, that long tongd doctresse Dame
Law. must have been faint (in spite of insperation) to have given over
speaking in the congregation, and employ her Parrats tongue in stead of a
winde-clapper to scarre the crows from thy carrion. But profound Cliffe the
ecclesiastical cobbler, interrupted from his morning exercise with this false
alarm, broke up his brotherly loue-meeting abruptly, when the spirit had but
newly moved him, and betook him to his solitary shop, abutting on the back
side of a bulk. Nor was his souterly sorrow so hippocritically ungrateful,
but he determined in the abundance of his tears, that made a full tide in his
blacking tubbe, to have stitcht up your traytourshippe a tumbe of vntand
leather, wherein tanquam culeolo insutus, he might have sought his fortune in
the seas. But I know not how this parracides exequies were prorogd, in so much
as a brother in Christ of his at Northhampton, fetched a more thriftier
president of funerals piping hot from the primitive church, which including
but a few words and those passing well expounded, kept his wainscot from waste,
and his linen from wearing, suffices he tombled his wife naked into the earth
at high noone, without sheet or shroude to cover her shame, breathing over her
in an audible voice: Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I
return again. Tut, tut, a thousand of these pranks make no discord in my
young masters discipline, whose reformed fraternity, quoat Scripture so
confidently, as if they had lately purchased a commission of cum priuilegio ad
interpretandum solum, from Christ and his twelve Apostls. And in deed who
knows whether Master Martin being inspired, as erst one of his faction, who
hearing the waits play under his window very early, insulted most impudently,
that in the midst of his morning prayers, he was presented with the melody of
Angels, so he in like manner should vaunt of some revelation, wherein the
full sinode of Lucifers ministers angels assembled, did parliament all their
envy to the subversion of our established ministry, and then comes forth some
more subtle spirit of hypocrisy, which offers himself to be be a false
prophet in the mouths of our Martinists, to whom the whole sedition house of
hell condiscending, break up their sessions, and send this seducer into the
world, where finding no such mutinous seat, as the heart of our second Pilate
Marprelate, he chose it in stead of a worser, to be unto England as Zidkiah
son of Chenaanah was unto Ahab. Bear with me good Master Pistle-monger, if in
comparing thy knavery, my full points seem as tedious to thy puritan
perusers, as the Northren man's mile, and a waybitte to the weary passenger, for
I tell thee troth, till I see what market commission thou have to assiste any
many sentences, I will never subscribe to thy periode prescisme. And hear
thou old Martin, did all thy libells jointly shroude so much substance of
divinity in their outlandish letters, as that one periode of uniformity in T.
C. directing to obedience, I would think God had bin merciful to thee in
inspiring thy soul with some one separate motion, from reprobation, but when
whole reames of paper are blotted with thy huperbolical blasphemies and
religious matters of controversy more then massacred by thy profane
scurrility, I ca^ but suppose thy heart yt house swept and garnished, into the
which the soul spirit returned with other 7. spirits worse then himself.
Malicious hipocryt, did thou so much malign the successeful thriuings of the
Gospel, that thou should filch thy self, as a new disease into our
government? were thou the last instrument of Satan's envy, that as the
abhortiue child of a Chaos of heresies, thou sholdst adorn thy false dealing
with the indtiments of discipline? Me thinks I see thee smile from under thy
double-fact hood, to think how craftily thou have crept into men's
consciences: but would thou observe, how is thy alarums have prosperd in our
peaceable ears, that make no more breach into our state, then the iron horns
of those honey to^gd prophets into the arraies of the Aramites. Chro. 2. and
tenth Chap. thou would with Achitophell return to thy house (at least if
thou have any) and hang thy self in a melancholy, for that thy counsel was
turned to follye. When I first saw thy books, I ascribed thy impudence, to the
Calab^ian wonders of 88. but when 89. beheld thee in a new suit, I imagined the
excess of our sins, sent thee forth to give railing sentence against us, as
Simei against David in the 2. of Kings. Yet seely sophister would thou
return the sobriety of thy morning wits to this ouerworne Simile, that the
rod which was made to correct post destinatum finem, is cast into the fire,
thy despair would deem every dark hole, the entrance into hell, thy soul
being the city, whereof the devil is made free by endenture. And be it true
which pitying report bath avouched, Herostratus desire to be famous, made thee
to seal him a conueiance of it many years since, so that now thy notorious
pamphlets having passed the Press, it is to be feared he will come over thee
for couenantes ere many years to an end. It may be thou have read Foxes
Monuments more idly, where lighting on the example of Luther, that by his
prayers importunity, made the devil to deliver up the obligation of his
damnation, that sold the ioies of Heaven, for the inheritance of earth, thou
hopest in like manner in the age of thine iniquities to be restored to
eternity, by the incessant invocation of the Church which thou termest
Antichristian. Deceive not thy self thou man of security, for the enemy of
Adam is no poetical Argus, that his eyes should be put out by thy arguments.
I tell thee troth, he will be-pistle thee so peuishly, with allegations of
vnuenidall sins, as though he were borne within two houses of Battle bridge.
It is not thy despairing protestations, can make thy peace with God, whose
church thou have sought to divide, as did Herod's soldiers his garments: well
give thee leave to tell us a smooth tale of the intercepting of thy treasons,
and curry favor like a crafty fox, with the civil magistrate in politic
terms of fear and reverence, but thy heart is no more disguised in this
hypocritical apparel, then a trenchour Aristippus in the coat of a Parasite.
Why discourse I so soberly, with the mortal enemy of modesty, when as the
filth of the stews, distild into ribauldry terms, cannot confectionate a more
intemperate style then his Pamphlets. Thou calst our Bishops wicked by
comparison, whereas (were thou strooken as thou protests with the untoward
euentes of thy villainies) thou should find the defilings of the 7. deadly
sins, to have brought thee by a pleasant pollution, within the possitiue degree
of damnation. What talk I to him, of hell or damnation, whom Lucifer has
furnished to infection, with the painted poison of snout-holy devotion, and all
the powers of darkness, have adorned as an intelligencer to their kingdom, of
the infirmities in our flourishing Church of England. To this purpose have they
inspired him with a most scurrile spirit of lying, that when his eagle-sighted
envy can truly atract no argument of infamy, his poetica licentia, may have a
fresh supply of possibilities, that increase by continuance to a complete
libell of leasings. All you that be scholars, read but his last challenge,
wherein he lays about him so lamely, as though of his limping brother. Page
he had lately learndd to play at cudgels. But how ever his crazed cause goes
on crutches, that was erst so bravely encountered by Pasquin and Marphoreus,
and not many months since most wittily scofte at by the extemporall endeavor
of the pleasant author of Pap with a hatchet: yet is not the good old creeple
utterly discouraged, or driven clean from his dounghill, but he means to make
the persecuted Cobblers once more merry. Yet by your leave his other days
danger is not so fully disgested, that he should forget the sanctified martyrs
his brethren, those runagate Printers, to whose revenge he bequeatheth a large
Pistle of railing Epithites, and mistearmeth our Bishops authority, with a
whole Textor of tyranny. A few of whose milder terms are of this making,
wicked Priests, presumptuous Priests, proud Prelates, arrogant Bishops,
horseleeches, butchers, persecutors of the truth, Lamhethical whelps Spanish
Inquisitours. Think you this myrie mouthed mate, a partaker of heavenly
inspiration, that thus aboundes in his uncharitable railings: yet are these
nothing in comparison of his ancient burlibond adiunctes, that so pester his
former edition with their unwieldy phrase, as no true syllogism can have
elbowe room where they are. In which Alphabet these that follow may be
placed: bounsing Priests, terrible Priests, venerable Masters, proud and
pontifical Patripolitians. Gentle reader, I give you but a taste of them by the
way, that you may know them the next time you meet them in your dish, and
learn to discern a poisonous scorpion from wholesome fish. Martin you must
think, was moude, when his gun-pouder papers were fired about his cares, and
the spendthriftes his Printers, haled to the prison their patrimonies.
Wherefore I cannot blame him though he sends abroad his Letters of
supplication, in behalf of his servants that did but his bidding. The Church,
the Church is persecuted amongst you my masters, and Martin gettes nere a
superintendentship by the shift, but let not Meg Law. cry once more to the
Churchwardens for her food, least she bring with her a camp royal of
scoldes, to scratch out your eyes. Oh she will declaime bravely over a
Cuckstoole, and play the giant in a narrow lane with her distaffe. Master
Cooper shall have his stipend still at Paul's chain, or else she will sweat
for it. I like such a wench that will frande to her tackling, why Bishops are
but men, and she will carry a Martin in her plackarde in despite of the
proudest of them all. Learn of her you London Matrones, to make hodie-peeles
of your husbands, and lead them like good souls up and down the streets by
the horns, let it be seen by your courages in scolding, that women have
souls, which a balde eloquent brother of yours, denide not long since in his
Sermon at Lichfielde. I, I, my masters, you may mock, on as you see cause,
but I warrant you the good old true-pennie Marprelate is not so merry, he
sits ruminating under an oak, or in the bottom of a haystacke, whose blood
shall be first spilte in the reformation of the Church. And not without cause,
for he that has so lately felt the pain of worming and launcing, cannot but
stand in awe of Bulls slicing tools one two months after. O it is a
hairebrande whooresonne, and well seen in Phlebotomie, if a but once take
knife in hand, cha will as soon let out the seditious humors forth a
Martinistes body, as the best he in England, that has bin twenty years
practioners in Surgerie. Good munckie face Machiuell, show but thy head once,
and try hun at my request, and if he do it not more handsomely, then those
whom thou call Butchers and Horseleeches, then never trust an old ladde
whilst thou live. How ever it happens, thou bear thy resolution in thy
mouth at high midnight, and have Scripture enough to carry thee to heaven,
though thou were hangde to morrow. We fear not men that can kill the body,
quoth Martin, because we fear God, who can cast both body and soul into
unquenchable fire. Do thou fear God in deed, I pray thee good
hedge-creeper how shall we know that? What, by the smoothing of thy face, the
simpering of thy mouth, or staring of thy eyes? Why if that be to fear God,
I Will have a spare fellow shall make me a whole quest of faces for three
farthinges. But thou will peradventure say, by thy obedience unto him. Then
will I catechize thee more kindly with a few more Christian questions: the
first whereof shall be this, wherein thou placest obedience, which if thou
aunswerest, by doing that which God has commanded in his word: then would I
know of thee, whether that of Paul be Canonical or Apocripha, He that
resists the magistrate, resists the ordinance of God. And here I am sure
to be had by the ears with a Geneua note of the distinction of magistrates,
but all that shall not serve your turns, for I Will drive you from your Dic
Ecclesiae ere I have done, ware the unmasking of Martin, when it comes it is like
to be a shrewde Pistle, I can tell you. Prepare your arguments as you will,
for Mar-Martin Junior, means to make such havoc of you in that his next pee
of service, as all your borrowed weapons of simple T. C. shall not be able to
withstand. For your old soaking Demonstrationer, that has fcrapte up such a
deal of Scripture to so little purpose, I Will leave his confusion to the vacaunt
leisure of our grauer Divines, who I know, did they but once set pen to
paper, would grind his discipline to powder. Thou art the man, old Martin of
England, that I am to deal withal, that strives to outstrip all our writers
in wit, and iustle our government forth of doors with a jest. What, we
must not let you pass with such favorable terms, as our grave Fathers have
done, your Books must be looked over, and you beaten like a dog for your
lying. I think, I think I shall have occasion to close with you sweetly in
your Hay any work for a Cooper, and cut off the traynes of your tedious
syllogismes, that now have no less then seven or eight Termini waiting on
them. Fortify your ruinous buildinges betimes, and say he was your friend
that badde you: for I can tell you thus much, a whole host of Pasquils are
coming upon you, who will so beleaguer your paper walls, as that not one
idle word shall escape the edge of their wit. I give thee but a brauado now,
to let thee know I am thine enemy, but the next time you see Mar-Martine in
arms, bid your sons and your family provide them to God-warde, for I am
eagerly bent to revenge, and not one of them shall escape, no not T.C. himself
as full as he is of his miracles. But to pursue master Protestationer in his
common place of persecution. I remember we talked even now of a dudgen
destinction from which my Bedlam brother Wig. and poltfoote Page with the rest
of those patches, strive to derive their discipline disobedience. Our
Ecclesiastical government and governors say they, are wicked and unlawful.
Why? because Sir Peter nor Sir Paul were never Archbishoppes of Canterbury,
London, or York. They were Fishermen, and were not able. When Caesar's
Officers demanded their tribute to make five groates amongst them, then what
reason is it our Bishops should enjoy their five hundreds, nay, that which is
more, their thousand and two thousands? They were none of these Cartercaps,
Graduates nor Doctors, therefore why should we tie our Ministry to the profane
studies of the University. What is Logic but the high way to wrangling,
containing in it a world of bibble babble. Need we any of your Greek,
Latin, Hebrew, or any such gibbrige, when we have the word of God in
English? Go to, go to, you are a great company of vain men, that stand upon
your degrees and tongues, with tittle tattle, I cannot tell what, when as (if
you look into the matter as you ought) the Apostles knew near a Letter of the
book. I wis it were not two pins hurt, if your Colleges were fired over your
heads, and you turnde a begging forth your fellowshippes, like Friars and
Monks up and down the Country. I marie sir, this is somewhat like, now
Martin speaks like himself, I dare say for him good man, he could be
contented there were nere a master of Art, Bachelour of Divinity, Doctor or
Bishop in England, on that condition he pressed Fishermen, scullers, Co^pers,
Stitchers, Weauers and Cobblers into their places. You talk of a Harmony of
the Churches, but here would be a consort of knauerie worth the publishing to
all posterity. Would you not laugh to see Cli. the Cobbler, and New. the
souter, ierking out their elbowes in every Pulpit. Why, I am sure Lady Law.
would fast man's flesh a whole month together, but she would give either of
them a gown cloth on that condition. My self do know a zealous Preacher in
Ipswich, that being but a while a go a stage player, will now take upon him
to brandish a Text against Bishops, as well as the best Martinist in all
Suffolk. Why, I pray you go no farther then Batter. have we not there a
reverent Pastor of Martines own making, that understands not a bit of Latin,
nor never did so much as look toward the University in his life, yet you see
for a need he can help discipline out of the dirt, and come over our Clergy
very handsomely with an here is to be noted. Oh he is old dog at
expounding, and dead sure at a Catechism, always provided, that it be but
half a sheet long, and he be two years about it. And well too my masters,
for such a one that vauntes himself to be as he is, as good a Gentleman
every inch of him, as any is in all Stafford sheere. Be what he will, one
thing I wot, he is seldom without a good Chief in his study, besides
apples and nuttes, although his wise can never come at them. I heard not long
since of a stout conference he had with a young scholar, who taking my
Deske-man somewhat tardie in his disputations, told him he was inspired with
too much Logique. Whereunto he replied with this solemn protestation, I
thank God, all the world cannot accuse me of that art. I hope anon master
Martin, I shall be meetelie even with you for your knauerie, if I go but two
mile further in your Ministry. It is not the Primitive Church shall bear out
the Uicar of little Down. in Norfolk, in groaping his own hens, like a
Cotqueane, I am to come over him when I have more leisure, for his ten
shillings Sermons at Thetforde: wherein if he rave as he was wont to do, I Will
make him wish that he had been still Usher of Westminster. Well, to the
purpose. You say Bishops are no Magistrates, because they are no lawful
Magistrates. Is it even so brother Timothy, will it never be better, must I
ever lead you up and down antiquity by the nose like an Ass. May neither
Scriptures nor Fathers go for payment with you, but still you will be
reducing us to the president of the persecuted Church, and so confound the
discipline of war and peace? If you will needs make us the apes of all their
extremities, why do not you urge the use of that community wherein Ananias
and Saphira were unfaithful. Persuade Noble men and Gentlemen to sell their
lands, and lay the money at your feet, take away the title of mine and
thine from amongst us, and let the world know you hereafter by the name of
Anabaptists. Admit that the authority of Bishops were as unlawful as you
would make it, yet since it is imposed unto them by the Princes own mouth,
and ratified by the approbation of so many Kings and Emperors, as well in
their particular Parliamentes as general counsayles, you are bound in
conscience to reverence it, and in all humility to regard it, insomuch as
Christ denide not tribute to Caesar an usurper, nor appealde from Pilate a
Pagan, who occupied that place by the intrusion of tyranny. Were the
Israelites in captivity, any whit exempted from the obedience of subjects,
in that they lived under the scepter of Nabuchodonesor an Idolater, who had
blasphemed their God, defafaced their Temple, and defiled their holy
vessels. Nay, are they not expreslie commanded by the Lords own mouth, to
honor him as their King: How can they then escape the dampnation of
contempt, that being private subjects to such a virtuous Sovereign, as is
zealous of Gods glory will control her, disposing of honors, and oppose unto
public derision, those the especial pillars and ornaments of her state,
whom she has graced from their infancy, with so many sundry ascentes of
dignities. But were this all, then should not treason be such a branch of
your religion as it is. Have not you and your followers undermined her Graces
Throane, as much as traitors might: call to mind the badde practice of your
brother the Booke-binder and his accomplishes at Bury, who being as hot
spirited as your worshippes, in the schismatic subject of reformation, and
seeing it would not come of half kindly to their contentment, made no more a
do, but added this new Posie to her Majesty's arms. Those that be neither
hot nor cold, I Will spue them out of my mouth, says the Lord. Deny this,
and I Will bring a whole Assizes, as Obsignatos testes of your treachery. To come
nearer to thee Brother Martin. Have not thou in thy first book against
Doctor Bridges, as also in Hay any work for Cooper, excluded her Highness
from all Ecclesiastical government, saying she has neither skill nor
commission, as she is a Magistrate, to substitute any member or minister in
the Church. And in an other place, that there is neither use nor place in the
Church for members, ministers or officers of the magistrates making. If this
will not come in compass of treason, then farewell the title of Supremacy,
and welcome again unto Popery. By this time I think, good man Puritan, that
thou art persuaded, that I know as well as thy own conscience thee, namely
Martin Makebate of England, to be a most scuruie and beggarly benefactor to
obedience, and per consequens, to fear neither men, nor that God who can cast
both body and soul into unquenchable fire. In which respect I neither account
you of the Church, nor esteem of your blood, otherwise then the blood of
Infidelles. Talk as long as you will of the joys of heaven, or pains of
hell, and turn from your selves the terror of that judgment how you will,
which shall bereave blushing iniquity of the fig leaves of hypocrisy, yet
will the eye of immortality discern of your painted pollutions, as the
everliving food of perdition. The humors of my eyes are the habitations of
fountains, and the circumference of my heart the enclosure of fearful
contrition, when I think how many souls at that moment, shall carry the
name of Martine on their foreheads to the vale of confusion, in whose innocent
blood thou swimming to hell, shall have the torments of ten thousand
thousand sinners at once, inflicted upon thee. There will envy, malice and
dissimulation be ever calling for vengeance against thee, and incite whole
legions of deuilles to thy deathlesse lamentation. Mercy will say unto thee,
I know thee not, and Repentance, what have I to do with thee. All hopes
shall shake the head at thee, and say, there goes the poison of purity, the
perfection of impiety, the serpentine seducer of simplicity. Zeal her self
will cry out upon thee, and curse the time that ever she was maskte by thy
malice, who like a blind leader of the blind, sufferedst her to stumble at
every step in Religion, and made her seek in the dimnesse of her sight,
to murder her mother the Church, from whose pappes thou like an envious dog
but yesterdaie pluckest her. How ever proud scorner, thy whoorishe
impudency, may happen hereafter to insiste in the derision of these fearful
denuntiations, and sport thy iesters pen at the speech of my soul, yet take
heed least despair be predominant in the day of thy death, and thou in
stead of calling for mercy to thy Jesus, repeat more oftener to thy self,
Sic motior damnatus vt Judas. And thus much Martin, in the way of compassion,
have I spoke for thy edification, moved thereto by a brotherly commiseration,
which if thou be not too desperate in thy deuilish attempts, may reform thy
heart to remorse, and thy pamphletes to some more profitable theme of
repentance. But now have at thee for the goodness of the cause, of which thou
say: We must not reason from the success.

Trust me therein thou have spoke wiser then thou art aware of, for if a man
should imagine of fruit by the rottenness, of garments by the moath frets,
of wine by the sowrnesse, I warrant him for ever being good costerd-monger,
broker, or vintner whiles he lives. Therefore we must not measure of Martin as
he is allied to Elderton, or tongd like Will Tongue, as he was attired like an
Ape on ye stage, or sits writing of Pa^phlets, in some spare out-house, but as
is Mar-Prelat of England as he surpasses King and collier, in crying, So ho
ho, brother Bridges. Woe ho ho, John a London. Ha ha he, Doctor Copecotes. Do
this and I warrant you, for savoring of the flesh, though you take the
opportunity of the spirit, with every sister in Christ. Behold the state of
the low Countries, since your Plaintiff Pistler, will needs make the
comparison, suppose Martin to be the map of Belgia dilacerata, whose chief
provinces as they are wholye possessed with Spaniards, so think his heart and
soul enhabited with spiet, they Romists in the matter of Religion, and he a
Papist in supremacies contradiction, her inward parts possessed with
Anabaptists, and Lutherans, and his more private opinions polluted with the
dregs of them both, her farthest borders of Holland and Zeland, peopled God wot
with a small number of imperfect Protestants, and the furthest and fewest of
his thoughts, taken up with some odd true points of Religion. How now Father
Martin, have not I hit your meaning patte in this comparison. Say, will you have
any more such interpretations, if you say Amen to it. I Will also reconcile your
allegorical induction of France, to the present constitution of your
frowardnes: but that shall not need, since the misery of the one is the mirror
of the other, and the Reader must suppose that Martin would near have compared
himself to Flaunders nor France, but as they reflect by allusion the
distraction of his factious faith. Howeeuer you take him at the worst, yet is
his welchnes persuaded, that the Lord has some speciell purpose, by
preuentinge of his press, to try who they be that are hipocrites, and what
they be yt are innocent: And not unlike too, for having interrupted the
trafique of honestye, so long as thou have with thy cou^terfet knavery, it is
more the^ hie time thy vnder-ha^d treachery, were brought to the touchstone of
authority. You think we know not how pretily your Printers were shrouded under
the name of salt-petermen, so that who but Hodgkins, Tomlins and Sims, at the
undermining of a house, and undoing of poor men, by diggyng up their floars,
and breaking down their walls. No, no, we never heard how orderly they pretended
the printing of Accidences, when my L. of Darbies men came to see what they
were a doing, what though they damned themselves about the denial of the
deed, is perjury such a matter amongst puritans. Tush they account it no sin
as long as it is in the way of protestation, being in the mind of a good old
fellow in Cambridge, who sitting in S. John's as Senior at the fellows
election, was reprehended by some of his betters, for that he gave his voice
with a dunce like himself, contrary to oath, statute and conscience: why quoth
he, I neither respect oath, statute, nor conscience, but only the glory of
God. Men are but men and may err, yea goodman Spe. himself in Paul's
churchyard, although he says he has no sin, what marvel is it then,
though some corruption cleave unto our aged Gentleman by his own confession.
Learn of me to judge charitably, and think that nature took a scouring
purgation, when she voided all her imperfections in the birth of one Martin:
which if it be so, he is not to be blamed, since as Arist. says, vitia
naturae no^ sunt reprehendenda. Gibe on, gibe on, and see if your father
Mar-martin will bear you out in it or no, you think the good sweete-faced
prelate* Mass Martin, has never broke sword in ruffians hal, yes that he has
more then one or two, if the truth were known, and fought for his wench as
bravely as the best of them all, therefore take heed how you come in his way,
least he belabour you with his crabtree style for your lustines, and teach
you how to look into a Martins neaste again while you live. Alas you are but
young, and never knew what his Bumfegingment, for if you did, you would
think five hundredth fistes about your ears, were more then Physic in a
frosty morning. Write or fight which you will, our champion is for you at all
weapones, whether you choose the word or the sword, neither comes amiss to
him, he never took his domestical dissension in hand to leave it soon. All
England must be up together by the ears, before his pen rest in peace, nor
shall his rebellious mutinies, which he shrouds under the age of Martinisme,
have any intermedium, till religions prosperity and our Christian liberty,
mis-termed of him by the last year of Lambethisme, do perish from amongst
us, and depart to our enemies: then shall you see, what seditious buildinges
will arise on the unfortunate foundations of his folly, and what contentious
increase will come from the school of contempt.

If they will needs overthrow me let them go in hand with the exploite etc.
HOlla, holla brother Martin, you are to hasty, what, Winter is no time to make
wars in, you were best stay til summer, and then both our brains will be in a
better temperature, but I think ere that time your wit will be welny worn
thredbare, and your banquerout invention, clean out at the elbowes, then are
we well helped up with a witness, if the aged champion of Warwick, do not
lay to his shoulders, and support discipline ready to lie in the dust, with
some or other demonstration. I can tell you Phil. Stu. is a tall man also for
that purpose. What his Anatomy of Abuses for all that, will serve very fitly
for an Antipast, before one of Egertons Sermons, I would see the best of your
Trauerses write such a treatise as he has done, against short heeld
pantoffles. But one thing it is great pity of him, that being such a good
fellow as he is, he should speak against dice, so as he does: nevertheless
there is some hope of him, for as I heard not long since, a brother of his,
meting him by chance (as thieves meet at the gallows) after many christian
questions of the well fare of his persecuted brethren, and sistern, asked him
when they should have a game at tables together, by the grace of God the next
Sabbath, quoth Phil. and then if it shall so seem good to his providence, have
at you for ames ase and the dise. I forgette to tell you what a stir he keeps
against dumb ministers, and never writes nor talks of them, but he calls
them minstrels, when his mastershippe in his minority, plaide the Reader in
Chesshire, for five mark a year and a canuas dublet, couenanted besides, that
in consideration of that stipend, he make clean the patrones boots every
time he came to town. What need more words to prove him a protestant, did not
he behave himself like a true Christian, when he went a wooing for his friend
Clarke, I warrant you he said not God save you, or God speed you, with good
even or good morrow, as our profane woers are wont, but stepped close to her,
with peace be with you, very demurely, and then told her a long tale, that in
so much as widowhoode, was an unclean life, and subject to many temptations,
she might do well to reconcile her self to the Church of God, in the holy
ordinance of matrimony. Many words past to this purpose, but I wotte well the
conclusion was this, that since she had hitherto conuerst with none but
unregenerate persons, and was utterly careless of the communion of Saints, she
would let him that was a man of God, put a new spirit into her, by carnal
copulation, and so engraft her into the fellowshippe of the faithful, to which
that she might more willingly agree, he offered her a spicke and spanne new
Geneua Bible, that his attendant Italian had brought with him to make up the
bargain. But for all the Scripture he could allege, it should not be, Phil.
Stu. was no meat for her tooth, God wot he could not get a penyworth of
leachery on such a pawn as his Bible was, the man behind the painted cloth
mard all, and so O grief, a good Sabaoths day work was lost. Stand to it
Mar-martin Junior and thou art good enough for ten thousand of them, tickle me
my Phil. a little more in the flank, and make him winche like a resty jade,
whereto a dreaming divine of Cambridge, in a cextain private Sermon of his,
compared the wicked. Say thou me so good heart, then have at you Master
Compositor, with the constructio^ of Sunt oculos clari qui cernis sydera
tanquam. If you be remembered you were once put to your trumpes about it in
Wolfes Printing House, when as you would needs have clari the infinitive mood
of a verb passive, which determined you went forwards after this order. Sunt
there are, oculos eyes, qui the which, cernis thou do see, clari to be
clear, tanquam sydera as the Stars. Excellent well done of an old Master of
Art, yet why may not he by authority challenge to himself for this one piece
of work the degrees he never took. Learning is a jewel my masters, make
much of it, and Phil. Stu. a Gentleman every hair of his head, whom although
you do not regard according as he deserves, yet I warrant you Martin makes
more account of him then so, who has substituted him long since (if the truth
were well boulted out) amongst the number of those privy Martinists, which he
threatens to place in every parish. I am more then half weary of tracing too
and fro in this cursed common wealth, where sinful simplicitye pufte up with
the pride of singularity, seeks to peruerte the name and method of
magistracy. But as the most of their arguments, are drawn from our grave
fathers infirmities, so al their outrageous endeavors have their offspring from
affected vainglory. lib. de ^abusio.
Agreeing with the saying of Hug. Innobedientiae morbus ex superbiae tumore
procedit, sicut sanies ex vlcere. The disease of disobedience proceeds from the
swelling of pride, as madness from some intolerable ulcer. The cause whereof
Gregory thus expresses. Dum plus exquirunt says he, (...).lib. 8
contemplando quam capiunt, vsque ad peruersa dogmata erumpunt, and dum
veritatis discipuli esse negligunt, humiliter magistri erroris fiunt. Whiles by
study they search out more then they understand, they break forth into
perverse opinions, and whiles they neglect to be the scholars of truth, they
most basely become the schoolemaisters of error. For such is the boldness of
our boyish deuines, that they will leap into the pulpet, before they have
learned Stans puer ad mensam, and talk very desperately of discipline, before
they can construe, Qui mihi discipulus. Qui venit institui says Cassiodorus,
antequam instituatur, alios instituere cupit, etc. The nouice that comes to be
informed, desires to inform others, before he be informed himself, and to
teach before he be taught, to prescribe laws before he has read Litleton,
and play the subtle Philosopher, before he knows the order of his sillables:
he will needs have subjects, before he can subiugate his affections, and couets
the office of a commander, before he has learned to stoop to the admonitions
of his elders, and begins to instruct and persuade, before he be instructed
and persuaded in any kind of art, which their folly once fuelled with ye
frowardness of blind zeal, makes the^ confound contempt with gods true
worship, and open their mouths against his ordinance, as did the Prophets
against Ieroboams hill altars. T.C. in Cambridge first invented this violent
innovation, when as his mounting ambition, went through every kind of Ambitus,
to compass the office of the Uicechauncelour-ship. But after he saw himself
disfauourd in his first insolence, and that the suffrages of the university,
would not difcend to his dissentious indignityes, his seditious discontent
devised the means to discredit that government, which he through his il
behavior might not aspire to. The^ began his inueterat malice, to undermine
the foundations of our societies, and reduce our Colleges to the schools of
the Prophets, to discard all degrees of art as antichristian, to condemn all
decency in the ministry as diabolical, and exclude all ecclesiastical
superiority forth the Church as Apocripha. No sooner had these new fangled
positions entered the tables of young students, but Singularity the eldest
child of heresy, consulted with male-conted mela^choly, how to bring this
misbegotte^scisme to a monarchy. To which purpose hipocriticall zeal, was
addressed as a pursuiuant into all places of Suff. Norff. Essex and Midlesex,
with express commandment from the sinod of Saints, to proclaim T.C. supreme
head of the Church. This past on thus, whiles the sword of justice, slept in
his scaberd, whose improvident eye neglecting the beginning of such burnings,
has added a more confirmed fury to the flame, which has now taken hold on ye
buildings of our bishoprics. How it has raged in those quarters before
mentioned for ye utter impouerishing of the allegiance of the communalty, and
lamentable undoing of the estimation of diverse other knights and gentlemen, the
whole course of the high commission may testify. Nether was this plague of
apostasy undeserved of their inconstancy, who forsook ye true service of God,
to worship the idol of Warwick. Put case his reading be great and his malice
more, that he has plodded through ten cart load of paper, and bin the death
often thousand pound of candels, yet as Gregory says, Greg. li(...)
perit omne quod agitur, si non humilitate custodiatur. Whatsoever is done does
vanish to infamy, if it be not vpholden by humility: What child does not see
into the pride of his heart, that first entertained the impudency of
controlling antiquity, and preferred the poison of his own perverse opinions,
before the experience of so many Churches, counsails and fathers. Quae mayor
superioria, ser,
says Bernarde, quam vt vnus homo toti congregationi iudicium suum prefcrat
tanqua^ ipse solus habeat spiritu^ Dei. What greater pride then that one man
should advance his judgment, above the sentence of a whole congregation, as if
he alone had the spirit of God. Pride overthrew the towr of Babell, prostrated
Golias, hu^g up Haman, killed Nichanor, consumed Herod, destroyed Antiochus,
drowned Pharao, subverted Senacherib, and I hope will also confound arrogant
T.C. and all his accomplishes in the Lords good time. And now that I have
unburdened my shoulders of the weight of his learning, I Will ribroste my brother
Martin a little, for obiecting to my Lord Archbishop, the not answering of his
books. Therefore first would I know of sweet M. sauce malapert whether he
would have the care of the commonwealth, and forseing consultation of
domestical and foreign affairs, resigned to the retorting of T.C. his
vnreuerent railings. Next what such equal proportion his mastership finds in
their places, that the gravity and mildnes of the one, should stoop his
attention so low, as the iangling leuity of the other. Were there no other
thing to refrayn his grace, from combating with a common barretour then this,
that in discordia nemo benedicit Dominum, it were sufficient to plead his
absence from this inferior fight. But when he considers that saying of
Augustine. Nullus est modus inimicitiis, nisi ob tempus obte^peremus iratis,
there is no mean of malice, unless for a time we give place to the furious, and
that which another sais, Sicut nihil est deformius quam respondere furiosis
ita, nihil vtilius quam tacere prouocatis. As there is nothing more unseemly
then to answer the froward, so there is nothing more profitable then scilence
to such as are prouokt. Let him use the liberty of his speech as he please,
and detracte from his learning in what terms hoe see cause, yet will all
Christendom admire his perfection, when T. C. his singularity shall go a
begging up and down the low Countries. I will not gainsaie but your reverend
Pastor may have as knauish a vain in writing as your self, and fasten a
slander on the Saints of heaven, Jerome i(...) Oseam.
as soon as any of your sect, for nil tam facile est, as Ierom says, quam
ociosum and dormientem de aliorum labor and vigiliis disputare. There is
nothing so easy for a man that is sluggish and idle, as to call in question
others men's watchings and labors. Men's praua, Greg. 15
says Gregory, semper in laboribus est, quia aut molitur mala quae inferat,
vel metuit ne sibi ab aliis infea^nt, and quic quid contra proximos cogitat,
hoc contra se, a proximus cogitari formidat. A wicked mind lives in continual
toil, because it either meditates the injuries which he is about to infer,
or fears some reproach to be inferred by others, and whatsoever he pretendes
against his neighbor, the same he mistrusts to be pretended against himself.
If T.C. has made thee his attorney, to urge the not answering of his books,
then I pray thee be my Mercury this once, and tell him thus much from
Mar-Martine, that he has undone more Printers with his py-bald pamphlets, then
his dish-clout discipline will set up again this seven years. Much
inkehorne stuff has he uttered in a iarring style, and intruded a great
deal of trashe to our ears by a dainty figure of idem peridem, but for any
new piece of art he has showed in those idle editions, other then that his
famous adversary has before tsme confuted, he may well enough bequeth it to
Dunce or Dorbel, whence his blundering capacity is lineally descended. What
master T.C. you think that no man dare touch you, because you have played the
scuruie scolde any time these twenty years, but I Will so hamper your holiness
for all the offenses of your youth, as all geering puritans shall have small
cause to insult and rejoice at my silence. Then see whether I dare stand to the
defense of your defame or no. Take heed good man Howlyglasse, that I make not
such a hole in your coat the next Term, as Martine and his sons shall not
sow up in have, I tell you I am a shreud fellow at the uncasing of a fox, and
have cats eyes to look into every corner of a Puritans house. I warrant you
my brother Page will say so, by that time I have talkte with him a little, who
although he be none of the straightest men that ever God made, yet has he as
good skill in milche bullocks, as any huswife within forty miles of his head.
Let him alone, and if he do not know by a cowes water, how many pintes of
milk she will give in a year, then will he never help his wife to make chief
again whiles he lives: and without offense to his Pastorshippe be it spoken,
he will say pretyly well to a hen, if she be not too old, always
provided, she have a neaste of clean straw in his study, and he groape her
with his own hands evening and morning. Then see if he do not make three
pounds a year of her over and above all costs and charges. I marie sir, is
not this a husband in deed, that besides the multiplying of the Church of
God, in his householde ministry, will keep his wife and family by cross
bargains a whole twelve month. What would he do my masters, if he had two
good legs, that will thus bestirre him in his vocation with one and a stump.
The world may say he is lame, and so forth, but he that had seen him run
from Houns. the other day, for getting his maid with child, would never
think so. I marvel with what face our Bishops could deprive such a man of
God, that being known to be a most heavenly whooremaister, a passing zealous
worldling, and a most mortified schismatique, was fitter iwis to teach men
then boys. Be ruled by Martine, and send him home into Deuon-sheere, or else
he will wrappe all your Clergy once again in Lazarus winding sheet. Which
favor if he obtain contrary to desert, I would wish him as a friend,
near more to urge Fathers to swear at the Funt, that the children that are
brought thither to be christened, are of none but their own begetting, lest
old Ragdale plie him as he did in times past, about the shoulders with his
plowe staff. Have with you Giles Wig. to Sidborough, and let us have you make
another Sermon of Sedgwick^^ pack-prickes: or such another Prayer as you did of
three hours long, when as a friend of yours (that best knew your arms) cast in
the Rams horns at your window. If you be remembered, it was the same time,
when you cride, Come wife, come servants, let us fall on our knees, and pray
to the Lord God to deliver us from all evil temptation, for the devil is
even new gone by, and look where he has thrown in his horns at the window.
Giles, Giles, I have to talk with you for your sauciness with the right
Honorable the Earl of Huntington, in whose presence you (though of all other
unworthy) then being, when conversant with other Gentlemen, he calde for a
boule of Beer, which brought, and set down by him, and he yet busy in talk,
you took very orderly from before him, and trilled it off without any more
bones, bidding his man if he would, go fill him another. And what of all this
I pray you, was that such a wondrous matter, does Giles care for any of your
Lords, Earls, Barons or Bishops. No, no, no barrel better herring with him:
we are all made of one and the self same molde, and Adam signifies but red
earth. I could tell you a tale worth the hearing, that would counteruaile Glib.
of Haustead, were it not that it would make M. Wig. as cholerike, as when he
burst in the Church maugre excommunication, and knocked the keys about ye
Sextens head, for not opening unto him. Come on it what will, in spite of
midsu^mer moon, you shall have it as it is, therefore attend good people to the
unfortunate sequel. G.W. of Wig. house, in the land of little Wittam, chosen
to the place and function of a pastor, by those reverend elders of the Church,
Hicke, Hob and John, Cutbert C. the Cobbler, and New. the broomseller cum multis
aliis que nunc prescribere longum est, at length seized (after many years
straggling on the superintendentship of Sidborough, where having worn out three
or four pulpits with the unreasonable bounsing of his fistes, it was his chance
on a time to have one quarrel more to another of them: so that no sooner
mounted on her back, but he began to spur her with his heels, to bore her
about the ears with his elbowes, and so pittiously misuse her in every part,
as would have grieved any heathen Ioyner to the heart, to behold. Nor could
his Text contain him in this choler, or plead any pardon or pity for this
poor pulpit, but he would needs ride her to death from one Diocese to
another, from York to London, from London to Canterbury, from Canterbury to
Winchester, and all without a bait, insomuch, that tired in hss way homeward
to his Text, he had stuck in the mire for any more matter he had, had not
John a Borhead come into the church as he did. Whom he espying in good time,
crossed the midwaie of a sentence to let fly at him in this manner. As for the
discipline which those wretches do hinder, look, look good people where that
vile whooremaster John a Borhead comes in piping hot from Clayphams wife. Whose
very sight put him so clean besides himself, that he could neither go
forward nor backward, but still repeated, John a Borhead, John a Borhead, that
vild whooremaister John a Borhead: to whom with the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, be al honor and praise both now and for ever. Ah hah master
Martine, what get you now bp your red cap? Whether was Clayphams wife or John
a Borhead more in fault, for marring this good sermon. If I. a Borhead, then is
it not best for him to come in my brother Wig. way, least he stabble him, as
he did the Drum once for playing after service. How ener it was, may it
please you Lords of the spirituality, in consideration of these laudible
premises, to send him home to his charge, that he may once more preach in
the yewe tree. My brother Vd. of Kingston thinks I Will spare him for his wives
sake, that is reported to be as good a wench as ever playde her prises at
Pancredge, although she is not altogether such a gyantesse, as my brother Wig.
female, but forma fragulis, and Ale is not worth a button, if it be too stale.
Wherefore prepare you good neighbor V. to undergo the cross of persecution.
Martine has vaunted you to be a venterous knight, and I do mean to break a
lance with you, ere you and I part. Wherefore what say you now to the matter,
is Christ descended of bastardisme or no, as you gave out in the pulpyt? Would
you not have your tongue cut out for your blasphemy if you were well served? Are
you a notable preacher of the word of God, and a vehement reprouer of sin, that
thus seek to discredit the fleshly descent of our Savior, I thought you such
another, when I first saw you emblazoned in Martins books. It Is you that are
so holy, that you will not forsooth be seen to handle any money, nor take
gold though it should filch it self into your purse, but if God moved the
hearts of any of your brethren or sistren in the Lord, to bring in pots, beds
or household stuff into your house, you would go out of doors of purpose
whiles it was brought in, and then if any man ask you, how you come so well
storde, your answer is that you know not how, but only by the providence of
God. I must belabour you when all is done, for your backbiting and slandering
of your honest neighbors, and open inueighing against the established
government in your sermons. Help him Martin, or else his vpbraided absurdities
will make thee repent that ever thou belyedst or disgracedst Hone, Cottington
or Chatfield in his cause. May it please you therefore that are in authority,
considering how reverently he has abused Christ's birthright, to restore him
to preach that the blocks, stocks and stones of Kingstone, do not cry out
against you. I follow the rivers of folly, whiles the fountains of infection
do propagate their poison. Martin all this while thinks himself in league with
obscurity, whiles Phoebus the discouerer of Mars and Uenus adultery, has
streamed his bright day light into the net where he daunceth. Blush squint-eied
caitife, since thy covert no more will contain thee. Caelum te contegit non
habes vrnam. Therefore let al posterity that shall hear of his knauerie,
attend the discovery which now I will make of his villainy. Pen. I. Pen. welsh
Pen. Pen. the Protestationer, Demonstrationer, Supplicationer, Appellationer,
Pen. the father, Pen. the son, Pen. Martin Junior, Martin Martinus, Pen. the
scholar of Oxford to his friend in Cambridge, Pen. totum in toto, and totum in
qualibet part, was sometimes (if I be not deceived) a scholar of that house in
Cambridge whereof D. Per. was master. Where, what his estimation was, the
scorn wherein he lived can best relate. For the constitution of his body, it
was so clean contrary to all phisiognomie of fame, that a man would have
judged by his face, God and nature devising our disgrace, had enclosde a close
stool in skin, and set a serpentine soul, like a counterfeit diamond, more
deep in dong. Neither was this monster of Cracouia vnmarkt from his
bastardisme to mischief: but as he was begotten in adultery and conceived in
the heat of lust, so was he brought into the world on a tempestuous day, and
borne in that hour when all planets were opposite. Predestination yt foresaw
how crooked he should prove in his ways, enjoined incest to spawne him
splay-footed. Eternity, that knew how awkward he should look to all honesty,
consulted with Conception to make him squint-eied, and the devil that
discovered by the heavens disposition on his birthday, how great a lim of his
kingdom was coming into the world, provided a rustie superficies wherinto
wrapped him, as soon as ever he was separated from his mothers womb: in every
part whereof these words of blessing were most artificially engraven, Crine
ruber, niger ore, breuis pede, lumine lustus. To leave his nativity to the
Church porch, where the parish found him, and come to his riper years, that now
had learnd Puerilis, of the poor man's boy, and nere as pretily entered in Aue
Marie English, as any parish clarke in those parts. I am to tell you how
laudibly he behaved himself in Peterhouse, during the time of his
subsistership. First therefore he began with his religion at his first coming
thither, Hoc scitote viri, that he was as arrant a papist as ever came out of
Wales. I tell you I. a P. in those days, would have run a false gallop over
his beads with any man in England, and helped the Priest for a shift to say
Mass at high midnight, which if need were, I doubt not but he would do at this
hour. It was not for nothing my masters, that he so be-baited his betters, for
showing the people the relic of our Ladies smock in his sermon, and open
detecting of all their other blind superstition. Say what you will, he is a
close lad, and can carry a ring in his mouth, though all the world see it not:
what though he now dissemble with the time, and disguise his Spanish heart in
a Precisians habit. May not he hereafter prove a necessary member in
conspiracies common wealth, and advantage the holy league as much in this
means of sedition, as all Philips power by invasion. Simple English men, that
cannot see into policy before it supprise your peace, nor interrupt the
ambition of treachery, before it has besieged your prosperity. Do you behold
whiles innouations bud, and do not you fear lest your children and family be
poisoned with the fruit. The Scythians are barbarous, yet more foreseeing then
you, who so detested al foreign innouations, te^ding to the derogation of their
ancient customs, that they killed Anacharu^s for no other cause, but for yt he
performed the rights of Sibil after the manner of the Grecians. What should I
vpbraide your simplicity with the Epidaurians provident subtlety, who fearing
least their Country men should attract innouations from other nations, and
especially from their riotous neighbors the Illirians, interdicted their
merchants from al trafick with them, or travail unto them, but least they
should be utterly destitute of their commodities, they chose a grave man
amongst them, known to be of good government and reputation, who dealt
continually for the whole Country in the way of exchange, and meruailously
augmented their wealth by the reverence of his wisdom. But you fond men, as
in garments so in government continually affecting new fashions, think no man
can be saved yt has not bin at Geneua. Your belief forsooth must be of that
Scottish kind, and your Bibles of the primitive print, else your consciences
God wot, are not of the cannonical cut, nor your opinions of the Apostles
stamp. Pen. with Pan, has contended with Appollo, and you like Midasses, have
ouerprised his music. Good God, yt a Welsh harp should inchant so many
English hearts to their confusion, especially having nere a string belonging to
it, but a treble. Had a siren sung, and I drowned in attending her descante. I
would have bequeathed my bane to her beauty, but when Cerberus shall bark and
I turn back to listen, the^ let me perish without pity, in the delight of my
living destruction. Deceit has took up his seat in a dunce, and you think
him a saint, because he comes not in the shape of a devil. We know M. Pen.
intus and in cute, first for a papist, then for a Brownist, next for an
Anabaptist, and last for ye blasphemous Martin, whose spirit is the concrete
compound of all these unpardonable heresies. But had not the frantike practice
of his youth thoroughly founded his confirmed age in this fury, I would have
imagined his vpstart spite, a wonder above usual speech, whereas now the
conjectures drawn from his cradles, detract from his malice all maruels. For
whiles he was yet a fresh man in Peterhouse, and had scarce tasted, as we say,
of Setons modalibus, he began to affect factions in art, and show himself
openly a studious disgracer of antiquity. Who then such an unnatural enemy to
Aristotle, or such a new-fa^gled friend unto Ramus. This one thing I am sure
of, he never went for other then an ass, amongst his companions and equalles,
yet such a mutinous block-head was he always accounted, that through town and
College he was commonly called the seditious dunce. For one while he would be
libelling against Arist. and all his followers he knew, another while he would
all to be-rime Doctor Perne, for his new statutes, and make a byword of his
bald pate, yea had the Dean, President, or any other officer never so little
angerd him, they were sure ere the week went about to have hard of it, in some
libell or other. This humor held him at that time, when by conuersing with
French men near Christ's College of a Papist, he became a Brownist, how
afterward from a Brownist he fell to be an Anabaptist, I refer it to those
that knew his after behavior in Oxford. But for his last descent, a malo in
peius from an Anabaptist to be that infamous Martin, impute it to the age of
his heresies, that are now in there Harvest. Neither would I have you think
there was no more heads in it then his own, For I can assure you to the
contrary, that most of the Puritan preachers in Northampton shire, Warwick
shire, Sufolke and Northffolke, have either brought stone, straw or mortar to
the building of this Martin. Only Pen. found nothing but ry, which the last
part of his name, affords sufficiently, you may see what it is for a nest of
hornets to hiue together, oh they will make brave combs to choke bees withal,
if they be let alone but one quarter, not so much as T. C. himself, but will
have the help of his fellow Brethren, if he has any thing to write against
Bishops, were not all the elected in Cambridge, assembled about the shaping of
the confutation of the Remish Testament, O so devoutly they met every Friday at
Saint Laurence his Monastery, where the counsails and fathers, were distributed
amongst several companies, and every one of the reformed society sent there
combined quotations week by week in a Capcase, to my brother Thomas, yet
wandering beyond sea, succh a Chaos of common places, no apothegmatical
Lycosthenes ever conceited. Bishops were the smallest bugs, that were aimed at
in this extraordinary benevolence, God shield, the court have escapt their
collectio^s. Some thing it would prove in the end if it were published, that is
pouldred with the brains of so many Puritan springols, and polluted with the
pains of such an infinite number of Asses. Much good do it you M. Martin, how
like you my style, am not I old Ille ego qui quondam at ye besleeuing of a
sichophant. Alas poor idiot, thou think no man can write but thy self, or
frame his pen to delight, except he strain courtesy with one of thy Northren
figures, but if authority do not moderate, the fiery feruence of my enflamed
zeal, i will assail thee from term to term with Archilochus, in such a
complete armor of Iambicks, as the very reflexcye of my fury, shall make thee
drive thy father before thee to the gallows, for begetting thee in such a
bloody hour, O God that we two might be permitted but one quarter, to try it
out by the teeth for the best benefice in England, then would I distill my wit
into incke, and my soul into arguments, but I would drive this Danus from his
dunghill, and make him faune like a dog for favor at the magistrates feet.
But it is our English policy to advantage our enemies by delays, and resist a
multitude with a few, which makes sediton seed before the haruesters of our
souls suppose it in the blade: it is not the spirit of mildness yt must
moderat the heart of folly, dogs must be beaten with staves, and stuborn slaves
co^trolled with stripes. Authority best knows how to diet these bedlamites,
although Segnior Penry in his last waste paper has subscribed our magistrates
infants. Repent, repent thou runnagate lozill, and play not the Seminary any
longer in corners, least thy chiefest benefactors forsake thee, and recover the
poverty of their fines, by bringing the pursiuants to thy form. I hear some
vnderhande whisperers, and greeneheaded nouices exclaim against our Bishops,
for not granting thee disputation. Alas alas brother Martin it may not be: for
thou art known to be such a stale hackster, with thy welsh hook, that no
honest man will debase himself in buckling with such a braggar. But suppose we
should send some Crepundio forth our schools to beat thee about the ears with
ergo. Where should this sillogistica concertatio be solemnized: what in our
Uniuersity schools at Oxford, or in puluere Philosophico at Cambridge. No they
were erected in time of Popery, and must be new built again before they can
give any access to his arguments. Truly I am afraid yt this General
counsel, must be holden at Geneua, when al is done, for I know no place in
Enland holy enough for their turn, except it be some barn or out-house about
Bury, or some odd blind cottage in the heart of Warwick shire, and thither
peradventure, these good honest opponents would repair without grudging.
Provided always that they have there horse-hire and other charges allowed them
out of the poor man's box, or else it is no bargain. All this fadges well yet, if
we had once determined who should be father of the act. Why what a question is
that, when we have so many persecuted elders abroad. The blind, the halt, or
the lame, or any serves the turn with them, so he has not on a cloak with
sleues, or a cap of the university cut. Imagine that place to be furnished,
where shall we find moderators, that may deal indifferently twixt both parts.
Machiuell is dead many a year ago, or else he had been a fit man for this
may game, therefore whom shall we have now, since it must be neither yours nor
ours. Some vpstart country Gentleman, that has undone all his tenants by
oppression, even such a one as Scar. of Warwick shire, that being a noted
Martinist, be frinded his poor coppi-holder Criar, and turned him out of all
that ere he had very orderly. How think you my lay brethren? is not here a
trim convocation toward. But mark the end of it, and then you may haps see
odd buffeting with the buttond books, and battring down of bishoprics. Giles
of Sidborough will off with his gown at least, and make demonstrations of
Logique with his fists like Zeno, what though he be low and cannot reach so hie
as an Archbishop, may not he stand like a iackanapes on his wives shoulders,
and scold for the best game with all that come. He is saving a reverence a
spritish dispuer, and a pestilent below at an imperfect sillogisme. Nay mark me
well, and take me at my words, he shall speak false Latin, forge a text, abuse
a Bishop, or make a lie of revelation for more then I speak off with any man in
Enga^ld. Neither do I flatter him herin for he hears me not, if I did, it were
no matter, considering that virtus laudata crescit,

From jest to ernest, I appeal to you Gentlemen, how ridiculous in policy
this disputation would prove if it were granted. First for there Bibles, the
touchstone of all controversies, they must be of their Favorites translation,
or else they will deny there authority as frivolous. Admit they go to the
original (which but few of them understand) they will have every man his sundry
interpretation. Let our deuines allege any text, they will expound it as they
list, say the fathers or other ancient writers what they will. For such is the
growth of there arrogance, that they are not ashamed to compare themselus with
Jerome or Austen, and in their tedious sermons preach against them as profane.
If this the^ be any betraying of the wretchedness of our cause (as they call
it) not to dispute with them that deny all principles, not to contend with the^
that will be tried by none but themselus, I refer it to all considerate
judgments, that have no more experience in the actions of peace then a
reasonable soul may afford. The more pacified sort of our Puritans, would
needs persuade the world, that it is naught but a learned ministry which their
cha^pion Martin endeavors: were it no otherwise his pardon were easily sealed,
but those that know the treason of his books, can report of his malice against
Bishops. One thing I am persuaded, that he neither respects the propagation of
the Gospel, nor the prosperity of the Church, but only the benefit that may
fall to him and his boulsterers, by the distribution of Bishoprics. Beshrewe
me but those Church-liuings would come well to decayed courtiers. O how
meerilye the Dice would run, if our lustye laddes might go to hazard for
half a dozen of these Dioses. Not a page but would have a flinge at some or
other impropriation or personage: and in conclusion, those livings which now
maintain so many scholars and students, would in two or three years be all
spent in a Tavern amongst a consort of queanes and fiddlers, that might carouse
on their wine-bench to the confusion of religion. Well, to proceed in this
text of reformation: is not this thy meaning Martin, that thou would have
two and fifty thousand Pastors, for two and fifty thousand Parish churches in
England and Wales. If thou say the word, we will have a place in both
Uniuersities, begin in Oxford first with the fresh-men, and so go up to the
heads of the University, and then count how many thou can make. Our Beadles
that know the number best, would needs persuade us, that of all sorts, there
is not full three thousand: in Cambridge they say there is not so many by a
thousand, then call thy wits together, and imagine with thy self, out of these
three thousand, and two thousand of all gatherings, how many good preachers may
be mustered, some four hundredth as I guess, peradventure thou may rebate
them to some fifty or threescore, because there is no more open-mouthes of thy
profession in both Uniuersities: How far this fifty is from fifty thousand,
a farthing worth of Arithmetike will teach you: where will thou have then a
competent number to fill up those defects of dum ministers: inspiration I
perceive must help to patch up your knauerie, and then welfare the cobbler of
Norwitch, that being one morning something earelie at Saint Androwes, and the
Preacher not come before the Psalm was ended, stepped up into the pulpet very
devoutly, and made me a good thriftis exhortation in the praise of plain
dealing. If this be not true, ask the Mayor that committed him to prison for
his labor. Such another Doctor would he prove, that standing in election for
a living that was then in her Majesty's bestowing, came to be examined by men
of gravity in the circumstance of his sufficiency, who discending est soones
into his vnschooled simplicity, gave him this little English to be made in
Latin. There be three Creedes, the Nycen Creed, Athanatius Creed, and the
Apostles Creed, all which ought to be believed upon pain of damnation. The
good simple superintendant, that saw himself so hardly beset, craved respite
to compass this vulgar, which grannted, after some deliberation he began thus
to go forward, Tria sunt Creda, vnum Niceni, alterum Athanasii, tertium
Apostolorum, quae omnesdebent esse creditum, sub poena condemnationis. I marry
Sir, here is apeece of scholershippe of the new cut, which for the goodness of
the Latin might have borne a part in the Pewteres paggeant. I keep a register
of ten thousand such knacks. Why, there is not a Presician in England that has
abused art, or mistoken a metaphor but I have his name in black and white,
what say you to that zealous sheepebyter of your own edition in Cambridge,
that said the wicked had a scabbe, a braune, and a crust on their conscience,
being so full of their wily gilies, that we that are the true children of God
can not tell how to concern them: or was not he a sound card, that talking
of the majesty and authority of the scriptures, said they were the sweet
meats of Saints, the household stuff of heaven, and the home spunne cloth of
the Lords own loombes, being delivered from the stonebow of his mouth, when he
appeared in glory on mount Sinay: But this is nothing to the good sport of that
is behind. What, I must tell you of a fellow that trolles in his rethotike
like Martin in his riddles. This hors-holy father preaching on a time in Saint
Mary's at Oxford, came off with this mannerly comparison: There is an ugly and
monstrous beast in our tongue-called a hog, and this ugly and monstrous beast
in boistrous and tempesteous weather lifts up his suoute into the air, and
cries wrough, wrough: even so (dear people) the children of God in the
troublesome time of temptations, cry, Our help is in the name of the Lord.
Such another woodcocke was he of Yarmouth, that said openly in the pulpet,
whosoever wears a veil, is an whore without exception, and on an other time,
two women coming to be churched, whereof the one wore a veil, the other went
without. He began his thanksgiving in this form: Let us give God thanks for
the safe delivery of one of our sisters, for the other let us not give God
thanks, for she is a stranger, and we have nothing to do with her, I take
her to be Dinah the harlot, that sat by the high way side, for she has a veil
over her face, In the next place to him, shall he be put that raising on the
Papists in his Sermon, alleged this argument to confute their religion, Nay
(says he) you may gather what a wicked and spotted religion this papistrie is,
for Campion himself that was accounted their chiefest pillar, was reported to
have had the pox. I have another in my tables, that handling that place of
Joshua where Rahab entertained his spies, would needs conclude all Inkeepers to
be harlots, because Rahab the harlot was an Inkeeper. I shall run my pen out
of breath, if I articulate all the examples of their absurdeties that I could.
Have not Trinity Ha^l men in Cambridge a preaching brother in Bury yet in
suit, for saying all ciuillians were papists. To let him pass for a patch,
that being master of none of the meanest Colleges in Cambridge, and by the
oath of his admission, bound to take no money for preferments, made answer to
one that offered him forty marks to make his son fellow: God forbid I
should take any money for it is against my oath, but if you will give me it in
plate, I Will pleasure him in what I may. This is the dreamer if you be advised,
that is indebted above two thousand hours to the Unersitie, which he has
borrowed by three and four at a time upon several sundays preaching as it
came to his course: it is a shame for him, that he does not pay them,
professing such purity as he does. Martin, thou see I come not abruptly to
thee like a rednosde ieaster, that in the pride of his pottle-pots curries over
a reuelling riffe raffe of Tapsterly tauntes, and course hempen quippes, such
as our brokerly wits do filsh out of Bull the Hanginans budget, but I speak
plain English, and call thee a knave in thine own language. All the
generation of you are Hipocrites and belli-gods, that devour as much good meat
in one of your brotherly love meetings, as would wel-nye victual the Queens
ships a whole month. It is a shame for you to exclame so against Cards, and
play thus unreasonably at Maw as you do. Gaffe Martin, do you remember whom
you vpbraided by Primero? well let not me take you at Noddy any more, least I
present you to the parish for a gamster, this is the ninth set that you have
lost, and yet you will not leave off. Beware Anthony Monday be not even with
you for calling him Judas, and lay open your false carding to the stage of all
men's scorn. I marvel Pasquill comes not away with his legends, considering
that the date of his promise is more then expired. It seems he stays for some
Saints that are yet to suffer, and wants none but Martin to make up his legend
of Martyrs, if it be so I would thou would come aloft quickly, that we
might have this good sport altogether, and not live ever in expectation of that
which is not. O I could furnish him to the proof with such a packet of male
and female professors, as the world might not pattern. A good old dunstable
doctor here in London, should be the foremost of them, that said his wife was
as good as our Lady: and another time quarrelling with one of his neighbors
that was a fadler, about setting up of the Organs, in a good zeal he lift up
his fist, and stroke out two of his fore teeth, like a right man of peace:
where have you lived my brethren, that you have not heard of that learned
Presbiter, that talking how Adam fell by eating of the Apple, discourst thus:
Adam eat the Apple and gave it to his wife, whereby is to be noted that the
man eat and the woman eat, the man eat, but how, a snap and away: the woman
eat, but how, she laid her thumb on the stalk, and her finger on the coare
and bitte it overthwart, in which biting it overthwart, she broke all the
commandments, insomuch as under ten green spots the ten commandments in
every Apple are comprised: and besides that corrupted her five senses. From
whence we may gather this observation, that a woman always eats an Apple
overthwart. Why, this is sound divinity, and apt for to edify, Sed abeundum
est mihi, and from the Clergy must I leap to the Laytie. Wherefore God even
good man Dauy of Canterbury, and better luck betide thee and thy limbs, then
when thou dauncedst a whole sunday at a wedding, and afterward repenting thy
self of thy profane agilitie, thou entredst into a more serious meditation
against what table thou had sinned, or what part was the principal in this
antike iniquity. The eyes they were the foremost in this enditement, but the
legs, (O those leude legs,) they brought him thither, they kept him there, they
leapt, they daunced, and I leualted to the Uials of vanity: wherefore, what
did thou but like a true christian chastised them accordingly. The scripture
says, if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, Dauy says, my hose and shoes
have offended me, therefore will I pluck them off. This text thus applied,
off went the woollen stockings with a trice, and they with the good neates
leather shoes were cast both into the bottom of a well. The sinners thus
punished, and all parties pleased, home went the pilgrim Dauy barefoote and
barelegge. And now since wind and tide serves, now I care not if I cut over to
Ipswitch: there is a Cowdresser there that I am sure will entertain me if she
be not dead, great Jane of Ipswitch they call her, one that has been a tender
mother to many a Martinist in her time, and has a very good insight in a can
of strong wine. A good virtuous Matrone is she and a wise, having no fault but
this, that she will be drink once a day, and then she lies her down on her
bed, and cries, O my God, my God, thou know I am drunk, and why I should
offend thee my God by spuing thus, as I do. I have not been in Essex yet, but
I Will set in my staff there as I go home, for I have a petition for my brother
that made the Sermon of Repentance to deliver up for me to the Council: but it
must not be such a one as he delivered for him self to my Lord Treasurer,
beginning with O sweet Margery, could thy eyes see so fare, thy hands feel so
far, or thy ears hear so far etc. for then every serving man will mock
us, but it must be of another tune, with most pitifully complaining, that a man
can not call an Ass, ass, but he shall be had coram nobis, In this vain
enough, because actions of the case are chargeable, and Guilde men
uncharitable. If the dog Martin bark again, I Will hold him tugge for two or
three courses, and then beware my black book you were best, for I have not
half emboweld my register. Amend, amend, and glory no more in your
hypocrisy, least your pride and vain glory betray our prosperity to our
enemies, and procure the Lords vengeance to dwell in the gates of our city.
The simple are abused, the ignorant deluded, and Gods truth most pitifully
peruersed, and thou art that most wretched seducer, that under wolves raiment
deuourest widows houses. Uisions are ceast, and all extraordinary revelation
ended, although a good fellow in Cambridge, hearing all things might be
obtained by prayer, prayed two days and two nights for visions: wherefore
broach no more heresies under color of inspiration: if thou do, thou art
like to hear of me by the next Carrier. And so bon nute to your Noddishippe.

Yours to command as your own for two or three cudgellings at all times.
Cutbert Curriknane the younger.


