A True and admirable History, of a Maiden of Confolens, in the Province of
Poictiers: that for the space of three years and more has lived, and yet
does, without receiving either meat or drink.

Of whom, his Majesty in person has had the view, and, (by his command) his
best and chiefest Physicians, have tried all means, to find, whether this fast
and abstinence be by deceit or no.

In this History is also discoursed, whether a man may live many days,
months or years, without receiving any sustenance.

Published by the Kings especial Privilege. AT LONDON, Printed by I. Roberts,
and are to be sold at his house in Barbican. Anno Dom. 1603.

To the Worshipful, M. Thomas Thorney, Master. M. William Martin, M. Edward
Rodes, and M. Thomas Martin: Governors of the mystery and cominaltie of the
Barber Chirurgians. And to the whole Assistants of the clothing* happy
success in all their actions most heartily wished.
MAtter of novelty or admiration, has evermore no greater enemy, then
ouer-rash and preiudicate oppinion: things likewise (of never so much credit)
in other countries, being not bred or borne in our own, do surmount all
compass of belief. Wherefore Gentlemen, this wonder, happening in the
declining state of the world, and in France, no fat region from outs of
England: if the brackish deuider of our Continents, make it not vnrellish-able
in your tastes, the quea^^ie stomachs of others I shall the less care for. You
are men of a misterious profession, exceeding good Anatomists, and skillful
searchers into our bodies whole faculties. The Author of this labor in
French, as (by reading) I am sure your selves will say no less, is both an
excellent Philosopher, Phi^^^ian, Chirurgian, and a skillful Anatomiste, and of
all these has made good witness in this discourse* I could not be-thinke me,
to bestow my pains any where more desertfullie, then on such as are
answerable to the first Authors quality: which neither I would not
ouer-boldly presume to do, ^ill (by a kind examen) of some of your selves,
the work was thought worthy your entertayning. It has cost me good pains,
and therefore may merit the kinder acceptaunce: which if it do find at your
hands, as I would be ^orie but it should, I remain yours in any more serious
employment.

Your worships in true affection. A. M.

To the Reader.
FRiendly Reader, having seriously read over (and with no mean admiration)
this present History: I made s^ealth of some private hours, from my more
weighty employments, to let thee have the same in thine own familiare
language. Wherein (I hope) thou will thankfully accept, if not my pains, yet
(at least) the kind affection I bear thee, in acquainting thee with one of
the rarest meruailes, which can be found among the histories of elder ages, or
those more recent and of later times. And because I would prevent thee, in all
occasions of sinister suspicion, over and beside, that it is a matter most
public and general in Poictiers, as also through the whole country of
Poictu: thou have here the restemonie likewise, of many worthy, grave and
credible persons, such, whose truth can no way be excepted against; who have
all s^^n^ the Maiden now in question, and (by his Majesty's commandment, they
being his best and cheifest Physicians) they have made trial to their very
uttermost, to find out the least scruple of deceit herein to be imagined.
They have committed her from her Parents, to diverse Noble and worthy persons,
some of which have kept her close locked up, some four, five, or six weeks,
some for as many and more months together, where not so much as the sent of
any food was to be^ felt: and notwithstanding, they found her in the very
same estate, as when they shut her up upon this proof. All which (me thinks)
in reason might suffice to content any selfe-willed conceit whatsoever: if
not, as the Maid yet lives, and long is like to do, let the doubtful (if
please them) but bestow their pains, and (by the best means they can devise)
freely make trial, and satisfy themselves, for such is the desire of the
pore Maiden herself. Farewell.

Abstinentem hanc vidit anno superiore, alterum iam annum sine alimento
trahentem, D. N. Rapinus vir non Irenarchico munere solum, sed varia etiam
eruditione illustris, vt testatur hoc elegantissimum de ea carmen.
De puella duodecenni, que iam biennium perstat fine cibo and potu viuere ad
Confluentem Vigennae, an.sal. M. VI. C. I.
QVam varia exercent hominu^ miracula mentes.
Quorum constitui non ratio vlla potest!
Ecce valens and adulta duos iam virgo per annos.
Vitam agitat, nullo freta vel vsa cibo.
Obseruata Magistratu, and vicinia ab omn^^
Qua fluit exiguo tuncta Vigenna Goro.
I am ieiuna famem tolerat sine fraud biennem,
Et iam praeclusis faucibus arcta gula est.
Mireris nullum suspenso a pectore ventrem:
Mireris nullas inde, vel inde vices.
Et nihil excernit, stricta vt nil excipit aluo,
Puraque ab vtrauis part pudenda latent.
Illa tamen sentit, loquitur, videt, ambulat, audit:
Quod nos intentis vid^mus ipsioculis.
Aut magico fallax in corpore spiritus errat:
Aut pasta exili lampade flamma subest:
Iut docet ^stento nature a potentior, iste,
Maiorem humanis legibus esse Deum.
N. RAPINVS. P.
RESP.
NEC nostra fallax in virgin spiritus erra^,
Carmine nec magico fascinat ille ocu^os.
Nec, veluti incider it nunc dignus vindice nodus,
Quas posuit leges transi^it ipse De^s.
Sed quod (...) tua, magne vir, annuit vn^
M^sa, alita exili lampade flamma subest.
F. CITOIS. D. MED.
SI quando leuibus fama pinnulis vehens,
Nullis puellam victitare ferculis,
Sitis arid^, atque tristis exortem famis
Narrauit, omnes commodum pallescere,
Omenque lauum deprecari prodigi,
Vnus veniret confidenti pectore
Hygieia iussit Pallas: Ille protinus
Sibi optiones filias sumens Iouis,
Gnauus remouit alta mundi moeni^,
Auiaque Naturae penetra^it loca,
Hic vnde rerum semina, vnde profluant
Marisque fontes, sluminumque limpida,
Animaeque ventum praepetes, quibus modi^
Hyemesque, solstitiaque dispernat Deus:
Qui causa frugum succulentis germinet
Mandata glebis, quoue sustentans cib^
Inolescat animal, sieve sensibus cluit
Auctum, negatis sieve sensibus caret,
Hic vidit vsquam quicquid est: Quod vt grau^
Pauore mentis solueret, doctissimis
Citoeus infit explicare schedijs,
Quae quisquis olim legerit, caelestium
Opera videri scripta confitebitur.
M. VIDARD Procurator Regius Pict.
LE MESME.
DVn miracle tu fais naistre un rich discourse,
Traictant, Si sans manger on tomb en atrophie,
Si un corpse par trois ans a peu viure s^^s vie,
Puisque les alimens sont l'ame de nos iours.
Iamais Phoebus ne vit rien semblable en son course,
N' Aesculape son fills: car si c'est malady,
Le defaut d' alimens eut son ame rauie:
Mais sans boire and manger celuy cy vit tousiours.
Viure ainsi n'est ce pas un prodige bien rare?
Ce viure dementant la Nature, and ses lois,
Qui veulent qu'a momens nostre corpse se repare.
Mass un effect plus beau faict ton liver (Citoys)
Repa^ssant nos esprits d'vn si precieus viure,
Qu'il fournit d' alimens, pour en mourant reuiur^.
FIN.
The French Sonnet thus Englished.
A Miracle begets thy rich discourse,
Disputing; If consumption do ensue
On want of feeding: Or, if life's right due,
Be in a body (life-lesse-liuing) Since, it is true,
Food is the soul, which does support life's course.
^^oebus nere saw the like, in all his race,
Nor yet his Physic Son; for, in disease,
Life fayles, if nourishment do not appease:
Yet (without meat or drink) life here holds place*
Is It not a wonder then, one thus should live?
Nature here takes the lie: and those decrees
That every moment (as the bellies fees,)
Bids fill the gut, or else our health we leese:
(Citoys) to us a further rule does give.
Feeding our spirits with a precious food,
Maintayning life in death, more pure, more good*
FINIS.
PEllegis hoc scriptum? suffundere lurco rubor^,
Ni subis infensi pallidus ora Dei:
Ah tum te miserum iudex cum venerit ille^
Viuere neglectis qu^m potes vsque cibis.
I. MOR^AV. O^
LE MESME.
ROugiventre glouton a l' abord de ce liur^,
Si tu ne veux pallir au judgment de Dieu:
Que feras tu, chetif, en ce terrible lieu,
Puss qu'on peut icy has long temps viure sans viure^
The French thus Englished.
BLush belly-glutton, to behold this book,
Gods judgments, if they here thee not affright:
what will thou do (wretch) in more dreadful plight?
On one (long living foodlesse) thou may look.
FINIS.
LE MESME.
I Ecroyois en la foy d'vn erreur populaire,
Que de ce corpse mortel le foible bastiment,
Prive du fort soustien d'vn solid aliment,
Caduc, en peu de temps viendroit a se deffaire.
Mais le nouueau lab^ur de tes doctes escrits*
Plein de l'air anime d' vne belle parole,
Qui preuue le contraire, and m'enuoye a l'escol^,
Du choc de ses raisons estonna mes esprits.
Puis le naif raport d'vne recente histoire,
Con^it an doux nectar de ton mielleux discourse,
Puissant de me nourrir, sans manger, plusieurs iours*
Renuersant ma creance, establit ta victoire.
FIN.
The same French Sonnet, thus Englished.
A Populare error long time me misse-led,
That the weak building of this bodies frame:
(Robbed of foodes strong support) would shrink the same*
And, in short while, deliver it for dead.
But this fresh labor of thy flowing wit,
Full of the soule-breath of most pleasing words:
Approues the contrary, and to me affords
Schoole-p^ines again; so powerful is thy writ.
A ^ecent History, so sprightly told,
Sweetened with Nectar of thy honny-phrase:
Foodlesse, ^eedes me for many, many days,
And now to change h^leefe, I may be bold.
FINIS.
HI^ liber hu^^ns d^m tollit corporis escam,
Ingenio dulc^ns quis neget esse cibum?
Pasch* Le Coq M. D.
FOelix hoc praeco^e tuae, virguncula, vita.
I am non to siccus succus, vt ante, ^ouet:
Ipse sed aternam vitam dat and accipit author*
Incertum tu illi, an debeat ille tibi.
A. CITOYS Frater in Curia Patronus.
LE MESME.
VNE humeur dans ce corpse estroictement enclose
Depuis un si long temps ceste fille entretient:
Vne meilleure vie en ce liver luy vient:
Car ce liver and la vie est vne mesme chose.
F J N.
The French thus Englished.
AN humor in the body strictly closde,
Has so long time this Maidens life supplied:
A better life this book has her proposde,
For this book, and her life, are near allied.
FINIS.
A MONSIEUR LESCARBOT SVR LA TRADVCTION DE cette histoire.
L'Autheur qui premier a enfante cette histoire*
Sembloit auoir au peuple en^ie ce bonheur:
De cogno^stre and scanoir par son docte labeur,
Ce prodige nouueau d'immortelle memoire.
Toy, Lescarbot, emeu non d'vne vain gloire,
Ma^s d'vne affection digne d'vn noble coeur,
As supple' au defaut de ce premier autheur,
Rendant son noble escrit a tous Francois notoire.
Si le nom de Citoys merit estre immortel,
Pour a^oir aus h^mains descouuert des mer^^illes,
Qui leur vont rauissant l'esprit and les oreilles,
Ton nom certamement merit d'estre tell,
Qui par ton bean discourse fais que la mesme chose*
Ore est commune a ce^s a qui elle estoit close.
I. DE LA ROQVE.
To Monsieur Lescarbot, upon the traducing of this history. ()
THE Author that first infanted this Book,
Seemed envious of the peoples happiness:
Loath that in his learnd labor, they might look
On matter of such wondrous worthiness.
Yet thou Lescarbot, moved by no vainglory,
But in the affection of a noble mind:
The first man's fault have quitted in true kind,
And made all France acquainted with the story
If Citoys name immortally deserve,
For opening such a marvel to us men:
As both their cares and minds may sweetly serve
They name as worthily may merit then.
Thy queint discourse imparts the self same right,
In common now, which he kept out of sight.
FINIS.
To his good friend. A: M.
WOnder, be dumb: And (now) no more prefer,
(Like to some self loved, boasting Trauailer)
Thy past Adventures: for an Age is borne,
Upon whose forhead, caracters are worn
So strangely, that ee'ne Admiration stands
Amazde to read them, (with ^eau'd eyes and hands.)
Times oldest Chronicle proves it most clear.
England near spent such a miraculous ye^re,
And (France!) thy maiden childbirth, goes (by far)
Beyond all those, bred in thy civil war:
The wonder being (by thus much) greater grown,
Last day she spoke no language but her own,
Yet now she is understood by Englishmen*
Such Magic waits (dear friend) upon thy pen.
Tho. Dekker.
A true and marvelous History, of a Maiden of Poictou, who for the space of
three years and more, has lived without either meat or drink.
EVripides desired, that either we might line as dumb, in perpetual silence:
or that dumb things, without any ambiguitie of words, might speak to us. As
for my self, I could wish, that either we were of those Indian people called
Astomi, whom Pliny Lib. 7. cap. 1.
describes to live without mouths: or else contented (like them) with the
sole benefit of air, without eating or drinking, we might here spend our
time. For by this means it might come to pass, that our spirit, (which with a
firm eye cannot co^template things natural, no more then the Owl look on
the rays of of the Sun) being freed from those mistes and thick vapors,
occasioned by the use of meats: would comprehend with a perfect regard, the
Ideas and forms of things nakedlie, and according as they are indeed* Heracl.
Chrisippus then should not need, to take Helleborus with such obserua^ce, for
the purging of his understanding, to the end he might the more subtly see,
the strength of his arguments. Our soul (against her nature) would be no
heavy burden at all unto us: she should not need to serve herself with the
salt of our bodies, to keep her from corrupting* but rather she would be like
unto a Phar^s, which in our divine navigations, would discover the way for our
attayning to the land of heaven.

But in regard that our life is maintained, by the nourishing of the body, and
that by (one mutual assistance) both together do conserve themselves, even
while we our selves do study how to support this life, by continual care for
furnishing it with ^oodes: it ensues, that we altogether abase, and cast
down to the earth, that part of the soul, which otherwise (of her self)
would covet nothing else, then to eleuate her self to high and heavenly things.
Notwithstanding, Plato holds, that In his Timeus.
man is pouruayed of store of repletion, and cloying for the intestines, to
show, that God has created him a soul full of reason and council: with out
which, as the plants are evermore fastened to their roots, for their feeding,
so would he likewise always have meat in his mouth, or else, as the beasts,
his mind would be perpetually laboring, in seeking after nothing but fresh
pasture. You may see the same thus, while the meat does convey it self by
the passages of the belli^, the spirit naturally sends his strength vegetative
and nutritive through the body, and by this commixture, life, and the motion of
the body is maintained: and as this more sublime part of nature, passes on
further still to show the effects of his force and virtue, so after food has
sustained the body, the spirit is called too the desire of new viandes, and
constrainde to yield it self subject to the bellies appetite* Lib. 26. cap. 8.
For there is nothing (says Pliny) that is more painful to a man, then his
belly, for the content whereof, the most part of men employ their whole life
time. This importuning vessel of the body, evermore is at hand with us, like
a greedy creditour summoning us many times in the day: but he is not to be
listened to always when he calls, if he have had his duty paid him. No more
then one under age, who would not allow his tutour or guardian the expenses for
his nourishing, as though he had lived with him only upon wind, and yet
continually has bin Tit. De alim. pup. praest. C.
by him, and fed with his pursse: but whosoever shall or does deal so, the
Emperor has judged him not receiueable, except he can prove he has had his
feeding elsewhere.

The necessity of the belly, is always in such rigor with us, that the
Stoics themselves, who were excluded (in themselves) from all sense of man,
constrainedly did yet listen to the bellies murmuring: and did eat, but how?
to the end they might shun eating. Quite contrary to certain gourmandes and
gluttons, who used then, and yet do, to eat and drink, only to increase
their eating and drinking: having no other God but their belly, whereon they
bestow whatsoever serves to excite luxury: for which, the Seas are trauersed,
even so far as to the River Phasis, ransacking her entrails, for
contentation agreeing with their insatiable appetites. And this is that part,
wherein we come nearest unto brute beasts, who by their proper nature, are led
to desire whatsoever their belly demaundes, and (with whom) we make common
this necessity, of eating and drinking.

For nature has given to all creatures one instrument of life, which is
natural heat, and that (even as our wood in the fire) has his seat in the
triple substance of our body, to ^it, the solid, humorall and spirituous
parts, which (without ceassing) he ruinates and consumes: so that in very
small while, all would be wasted, if it were not maintained by a fresh supply
of meats and drinks, neither more or less, then as the flame of a Lamp,
which is extinct so soon as the Oil is consumed, if no more be put thereinto
for longer lasting: And hereupon, Hippocrates Lib. 1. Aph. 14.
the Prince of Physicians said, that the bodies of young men have need of more
nourishment, then others, because they have much more heat then they: for
otherwise (says he) their bodies would consume themselves. Contrariwise, the
bodies of old men, because they have but little store of heat, they have
need but of as little nourishing.

Aph. 13.
Hence may we draw a confirmed atgument, by this which Hippocrates himself
has said, that old men easily endure fasting, but next the^, such as are in
the strength of their age, yet less then young men, and infants least of all
other, but especially such as are liueliest, and readiest in their bodily
functions. For the littlenes of heat, the tenacitie of the primitive humor,
and the densitie or thicknes of the body, impeacheth old^ men, that this triple
substance cannon wast it self at all: whence proceeds, that they have
nothing at all such need of meats, and the desire or appetite after the^ (if
so I may say) which is hunger, in them is much languishing. As contrariwise in
young men, it is so much the more ardent, as the heat natural is abundant,
the (...) more fluxible, and the composition of the body more thin, and less
heaped together. Which three things, as they cause the food received to
consume, so by little and little, they repair any defect there arising. For as
it should be thus, that the substance of every creature, dissolues it self by
the pores of the skin, into the air which enuirons it 1. De sym^om. cause. 7.
(says Galen) so follows it of necessity, that the very nearest parts of the
skin, should be first destitute of nouriture, that by their propper strength
and virtue, they might draw the nourishment from the other neighboring parts,
only to repair that, which through default of sustentation is become worst:
those there, from the veins, these here, from the liver: the liver from the
intestines and ventricle (by the mesenterie veins) calling what is most
familiar, and conuenable to his nature. Then the ventricle, seeing her self
empty, by a natural understanding which she has, of that which is wanting to
her: she is incited to desire meat, wherewith she may be sustained.

But if some body be presented, which has but small store of heat, and much
more natural moisture, whereto the pores and respiracles of of the skin do
give place; there is no great euacuation made of this triple substance, and so
consequently, there is no need at all of much nourishment. Neither is it
altogether necessary (as Galen witnesses) De venae sect. ^duer. Eras.
in those places, where, (beside that already said) the air which
enco^passeth us, is cold, and the body heavy, benumbde, and not stirring:
because the little troughes and openings in the skin, are mouths, and yet
little or nothing at all passes out at them. And this he gives us to
understand, by the example of saluage beasts, which (all winter together) will
not leave their dens and cauernes, and hereupon he calls them Phooleuonta
Zooa, such as are Bears, Battes, or (...) Serpen^s, Lizardes and diverse other.
All which having at spring time (by warmth and heat) the conuoyes of their
body released and opened, when they know that inward warmth resolves them,
and makes them to wax hungry; they come forth (by their own proper motion)
out of their prisons, and (guided by nature only) seek in all parts, the
feeding which is aptest for them. Hence he gathers, that continual
breathing, which is occasioned by respiration, procures this defect, and this
also prouokes the appetite and desire of eatting. For nature has given this
property to the empty part, which thus requires to be filled. So that if the
cause ceased, for which the body has need of nouriture, it would ensue as
necessarily, that the self same penury, and his understanding, which is
hunger, by little and little would decay: and therefore by this reason, the
creatures which are so hidden in the caves of the earth, may live without the
use of food. S. August. lib. 21. deciuit. Chap. 6*
So likewise, by the report of notable men, and well worthy credence, that in
the Lanternes and hollow places of old Sepulchers, burning Lamps have bin
found, which the inscriptions on the said Tombs have witnessed, that they were
put in there, almost infinite years before their finding: as that whereof
Lodouicus Viues speaks, discovered about the year 1500. which Hermolaus
Barbarus says, was found in the territories of Pauia, without date of day, or
of Consul in very deed, but yet notwithstanding, it had bin there enclosed
above eight hundred years before, as by the written discourse P. Appianus
gathered. Such Lamps then, were preserved so long a time with little
maintenance, because the moisture there does strongly support them, and they
perish but little: whether it be by the humiditie (which the Alchymistes term
radical) of the gold (which alone among all natural bodies, is believed, to
suffer no diminution at all of his substance) or any other thing thereto
belonging, but so it appears by the testification, engraven upon a vessel of
earth, which Barbarus before mentioned, delivered written in these words.

Plutoni sacrum munus ne attingite fures,
Ignotum est vobis hoc quod in orb latet.
Namque elementa graui clausit digesta labor
Vase sub hoc modico maximus Olybius.
Adsit foecundo custos sibi copia corn^,
Ne pretium tanti depereat laticis.
And this which follows, was written or carved upon an other vessel of
earth, and enclosed within the former, bearing these words.

ABITE. HINC. PESSVMI. FVRES.

VOS. QVID. VOLTIS. CVM VOSTRIS. OCVLIS. EMISSITIIS.

ABITE. HINC. VOSTRO. CVM. MERCVRIO. PETASATO. CADVCEATOQVE.

MAXVMVS. MAXVMVM. DONVM: PLVTONI HOC SACRVM. FACIT.

Now in this vessel of earth, wa^ and had bin kept this Lamp, placed between
two Flagons or Bottles, the one of gold, the other of silver, full of the most
pure liquor of gold: which was imagined to have given nutriment to the Lamp,
that continued burning for so many ages. The same Barbarus called this liquor
heavenly water, or rather, the divine water of the Alchimists: which also he
notes, to have been called by Democritus and Mercurius Trismegistus,
sometimes divine water, sometime the Scithian drink: sometime spiritual, that
is to say, a spirit drawn Or Quintessence.
from the celestial nature, and fifth essence of things, whereof is composed
Aurum Potabile, and the Philosophers stone or dust, in the search whereof, so
many people have vainly consumed themselves. To this divine licquor of gold, I
know not whether I may attribute or no, the (...) of a Lamp continually
burning, whereof Cedrenus speaks, In the abridgemet of his History.
which from the time of the Emperor Justinian, was found in the city of A
City of Syria, beyond Euphrates.
Edessa, with an Image of our Savior Jesus Christ. It had been enclosed or
hidden, over a certain gate, immediately after the passion of Christ, and yet
nevertheless, it had also remained there five hundred years, without
extinguishing. Moreover, some of the oil which was found therein, being cast
into the nearest fire to that place, it burned entirely all the troops of
warriors, of Chosroes King of the Persians, who was an enemy to the
Christians. Whatsoever it were, in consideration of the reasons before
alleged, I find it not so strange, as an example now to be made, of a thing
very rare, and almost incredible, happening within our own quarters of Poict^:
to wit, the fast or abstinence of a maiden of Confolans, (or Conflans,) who for
the space of 3. years, and even till this day, has lived, and does, without
any bodily food or sustenaunce.

This Maiden is about 14. years of age, and is named Jane Balan, her Father
John Balan, a Locksmith, and her Mother Laurencia Chambella: her ^^ture is
answerable to her age, some what Country-like of behavior, anatiue of the
Town of Confolans, upon the River of Vienna, in the confines of Limosin, and
also of Poictu. In the eleventh year of her age, being seized on by a
continual Fever, the 16. day of February, 1599. she has since then been
assailed with the access of diverse other sicknesses: and beyond all the rest,
with a continual casting or vomiting, for the space of 20. days together. The
Fever having somewhat left her, she grew to be speech less, and continued so
28. days* without the delivery of any one word: at the end of which time, she
came to her self again, and spoke as she had done before (saving that her
words were full of fear, and void of good sense.) Now came upon her a
weakness, and benumming of all her senses and bodily moouings, from beneath
the head, in such sort, that Oesophagus it self, (being that part of the
stomach, which serves as conduct for passage of meat and drink, into that
which we term the little belly) being dissolved, it lost the force attractiue.
Since which time, could not any one persuade this Maiden (in any manner) to
eat, albeit they made trial, to have her but suck or lick meats delicate,
fruits, and sweet things, agreeable to such yo^ig years. Notwithstanding, the
use and motion of her members, came to her again about six months after:
except in one hippe, on which side yet she goes with some difficulty. One
only impotencie remains to her, that she cannot swallow or let down any
thing, for she altogether loathes and abhors mightily, both meats and drinks.

In this time (a thing most strange) the inferior part of the belly, by little
and little is in such manner grown lean, and dried up in her, as down from her
sides, and so along to her nauill, there remains nothing of the belly which
she had before. There is only in this place (or in sted thereof, to wit, under
the ancient belly, where we may say it has bin) a Cartilage or gristle,
hanging pointed down from That part of the breast where the ribs meet and
join together.
thorax, or sternu^^, after the manner of an eaues or penthouse, which throws
off from the building, all the water that falls on the top or couerture.
Here-hence, and from the points of these bastard-sides, the skin underneath
does suffer great pain and feeling, both of extension and diu^lsion, as may
easily be perceived by the moanes which the Maid herself makes. From thence
comes it, that all the muscles, intestines, bowels, and other parts of the
belly, being withdrawn and annihiled by want of food: one would judge that
they had bin rackt or rent away, at least, there remains nothing but the
lappings and silaments, for all the ^leshie substance, which filled those parts
there, are perished and gone.

As concerning the other parts of her body, it behooves much more, that there
should be an aunswerable diminution: yet she has a large breast, the paps
pretty and round: her arms and thighs fleshie, her face also indifferent
round, but brownish: her lips somewhat red: her tongue (indeed) drawn inward
a little, but yet her words prompt and ready: her head covered with hair of
good length, for her nails and hair, they do increase, in each meet part of
the body. There comes not any excrement from her, her belly yields no ordure,
neither does any urine at all pass from her bladder, or is the matrixe
impeached by her menstruall flowers. Her head is not charged with filth or
dandriffe, but shows it self very sound and well, as well in the exterior
part of the (...) as in the inward organes of (...) for neither does her nose
or (...) render any excrements, only from her mouth comes a little spettle,
and sometimes from her eyes issues a few tears.

The whole body over, yields no sweat at all, but we, and such as have touched
her, do find all her skin to be cold and dry, and not heated or chafed by
any moving, (except the arme-pits, and those parts which neighbor near to the
heart) yet does she travail about the house, go to the market for victuals;
sweep the house; spinne at her wheel; reele off her quill; and gives herself
(as any other) to all serviceable offices in a family, and seems as if she
were not defective, in any part of sense, or moving of her body.

By all which things, we may gather the raritie, and marvelous novelty of
this example: for the accident happens in such an age, when as the body
receives increasing. And those things which increase, have need of good store
of nouriture* but especially in bodies of such constitution, as this Maidens
is, slender, thin, and cold, where the internal parts are accustomed to be
most hot. Hence comes it, that our ancients have said, that in VVinter our
bellies are Lib. 1. Aph. 15.
more hot, then at other times, which causes a much readier concoction, and an
appetite less tolerable, especially when it is provoked by exercises: whereof
this Maiden makes no spare, especially, such as her age is capable of, the
air and soil also wherein she lives, affoords the people to be very hungry.
All which occasions of appetite and hunger, were taken from her by the accident
of her continual Fever: and in the end, all her natural functions became
assuaged, and seized on by a kind of dead Palsy.

And now to begin with the first and principal, the little belly or maw,
(which otherwise is the receptacle of food, and the officer for the first
concoction) being lagde and rent by the ordure of crude and raw humors, has
languished in such sort, as it had no power, either to retain the meats
therein enclosed, or to receive in any other. Even so in Hippocrates,
Hermocrates being surprised with an extreme burning Fever, did evermore cast
the food he received: because this faculty had lost his strength, and that
was quenched in him (says Galen in the same place) Com. 1.
whereof the office was, to feel lack in health, and to desire what was
familiar for him.

Many would attribute the cause of this Symptom, or passion ensuing sickness,
to some bad power in an Apple, which an old woman had given to this young
Maiden, two or three months before; because when she had eaten it, she had a
distaste of her meats, and felt some alteration of her spirits. But in regard,
that (besides this) nothing has happened to her, which outwardly has
impeached her health, neither her natural functions, until she became
surprised by the Fever before mentioned; I see no reason at all, that yields
any subject to believe, how the evil power in the Apple, could remain so long
time hidden, without yielding any effect. Her vomiting ceassing, she became
dumb, by reason of those nerves resolution, which we call recurrent (which
happened to her soon after through all her body) the fleame cold and raw, being
liquefied by the heat of the Fever, which by this means wrought a debilitie
in the brain, caused that she could not be sound and well in spirit.
Here-hence it has necessarily followed, that she must needs loose the sense of
taste and sucking, and likewise the use of swallowing meat and drink: which
only has procured the abolition of the animal appetite, and by little and
little, it has bin followed, by a total privation of the appetite natural,
which Hippocrates notes by these words, Genestai de ouc edunato, if we may
give credit to his most grave interpreter Galen. Which casts the cause of this
passion, upon the blame of the liver, who being the vegetant and natural
soul, so soon as she is wounded, she is constraind, that the auxiliarie, or
succouring faculties, (to wit, attraction, retention, assimiliation or
comparison, and expulsion, in whom lies all the power of nourishing) must needs
sinck and fall, and so consequently the appetite, which cannot be complete and
perfect, but by attraction. The same Author gathers it to be the sickness of
the liver in Hermocrates, by this, 1. Epid. sect. 3.
that the sixth day of his sickness, he was seen to look yellow: and
notwithstanding, in all the course of his disease, which was for 27. days,
this yellownes never left him (as it had done in Heraclides, to who^ the self
same passion happened, and on the same day) neither by sweating, neither by the
voyding of much choler; nor by the conuoye of the belly; nor by urine, nor
yet by vomitting. And therefore it was easy to be seen, that the natural
facultic (whereof the liver is the fountain) in very strange manner was
overthrown. Which being so, all the 5. De lo^. aff. Chap. 1.
strength of appetite does become so weakened, says Galen; as sick-folke
rather desire to die, then receive any thing ^n at their mouths, or have it so
much as but touch their lips.

In the Maiden of whom we speak a^ this present, (who has not bin ^^alte
with, by any cunning, or helps to nature), the liver has bin so besieged with
the burden of hurtful humors: as her natural heat being broken, and having
no more force; by little and little it has dried up, with all the nether
parts of the belly, yea and so, as there is nothing indeed to be meruailed
at, when we see the functions of the natural O^conomi^ to be also abolished.
This then is one of the causes, of this distaste of meats, and of the fast or
abstinence thereon ensuing, that this drying up of the liver, and of all those
parts serving to nourriture* from whence attraction being taken, it has then
bin followed with a privation of sucking or swallowing, which is the beginning
of hunger. In this opinion I have Galen ^or my 1. De lo^. affect. Chap. 1.
warrant, who says, that by reason of the livers debiliti^, the body can
receive no nourishment: and yet notwithstanding, it may so subsist a long time,
to wit, so long as the heart remains sound. Nevertheless, Hermocrates died at
27. days end, because the corruption of humors had gained the substance of
the heart: which likewise the quality of the Fevers heat (by altering) had
consumed, after it had chased away the natural heat. But this Maiden has bin
preserved, in regard^, that the Fevers fire being extinct, the natural heat
which remained, being but weak, has yet bin detained in a body locked up
fast, covered with a skin wrinckled, cold and dry. Of this heat she makes
but very small decay in herself, nor has she (...) also of much maintaining
the same these may serve as second and third causes of this defect of appetite.

For all that she exhaleth by the means of respiration, as her breath, and
natural heat, the same is repaired and supplied, first of all by the air
drawn, as well by inspiration, and received at the heart by the pipes of the
lunges or lites: as by this insensible transpiration, (which, according as I
can judge by her disposition, is almost utterly wasted in her) received in the
whole body by the arteries* After this, nature (thus lagde, and scantly
vigorous) delights herself with this crude rhumi^ humor, which cannot in this
young body, but (of it self) it should much abound and increase, according
to the quality of her sex and age: and the same more especially may now be
discerned, by some little decadence of her body, through the palsy, which is
not as yet perfectly cured. Now this humor (in time) does sees it self, and
conuerts into food, proper and apt for nourishing of the body. And there is
no want of many other things, which have their maintenance in our bodies,
wherewith nature may serve herself, when (pressed by hunger) she pleases to
use them for sustenance: as fat, marrowe in the bones, and fleame, all which
things, the dispoiled parts of the body, do draw to their natural seatings,
to fournish well their own expenses withal, and they receive them (like a
dispersed dew) through their whole substances. Symmach. lib. 1. Epist. 33.
So says one, that the Snayles in the air having drought, if no dew do fall
to them from heaven, they live by sucking themselves. And thence grew it that
Plautus said.

Captiui.
Quasi, cu^ caletur, cochleae in occulto latent,
Suo sibi succo viuunt, ros si non cadit.
Arist. Hist. an. lib. 8. Chap. 13.
And so the Snayles on the earth, when they will defend themselves against the
sharp cold of winter: they make before their shelles entrance, a certain
white covering, Plin. Hist. (...) Cap. 39.
hard like plaster, and live so within, six months together, under the
ground, near to the roots of herbs, sustained only by the internal humor
which redoundeth from themselves. Which likewise diverse other kinds of
creatures do the same, such as are accustommed to decline from the rigor of
winter, by withdrawing into dens: at Serpents, Frogs, Flies, Worms,
Dormise, Rattes of the Mountains, Turtle Dooues, Swallows. etc*

For, in regard of Serpents, almost all (shunning the cold) remain all winter
hid within the earth, as says Aristotle: from whom, Hist. an. lib. 8. Chap.
15. Plin. Hist. not. lib. 8. Chap. 39.
albeit Pliny have borrowed, that which he says concerning Serpents, he has
notwithstanding (against reason) taken Aristotle's intent contrary to sense;
there where he says, that of all the Serpents, the Viper only seeks the places
under ground, and the other the hollowes of trees and of rocks. Whereas
(quite contrary) Aristotle has written truly, that the Viper is welnigh
alone, who during the winter, withdrawes himself under stones or rocks, and
the other under ground, for then sleep serves them in sted of food. Nay, and
much more, Vipers do endure hunger a whole year together, without counting
the time of winters cold, so says Pliny: which we have known by
eye-experience, we that have abundance of them here, of whom we have kept a
year and more, enclosed in bottles of glass, without any food at all.

As for Frogs, whom Pliny thinks (after a life of six months) to resolve
themselves into slime or mud, and are reuiu^d again at the coming of the
Springtime waters: they are soundly deaded with cold, but yet not reduced to
nothing, as Pliny holds. For they remain in the cauernes on the coasts,
where not only they abstain from all nourishment, but are likewise half dead*
and they may be seen in this estate in your Fennes on the Seacoasts, (which
are not subject to freezing) at all seazons of the year. So likewise in the
ditches whether they are retired, where you shall not only see their young
ones, but also the Frogs of the other year.

Your Flies, benumbed with the cold of winter, remain hidden in the rifts of
planchers and pieces of wood, and come not out, but by fire arteficiall, or by
the renewing heat of the Spring, or of Summer. During this numbnesse, they
live not so much by reason of their bodies smalnesse or littlenes (as Aristotle
argues) De part. anim. Lib. 4. Cap. 5.
as by the cold which is in them. For that which is hot, desires food, and
digests it very soon: contrariwise, that which is cold, does very easily let
it alone. Among the A^ist. Lib ^ Cap. 14.
Flies, they that make Honey, do forbear to come forth in the same time, Bee^.
but abide close in their little Hiues, yet without eating: whereof we may
easily make proof, in that, if one bring food, and set it before them, they
will not so much as touch it.

And if it chance, that any one ge^^ forth, you shall see the same to have a
transparant body, as utterly empty of all nourishment: from the heart of
winter, until the years renewing, Lib. 11. Chap. 16.
they live in sleep, without any nouriture, so says Pliny.

Arist. lib. 4. cap. 5. de part. anim.
Above all other kind of creatures, the Grasshopper does fast the longest: for
the moisture which is superaboundant in their bodies, does sufficiently furnish
them with store of nourishment.

Worms growing to be old, their skin does outwardly wex very hard, and
because (that skin) then looks of yellow, or gold culler, the Greeks were wont
to call them Chrisalides, and the Latins named them Aurelia. After they have
once taken this form, they will receive nothing more into their bodies,
neither do they void or cast any thing forth.

Among these, the Silke-worme shows a miracle in nature, about the midst of
Summer (closed up fast within her husk of silk) she lives at the least for
forty days together, not only without eating, but imployes beside, very much
of her substance, in making of silk: and coming forth of her shell or
couerture, she becoms a Butterfly, and yet this liberty makes her not to seek
any nourishment.

Arist. lib. 8. cap. 17. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 57.
The Bar or Dormouse, remains hidden all VVinter in a perpetual sleep, and
during all this time, she has no other nouriture then sleep.

Arist. lib. 8. cap. 17.
The Rats of the Mountains, like unto Dormise, doesleepe hidden all the
winter, and for six months continuance, they are busied in such a profound
sleep, as being cast up out of the ground by digging or otherwise: they will
not awake at all, until such time as they be brought into the Sun, or laid
before the fire, and they begin to feel heat. They carry hay, chafe, and such
other like things into their caue^nes, to keep them from the cold, but yet all this hinders them not from sleeping soundly.

The Tortuise of the earth, all winter lies within the earth, and there passes
that season as the other. And I ib. de A^phib.
Rondeletus witnesses, that not only in winter, but like wise at al times,
she can live longest without any food, yea, although she have her head cle^t,
or cut off: and this is by the power of the cold moisture within herself.

Arist. lib. 9. Cap. 29. ^^^. lib. 10. Cap. 24.
The Loriot (a kind of Bird, having this nature, that if a man see her, when he
is sick of the laundise, the man shall wex whole, and the bird shall die
immediately:) all the winter she lies hidden in the earth, and shows not
herself till about the Solstice of Summer.

Arist. lib. 8. Cap. 16.
Your Swallows, as well those of houses, as they that are wild, to shun the
sharpnes of winter, when it draws Pl^^. lib. 10* Cap. 24.
near, they retire themselves to secret places in the neighboring Mountains:
where you shall find them naked and without any feathers, and you may see them
almost in the like condition, even at the Springtime.

As for them, which are called Swallows of the Seacoasts, they withdraw
themselves to the sides of Rivers, Lakes, Marshes, and of the Seas, where the
Rocks do serve them for a retirement* There shall you see them in multitudes
together, as newly assembled to chase one another. In such sort, that (as
Agricola says) the Fisher men many times take them out of the waters, so fast
joined and tied together, as our new Philosophers may cease henceforward, to
forge their new Colonies in Afric, and other places beyond the Seas.

Arist. lib. 8. cap. 10. hist.
Turtle-dooues, they begin to hide themselves when they are fat, and although
that they leave their feathers in their holes, yet notwithstanding, they keep
their fatnes.

Some one peradventure, being a more diligent searcher into natural things,
may discover a great number of other birds, which might be thought to be
strangers, because in winter time they hide themselves thus, and yet
nevertheless are of our own country, as Kites, Stock-dooues, Black-birds,
Stares, Houpes, Backs, Gripes, Owls, and others, which are sustained and fed
by the fat within themselves, in all which time, the Gal. 4. vsu part. et Com.
2. de rat. vict. acut.
course and office of the belly ceasseth. For Galen holds, that when hunger is
not thorowlie contented, the fat, marrow, and fleame, give nourishment to the
natural heat. Whence Hip. lib. de carn.
we may also relieve a doubt, which may arise from that which Hippocrates has
written, and maintains, that a man can hardly live out the seventh day,
without eating, which although he happen to ouerpasse, yet notwithstanding,
he will die soon after. For albeit it may be true, and that which he says,
might have been manifested in this Maiden of Confolans, the intestine receiving
no food at all, it shut up it self in such sort during this time, that it
could not afterward admit the receite of any: yet notwithstanding, it is not
altogether so constrained, that by this restriction of the entrails, death
should follow thereon so readily. For it is recorded of the Scithians, that if
by any occasion happening them, they are to endure long fasting: they will
bind up their bellies strictly with large bands, to the end, that hunger may
not charge them so soon, because they have left little or no space at all for
the bellies conuoye. And ^oreouer, the Maiden of Spire, of whom ran such
great report, that she had bin three years without eating: yet after the
superabounding humor was consumed, she returned (according as they say which
wrote thereof) even as one from banishment, to her first right course and use
of eating: beginning (as it ^s very likely) with potages and licquid things,
by little and little, if this be true which those authors have said* Or
rather, if the mother of the maid did not impose it on those good people (as
the rumor ran) therefore there has bin some occasion of remaining in doubt,
by their own proper writing: for it might be noated, that her nose voided
much, her ears wanted no part of their ordure, and that she delivered
abundance of tears forth at her eyes, which shows, that the languishing
powers have bin often relieved with some food, albeit not solid, whereby
these excrements (by a secret strength in nature) were sent into their proper
organes.

And nothing at all against this, makes the Paradoxe, which M. Ioubert has in
the second book of his first decade, where among many notable examples of a
long fast or abstinence, he produces as an Hypothesis or argument disputed,
that history of the Maiden of Spire. For, besides a great number of
observations of the same quality, which he places before, and that have bin
approved by the auouching of many grave Authors: we have also notable
confirmations, as well by experience of elder ages, as of newer and later.
Plato makes report in his Common Wealth, of a certain man named Herus
Pamphilius, who remained ten days together, among the dead bodies of them
which had bin slain in a battle: and two days after that he was brought
thence, as one was laying him on the pyle of wood, to be burned among others,
Lib. 11. Cap. 54.
he was found alive. As for Pliny, he is not persuaded, that through lack of
eating, a man should be compeld to yield too death, at the seventh days end.
Diogenes Laertius recites by the testemonie of Dicearchus, that Pytha^or as,
the chief master of abstinence, continued forty days together without
drinking: by whose doctrine also, Apollonius Thyaneus learned (by a long use
and custom) to endure fasting for many days, Lib. 7. Cap. 18.
Pliny assures us, that drought or thirst may be surmounted, by a constant
perseverance, and that the Roman noble Knight Julius Viator, having had
warning by Physicians in his younger years, not to drink any water at all, by
reason of a certain indisposition in him, leaning to the dropsy: he turned
the custom of nature in such sort, as he passed his age without drinking.
Fresh yet in our memory, and all France has seen the same, in the person of
my Lord Marquess of Pisani: who is a man of such merit, as the King himself
imployes his service, in matters of great importance. There are many books of
devout enstructions, which do recounte meruailes, of diverse frequent and
voluntary abstinences, as of P. Alcantara, a Monk in Spain, and that for
eight days and more in every month. But beyond all others, there is an
history very famous, of a certain Maiden named Catharine, being in the soil
of Colherberg, who has bin known to live seven years together, without
drinking, or eating any thing whatsoever. She was carefully tended by Henry
Smetius, at this present Professor in Heildeberge, and John Iac. Theod.
Physicians. The 24. of November 1584. by the commandment of John Casimir,
Count Palatine, and since also to the same effect, four Matrones were
appointed to keep her company, as well by night as by day, who with the
Physicians, have also acknowledged, this abstinence to be most true. Three
years after, this history was traduced into French, and Printed at Francford
by John VVechel, in the year 1587. with an advertisement in the end, that the
Maiden as yet then lived in that manner, without drinking, eating, sleeping, or
delivering any excrements.

Besides all these, Ioubert (concerning this argument) has set down such
pregnant and necessary reasons, as I cannot think, that any one needs to make
doubt thereof. Nevertheless, being my self afterward to discourse on the same
subject, I happened (being in a Booke-sellers shop) letting mine eyes wander
over the books, to be presented at my very entrance with a little book, bearing
in the forehead this title: Fieri non posse, vt quis sine cibo et pot^ plures
dies et annos transigat. At the same instant I took, the Book, which (in
regard it was written by I. Haruet a Doctor of Physic, and of the same
condition with us, and as we are) I read it very seriously from one end to the
other. But coming to the place, where he argues on the negligence, of the
Authors of so Page 74*
many notable examples, who (he says) have bin somewhat deceived, by the
inueterate belief of this extraordinary fasting: I thought it good, that he
should be satisfied in this point, and passed my promise thereon, in the name
of our Maid of Confolans; albeit, during so many months, and years, I could
not give my self to consider all het actions and motions; nevertheless it is
very likely, by that which is said in all places of her, concerning the three
years fast now in question. And yet such as have seen her naked, as we have
done, have thought no otherwise, if she be not changed since the last time I
saw her, which was in the month of July last, 1602. Some say, that she is now a
little more full of flesh, and yet she has never received any food at all,
that could possibly be known. Beside, this truth ought to receive credit
generally, by the faithful report of so many persons of honor, and good
quality, who (for trials sake) have kept her in their houses, among their
Maids and children, some for three, others for four months and more. If any
one be further desirous, and would willingly see her, he has free liberty,
and the Maiden herself will not contradict, what other proofs, he or any can
make of her. But in my mind, Ioubert would have received no mean contentment,
by the sight of an accident so strange: for, if to so many pertinent reasons,
he could have had but an eye-experience, he should not have had now (perhaps)
Haruet for his adversary. Who being in the humor, to combat against both
sense and reason, it may be, it would then be the harder for him, to undergo
the demonstrations of Ioubert: for they are underpropped with principles
soundly assured, and drawn from the oracles, even of the great Dictatour of
Nature.

Lib* de vita et mor. et resp.
Aristotle instructs us, that all kinds of creatures, have in them a certain
natural heat, which is combined to the soul with so strict a bond, as the one
cannot be without the other: and that those creatures, while they live, have
this hea^, but death coming, they are cold immediately. And Lib. ^. de genesis an.
Cap. 3.
in another place, there is (says he) in the seed of all creatures, the thing
that causes facunditie, and that is it which we call heat. And further he
says, in the earth, and in the waters, the creatures and plants do engender,
because in the earth there is a moisture, and in the moisture is a spirit, and
in this great substance, is the animal heat, to the end that all things should
be somewhat full of soul. Thus does he hold, that all things are made by
heat, and that all functions are performed thereby.

Lib. ^. ad Glauc. Lib. ^. de vsu par.
Galen is also of the same oppinion, and says, that heat is either the
substance of the faculties, or at least, the chief, and most necessary
instrument of them. It is no marvel then, if Haruet thinks it to be strange,
that Ioubert says according to Aristotle, that life depends upon heat only.
For, that it must needs be so, life is nothing else, but an abiding or
attendance of the soul with the heat, according to the same Aristotle's
judgment: Lib. de resp.
and we cannot in this obscurity of things, find any more assured instance of
this present life, then by the functions thereof, of all which, heat (as the
especial instrument, and without other means) is the author, the cause
motive and effecter. And Ioubert (to no small purpose) has defined life by
heat, in that Aristotle has consigned death, by the extinctio^ of the same
heat: for Ioubert groundeth on this axiom, that of two contraries, the
consequents are contraries. And Galen himself, 1. De san. tu.
(who holds death to arrive then, when heat being weakened and broken by
frequent action, becomes faint, and that the temper of the elementary qualities
which are in us, being out of square, comes to yield it self under the
tirannie of one alone) gives thereby reasonably to understand, that the course
of life keeps it self for so long time, as natural heat does abundantly
disperse it self with the radical humor, and that the elementarie qualities
do hold a good simpathie among them selves, in their harmony and kind accord,
which we call temperature. And therefore it is blameless, to define life by
these two causes, that is to say, heat and temperature, because it behooves to
take the definition, by the cause which is most near. Now heat is the most
near instrument of the soul, the temper (next that) of natural heat, which
disposes, and accommodates it to diverse actions. Then this causall definition
is well derived, from the chief and principal occasion of life, which here
we have alleged by the authoritic of Aristotle.

Nevertheless, Haruet goes after another fashion, he defines the life of man,
to be an action of the reasonable soul, produced into the body of man: but
this definition is not subtle enough. For first and foremost, life is no action
at all of the soul, otherwise, it should be the soul that lives, and not the
body: but life is an abiding (as has bin said) or an union of the soul with
the body (according as Aristotle describes in another of his books) whereof
(soon 8. Metaph.
after) proceeds action.

Here I add, that the actions of life, being, to understand, to smell, to
move, and to nourish: if life be an action, then it were an action of an
action, which is most absurd. Or else, if life be an action of the reasonable
soul, in so much then as she is reasonable, the corporal parts should then be
driven to perform they^ operations (as receiving food for nourishment, to
beget her like) only by reason and the intellect, and not by any natural
sense. But peradventure, Haruet having drawn his definition from others, has
read, that life is an act of the reasonable soul, which word of act, he has
converted into action. Or, act is that which the Greeks call E^telecheia, which
is a perfection, efficacy, and moving power of it self: far enough differing
from that which they call Ergon. And so one may (to some purpose) define life,
an act of the soul in the body, that is to say, a power and virtue of the
soul, by the union thereof with the body* Whence is casie to be understood,
that taking life generally, it should rather be imputed to natural heat, as to
the organe of the soul, then unto reason: in case notwithstanding, that this
heat still abides always united with the radical moisture, which although
that day by day it be consumed by this heat, yet nevertheless, nature
provides a subrogation daily of new, which she borrows from the nouritures we
receive, as it has bin said already heretofore. But Haruet imagines, that
these nourishments serve yet to another use, which is (says he) to relieve and
fortify the spirits; the which I^ubert has omitted: as if under this name of
radical moisture, we should comprehend only moisture by it self, and not the
spirits likewise. And what is he, who will deny, that the spirits are not
restored and strengthened, both by eating and drinking? Ye have (in very
truth) great store of things, here chawed, and eaten unprofitably, and to
little purpose. And of abounding, that which he proposes against Hippocrates,
in the 14. Aphorism of his 2. Book, is altogether paradoxicall, to wit, that
he in whom heat is most languishing, has the more need of nourishment:
which he proves by the example of a forty-yeeres aged man, who (says he)
receives more food then any infant of two or three days, in whom
notwithstanding, there is an advantage of this heat, according to Hippocrates
himself.

Behold, in my judgment, an argument very feeble, if one should bring in all
that he fails in, and if also we should oppose the organs of the twain, the
one against the other. For, to the end that under this word Infant, no
cauillation may be covered, I call all them Infants, which are under 14. years
of age, in the same manner as the Greeks do understand this word Paidi^. They,
I say, that according to the proportion of their maw or little belly, do take
more food, then men of middle and perfect age: as well by reason of the power
of the faculty, which seethes or boiles the food (whence proceeds a speedy
riddance thereof,) as by their frequent exercises, during the which time, good
store of their substance glides it self through the pores into the skin: to
the end I may be silent also, in the two necessities alleged by Hippocrates,
that infants have of eating, to wit, for nourishing, and to give increasing to
the body.

Now the strength of the faculty, which boiles the meat in our stomach,
depends much upon temperature and moderation, but that is, when it is excited
and provoked on by the heat natural, which although that after one food is
digested, she introduces not then of herself any other nouriture, as says
Haruet: nevertheless; because that this first is thus digested by heat, there
grows incontinently a feeling of penury and want of food, at the mouth of
the ventricle, which we call hunger. For this cause, Ioubert referres only to
heat (as the principal agent) the quantity of those foodes, which we take
immediately after, and they are ruled by the appetite of hunger. The facility
of supporting Com. 2. Apho. 13.
hunger (says Galen) makes it self known thus; when any one has no appetite
at all, and yet nevertheless he feels no endamagement or defect. Which
Haruet thus brings in, that such as are restored from sickness, have a good
appetite, and yet notwithstanding, no such meats are then given them, as their
appetite does desire: but when advise is given for restoring of the powers, it
beho^es also to have regard to the (...) of the natural heat, (...) is not to
be any way iniuried, but still supported. This is thus done, because that the
temperature being not yet thorowlie reseated, and the natural faculties feel
themselves as yet to be diseased: the organes cannot boil the foodes received,
in too great a quantity. Now Ioubert in his demonstration, purposed to speak
of the healthful* not of the sick, or else of them which are neither. And
therefore he concluds, that old men have not need of meat often, because they
do not desire or appetite often, principally considering, that they have cold
bodies: whereto Haruet in no wise will agree, for he says, that all the action
of mixed bodies, comes from the quality; which winnes the upper hand in the
assembling of the elements. So is it in living bodies, heat rules over the
other qualities, of which heat, all action has his original, and not of
cold. I willingly admit the proposition with Aristotle, so far forth as to
mixte things, inanimate or without soul, and which know the simple forms of
the elements, for their principles. But in animate bodies, having souls, and
which have a form more noble, wherein are contained those other more ignoble
(even as the triangle within the quadrangle) this is not a thing so easy. For
they acknowledge (as the principal of their functions) that nature, properly
called the soul I say, that is, the moving virtue of the natural body, the
organe, living by power.

And as for that which Haruet places in assumption of his argument, that in
the living body, heat does surmount the other elementarie qualities: I cannot
allow thereof, except he will have this heat to be understood, to be the same
which diffuseth it self through the body, governs and moderateth the whole
Oeconomie of same. And this, while it is in essence, maintains life, but
coming once to quench it self, then death of necessity must follow: and this
surmounteth and subiecteth to it self, not only the cold, moist and dry
elementarie qualities, but even the hot elementarie nature also, being (as in
herself) truly celestial. For, if he would have to be understood, this
heat predominated by the elementarie heat, as it seems to ensue by his
sillogisme* then let me set the Salamander before him, which (in his mixtion)
is composed of a temperature so cold, as his very touch does no less
extinguish the fire, then as if it were ice. He lives notwithstanding, yet not
by the heat mixed or elementarie, which being weak in it self, cannot
surmount the power of this cold: it follows then, that it must needs be by
the heat celestial, which likewise maintains life in Serpents, whom every
one knows to be cold temperatelie* This then which has bin said, that the
cold in old men, makes them to hate the abounding of food, it must be, that
Haruet means it in such sort, that cold has no dominion over human bodies,
because actually it can have no part thereof. But for the cold of Hippocrates,
it is Com. 1. Apho. 14.
the same, which Galen, and all Physicians (by comparison) do call a soft
heat, and therefore their weak and little heat, has need of some small
help: even as the slender flame of a Lamp, is maintained by putting in the
oil by little and little, but easily is it extinguished, in being smoothered
by a superaboundant effusion.

Hitherto we have spoken of natural heat, as being the primitive agent:
wherein we have defended for M* Ioubert, that according to the abounding or
tenuitie thereof, the body has need of much or little nourishment. Now let
us speak of the primitive humor pacient, and of his nature, and how it is
subjected to this heat.

With the consent of all Physicians, we have constituted heat to be the first
essential cause of our life, and have said, that she, of herself, cannot
produce any effect of her functions, without a proper nourishment, which is the
radical moisture, and the primitive abounding, mingled with heat in the seed
and menstruall blood, the principles of our generation. But by the swift flight
of years, i^ greatly deminisheth and decays it self, to our harm, by the
continual embracing of the heat: for the slacking or delaying whereof, as we
do warily renew the oil in the burning Lamp, even so do we as dilligently
give feeding to this heat, feeding, I say, which serves to restore this
humiditie, and deliver it from so strict an embracing. So that if in the body,
there be any superabounding humor, which these parts cannot any way disperse,
Galen calls the same, Peritton hupoleipomenon. In lib* 5. Apho. 39.
And in Schools, it is termed an unprofitable excrement, as it, which remains
(says he) within little hollow places of the bones, and (as the humiditie
fumes up to the lungs or lites, the moisture glues the joints, the seed is in
the secrets and pipes, whereby it is voided forth, spettle is in the tongue,
and milk in the breasts) so this keeps the place for food, and serves the
fomentation and blowing up of the natural heat, as Ioubert has very amply
written in his Paradoxe, and we our selves have heretofore declared.
Therefore, so much as remains of this humor in the body, and while it there
remains, there is no need at all of drinking nor eating, and yet
notwithstanding, it is in the mean time nourished, and lives: which Haruet
denies with the like obstinacy, and rejects all the reasons of this
demonstration. But for our own credit and regard, and without troubling our
selves, to cull out his writings by parcels, where he himself both makes and
feigneth objections, whereto also he answers, as any new Apprentise in
Physic might do the like: we will confute those reasons, which seem to be
best furnished with appearance, albeit we cannot endure any error, how little
so ever it be.

Page, 47.
In the beginning of this proposition, he imposes on Ioubert, who has
written, that not only the smalest heat helps to make abstinence or fasting
the more easy, but also, that the humor superfluous, and which holds the
place of natural heat, might the more abound. This does Haruet interpret in
his sense, as if Ioubert had said, that the sole smallest heat, not only helps
to render abstinence the more easy, but also to the end, that the humor
superfluous, and which holds the place of natural heat, might be the more
abundant. From whence he draws the proposition following; That the smallest
heat causes the abounding of the superfluous humor: against which proposition
he so tires his spirit, and torments himself, even as if it were upon
Ioubert. Let the Reader see, if he have proposed appearance, or no.

Now he makes it a great case, and Page* 52.
thinks he has enterprised an act beseeming an other Hercules, to show, that
the excrement sometimes holds the place of food, and that nature serves
herself in the same usage or manner, and that it can repair that, which is
impaired by the power of heat. In truth, the excrements do not fall altogether
under one and the same consideration. For there be some which are quite against
nature, and wholly unprofitable, and which have no resemblance at all with us,
and therefore can never turn them selves to our use, to be incorporated with
us. The Greeks call them by an apt name, Perittoomata, as the ordure, urine,
sweat, etc.

There be others more according to nature, which are profitable to some part of
the body: and yet are excrements, not in regard of all, or the whole body, but
for some part thereof only. Even so the Chylus or white juice, (coming of the
meat digested in the stomach, whereof blood is engendered) after that the
ventricle is full, it is sent to the intestines, as an excrement and
unprofitable charge. When it is drawn by the liver, then that which was an
excrement of the ventricle, is now made a nourishment to the liver. Now there,
while of the Chylus or white juice blood is made, the spleen, and the bladder
of the gall or choler, do draw from both the one and the other, gall (which
are the excrements of the liver) their familiar nouriture: and having taken
their conuenable portion, they send away the rest as an excrement, which can
do no more service, nor give contentment to any one part. The spleen sends
that which she holds superfluously, by a little vessel at the bottom of the
ventricle, and sometimes by the hemorrhoides, and from thence to the
intestines. The vessel of the gall or choler, by the Parancholidocum, to
Duodenum or Intestinum primum, and other parts.

By the which demonstration, Galen ^. De fac. na^.
would induce, that all these two parts of blood, (to wit, the thick and
earthy, which the spleen draws, and the most subtle of all, drawn by the
bladder of the gall or choler, which having past by the examen of the heat,
conuerts it self into choler) are according to nature, and serve her to some
use, because that their proper vessels were ordained, for the^ to be received
into. But as concerning the diverse kinds of choler, and all the sorts of
serosites, because that they are things unprofitable, and out of nature, there
has not been any vessel allowed to them, Only to phlegm, rheum, or
spettle, nature failed, in giving it a particular receptacle, although it be
beneficial, but rather has lodged it in the veins with the blood, there to
be boiled, and made capable for nourishing of the body. Haruet obiecteth, that
this rheum or phlegm, holds no part of an excrement, but is natural and
elementarie, to wit, a fourth humor of blood. I answer, that by conference of
other humors, which are of the nature of excrements, it should appear
manifestly, that that place of Galen, is understood by excrementall phlegm:
for so he compares all the excrements. As (says he) among the diverse kinds of
gall, one is profitable and natural in the creatures, the other unprofitable
and out of nature: even so in the phlegm, that which is sweet, is healthful
and natural in the living creature, that which is sharp and salt, is out of
nature. Moreover, that it is so, that in all concoction, there is some
excrement separated from the food: which then shall be the excrement of the
elementary phlegm? For the juice melancholic has his excrement, the bilious
or choleric also has his, neither is it that which is lodged in the stomach
and the intestines: for it is not as yet come so far as the liver, where the
office is performed of this concoction.

In brief, phlegm is not held to have any particular instrument, because that
if sometime through want of eating, there shall be a defect of blood: the same
turning it self on the blood side, shall serve as nutrime^t to these parts. For
the natural phlegm, it nourishes and maintayneth continually, not by power,
and want of meat only: but actually in the parts that are cold and moist. It
is then an excrement, but profitable, which Gale^, in the place before
alleged, says, that abiding in the body, it may be changed. And the same, in
the first of his Prognostics, he does not any way contrary, where he calls
it, not as he does here, nourishment half boiled: but an excrement of the
nourishment half boiled, whereof the body being filled, 2. De ac. disc*
it may (so says Hippocrates) not only pass for food once in the day, but
likewise cause to endure more easily, an extraordinary hunger.

Page* 54.
Haruet obiecteth two things, the first, in the Dropsy, named Anasarca, (which
the Latins call Intercus) all the parts of the body being swollen with phlegm
or rheum: and yet notwithstanding, the pacient at all times must have food
given him, whereof if there by any want, he seems always ready to give up
the ghost. I answer, that all fleame is not proper to nourish the body, but
only that which is sweet. Now, that of the dropsy is salt, by reason whereof,
it putrifieth, and gives ill sent also to the parts which it touches, and
Galen calls it baleful, or murdrous: the which, because it is commixed with
some other humors, not only changes his true and natural cullor (as Galen
says in the same place) but also his temperature: so that by Hippocrates and
Galen, it is more often 6. Aph. 14. et sect. 4. Aph. 482. coac.
designed by the word water, then of phlegm or rheum. By means whereof,
Serenus calls it Aquosus languor, and Horace he terms it, Aquosus Lib. 2.
Od. page. 66.
albo corpore languor.

This solution may satisfy also the objection which he makes soon after,
concerning the excrements of the sick, which (says he) if they have power to
nourish during the time of sickness, wherefore then, (they being consumed,)
does not the sickness it self cease? And if the sickness cease, wherefore
are all the parts of the body in themselves so abated? Alas (good man) those
excrements are altogether against nature, and the body desires nothing more,
then to be delivered of them, as Galen speaks of the yellowe fat 2. De ^at.
f^c.
humor. This is more strong, then where he says a little before, that
Ioubert concludes not well, saying, that if the ventricle be filled with the
phlegmatick-humour, it has no appetite at all; why so in like manner, all the
parts of the (body being filled) they cannot have any desire or hunger. For
this appetite of the ventricle, whereof here is some question made, it is an
animal appetite, which not being so in the other parts, this fleame cannot
communicate herself to them in the same manner. I answer, that there are two
sorts of appetite in the ventricle, the animal, and the natural. The animal
appetite, is a certain molestation and anguish of the ventricle, proceednig of
the sucking, or of the compression of the food, for and by the which, being
angry or offended, it desires meat. And the natural appetite, is a
strength, bred and borne in all parts of the body, which desires evermore
what it wants, and is thereto agreeable. The one is appeased by the vapor of
the meats received, and, by how little soever it be of substance: the other,
by the only application he makes of the meats. The animal appetite is
particular to the sole ventricle, the natural is common, as well to the
ventricle, as to all the other parts, by the which, being brought to the
orifice superior of the same ventricle, it exciteth the animal appetite,
which serves us as a spur for the desiring of our meats. So long then as the
raw humor and phlegmatic remains at the ventricle, and that there (by the
natural strength thereof,) it is boiled and brought into an estate: the
^unicles, which make the body of the ventricle, in taking their competent
portion, and the best thereof, do convert the same to their own profit. So the
natural appetite being contented, the anima^l appetite is not offended at all,
or complains at entrance of the ventricle. If all the body were full of one
and the same humor, all the parts to whom this appetite is common, and
communicates the strength of this emotion, would borrowe thereof, and draw
thence what should be serviceable for them.

These are the arguments, wherewith the learned Ioubert has fortified his
opinion: arguments, which (in my judgment) until this instant hour, there
could be no one found, that did know deservedly how to stand against them.
Whereto there are joined many examples, both of plants and other creatures,
that not only preserve themselves many days, but also many years, without any
nourishment taken outwardly. As in plants, the Onyon and the Garlic etc: in
grain, Wheat Re, Barley, Oats, Millet and others: in and among beasts,
Serpents, Lizardes, Dormise, Bears, Crocodiles and Cameleons*. Of which
examples, Haruet strives to weaken the authority, by opposition of the
dissimulitude and great disproportion, which is between the life of brute
beasts, (yea, much more of plants,) and that of man: because his principal is
referred to the reasonable soul, and theirs to the soul unreasonable, and
beside, that heat (the instrument thereof) is much more noble in man, then in
the unreasonable soul, and yet more in the unreasonable soul, then in the
plant. Whereto I answer, that the similitude of these examples, do very well
agree together, in that kind of life whereof we speak in this place, which
is, the faculty of nourishing and feeding of the body, which is equally
distributed, as well in beasts as in 2. Deg^^. Cap. 5.
plants, says Ari^^^tle. And moreover, that they agree in the kind of the
cause, to wit, the raw and phlegmatique humor, wherewith their bodies are as
well filled, as those of men. But who can (says Har^et) Page, 78.
support such a great abundance of fleame in Diaphragma, without a palpitation
of the heart, sickness of the stomach, pain of the colic and the reins,
and who can retain them in the head, without an apoplexy? I answer, that
this humor abounding in cruditie, seethes it self in the body there, and yet
hurtes it not at all: for, being according to nature, it cannot create any
accidents and diseases against nature. He will object (perhaps) that the sole
abounding of fleame, causes an apoplexy. But I say, that it is an excrement
properly of the brain, which has not bin wunt to go lodge it self at the
ventricles thereof, nor does, except it be driven by the spirit, or the vapor.
He will say, that in these natures, the spirits are more feeble, and have not
power sufficient, to make so great a violence or impetuositie. Whereto I reply,
albeit that (otherwise) the exercise of the body is healthful, says Galen,
yet Com. 3. Aph. 20.
nevertheless, if you will exercise a man full of fleame, or of one and the
other choler, or else full of blood, you shall forward him (by such exercise)
either to an Epilepsie, or Apoplexy.

Now, where he says, that our life is differing from that of Plants and
beasts, and that her principle, which is our soul, is much more noble the^ the
others: what is he that will deny it? when Aristotle himself believed, that she
only was divine, and came from abroad or without, to lodge within our body?
But because he encloseth within his objection, the vegetative soul of Plants,
and the sensitive of beasts: it behooves to let him know, that our body has a
vegetative soul, and nourishes it self as a Plant, senseth or senteth as a
brute beast, and has the discourse of reason, of which it makes use as a man.
For, mark but his beginning (says the same Aristotle) he lives as the plant,
and has only then the vegetative soul: afterward, in time, he gains the
sensitive, and at length comes the intellectual and reasonable, which brings
(with it) all perfections. For he is not all at one time both an animal and a
man, nor an animal and an horse, (though this reason be scant seemly in the
mouth of a Christian Philosopher,) but he^ is first of all an herb, a
Lettise, afterward, a dog, a horse, or the like thing, and at length he comes
to be Casar or Cato.

De prisc^ med.
But Haruet continues on yet, and proves by Hippocrates, that our elders
would never have sought out a proper manner of feeding for man, if one self
same drinking and eating, might have suffised for the nourishment both of men
and beasts. Nevertheless, he omitteth that which Hippocrates adds, that in
the first age, men used one selfsame food, as the other creatures did, when
the invention of sowing and planting was as yet unknown to them: then they
fed on fruits, which nature (on her own good will) brought forth, without
any tillage: howbeit notwithstanding, the omnipotent Creator of man, had a will
from the beginning, that he should not only feed on the fruits of the earth,
but also that he should use the unreasonable creatures for his nourishment.

What would he have Hippocrates to say more? That which our ancients then
did, declared a will to provide for the infirmity of our natural heat, which
being sometimes unable to digest those meats, that were too crude and raw: is
now better supplied and maintained, by such as are prepared and corrected, by
knowledge and experience, in the doing whereof, the health of man is the less
subject to perrill. Otherwise, a man might take and eat without danger (if he
had been thereto accustomed) of Hemlocke with the Stare; and of Helleborus with
the Quail; or, as Mithridates, use poisons, not to be poisoned: and he being
inured to such a custom, they were to him as natural viands. In like manner,
an old man of Athens (recorded by Galen) used familiarly 3. De fimpl. fac. Lib.
9. hist. Plant. cap. 18. Arist* de reg. prin.
to eat Hemlock: as Thrasiaes did the like of Helleborus, by report of
Theophrastus. A maiden being sent by the King of the Indiaes to Alexander, she
did a long time feed before every one, of Napellus, called VVoolfes-bane,
without any prejudice to herself.

But without all these, the earth (our good Mother) has not she brought
forth from her bosom, many other things necessary to maintain life? yes
truly has she, and (in the estate as she receives us, when we come to arrive
in the Inn of this world) she thereafter entertaines and feeds us: showing
herself always benign, sweet, indulgent, and ready, to do whatsoever she can
devise to serve our use.

When she is tilled and husbanded, what diversity of foodes does she
produce, proper and apt for our nourishing? How plenteously is she furnished
without tillage? what odours? what favors? what iuyces? what cullers? And yet
(in this while) we will needs exercise our cruelty upon the brute beasts, we
will keep those creatures imprisoned, to who^ Nature has given the free wide
palace of heaven. Why are not we more careful, to make our bankets in
simplicity, and without butcherie, after the manner of Pythagoras: rather then
to war in the air, adventure life on the Seas and Rivers, and make such spoil
of the earth as we Ovid. 1. Meta.
do? Our elders do report, that the age, which we call the golden age, was
happy in this, that it fullied not her mouth with the blood of creatures, or
wild beasts.

The Philosopher Apollonius Thyaneus, being demanded by the Emperor
Domitian, why he kept not the common manner of feeding, which co^sisted in the
usage of flesh, but rather did eat roots and fruits, such as the earth
yielded? returned this answer. All that the earth brings forth unto us, is
sound and healthful, what need have I then, to go seek after Fowls in the
soil of the River Phasis, or the Francolines in Ionia* for him, with whom much
better agrees (as with Country Horace) the Olive gathered from the fat branches
of trees, or Sorrel growing in the field, or Mallows, wholesome for wearied
bodies?

Haruet pursues to confute the alleged Page* 67. 68. 69.
examples, saying, they are but fables that are reported of Serpents, Dormise,
etc. For as concerning Serpents, who all the vvinter abide in their dens,
they nourish themselves with the earth: Bears and Dormise make their provision
of victuals in Autumn, whereon they live, like unto the Ant: the Camelion
feeds himself with flies: the Crocodile cannot live long time out of the
water, ^. De ge^es. anim.
according to Aristotle.

That the Serpent nourishes him self of the earth only, the reason of the
same Philosopher does repugne, who says, that a mixed body cannot be
nourished with one sole and simple element, whereto also the success in things
is comfortable. For we have many times noated, that as among Fishes, the
great ones eat up the smaller Fry: the self same is in practice among the
Vipers, Adders, Snakes, and such others. Now, that Serpents can live very long
without any food, Aristotle Arist. anl. Lib. 8. cap* 4.
shows the same, by the experience of such as the Apothecaries do ^eepe,
whereof we have spoken h^eretofore.

And as concerning that which is said to the Serpent, in the third of Genesis:
Thou shall eat earth all the days of thy life: this concerns nothing at all
our earthly Serpents, but the ancient enemy to mankind, whose sla^ish servants
do eat the earth, that is to say, they can relish nothing but earthly things,
according as the learned Divines have expounded D. Aug^* (...) Gene.
it.

Aristotle writes, that the Dormouse (in VVinter) is not only hid in the caves
of the earth, but also in the hollowes of Trees, and that during this season,
he fattens by sleeping. Haruet thinks, that they eat the provision they have
hidden, and labors himself against Aristotle, saying: that sleep euacuates
the body, when as the ventricle is emptied, by reason of the heat, which
evermore consumes the moisture.

Lib. 5. Apho. 27.
But behold here the Aphorism of Hippocrates, which is flatly against him.
They (says Hippocrates) which in the night are thirsty, it is good for them
to sleep, even then when they are very dry. For sleep (above all things) does
moisten the body with great store of pleasing: not the body which is wholly
empty and dry, but that which is filled with food, or with crude moisture,
the natural faculty (in this while) is busying it self to her uttermost
power, for the concoction of the meats, and the raw humors. Who will doubt
then, that a slothful creature, and full of cruditie, may not fatten himself
by sleeping?

Lib. 11. cap. pen.
Pliny says, that it is better to make concoction, in the time of sleep, for
gathering corpulence, that is to say, for fatning of the body* then for
attayning to any strength thereby. And Martial, willing to waken those
students, which sleep away (as one says) the fat of the morning, has
addressed these two verses to them.

Dormitis nimiu^, glives, vitulique marini,
Nil mirum sivos crassa Minerua premit.
We have seen many Beasts, ^. De temp.
which at Springtime having left their secret aboade, are much fatter then
the other, because the time has been very favorable to them. And Galen says,
that women are more fat then men, by reason that they are more cold, and
greater sitters in the house, then men usually are.

8. Hist. any. cap. 17.
Aristotle approoueth by two reasons, that Bears do not eat any thing,
during the time of their winter retirement: the one, because they come not
forth at all: the other, in regard they seem to have their bellies restrict,
and their intestines empty.

Haruet beats back the first, because (says he) they have wherewith to feed
on. But, to a beast of such greatness, what store (I pray ye) needs there,
of roots, apples, or such like, all those days, and all those months? The
second reason, Aristotle iustifies the same by eye*experience. For one says,
that their intestines by lack of eating, close up in such sort, that they
almost touch together. And therefore when they come forth, they feed on a
certain herb called Wake won.
Aron, to unloose their entrails. The seven first days that they are hid in
their Caves, they be in such sort overcome with sleep, as although one smite
upon them, 10Lib. 1. Hist. not. Chap. 36. Lib. 18. Hist. Sep^en.
yet they awake not at all, so says Pliny and Olaus: Then (say they both)
they fatten woundrouslie by this heavy sleep, and principally by the sucking
and licking of their right foot. Which is to be understood in this sort,
that after they have past fourteen days in sleep, they rise upon their
buttocks, and live by licking their fore-most feet, until such time as Spring
time comes, then they issue forth. In regard of the males, they are very fat,
but not the females, because at this time they nourish their whelps: but no
such mass or lump of white and deformed flesh, which by little and little (in
licking) they bring to a form, as ignorantly has bin credited of antiquity:
but a young little Bear, well formed, such as great Exero. 6. 15.
Scaliger witnesses, to have bin (not long since) found in the belly of a
she-Beare, that one rent in pieces.

The same Scaliger, first (before Haruet) declared, that the Lord John Exercit.
196. 4.
des Lands, when he was in Syria, bought a Cameleon: and it was noated, that
by prompt mooning of his tongue, (which he can cast and recast out of his mouth
in one instant) he took a Fly that was on his breast. Which was news to
them, who thought (it only) among all other beasts, to live without food or
drinking, and only to nourish himself by the air, evermore fasting, without
enduring any languishment, De pall.
as also Tertullian says. Nevertheless, it is not altogether from the
purpose, in supposing that he should live by the air, because he has bin
seen to pass a whole year together without eating, as the same Scaliger
^aith: and, that after he has yawnde or gapte, and taken air, he has shut
his jaws, and then his belly became blown full (like a bladder) of this
ayrie substance. There be some that say, that turning himself to the Sun, he
seems to swallow in his beams, and so pursues them all about yawning.
Tertullian has avouched as much, in his Lib. De Mant. he nourishes himself
(^aith he, speaking of the Cameleon) in yasking and yawning, he chawes, and
blows up himself like a football, 2. Hist. any. Chap. 13. ^. Hist. not. Chap.
25.
the wind is all his food.

The Crocodile (by the testemonie of Aristotle, and Pliny after him) passes
always six months of winter, in her Cave without eating. Aelianus ^aith,
that she remains three score days only so hidden, during which time she
^areth nothing. Symmachus, a man of good quality, an Orator among the
ancient Romans, caused Crocodiles to be brought into the Theater before the
people, after that he had made them to fast fifty days. Long time afterward,
he kept two of them without giving them any food, reserving them, to have them
seen at Symmach, lib. 8. Epist. 44. 8. Hist. an. Ch^p. 2.
the arrival of certain friends of his: Although (says he) they made show,
not to live long time without eating. As for that which Harue^ alleges from
Aristotle, that the Crocodile being out of the water, cannot live any long
time: this receives his interpretation by the same place also, where he
writes, that albeit the Crocodile delights herself in the water, in such
sort, as she cannot live, being enclosed out of watrie places, nevertheless,
she dies, if she receive not air as she is wunt to do, and in nourishing her
young-ones out of the water.

For so much then, as she is a creature partly waterie, and partly earthie, he
holds, that she is to be rancked among those creatures called That live as
well on land, as on water Lib. 2. Cap. 20.
* Amphibii; and which are of a nature not stayed, whom he calls
Epamphoterizonta. Other-wise he should contrary himself, having written
before, that she spends the day on the land, and the night in the water, both
the one and the other, by reason of the heat she loves. And this he would have
understood of the time, wherein she does not hide herself at all, by reason
that cold is so contrary to her: as when it is fair seasonable weather, she
must needs* be on the land in the day time, and in the water all the night.

I might avouch here, the Indian bird without feet, which the sacrifisers to
Mahomet, did some time make the King of the Moluques to believe, that it dropte
down out Paradise: because she is not found but in unknown places, separate
from the troops of the world, by reason whereof, they of that country, call
it the Bird of Paradise. She lives evermore in the air, and never at any time
touches the earth, till after she be dead: whereon she lies, and preserves
herself a long time without corrupting.

This Bird does not nourish herself on Mushromes, or other semblable insect
things (as Sparrowes and Swallows do) for she lives in the middle region of
the air, where are no creatures (known unto men) whereon she may feed: but
upon the air only, or on the vapor arising from the Isles of the Moluques,
which do send forth on all sides a very sweet and Aromaticall savor.
Cardanus holds, that she cannot live of the air alone and perfectly, because
it is very subtle in those countries. But he that has given her the air for
food, has also power so to thicken that air, as to render it self apt
enough for her nourishment.

And no less admirable is the bird In vita Ar^oxer.
which Plutarch calls Rhintaces, very common in Persia, which has nothing
empty in her body, but is within all full of fat, (as are the Bennarics in
Languedoc) and yet notwithstanding, this Author says, that she lives not but
of the air, and of the dew therein.

^ib. 5. hist. ^ni. cap. 19. ^lin. lib. 11. Cap. 36.
Aristotle, the Prince of truth, writes, that in the Furnases, where the
Melters and casters of Copper are in Cypres, they have a little creature, of
the bigness of a great Fly, which they call Pyrausta, the which has wings, and
sour feet. So long as there is fire in the Furnace, this worm or Fly lives,
but let it be never so little off from it, it presently dies: and yet
notwithstanding, this creature is most cold, having no other maintenance then
the heat of the fire only.

But why should I dwell on these examples, whereof Haruet (in every place)
holds, that we can draw no consequent by them to men? Peradventure then, some
examples deduced from men themselves, may make him to acknowledge a truth. And
therefore I will produce one, which is out of all scruple, whereof, Princes
worthy of belief, made recital to King Henry the third, being in Poland. He
had there many great Lords of France, Councillors, etc. He had also diverse
Physicians in his Court, and among others, Monsieur Piduxius our Deane:
skillful not only in Physic, but likewise, in whatsoever concerned the
knowledge of the natural history. He was then Physician to my Lord the Duke
of Neuers, and called to council with the Kings own Physicians. From him was
it, that we verbally heard this History, which also is written by Alexander
Guaguinus of Verona, Captain of the footmen in the Cittadell of Vitebcka, on
the limits of Moscouia, and in his description of the said Country.

He says, that there are certain people in Lucomoria (which is a Region, in
the utmost confines of the Sarmates toward the North) which dye, (or rather
remain entraunced, like your Frogs and Swallows) every year, the 27. of
the month November, by reason of the extreme cold in that part of the
country. Afterward, at the return of Springtime, the 24. of April, they
come to life again. These people make their commerces with the Grustintzians
and Sperponomptzians their neighbors, after this manner. When they feel the
time of their entrauncing to draw near, they then lock up their merchandises
in certain places, and the Grustintzians and Sperponomptzians there take them,
and leave other in their sted, of answerable value. The time being come of
their reui^ing, they take the merchandises, which were left in exchange of
theirs, if they perceive they have profit by them: if not, they demand back
their own again, whereby arises oftentimes quarrels, and wars between
them. By this sleepie trance, the natural heat in these bodies (which
otherwise are accustomed to this air, and boiled again, as says Albertus
Cr^^tzius, by the freezing) is no whit extinct* because that all the places,
por^s, passages, and conuoys, being locked up and stopte, it gathers it self
about the entrails, and by this Antiperistasis or repulsion of every part, she
increases herself, and makes her power the more vigorous for the Springtime
ensuing.

Above all other parts of the body, the danger is principally of the
brain, which has great store of large openings, and (among others) the
nostrilles: were it not, that when they begin to wexe stiff with cold, a
tarte rheum or moisture distilleth from the nostrilles, which (by report of
the said Lord Piduxius) Their eyes, ^ares, nostrilles and mouths, are softlye
frozen up, before they fall into their ^^ance.
even as it flows, congeales it self no less, then the spettle it self
does, and so it wexeth hard before they fall to the ground, according as
Sigismond de Herbestein describes, in the History of Moseouis. By means
whereof, the nostrilles and other parts being locked up; the malice of the air
cannot so easily pierce up unto the brain. And if any one of them, to shun
this cold vnfreendlines of the air, thinks (by covering himself with
skins and other things) to forestall the Isicles hanging at the nostrilles
and mouth etc: immediately, the air being excessiuely cold, steps up into the
brain, and there extinguisheth the natural heat, so that these Lucomorians,
in sted of a temporal entrauncing, do then fall into a perpetual and
endless. But the time being come, that the Sun gets rule over the cold,
and brings in again the sweetness of the Spring season: the ycie moisture (at
the parts before named) melting it self, the heat by little and little
insinuates into the bones, the feeling and vigor creepes again into all the
members, and then has the body the same O^conomie, which it had before.

Haruet concludes his whole discourse, by the fasting of holy personages,
Moses, Elias, and our blessed Savior, the which (says he) should be held
for no miracle at all, if, according to nature, so long an abstinence may be
made. Ioubert has answered, that in sick persons, and such as are much subject
to sickness, a long fast or abstinence is natural: but supernatural in such
persons, who otherwise are perfectly well, and of good temperature.

Harnet obiecteth the place of Auice^, cited by Ioubert: That the same might
also happen to healthful men. For our own selves, we will embrace the oppinion
of Io^bert in such sort, as we do hold, concerning the accident here
happening among us, to whom this abstinence is yet so easy: that it has bin
occasioned by a sickness against nature, albeit some others (in like manner
diseased) have afterward bin healthful again. But as for persons of such rare
sanctity, we think not their fast to have bin by any sickness: but only by
the special will of God, and that natural appetite then returned, at the time
limited by his providence.

Last of all, where he exhorts every one, to imitate a certain Gentleman,
who (by care and diligence) discovered the imposture of an Hermit in Sauoy,
that (by feigned fastings) had long time dece^ued the peoples oppinion. As for
our selves, not knowing how to go against the authority, of so many rare and
clear sighted Physicians, nor yet how to steal into our eyes, the credence of
what they have seen: we love rather, to leave it, even to the most curious
reseacher, into the causes of the extraordinari^ works of nature, then like
the companions to Ulysses, charmed with the fruit of the A^^ee in Afric
called the Lot ^^^.
Alyfier, or fatal tree, to serve, or know no other Gods, then Edusa and
Potina.

FINIS.

