A BRIEF EXPLANATION OF THE WHOLE BOOK of the Proverbs of Solomon.

By ROBERT CLEAVER.

PARNASSO ET APOLLINE DIGNA printer's device of Felix Kingston

AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON for Thomas Man, and Rafe Iackson. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THOMAS CREW Esquier, grace, mercy, and peace be
multiplied in Jesus Christ.
SIR, having been certain years since, more pressed, and forward to offer our
selves to be doing then duly considerate what a burdenous task we should
undergo, one of us undertook the explication of the Proverbs of Solomon, and
the other to further the same by inspection, and assistance in difficult and
doubtful places, when need should require. But we found it a matter of greater
travel, and longer labor then we thought of, and have met with such
interruptions as we had just cause to look for, but did not sufficiently
foresee: for (besides that the book is wholly sententious, and the unfolding of
sentences requires brevity, and perspicuitie, with truth, and soundnes, which
cannot be attained unto without mature deliberation and study) the Lord
himself did stop our passage with his own hand, for a season, by visiting one
of us, even him who was to do the work, and sustain the burden of the
business, with such defect of health and sight, as did actually prohibit our
course of proceeding. But now (by his good hand) that let being removed and his
assistance ministered unto us, we at the last have waded through the book, or
rather have swomme over it: for it is so profound and deep with perfect
excellency, that neither we, or any man else can diue to the bottom of it.
Solomon himself was far too low of stature, and not tall enough in
understanding, even (when he knew most) to stand in it, and hold up his head
above the mystical waters of admirable wisdom, although his tongue did
speak it, and his hand pen it. We have by due consideration with our selves,
and judicious advice from our wise and learned brethren, proceeded in a course
different from our beginning, laboring only to make the text as plain and
conspicuous, as we could in so few words, without our former additions of
Doctrines and Uses. For we saw the time would be long before we could finish
the work: the printing would be chargeable, if we should live to bring it to
the press: the boo^es would be dear to such as should buy them: and the
pains would be tedious to those which should read them: and albeit some might
have more benefit by so large a volume, yet more may have some benefit by this
compendious contriuall: for the very knowledge of the right sense of the
Scriptures (which in this mark we chiefly aim at) is very commodious in
sundry respects, and the groundwork of all piety. That makes Ministers to
be fruitful Preachers: that makes private persons to be profitable hearers:
that yields matter of wholesome meditation to the mind: that puts vigor
of good affections into the heart: that ministers store of useful speeches to
the lips, and that prepares a way for faith, for repentance, and all
internal graces and external obedience to the whole man. The want hereof is
the cause why the words of God are so much by some perverted publicly to such
purposes, as the holy Ghost never intended, both presses, and pulpits (which is
with tears to be lamented) sending out so many erroneous writings, and
sayings, for the confirmation of separation, superstition, injustice, sensual
lusts, and all manner of licentiousnes: and why being by others soundly
alleged they are so greatly mistaken, and work no better effects in those to
whom they are preached. For this cause we have not been altogether remiss in
searching out, and sounding the sense of every sentence of this book, or in
pondering the force of every word which may seem to carry some weight, so
far as our knowledge, or means would extend: but if the learned of better
judgment shall any where find us failing, let them be pleased to make it
appear unto us, and we do promise not to stand wilfully, or peremptorily in
any error, but to be attentive to their reasons, and reformable in our
opinions. What we have done herein, we think it our duty to recommend as a
testimony of our love to your Worships patronage, not doubting but that you
will diligently read, and wisely judge of it, as you do of other books of
this nature, notwithstanding your manifold and weighty employments otherwise.
We rest assured of your charitable mind, that without offense you will bear
with our homely kind of writing, although it be deuoid of all polishment, and
elegancy, considering that we make but an exposition to inform the judgment
in the meaning of the Scripture, and not a discourse to work upon affections:
it is sufficient that the foundation stones lying in the ground, be firm, and
stable, although not beautifully hewn, carved, or graven. The sentences which
we explain are excellent as well for matter, as manner, and defective in
nothing that may give satisfaction to the best qualified, and most complete
Christian in the world. Wise readers therefore (we doubt not) will be entreated
to content their eyes with the bright and shining beams thereof, that they may
not need to require any exact perfection in this our dim and duskish
Commentary. A plain iron key will serve for good use, to vnloc^e the door of
a golden treasury. The mark that we aim at herein is the glory of God, and
the edification of his servants, and not our own praise and commendation for
eloquence. And thus with remembrance of our duty, referring the whole work to
your wise and loving consideration, we commit you and your gracious
yoke fellow to the blessed protection of God Almighty, beseeching him daily
more and more to multiply all his graces and mercies upon your self, and
yours. Draiton this 10. of May 1615.

Your Worships in all duty to be commanded, JOHN DOD. ROBERT CLEAVER.


A BRIEF EXPLANATION OF THE whole book of the Proverbs of SOLOMON.
CHAPTER. I.
Verse 1. The Parables of Solomon the son of David, King of Israel.

IN this whole book we are to consider first the title or inscription, being
as it were the head thereof, laid down in this present verse, and the five
next following, and then the tract or treatise as the body of the same, from
the beginning of the seventh verse, to the end of the last Chapter. In the
title God gives a singular commendation of the book, first from the subject
matter: secondly from the Scribe or penman (both which are described in this
our text) and thirdly from the end and use thereof, as shall appear in the
words ensuing. The matter of it is Parables, whereby are sometimes meant dark,
and mystical sayings, not easy to be understood, as when they say to Christ;
Why speak thou to them in parables? And again, Matthew. 13. 10.
Lo now thou speak plainly, and thou speak no parable: Ioh. 16. 29.
sometimes a borrowed speech, a similitude, or comparison, as when it is said,
All these things spoke Jesus to the multitude Matthew. 13. 34.
in parables: and sometimes short, and sweet prouerbiall sentences, full of
weight, and wisdom, as when it is said: My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and
the meditation of mine heart is of knowledge. I will incline mine ear to a
parable, and utter my grave matter upon the harp. And here now does the word
bear all these senses in this place. The Scribe whom God used as his
Secretary, or penman, was Solomon, who is described by his parentage, as being
David his son, and by his dignity, that he was a King, whose honorable
estate is illustrated by his glorious dominion, or subjects, Israel, the people
of the Lord, whom he had chosen to be his portion, and the lot of his
inheritance, and that whilst they were in their perfection of beauty, both for
Church and Commonwealth, making but one, and the same entire, and undivided
body, not yet dismembered, nor rent asunder one tribe from another, as
afterward they were in the succeeding ages.

Verse 2. To know wisdom and instruction, to understand the words of
knowledge.

HEre begins the third part of the inscription, wherein is contained the
use, and end of this book, which is

twofold: First, general, such as is common to all, verse. 2. 3. Secondly,
special, such as concerns some kinds of men, verse. 4. 5. 6.

The general use is partly for the mind, and understanding, as in this verse,
partly for the practice, and ways, as will appear in the next. Our text
says, that it was written to incite, and teach men to know wisdom, to
attain unto, and proceed in the knowledge of things that make a man wise to
salvation: and instruction, to wit, the means whereby wisdom is to be
obtained, as doctrine, exhortation, reprehension, etc. and to understand the
words of knowledge, those sayings, and sentences, wherein knowledge, and
wisdom is delivered.

Verse 3. To receive the instruction of understanding, of justice, judgment,
and equity.

THe knowledge mentioned in the former verse, is amplified in this, both by the
cause of it, instruction received, whereby understanding is gotten, and the
effects of it: the first whereof is justice, which is not restrained to the
Magistrates office, nor to the duties of the second table of the commandments,
but to be extended to all the ways of men, that they be warrantable, and
lawful: the second is judgment, which is with mature deliberation to regard
all causes, and circumstances, that any way tend to the due manner of our
proceedings: the third is equity, that we do not only walk with an even
foot, neither turning to the right hand, nor to the left, but to propose a
right end also in all that we deal in, with truth of heart, and vprightnes.

Verse 4. To give to the simple sharpness of wit, and to the child knowledge,
and discretion.

THe general use of this book, and that which is common to all, has been
showed in the two former verses: now here follows that which is special, and
concerns some kinds of men, as the simpler sort in this verse, and the
learneder in the next.

And it is uttered by way of anticipation, or objection that might be made
against the premises, in this manner: These Proverbs are profound, and deep
sentences, and the more short they are, the more hard and obscure they be: well
may great scholars, and men of much learning gather wisdom, and knowledge
from them, but we that are simple and silly persons, unlettered, unlearned,
and dull of understanding; shall never be able to reap any profit by them: Yes
(says he) all sorts, that are exercised in them aright, shall receive good by
them, one as well as another. The first sort he calls by two names, simple,
and children: by simple, understanding those persons, whom elsewhere he calls
foolish, ignorant, unskillful, Prou. 14. 5.
and such as believe every thing told them, and yield to every thing imposed
upon them. To these this book will give sharpnes of wit, that is, a good
capacity, with quicknes of conceit, cunning (as the word signifies) or
subtlety: but such as is harmless, and holy, not whereby they are apt to
beguile others, but able (notwithstanding their doue-like simplicity) to
beware and take heed to themselves, that they be not beguiled of others: which
kind of wisdom our Savior Matthew. 10. 16.
himself commends in the Gospel. By child he means not babes and infants
by age, through want of years, but whatsoever years they have on their
backs, he calls them children, if they be nouices lacking judgment, and
understanding, or rash, unsettled or mutable in that which they know. To these
this book will give knowledge, and discretion, soundnes in judgment,
staiednes in affection, and prudence in ordering all their ways.

Verse 5. A wise man shall hear and increase in learning, and a man of
understanding shall attain unto wise counsels.

Verse 6. To understand a parable, and the interpretation* the words of the
wise, and their dark sayings.

NOw we come to the second sort of them, to whose use and profit the Proverbs
are destinated, who are set forth by two titles: first they are said to be wise
indeed, with an excellent knowledge of things divine, and humane: secondly,
they are called men* of understanding, such as are qualified with an excellent
faculty of perceiving, discerning, and judging of things, that they are not
easy to be misled, or deceived.

And these words as well as the former tend to the prevention of an objection,
which out of the former might be raised in this manner: If your sayings and
sentences be so plain and easy, that the simple may sound them, and the child
may comprehend them; what good will they do to the wise and learned? men of
judgment and knowledge shall lose their labor, and mispend their time in
reading of them, what shall they get more then they have already? Yea (says
he) the greatest Clerks, and deepest Divines, may gather instruction from
them, as well as the vulgar and meaner sort of people. They are shallow enough
for a little child to wade in, and deep enough for a great Leuiathan to
swim in. And therefore it is said that a wise man by hearing shall increase in
learning, that is, there shall be added to him a great measure of knowledge,
and shall attain to wise counsels, to wit, shall be enabled to get and
purchase, possess, and keep industrious counsels or thoughts, even such
whereby he may be as skillful in things pertaining to him and his affairs, as
the Master of a ship is in stearing and governing it in the greatest dangers:
for from thence is the word borrowed. Now this is further amplified in the
sixth verse, that they shall cause him to understand (for so the Hebrew word
signifies) a parable, any prouerbiall sentence, though difficult and obscure
to others, and the interpretation thereof, the true sense and meaning of it,
the words of the wise, and their dark sayings even to discern of, and unfold,
the most intricate points, and to answer to the hardest questions or riddles,
(as the original text imports) such as the Queen of Sheba posed Solomon
withal. 1. King. 10. 1. 3.


Verse. 7. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge: but fools
despise wisdom, and instruction.

THus much concerning the title or inscription: now follows the treatise it
self, which has two parts: first, the preparation to the prouerbiall
sentence, containing many notable exhortations, and arguments to the study and
practice of that wisdom, which is contained in this book, laid down in the
first nine Chapters. Secondly, the prouerbiall sayings themselves, from the
beginning of the tenth, to the end of the book.

In this present verse is proposed the principal proposition, and sum of
these nine Chapters, that is, the fear of the Lord, a reverent awe of his
Majesty, proceeding from faith, whereby through the feeling of his love, as
well as the weight of his displeasure, we are afraid to offend him, true piety
and godliness (for it is a part for the whole worship of God, whereof it is a
principal part, and as it were the custos and keeper of the rest in their
duties, all evil being committed where it is wanting) is the beginning or head
of knowledge, the foundation and top, the entrance, proceeding, and perfection
of wisdom.

In the latter part of the verse, he meets with an objection, which is made
in this manner: As much as you praise this wisdom, who regards it? is it not
despised of the most part, and rejected every where? True (says he) but what
are they which contemn it? fools, meaning all wicked men. And therefore it is
no matter what account they make of it, unless they were wiser. The opposition
then of this sentence stands thus: The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
knowledge and wise men will embrace it: but how excellent soever wisdom and
instruction is fools will have it in no estimation, but set light by it, and
despise it.

Verse 8. My son hear thy fathers instruction, and forsake not thy mothers
teaching.

Verse 9. For they shall be a comely ornament unto thy head, and as chains for
thy neck.

TRue wisdom having been before described, and the fear of God commended, he
adioyneth an exhortation to embrace the same, by making use of the means
thereof:

where we have to observe First, a precept, verse 8. Secondly, a promise, verse.
9.

In the precept are to be understood, the subjects of it, the persons to whom
it is directed, every faithful reader, and therefore he speaks to all, as
if it were one man, and that out of pure love, even as a father to his beloved
child: and because he should hearken to him, as a loving child to his
father, he calls him his son.

In the next place the matter of the precept is to be noted, that he hear the
doctrine, whereby this wisdom is offered, called instruction, and teaching,
which he commends by the efficient isntrumental, to wit, his parents, which
should incite him, to be attentive to both, and contemptuous to neither.

The promise is laid down in an eligant similitude, suiting with the capacity
and affections of children, to whom he speaks, that they, namely instruction
and teaching, heard, and not forsaken, shall be a comely ornament, in Hebrew,
an increase of grace to thy head, and as chains for thy neck, they shall so
garnish and deck thee, that if a crown of gold were set upon thy head, and a
chain of pearls were put about thy neck, thou could not be more adorned,
and beautified before God, and men.

Verse 10. My son, if sinners do entice thee, consent thou not.

THis verse, and the nine next following, contain an excellent caveat, to take
heed of, and avoid those means, which make the instructions of parents, or
other governors, fruitless, and of none effect, namely, pernicious, and
pestilent inticements. This matter he does here propound in general, and more
particularly amplify afterward, in that which follows.

In the general he forewarneth his son, that is, every godly man, and such
as addict themselves to wisdom and virtue, to beware of seducers, showing
both what manner of persons they are, to wit, sinners, and how to be avoided,
by not consenting unto them, or giving the least ear, or liking to their
flatteries and deceitful persuasions.

Verse 11. If they say, Come with us, we will lay wait for blood, and lie
privily for the innocent without peril.

HEre follows the particular handling of the fotmer matter, in this verse,
and diverse of the rest that follow: wherein are set down, first the enticing
speeches of sinners, as it were motives to win consent, and aftetwards the
wholesome disswasion of the holy Ghost as a retentiue to hold them back from
yielding. In both which we have the counsel, or that whereunto they do move
us, and the several reasons whereupon the same is grounded. The motives of the
wicked, are to work mischief, and to practice cruelty by cunning: which the
spirit of God sets down according to their meaning, in odious terms, such
as their own lips would not so apertly utter, and especially at the first:
for it were enough to fright and discourage one, yet not fleshed in sin, to
hear such words: Let us lay wait for blood, undo men, either by taking away
their lives, or hurting, if not utterly overthrowing their estates, which is
their purpose, but not always their pretense; and lie privily, like hunters for
beasts, and fowlers for birds, or thieves by the ways side, and enemies in
ambushment, dissemble, and conceal our malicious, treacherous, and hurtful
plots, until we have advantage: for the innocent, whom God justifies, and
approves of, and who have deserved no such entreaty at the hands of their
oppressors, whom clamorous tongues notwithstanding spare not to deprave, as if
they were culpable of heinous offenses: without peril: for so do the learned
take the word here used, in some other place, as Job. 9. 17. He destroys me
with a tempest, and wounds me without danger.

And having hitherto declared both the matter, and manner of their allurements,
he now begins to relate their arguments, whereby they go about to inueigle
the simple: and this first from the safety of the attempt, that they may take
it in hand, and proceed in it freely, and without fear of punishment, which is
brought in the beginning, and placed in the forefront, to animate them against
all dread and discouragements at the onset.

Verse 12. We will swallow them up alive, like a grave, even whole like those
that go down into the pit.

NOw follows the second reason of these tempters, drawn from the facility
and easiness of their exploits, to prevent the doubts that might arise against
their proceedings, for the difficulty of their attempts, and the doubtfulnes
of their success: because that many that could be content to do any evil,
which may bring good to themselves, or hurt to the innocent, yet for fear of
foil, repulse, or evil success, are the more unwillingly drawn unto it. Now
therefore inticers evermore take away this scruple, and make the simple believe
that they can effect it without any trouble. They are able with much ease, and
as little resistance, to overcome and pray upon the living, whom they take in
hand to undo, as the grave does receive and consume the dead corpses, that are
buried in it.

Verse 13. We shall find all precious riches, and fill our houses with spoil.

THis verse contains their third reason, which is taken from the commodity
that they shall get by their attempt, not pelf, nor trumperie, not trifles of
no value, but riches of all sorts, and those that are precious, and in
abundance, wherewith they shall store their houses, as conquerours do, when
they have the sacking of cities, and carry away the pray.

Verse 14. Thou shall cast in thy lot among us: we will all have one purse.

HEre is an objection prevented, which the party tempted may think or say:
that he shall take as much pains as others, but find less gains, seeing it
is to be feared, that you being masters in this trade, and captains in
mischief, will challenge the most unto your selves, and being many, and of an
old confederacy, will make my part the least. Answ. Yea the booty shall be
divided most equally, and then according to the fashion of Merchants, we will
cast lots to determine each man's part, (and that which is more) thou shall in
the mean time have money of us if thou want, to defray thy charges: thou
shall live of our purse, and we in the like case, will of thine, we will have
a common bag among us.

Verse. 15. My son, walk not in the way with them: refrain thy foot from
their path.

NOw are we come to the retentiue, or disswasion whereby the spirit of God
withholdeth his children from consenting to the cunning inticements of sinful
seducers, which he first begins with a dehortation, and then confirms with
arguments.

The dehortation is used in this verse, as an antidote, or counterpoyson
against their virulent tongues, directly opposite to their counsel or call.
Come (say they) and go with us: my son (says he) walk not in the way with
them, converse not with such in friendship, renounce their acquaintance, and
have little to do with them: refrain thy foot from their path, be not where
they haunt, or are, if thou can choose.

Verse 16. For with their feet they run to evil, and make haste to shed
blood.

THe deceivers come armed with guilefull shows of reason, like swords, and
offensive weapons to wound men's consciences, by drawing them into mischief,
and therefore the holy Ghost offers us substantial and forcible arguments
like shields and defensive weapons to resist them: whereof we have one here
taken from their hurtful cruel disposition, which appears by their effects,
the doing of evil, and the sheding of blood, especially by the manner thereof,
in that they run and make such haste thereunto. And this is assumed out of
their own words in the eleventh verse.

Verse 17. For in vain is their not spread before the eyes of all that has
wing.

AS before he advises the godly to be cauteous and not yielding to the
inticements of those wicked tempters, because all their ways tend to the doing
of hurt: so here he diss^adeth them by another argument, from the uncertain
event of their attempts, contradicting their bragges and absolute promises
which they made to themselves of prosperous success, in the twelfth and
thirteenth verses, and this he does by a similitude: although they be as
confident of speeding well, as if they had gotten the pray already, yet can
they no more assuredly say that their counsels and purposes shall take effect,
then an unskillful fowler (which lays his grinnes and snares openly) can
certainly affirm, that he will catch the birds that are flying in the air,
and observe where his nets are laid to shun them.

Verse 18. Moreover, they lay wait for their own blood, and lie privily for
their own lives.

TO the former two reasons* he adds in those words, a third from the danger
and peril of their plots, that the greatest hurt is like to redound to
themselves: they would shed blood, and so they shall, but it is their own.
They use al their art to take away life, and make a slaughter, and that they
shall do, but they are the men to be killed, themselves must be slain. And
where then is the safety which they so much presumed of* and gave warrant for,
with such confidence?

Verse 19. Such are the ways of every one that is given to gain; it will take
away the life of the possessers of it.

NOw are we come to the conclusion of this point, wherein all that has been
spoken thereto, is knit up sententiously, with a rhetorical acclamation, and
applied to more then robbers, and purse-takers, or gross murderers: for,
says he, such are the ways of every one that is given to gain: so stands
the case both for practice of cruelty, if occasion be offered, and peril of
selfe-hurting, with all that are too greedy of getting commodity. It is the
gain or commodity that is desired with a covetous mind, or compassed with an
unrighteous hand, it will take away the life of the possessers of it, bring
destruction at last of soul or body upon them that so unrighteously hunt after
it.

Verse 20. Wisdom cries without, she puts forth her voice in the
streets:

Verse 21. She calls on the top of the assemblies, she utters her voice at
the entering of the gates she speaks her words in the city* saying.

BEfore was showed the counsel which the holy Ghost gives to prevent sin,
and to detain men* from the practice of it: and here is offered a direction to
them that have sinned, (as all men have in every place) that they may be
reclaimed from it. And this is set forth first by the author, secondly by the
mean, thirdly by the matter.

The author is Wisdom or wisdoms, the most high and excellent wisdom
Jesus Christ, the eternal wisdom of God, in whom are hid all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. 3. who takes upon him here, and in certain
other chapters of this book, the person of a Matrone, a Lady, or Princess,
according to the feminine gender, whereof the word that signifies wisdom is
in Hebrew. The manner of giving this advice and direction appears in many
words, as, she cries, uses earnestnes, without, abroad and openly, she
puts forth her voice in the streets, she speaks freely, and plainly, and
distinctly, in places most frequented, she calls in the top of the
assemblies, as it were out of an high place, as they used to do which were to
make Orations, or speeches to a great auditory or multitude, she utters her
voice at the entering of the gates, whither people were wont to repair for
matters of justice and judgment, Genesis 34. 20. Ruth. 4. 1. And utters her
voice in the city, speaks audibly and sensible in every place and quarter of
the city. All tends to this, that she seeks opportunity every where to
do good in every place, in fields, towns, Judgment places, market places,
publicly, and privately, and by all endeavors.

The matter is contained in the two next verses.

Verse 22. O ye simple ones, how long will ye love simplicity, and scorners
delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge?

HEre begins the matter of Wisdoms speech and direction, which consists
of an expostulation in this verse, and of an exhortation in the next.

In the expostulation note First the persons with whom she deals. Secondly
the faults for which she blames them.

Of persons three sorts are reprehended: the first are the simple, such as are
void of sound judgment and understanding, and therefore ready and easy to
be perverted, as it is said in another place, The simple believes every
thing. Prou. 14. 15.


The second are scorners, such as being set to do evil, refuse, deride, and
disdain all means used to reclaim them.

The third are fools, who are poisoned with pestilent opinions, and corrupted
with wicked courses of life and behavior.

The faults wherewith she obbraideth them, are the habites of evil in them, as
of simplicity in the simple: of scorning in the scorners: of foolishnes in the
fools, whereof she conuinceth them by two arguments: one, that they are
obstinate, and persist in them, which is intended in how long? the other, that
their hearts and affections were possessed with them, in that they loved the
same, and delighted therein, and hated to be cured of them.

Verse 23. Turn you at my correction, behold I will power out my spirit unto
you, and make you understand my words.

Wisdom having searched into their sore, and discovered the same unto them,
does now apply a plaster which may heal it: and after a sharp rebuke for
their former folly and contempt, she prescribes remedy for the time to come,
by faithful counsel, with an exhortation: wherein may

be observed, First the duty that is to be performed. Secondly, the motives
that should induce them to it.

The duty to be performed is repentance and reformation, which she calls
turning, by a similitude taken either from travelers, that have gone the wrong
way, and must come back again, or from servants, or children, or soldiers,
which have run away from their governors, and so undone themselves.

The motives are two: the former is from that sharpnes which the Lord had used
toward them, either by rebukes or chastisements: and the latter from that
kindness which he would show unto them, the promise whereof is noted with the
word of observation, Behold, as intending a thing admirable and worthy to be
looked upon of all: and so indeed are the things promised, the effects of his
kindness, as namely he would bestow his spirit upon them, and gifts and graces
of the holy Ghost, and that not sparingly and in a small quantity, but
plentifully, and in great abundance, as rich fountains cause their waters to
boil out; (for so does the word signify) and more particularly he promises
to illuminate their mind, with the saving knowledge of his holy will, which
is the work and fruit of the spirit, that shall be powered upon them.

Verse 24. For as much as I call, but ye refuse, I stretch out mine hand, but
none regards:

Verse 25. But ye despise all my counsel, and will none of my correction.

HItherto Wisdom has persuaded wicked men to repentance, by expostulations,
exhortations, and promises: now she declares the miserable estate of wilful
persons, with comminations, menaces, and threatenings.

The judgment that she denounces against them, is no less then destruction
it self, which is showed by the cause of it, in these two verses, and by the
grieuousnes of it, in the three next.

The cause is obstinacy and peruersenes, whereof she conuinceth them, partly
by her benignity and kind dealing toward them, and partly by their
ingratitude, and contemptuous behavior toward her: she calls them by way of
inuitement, to be partakers of her graces: she stretches out her hands unto
them: but they refused to hearken and yield obedience to her voice: none of
them regarded the testimonies and tokens of her favor: they despised, set
naught by and derided her counsel, those wholesome precepts and admonitions
which she gave unto them, and would none of her corrections; they were weary
of her rebukes and chastisements, but not amended by them.

Verse 26. I will also laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear
comes.

Verse 27. When your fear comes like an horrible desolation, and your
destruction approaches as a whirle-winde: when affliction and anguish shall
come upon you:

Verse 28. Then they shall call upon me, but I will not hear, they shall seek
me early, but they shall not find me.

THe cause of their misery having been expressed in the premises, the
grieuousnes thereof is in these words described: as first that they shall be
comfortless, and helpless, the Lord showing himself righteously unmerciful
to them in laughing at them and scorning them: not that there is in the Lord
any disposition of laughter, or scorning, but for man's capacity he is often in
the Scriptures resembled to man with humane affections: as here, because he
will not care for them, but cast them off, he is said to deride them; for that
it is a misery not to be relieved in misery, but a double corsie and woe to
be iested at of those who only can help them.

Secondly, the manner of the plague amplified with so many words and similies,
does prove it to be grievous: as, because it will be terrible, and make them
sore afraid, it is called by the name of fear, and it is said to come like an
horrible desolation: the word properly signifies a furious breach of any
thing, breaking and overthrowing whatsoever it meets with: and it is compared
to a whirle-winde, which comes suddenly and with great violence, not only
blowing up dust, and chafe, and light matter, but blowing down oftentimes
trees, and houses, and strong buildings.

Thirdly, the effects which it will work shall give testimony sufficient of
the sharpnes of Gods proceedings against them: for that their hearts shall be
filled with affliction, and anguish, and their tongues shall be compelled
through extremity of torment and danger to cry to him, whom they have
contemned, but to no purpose, and without success: for he will not answer
them, that is, grant their requests, but will testify his wrath, and increase
their sorrow, by denying the things they pray for: yea the greatness of their
distress shall enforce them to seek him early, very diligently and
carefully, they shall spare no pains, they shall break their sleeps in the
morning, and yet shall not find him gracious and merciful to them in their
griefs and perplexities.

Verse 29. Because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the
Lord.

Verse 30. They would none of my counsel, but despised all my corrections.

HE insisteth still upon the point in hand, and justifies his accusation, by
repetition of those sins which would cause them to be^ so fearfully plagued.
And in reckoning them up, he begins with that wherewith he ended in the
expostulation, their hatred of knowledge: and whereas he vpbraided them with
refusal of wisdoms gracious offers, and that they regarded them not, he
makes it good by this, that they chose not the fear of the Lord, they would
not learn to be religious and godly, when means and opportunities were
ministered unto them. And before it was said unto them, ye have despised all my
counsel, and would none of my correction; here it is said of them, they would
none of my counsel, but have despised all my correction; the sense is the same
though the words be somewhat varied.

Verse. 31. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own, and be filled
with their own devices.

THe former two verses contained a rehearsal of the complaint, and this a
renewing of the threatening, wherein he declares their destruction to be just,
and according to their own deserts, by a similitude in this manner: even as it
is equal that planters or plowmen should eat of the fruit or grain which
they have nourished or sown, and labored for, especially if they have
increased much fruit, or sown much corn, or taken much pains, that then they
should be partakers of the labors of their hands more plentifully: so
stands it with the righteousness of God to give to these that they may eat
of the fruit of their own way, that is, taste of that sorrow and confusion
which their dissolute lives and froward hearts do duly demerit. And be filled
with their own devices; albeit they could never make an end of inuenting and
practicing that which is evil, yet they shall be sated at last, and
surcharged with the effects thereof. Such fulness of shame, grief, desperation,
and all manner of torment, that they shall feel themselves ouerburthened
therewith, as is the stomach, when it is oppressed with too much meat, and
made sick by a surfeit.

Verse. 32. For the turning away of the simple slaieth them: and the prosperity
of fools destroys them.

THe former part of this verse is annexed to the premises, both as an
explication and confirmation of the same: for what are the ways which simple
ones (that is, such as have not discretion to get knowledge, when it is
offered) shall eat the fruit of their turning away, their wilful refusal of
wisdoms instructions, which they will neither learn, nor obey, nor with any
liking so much as look toward: and what are the fruits which such sinful
ways do cause those simple idiots to eat of? death and damnation: they slay
them: if they bring not violence upon their bodies, yet they bring both body
and soul to perdition for ever. The latter part preuenteth an objection that
might be made, and often is, against this and the former sentences of wisdom:
Does contemptuous turning away slay the simple? and do despisers eat the
fruits of their own ways? how comes it to pass then, that of all others
they commonly thrive best, and few are found so prosperous, and in so good
estate as they? The answer is made that the prosperity of fools shall
destroy them, both in hastening their judgments, and making it the more
grievous: and so stops not, but furthereth the executions of wisdoms
threatenings.

Verse. 33. But he that obeys me shall dwell safely from fear of evil.

LAstly, this point is amplified, and so shut up by the contrary, namely the
behavior and condition of the godly, altogether opposite to that of the simple
ones, scorners, and fools, formerly described: for these here commended,
despise not wisdom, nor turn away from her, but hearken attentively, and
yield obedience unto her: and therefore they live not in danger of death, of
plagues and punishments, but dwell safely, are out of peril of destruction, or
of any hurt, though not exempted from all crosses and sufferings, and be quiet
from fear of evil, not only no evil it self, such as would be noisome and
pernicious, shall affray them, but not so much as a suspicion and dread of it
shall go to his heart, to dismay him. Yet because no man can perfectly obey
wisdom in all things, the best in their infirmities are sometimes perplexed
and troubled with doubts, but never subdued, or utterly discouraged by them.
See chap. 10. verse. 9.

CHAPTER. II.
Verse 1. My son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my commandments
with thee.

THe wisdom and spirit of God having denounced most fearful and unavoidable
judgments against obstinate co^temners, does leave them, and comes now to
teach and encourage such as will be tractable whom in this chapter he
assisteth partly by precepts, prescribing the duties which they are to
perform, and partly by promises, assuring them of the good success, which
they shall not fail to find. The duties are set down generally in this first
verse, and more particularly in three next following.

The general duty is to give due intertainment to Gods holy messages first by
receiving his words, not only to hear them when they are graciously tendered,
but gladly and willingly embrace them with understanding, and so to be affected
and moved in heart with the power of them, as to desire and endeavor to obey
them, and then by hiding his commandments to keep them carefully being
received, which is expressed and made lightsome by a comparison taken from the
chariness of men, in preserving of their money, their jewels, or ought else
that is precious unto them: for such things they use to lay up safely, and
keep them under lock and key, that they be not robbed and beguiled of them.

Verse 2. And cause thine ears to hearken to wisdom, and incline thine heart
to understanding.

THe particular duties are the exercise of these means, whereby knowledge and
grace is obtained: which being four in number, two are contained in this
verse, and in the third, and the last in the fourth. The former of the two is
the attention of the ear, not hearing only but hearkening, and diligent heed
taking, to that which is spoken, making the ear to attend and hearken. The
latter in place, though first in order, is the desire of the soul, which
metaphorically, and by a comparison from corporal substances, he calls the
bowing of the heart, the enforcing of it by the help of the spirit, to be
religiously affected at Gods sacred ordinances.

Verse 3. Yea if thou call for ^isdome and liftest up thy voice for
understanding.

TO the two former duties, he conditioneth with them to adioyne a third, if
they would avail to get grace, and that is prayer; the manner whereof is
prescribed in the words of crying and lifting up of voice, importing the
feruency of it, that it ought to be ardent and earnest.

Verse 4. If thou seek her as silver, and search for her, as for hid treasures.

THe fourth means is here lastly prescribed, that study and industry be used,
by reading, hearing, conferring, and meditating, etc. And this is set forth by
a comparison, as men dig for silver, even with as much pains, great cost,
earnest affection, and constant continuance therein till we have found it, even
as the worldly man does for silver or gold, or any treasure which is hid in
some close, strong and secret place, as in the ground or within a wall, whether
men cannot come, but by toil and great labor: and yet not impossible to be
compassed by pains taking.

Verse 5. Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God.

AFter the preceps and instructions, follows the promise of good success to
every one which is tractable to observe these conditions proposed, he shall
understand the fear of the Lord, his heart and conscience shall experimentally
be acquainted with true piety and religion, and soundly also seasoned with an
holy illumination, and made judicious in the scriptures, and doctrines of
faith: so that he shall be well able to discern between light and darkness:
between truth and errors, in measure competent for his salvation.

Verse 6. For the Lord gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding.

THese words are added for a double use, as well to be a confirmation of the
promise, as an amplification of that excellent gift which is promised, and they
aptly serve for both. For (touching the former) how should they which in due
manner seek wisdom miss of it, seeing that he which incourageth them to
labor for it with assurance of obtaining it, is he which has the disposing of
it, and that is Jehovah himself, the eternal, unchangeable, and alsufficient,
who can easily work it with a word, as the manner described imports, out of
his mouth comes understanding. That is by his blessing, it being in a
borrowed speech ascribed to God, which properly belongs to man, who commonly
make their promises and appointments by the words of their mouths: in like
manner (though the Lord being a spirit has no use of mouth, or other corporal
members, and being omnipotent, his will carries power enough, without the
help of words) yet for our weak capacity that which he effectually works,
is imputed to the force of his words, as Mat. 4. 4. Man shall not live by bread
only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Lam. 3. 38.
Out of the mouth of the most high proceeds not evil and good? Jonah 2. 10.
And the Lord spoke unto the fish, and it cast up Jonah upon the dry land. And
touching the latter, namely the amplification, whosoever shall heedfully attend
to the purpose of the holy Ghost, may evidently perceive that wisdom is in
this verse, and the two next extolled and set forth by the cause, the glorious
and bountiful author thereof: and in the rest that follow, is commended by the
effects, the singular and admirable fruits of it. The author we see is the
Lord Jehovah, the only original, perfect, absolute, and eternal being, and
that out of his most gracious mouth it proceeds.

Verse 7. He has laid up true substance for the righteous: he is a shield to
them that walk uprightly.

Verse 8. That they may keep the paths of equity: and he preserves the way
of his Saints.

Having had occasion to speak of Gods beneficence, in bestowing that divine
and celestial gift of wisdom, he proceeds further to enlarge his praises,
for the effects of his

goodness, where may be noted: 1. The special favors which he shows. 2.
To what manner of persons they do belong.

The favors here mentioned are, provision and protection* The former whereof
is set forth by a similitude from provident fathers, who take care for their
children, and not only maintain them with food, and other necessaries, while
they are young, but carefully get, and lay up to make them a stock, when they
come to age: So, and better deals the Lord for his sons and daughters: for
whereas men gather corruptible goods for theirs, which many times come to
nothing, and they have no use of them, he hides that which is a being (as the
word signifies) for his: they shall be sure to enjoy the benefit of it; the
treasures of grace, joy, and glory, are safely reserved for them. The latter
is of two sorts, the one corporal concerning the outward man, as safety from
bodily enemies, and external dangers, which is also declared by a borrowed
speech, he being called a shield, that will intercept all noisome strokes, and
practices, that none of them shall light upon his people, to hurt them, though
for their trial, humility, and other profitable uses, they may be afflicted
by them. The other is spiritual concerning the inward man, as safety from
sin, and Satan, and apostasy, that notwithstanding, by these enemies of the
soul, they are in peril either to be misled through craft, or to be thrust
out of the right way, through violence, yet they shall keep the paths of
equity; they shall persevere, and proceed in their virtuous courses. And why?
For he preserves their way, he does as it were establish and guard them in
their weldoing by his grace, from the force and power of their own
corruptions, and the devils temptations, and wicked men's evil counsels, and
the worlds allurements, yea he directs, and by his providence prospers the
purposes, words, actions, and the whole course of their lives. Now he
describes those, for whom this provision is made, and to whom this protection
pertains diversely: first from their truth and sincerity, calling them
righteous ones. Secondly, from their holy conversation, that they walk
uprightly. Thirdly, from their happy estate, that they are the Saints of the
Lord: the deriuation of the Hebrew word imports such as to whom God shows
mercy, and so are made also godly, and merciful. So much for the cause of
wisdom, now follow the effects.

Verse. 9. Then shall thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity,
and every good path.

THe effect of wisdom, which he here begins to entreat of, is the vigor
and efficacy of it, whereby they are induced and made able to do that which
is good, as these words declare, and become circumspect and cautious to shun
that which is evil: as will appear in the sequel of that which follows.
Then, when thou have applied thine ears, and heart to wisdom: when thou have
called for understanding: when thou have diligently sought for it, and found
it, the Lord bestowing it upon thee, then shall thou understand, both know, and
iuditiously exercise justice, that which is lawful and right, and judgment,
prudence and good discretion, and equity, faithful and plain dealing, and
every good path, all good courses of righteousness and religion. And that he
means a practical knowledge, and not an intellectual only, it may be
seen by conference with other places; as chap. 8. v. 20. I cause to walk in
the way of righteousness, and in the midst of the paths of judgment. And in
the first chapter, verse. 3. To receive instruction, to do wisely by justice,
and judgment, and equity. See more there.

Verse. 10. When wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge delights thy
soul.

Verse. 11. Then shall counsel preserve thee, and understanding shall keep
thee,

Verse. 12. And deliver thee from the evil way.

Having in few words, but very significant, expressed the force of wisdom in
conducting and inabling men to that which is good; he is now about to declare
the virtues of it, for conservation against that which is evil: it is by a
borrowed manner of speech, or figure which we call Prosopopeia, compared to a
watch or guard, such as Princes and great men are wont to have about them for
the safety of their persons; and therefore it is semblably said in the eleventh
verse, (containing the sum of all) that counsel shall preserve thee, and
understanding shall keep them; their souls shall be as safe by the power
thereof, as the bodies of those which have a band of armed men to wait upon
them. Heereunto in the tenth verse he makes a passage, by teaching him that
would receive defense from wisdom, how he must be prepared for it: and
afterward in the twelfth, and those that follow, he specifieth the principal
hurtful things from which he shall be protected. In the preparation are two
things required; first, that Wisdom come not into the head only, so as it be
understood, or may be discoursed of; but into the heart, to season the
conscience, and that it be singularly loved, which will produce this effect,
that knowledge shall delight the soul, be pleasant unto it, as beautiful
sights are to the eyes, according to the proper signification of the word; or
as meat and drink are to the hungry and thirsty, or any thing which we
relish well, in which sense the word is also sometimes used, as Prou. 9. 17.
His bread is pleasant, etc. The hurtful things from which wisdom will defend
a man, are of two sorts; some are real, or actual, as the evil way, wicked
behavior, sinful attempts, exorbitant courses: some are personal, as means
and causes of the former, and these mentioned in the latter stream of the
twelfth verse, and more fully in those that next ensue it.

Verse. 12. And from the man that speaks perverse things.

Solomon has showed the actual evil, the wicked course of life, from which
the lovers of wisdom shall be shielded. And now he proceeds to promise
them safety also from the means thereof, such pestilent persons as use to
entice and corrupt others:

and these are 1. Dissolute men. 2. Whorish women.

Both which he describes at large, first the men, and them by sundry effects,
whereof each one as it were by steps surmounteth an other: the first is their
speech, that they speak perverse things, tending to the dishonor of God, and
the perverting of men, as the root and original of the word imports.

Verse. 13. And from them that leave the paths of righteousness, to walk in
the paths of darkness.

THe second effect of wicked men is their behavior, and deeds; (for ill
speaking is ever accompanied with ill doing) and these are set forth by an
opposition, or comparison of contraries, whereby their course of life is made
more odious; and therefore it is said, that they for sake the paths of
righteousness, which are also the paths of light, to walk in the paths of
darkness, which are the ways of ignorance and iniquity; as if he should have
said, they turn from the right way of knowledge and obedience, which leads
to salvation, and travel in the ways of sin toward destruction: and their
fault herein is so much the fouller, in that they go not astray by mere
error, or infirmity of their nature, as if they could not learn, or never were
directed to a better way; but against their knowledge, and contrary to the
light, they wilfully shun that good course which is approved of God, and
conform themselves to the will of Satan, and practice that which they would
never have examined by the rule of the word: for the shine thereof would
discover the hideousness of it, and make it appear to be odious and loathsome.

Verse. 14. Which rejoice in doing evil, and delight in wicked frowardness.

THe third property and effect of these wicked men, is the disorder of their
affections, whereby they aggrauate and much increase the naughtiness of their
words and actions; for they not only do evil, but rejoice therein: they come
to it with desire, they practice it with pleasure, and afterward are glad of
their hellish exploits; yea they exult, as the other word signifies, they
express that delight which they have taken in satisfying their lusts, either
by gesture, or countenance, or vaunting, or by some means or other, and many
of them glory most of that, whereof they ought to be most ashamed, as in
wicked frowardness; the word is perverseness of evil, sinful headiness in
their licentious attempts whatsoever.

Verse. 15. Whose ways are perverse, and they are obstinate in their paths.

THe last effect and property of the sinful miscreants, is their desperate
incorrigiblenesse, that albeit their ways be perverse, and all their course
and carriage be leaud and damnable, yet they are refractarie in them, and
resolved never to amend, but grow worse like resty iades, that are still going
backwards, when they should proceed in a journey. Neither will they hearken to
him that shall teach them by precept, nor yet be willing to follow him that
shall lead them by example, but are every way so auerse and froward, that their
Minister or best friends can have no hope or heart to deal any further with
them, but may leave them with a sigh as men incurable; as the Physician does
him that has the pangs of death upon him, or the Surgeon such a one as is
thrust through the heart. They are the same whom in the former chapter he
calls scorners, which would none of wisdoms counsel, but despised her
correction, etc.

Verse. 16. It shall deliver thee from the strange woman, from the stranger that
flattereth with her words.

NOw follows the second sort of perilous persons, from which, wisdom will
defend the men that love her: she will deliver them from the evil woman, from
the adulteress, and all her enticements, with the fruit and end thereof. And

here she is described by her 1. Qualities. 2. Effects.

Her qualities are, first, that she is a strange woman, one with whom thou
ought to have nothing to do: for strange stands in opposition to a man's
lawful wife; all others in that sense are strangers. So, other fire then that
which God fent down from heaven upon the altar, and was there continually
nourished, was called strange fire; then she is said to be a stranger, to be
reputed as a forreiner, that has alienated her self from God and his people,
by her filthy conversation. As therefore the Israelites might not marry with
women that were aliens, as being the daughters of strange gods; no more ought a
member of Christ to have company with an harlot, as being as it were of another
nation, not sanctified to the Lord; yea being distant from him by birth, as far
as the earth is from heaven. Her

effects are Her leaud and sinful behavior. The woe and misery whereunto she
brings her companions.

Some part of her misbehauiour is mentioned in this verse, as her smooeh and
flattering speech, whereby she labors to allure unwary and heedlesse
persons, and them with a bait to bring into her net.

Verse. 17. Which forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the covenant
of her God.

HEre have we declared unto us the effects of this strange woman, her
disloyalty and perfidious behavior, both against her husband and the Lord.
She forsakes her husband both in affection and action, though not perhaps in
bodily presence, as Potiphars wife, and the harlot mentioned hereafter in the
seventh chapter had not: neither do all, nor the most, but few of them utterly
refuse their husbands bed; notwithstanding she live and lie with him, yet she
is said to relinquish him, if she keep not her self to him only, and he
enjoy her wholly. Now to aggrauate the heinousness of the offense, Solomon
describes the husband so wronged, by his office and authority, and gives the
title of guide, adding withal a circumstance to make the fault appear the
fouler, that he is the guide of her youth; even he whom she first loved, to
whom she first gave her heart, and hand, and whom God had appointed to her as
an head and governor, even when she was young and had most need of direction.
Then her sin against God is set out, in that she has broken her faith
plighted in the contract, and at the marriage, and so is perjured, and that
against the Lord, whose covenant this was; not only for that he ordained
marriage to be entered into by such bonds and conditions, but because it was
ratified, sanctified, and established by his special presence, and with
special invocation upon his name.

Verse. 18. Surely her house tends to death, and her paths to the dead.

THe woe and misery whereunto the whorish woman does bring her customers is now
to be spoken of, and that is no less then destruction it self: for her house,
the filthiness and misbehauiour in her house, with the first entrance into
familiarity with her, tends to death; sometimes of the body, and always of
the soul, and her paths, her course and order of life will bring him that
accompanies her therein, unto the dead, to the same estate and punishment with
them, that have formerly perished in the same sin.

Verse. 19. Whosoever go in to her, return not again, neither attain they to
the way of life.

THe punishment of adultery is aggrauated by the certainty of it, and the
universality in respect of the offenders, being all almost in a desperate
estate: and therefore he says, Whosoever go in unto her, return not again;
none, of what estate or condition soever, that have familiarity, and commit
filthiness with her, escape without mischief, and hardly ever come to
repentance, or attain to the way of life, reform themselves, and take a
better course of life, that they might be saved. And so these words are for the
prevention of that wonted objection opposed against rebukes and threatenings for
this sin, we will repent and help all. But who does so (says the holy
Ghost) none that go in to her return again, that is, very few: for it is an
hyperbolicall, and comparatiue speech; as if he should have said, there are
none, to speak of, that reform themselves, in comparison of the multitude of
them which continue impenitent unto death and are damned. This manner of
speaking is frequent in the Scriptures. No man calls for justice, no man
contendeth for the truth. Esa. 59. 4. There is (...) that calls upon thy
name, neither that stirs up himself to take hold of thee. Esa. 64. 7. I
hearkened and heard, but none spoke a right, no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turns to his race, as the
horse rusheth into the battle. Ierem. 8. 9.

Verse. 20. That thou may walk in the way of good men and keep the paths
of the just.

THe virtue of wisdom has been commended, for the protection and defense
which it yields against wicked ways, and sinful people, which now he
amplifieth by the contrary, showing the benefit of it for direction to good
ways and the example and society of godly persons, as will be the better
perceived, if thou look back to the twelfth and thirteenth verses and annex
this unto them in this manner: It sh^^ deliver thee from the evil way, and
from the man that speake^e froward things, and from them that leave the ways
of righteousness, to walk in the ways of darkness: that thou may walk
^ the ways of good men, and keep the ways of the righteous; tha^ is, be
conversant with them, and conform thy self to the^ honest and holy behavior.

Verse. 21. For the righteous shall dwell on earth, and the vprigh^ shall
remain therein.

Verse. 22. But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, a^ the transgressors
shall be plucked out of it.

HEre have we the conclusion of the precedent discourse confirming it first by
the kindness of God, in way o^ promise unto the good, and then by his contrary
judgments in way of threatening unto the evil. Touching the former, he says,
that the just shall dwell in the earth, be protected in ti^ of peril, when
others perish, and they and theirs shall be established, so long as is good for
them, and enjoy al such blessings of this life, as will do them most good. But
the wicked shall ^^ cut off from the earth; the vengeance of God shall
ouerturne their persons, estates, and posterities, as grass is mown down, or
weeds are plucked up, or naughty trees are rooted out. If any object that the
godly commonly have least part in the earth, and earthly blessings, and are
soonest removed, let him consider that howsoever it seem so, yet indeed it is
nothing for. For while they live here the whole earth is theirs, with the use
of it, howsoever the Lord sees it good to put them to a spiritual diet, and
keeps them for surfeiting of excess, the better to fit them for their
heavenly inheritance: and when they are taken away by death, they be translated
to immortality and glory. Whereas the wicked enjoy that little, or that much
which they have, as usurpers and thieves do an house, which they have broken
into and keep for a few hours, until the officers come and apprehend them,
and then are they cast into prison, or led unto execution, they are eiected
with a witness, and cast into perpetual misery.

CHAPTER. III.
Verse 1. My son, forget not thou my law, but let thy heart keep my
commandments.

IN this Chapter the spirit of God proceeds to persuade his people to the
conscionable observation, and keeping

of his word, and that he does 1. By exhortations. 2. By reasons annexed
severally thereunto.

And the most of these are promises, yea all of them to the seven and twentieth
verse, and so after the thirtieth; yet amplified by their contraries, as will
appear in their places.

The exhortations are of two sorts: one is general, requiring an exact care of
al Gods law: the others are more special, containing an unfolded declaration of
sundry duties.

The first we have in these first words, wherein we may consider, first, the
persons to whom he speaks. Secondly, the counsel which he delivers.

The persons, are all faithful readers, or hearers, to whom without partialaty
he directs his speech, as if it were but one man, and he most dear unto him,
and therefore as before, so now again, and afterward, he uses the amiable name
of a son; as if he should say, It is not an enemy that deals with thee,
nor a bare friend, nor a master to his servant, nor a King to his subject, but
a father to his child: whether therefore thou look to God the author, he
loves thee tenderly that speaks unto thee, hearken therefore with attention,
and obey. His counsel is uttered, first, in a prohibition, forget not my law,
neither suffer my doctrine to slip out of thy memory, neither be unmindful to
put it in practice: then by a precept, but let thy heart keep my
commandments, get sound knowledge of them, and embrace them with vprightnes,
and good affection.

Verse 2. For they shall add unto thee length of days, and years of life,
and peace.

THe general precept for faithful keeping of Gods commandments has an ample
promise annexed unto it of a long life, and comfortable estate. For they,
wisdoms law and precept remembered, and obeyed, shall add unto thee length of
days: he means not that the terms, and times which the Lord has set shall
be lengthened, but as he has prefined a long life to any of his people, so
has he ordained it to be the reward of their obedience. And peace, welfare,
and prosperity, so far as is safe and good for thee, and corrupts not thy
heart with pride, vain confidence, forgetfulness of God, and death, and
immoderate love of the world. If any man except against these words as untrue,
or improbable, because many good men live in trouble, and dye in their youth,
let him consider that the obedience of the godly is not full, but in part, and
therefore it is no marvel, if in part only they are made partakers of
outward things: and hereunto add that the promises touching outward things are
not absolute, and simple, but conditional, and the Lord giving his children in
heaven eternity, and complete happiness, does verify all his promises with
advantage. And it pleases him many ways respecting their good, to shorten the
race of diverse whom he dearly loves. Sometimes, lest they should be
corrupted in the world, as that seems to be one cause why Ieroboams good 1.
King. 14. 11.
son was taken away so soon. Sometimes lest they should see the evils to
come: and therefore that worthy Josiah was Isai. 57. 1. 2.
called to his rest before the calamities that shortly after ensued. Sometimes
the wicked world unworthy of them and unkind unto them, is justly punished by
having them taken away Heb. 11. 3. 8.
from them. And for all this, notwithstanding they live never so short a time,
yet have they the length of days, every day being a whole day unto them, the
Sun of comfort, and of Gods favor arising upon them early in the morning,
and shining upon them brighter and brighter without any going down. Summer
fruit may be as ripe as the winter fruit, and yet gathered many weeks, or
some months before it.

Verse 3. Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind them an thy neck, and
write them upon the table of thy heart.

AFter the general precept, he prescribes especial duties, yet such as are
of large extent, and contain under them very many particulars: for by mercy
he means all good offices toward man; and by truth, faith, or faithfulness,
he understands all good duties which we owe to God. Which appears to be
so, because these being propounded in this verse are handled more at large in
the chapter, the latter in the former place, and the former in the second,
after the manner of the Hebrews. Now these graces he requires as carefully to
be kept, as prouidently gotten, admonishing that they forsake us not, speaking
by an hypallagy, he gives us a caveat, that we forsake not them, and withal
notes how ready they are (through our corruption) to be gone from us. And
the great difficulty of retaining them, and therefore in the next words he
requires that we should bind them to our necks, that is, look well to them,
and keep them safe, and tie them fast, as men do their chains, or costly
Jewels which they use for their delight, and ornaments: and withal to write
them on the table of our heart, that is, always to remember them, and think on
them, speak of them, and do them, as we use to set down in our tables those
things whereof we would keep a precise memorandum.

Verse 4. So shall thou find favor, and good understanding in the sight of
God, and man.

THe former precept has this promise annexed unto it for a reason: wherein two
things are promised: the first is, that by observation of that holy advice, or
commandment, a man shall find, that is, obtain comfort, favor, love,
liking, and good acceptatio: the other is, he shall find good understanding,
whereby is meant good success, or any such blessings, whereby understanding is
rewarded: for here is the cause put for the effect. And both these are said to
be before God, and man, that is, God will be gracious to such, and man will
be friendly. God will give them the fruit, and recompense of their
understanding, and cause their good estate to testify their wisdom, even
such as he does approve of, and man shall be witness of the same. Where now
may be seen how pertinently the promise performed does answer to the precept
obeyed. He that by the truth is serviceable to God, and likewise by mercy is
profitable to man, shall find favor and honor both with God, and man.

Verse 5. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own
wisdom.

Having in the precept last before, commended to us the constant possession, or
rather us unto the faithful custody of mercy, and thereby all righteousness
required in the second table, and truth, the quintessence of the first he
begins with the latter, declaring certain particular duties, and benefits
of piety, to the seven and twentieth verse, and then entreats of the former.
In the first place he persuades to trust and put confidence in God, which is
a resting, and reposing our selves on him, and his fatherly providence, both
for deliverance from all evil things, and the fruition of all good things
needful for us touching this life, and that to come. And hereof he
prescribes the manner, that it be with the whole heart, constant, stable,
firm, and well fixed, without wavering or diffidence: for he would not have
his sufficiency or fidelity to be suspected, or called into question. Neither
is this all, but much heed must also be taken that the heart be not divided,
partly depending upon the Lord, and hoping for help from him, and partly
relying upon other means, and putting affiance in them. Love is communicable
to creatures, so that it be in an inferior place, and fear also if it be
subordinate to the fear of him, and agreeable to his ordinance; but confidence
is annexed to his imperial crown, and reserved peculiarly unto himself. And
therefore he sets it forth here by the contrary, opposing unto it ones own
wisdom; that is to say, wit and policy, whereby a man is able to shift, and
make provision for himself in all cases; and naming one fleshly stay, he
means all of like nature, as wealth, worthiness, strength, friends and
innumerable others, more then can perticularly be recounted. And his admonition
is, that we lean not unto that one, or any of the rest, taking the similitude
from aged, or impotent persons, who commit the weight of their bodies to the
strength of their staff; if it be sound and strong enough, they are vpholden
by it, and stand fast; if it be rotten, cracked, or too small, they fall to the
ground with the breach of the same: or from houses or edifices which are
supported by pillars, which being firm, do bear up the roof and whole
building; but they being weak and insufficient, down comes all. And such is
the state of those which either utterly renounce all affiance in God, and
betake themselves wholly to worldly helps, or else trust that he will
establish them on the one side, and their own props made of reeds and wheat
strawes* shall steadfastly uphold them on the other. It is as good for a
foundation to be laid altogether on the sand, as partly on the sand, and
partly on a rock; and an house to be without buttrasses on both sides, if it
have nothing to sustain it, but ruinous walls on the one.

Verse 6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy ways.

Unto trust he requires knowledge to be adjoined, which is the understanding,
and apprehension of his will, and of his word, and this is declared by the use
and exercise of it, and that by the subjects, and those by their extent and
larg(...)s. The exercise of knowledge is an acknowledgement that profession be
made of him, with service done unto him. The subjects thereof are the ways of
men, the whole passage of their life, their actions which they perform, the
words which they utter, and the cogitations which they conceive. The extent of
the same is expressed by the note of universality, all: nothing is to be
done, nothing is to be spoken, nothing is to be imagined or thought of,
contrary to the rules thereof. To this he adds a second argument, taken from
the benefit and prosperous event of this knowing and acknowledging of him, he
shall direct thy works, and thy words, and purposes, by him thou shall be
informed what is lawful, and what is unlawful, what is holy, and what is
sinful, what is useful, and what is hurtful, what is most seasonable, and
what is out of season: by him thy heart shall be inclined to make choice of
that which is best, and to refuse that which is unfitting: by him thou shall be
assisted to perform thy actions, and utter thy speeches in such manner, as
shall be most acceptable to him, and profitable to thy self and others.

Verse 7. Be not wise in thine own eyes, but fear the Lord, and depart from
evil.

A Third precept he gives to fear the Lord, which is to subject thy self
unto him, and to stand in reverent awe of him: for his truth, justice,
greatness, goodness, omniscience, and vbiquitie: and because of his holy word,
his glorious acts and righteous judgment. And hereunto he makes a way by
remouall of that which is against it, and an impediment unto it, which is
selfe-liking. Be not wise in thine own eyes: that is, be not conceited, and
have no opinion of thine own wisdom. It is a borrowed speech, wherein the
estimation of the mind is compared to the aspects of the steare, according to
other texts of Scripture. Psalm. 101. 6. Mine eyes shall be to the faithful of
the land: that is, I will much regard them: and Isai. 66. verse. 2. To him will
I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit: that is, I will
declare my favor, and good acceptance, and minister comfort and help to him.
Now by this one, he forbids all proud thoughts, and imaginations of ones
self, for what respect soever. For an hie mind, and lofty conceit of a man's
own excellency will never agree with the true fear of God, which is evermore
joined with the sight of thine own vileness. And this grace he sets notably
forth by a worthy effect of it, the departure from evil, and that consists
partly in avoiding the baits of it, that we be not ensnared therewith, and
fall into it: and partly in breaking off sin (wherein we have formerly lived)
by sound repentance, and reformation: and setting it down indefinitly he
understands all kind of wickedness, as of heart, of act, of tongue, of any
sense, of any member, and is the same in sense with that which the Apostle
expresses in other terms, Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of
flesh, and 2. Cor. 7. 1.
spirit.

Verse. 8. So shall health be to thy navel, and marrow to thy Shikkui.
bones.

THis promise is added, not only to the precept immediately foregoing it; but
to those also in the fifth and sixth verses, which require an absolute
dependence on the Lord, as this last does an holy dread of him, with a
disclaim of their own wisdom, and an abandoning of all vicious behavior.
The reward promised is a good and comfortable estate, if not conspicuously
maintained with great plenty, and abundance, yet secretly, and in an hidden and
extraordinary manner nourished with effectual sufficiency. And this he
alligorically resembles to the condition of an infant, which in the womb
receives nourishment at the navel, whereby it enjoys continuance of life,
breath, health, and growth; and after it is borne by the milk which it
sucketh, and the food that is ministered unto it; the bones are replenished with
moistness, that is, marrow (by a metaphor taken from the moisture of the
earth, which feeds the roots of plants with nouriture, and they the stock,
or stem, and branches, with sap.)

This marrow of the bones proves the body to be in health, and good liking; as
Job describes the welfare of a man by the same note, saying, His breasts are
full of milk, and his bones run Job. 21. 24.
full of marrow. And this similitude very aptly befitteth the matter in hand,
and preuenteth such exceptions as fleshly men might take against the former
precepts. For if we nothing rely on our wisdom, but utterly relinquish the
estimation of it (says carnal reason) how can we possibly avoid penury? For
men would soon be starued for all their faith and holiness, if they had no
forecast to relieve themselves withal. Which thing corrupt sense also seems
to confirm, and vpbraideth us with the poverty and need of many, which will
not live by their wits, nor be opinionate thereof, which will not shift for
themselves indirectly, but do fear the Lord, and depart from evil. Do not
we see (says it) diverse of them quite destitute of lands, or living, stock,
or store, or any thing before hand to keep themselves and their families? what
be they the better for their humility, devotion, and mortification? The
fallacy of both these, as well of senseless sense, as of unreasonable reason
is detected, and confuted of the holy Ghost by this elegant similitude. What
wisdom or policy has the babe newborn to make shift for it self? and yet
the body of it thriueth as well as the thrifty husbands spoken of in the
Gospel; and who looks to the child in the womb? or Luke 12.
what substance has it lying by to maintain it? Nay, it has not so much as
the use of a mouth to receive meat, or milk, if any hand, or breast could
minister the same unto it: and yet the rich man's great barnes full of corn did
not better relieve him, then Gods providence, or ordinance does this poor
embrion.

Verse. 9. Honor the Lord with thy riches, and with the chief of thy revenues.

Having proposed certain of the principal parts of piety, as confidence in
God, etc. he teaches every man how to bestow and employ the same in any
condition of life, according as he shall find himself either blessed, or
crossed by the hand of the Lord; and therefore in this verse teaches him how
to use prosperity; and in the next save one, how to bear adversity. Touching
the former, he commands to honor the Lord with his riches; not only by
discharging such leuies, rates, and necessary dues as are required at his
hands, for the maintenance of his ministry, and the means of his service; but
also by a frank and free contribution, for the furtherance of true religion*
and Gods holy worship, as they were bound to pay tithes, and first fruits, and
taught to bring free will offerings, and voluntary oblations. Now the things
to be consecrated he sets forth, first, by the quality, that they be not
things vile, base, and of no value, and as it were the refuse of their
substance, but the choice, chief and principal thereof: the performance of
which is commended in Abel, whom Moses reported Genesis 4. 4.
to have offered of the fat of the cattle: and the default hereof is much
taxed in the Jews by Malachy, saying: You offer unclean bread on my altar;
and ye say, Wherein have we polluted Mal. 17. 8. 14.
thee? In that ye say, The table of the Lord is not to be regarded. And if ye
offer the blood for a sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame, and
sick, is it not evil? offer it to thy Prince, will he be content with it,
says the Lord of hosts? But cursed be the deceiuer, which has in his flock a
male, and offers to the Lord a corrupt thing.

Secondly, by the generality of kinds, that they dedicate to God part of all
their profits, whether it be of the croppe of the ground, or of the fruits of
the trees, or of the cattle of the flock, or of whatsoever other commodities
do accrue unto them. And though riches be only here specified, yet are all
other endowments to the same purpose to be destinated, and after the same
manner to be used; as credit, authority, strength, knowledge, eloquence,
cunning, and other good gifts both of grace and nature.

Verse. 10. So shall thy barnes be filled with abundance, and thy wine press
run over with new wine.

ANd because God cannot be well honored with riches without charges, and no
charges press a carnal heart so hard as those that are best expended; he
therefore encourages us to bestow this cost, and that with a promise of
greater gain, which he hyperbolically amplifieth, and with an holy excessive
kind of speech: his meaning is, that we shall be so far from being
impouerished by this cost, as that contrariwise we shall be enriched by the
same, the blessing of God being so great upon our labor, as that we shall
have as much corn as our barnes and granaries can contain; and wine in such
abundance, as that our wine presses, tubs, and other vessels shall run over
with plenty, or all other commodities proportionable and equivalent unto those
two. And though these things should fail to rise to such a quantity; yet this
promise does never fail of verity and truth, for as much as less measure of
earthly possessions may oftentimes be of greater use, and much more for comfort
and contentment. The wisdom of God sees in this argument a pregnancie, and
aptness to induce men to obey the exhortation: and therefore he puts it as
a forcible weapon into the hand of faith, for the suppression and keeping under
of diffidence, which causes so much grudging and restrainednesse, most men
thinking all to be lost that is well bestowed: whereas if they could
apprehend, and foresee the gain that will redound unto them, and the profit
they shall receive, they would esteem benificence, and large expenses
discreetly laid out for good uses, to be the chief point of thrift, and all
good husbandry: and they may well know, that when their barnes, wine presses,
shops, storehouses, chambers, coffers, treasuries, fields and pastures are
replenished with all store, plenty, and furniture belonging severally unto
them; yet they have not therein attained unto the fullness of their wealth, nor
best of their substance. For these earthly riches are promised and given only
as pledges and pawnes of more worthfull possessions, even celestial treasures,
and inheritances.

Verse. 11. 12. My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither be
weary of his correction. For whom the Lord loves, he corrects, even as a
father the son in whom he delights.

WE have seen how, and for what cause God is to be served in the state of
prosperity, whence he passes to another point, teaching us submissiuely, and
patiently to yield to his words, and the stripes of his hands in the state of
adversity. And this he does by way of a ( Prolepsis) after this manner.
Object. Notwithstanding all the wealth, and abundance with other kinds, and
degrees of felicity promised to them that fear the Lord, and dedicate
themselves, and that which they have unto his service; yet experience shows
that none are more afflicted with poverty, and other crosses, then such as are
most devoted to him, being willing to depart with any thing for his sake. Answ.
We find this to be true indeed, in all ages and places it so falls out;
howbeit the afflictions which they sustain are not punishments coming from
the wrath of God to their hurt, but chastizements from his love, and laid upon
them for their good: whereupon he exhorts to bear them accordingly,
delivering a precept, and backing the same with reasons. The precept contains
two rules monitorie, directed to the sons of wisdom, which are fruitful
readers, attentive hearers, and embracers of her: the first is, that they
despise not correction, viz. that they make not light account of it, as they
do who will not take notice of any strokes, or judgments that light upon
them; or if they be touched with the feeling thereof, they impute the same
either to fortune or destiny, or ascribe all to inferior and subordinate
causes, and turn their eyes from beholding the hand of him that strikes, and
from the sight of their own sins, which by due desert have caused themselves
to be smitten: and as they do who (notwithstanding they feel the smart of the
rod, and cannot but see the justice of God therein) are yet become senseless
and obdurate, without godly sorrow, without godly shame, without godly fear,
and without all godly remorse and humiliation: and as they do who seem to be
somewhat affrighted, and for a time dejected with grief, and humility, yet
proceed not to reformation of their vicious behavior: and as they who in
extremity of misery reform some part of their misbehauiour, and seem for a
time penitent, and very contrite for their offenses; yet when the calamity is
passed over, and they are freed from punishment and peril, they return like
the dog to his vomit, and live as impiously, as impurely, and as
unrighteously, as ever they did in former time: so then this is to despise
correction, not to be bettered by it, by making some good and profitable use
of it.

The other rule is, to avoid another extremity of being weary of his
correction, viz. when men be discouraged at their afflictions, when they
languish and faint under the burden of them: for that produces many
pernicious effects, thereby they are disabled from all good services, they
cannot be industrious in their several callings with any cheerefulnes: they
cannot pray with any comfort, they cannot give thanks to God with any
ioyfulnes: they cannot embrace the word with good attention, nor meditate in it
with any delight. We read in Exodus that the Lord sent a gracious message unto
his people, saying, I will take you for my people, and will be your God, Exodus
6. 7. 8.
and you shall know that I the Lord your God will bring you from the burdens
of the Egyptians. And I will bring you into the land, which I swear I would
give to Abraham, and to Isaac, and to Jacob, and will give it you for a
possession: So Moses told the children of Israel thus: but with what success,
the same text tells us, they hearkened not to voices for anguish of spirit,
and cruel bondage. Hence proceed distempers, passions, murmurings, grievous
conclusions of men against themselves: as that God abhors them, as damnable
hypocrites, reprobates, and cast awayes: that there will never be an end of
their miseries, and troubles, that they shall not be able to bear them long,
but fall down under them with desperation. Hence proceeds indirect seeking of
help, untimely, and unconscionably, and after a shifting manner. Such events
are not only ordinary in these days, but have bin ancient in former times,
and that amongst the dearest of Gods own servants, such as were Job, and
Jeremiah, whose discouraged hearts, drew their Job 3. 3. Ier. 2. 14.
tongues to passionate speeches, cursing the day of their birth, and the news
tellers thereof, with sundry imprecations against themselves, and their
innocent friends: and as were the afflicted Saints in the time of the Prophets
complaining after this sort: The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has
forgotten me: Isai. 49. 14. Lam. 3. 8.
and after this, My strength and mine hope is perished from the Lord. And as
was David's crying out in his haste, that all men were liars, seeming to tax
Samuel amongst the rest, that there was no truth in any, no not in him, nor
even then when in the name of the Lord he assured him of their kingdom. And
therefore in his distrustfulnes concluding that at one time or other, he should
dye by the hands of Saul, he fled out of Israel into Palestina, from the Church
of God to the heathen, where he was driven to miserable perplexity, to show
diverse uncomely 1. Sam. 21. 11.
tricks, and to play such parts as were altogether unseemly for his
profession, place and person. The reasons whereby he inciteth men to endure
afflictions without contempt, or discouragement, are two: the first is, the
principal efficient, the Lord himself, who is to be feared in the least of
his works: yea in his word, and who has a whole forest of rods to scourge us
withal, if we profit not by fewer, or smaller; which if we well considered, we
would stoop at the least, and fear at the first shaking of his hand at us.
For to contemn his chastisements is to despise himself, and to cause him to
lose his labor in nurtering of us. For we esteem it a sign of gracelesnesse
for a child beaten by his father not to shed tears, so far as often times it
draws tears from his fathers eyes: even so much more it argues want of
grace in us, if we melt not when we are corrected by God himself.

The second reason, and that which is to confirm the heart with patience, is
the moving cause, together with the formal, the favor and goodness of God
inducing him to inflict chastisements, that he be not driven to execute
vengeance and punishments. And this is cleared by a comparison of the like
dealing of a father with his child, who does not beat his son to kill him,
but to correct him: not to break a leg, or an arm, but his stubborn heart:
not to make him run away, but to cause him to return to a better mind, and
to better behavior: and in a word, not because he hates him, but because he
bears a singular love unto him.

Verse 13. Blessed is the man that finds wisdom, and the Iaphik.
man that gets understanding.

FOr the performance of the former duties he prescribes the most effectual
means, viz. the virtue, and knowledge of Gods holy word, which he calls by
the name of wisdom, the commendation whereof he sets forth by sundry
arguments, and illustrations. And in the first place he proposes a large, and
notable effect, the confluence and marrow of many effects, the felicity, and
happy estate of those upon whom it is conferred. And this he declares by an
Epiphonema, or acclamation, to the end to ravish our minds with the
excellency of it. Blessed is the man (says he) oh how blessed is the man that
finds true wisdom, which discerns what it is, and wherein it consists,
and accordingly valueth it as a thing most admirable, rare, and precious: and
the man that gets understanding, which by diligent travail in the
Scriptures, and profitable use of Gods sacred ministry obtains soundnes of
judgment, vprightnes of heart, and a good conscience, as far as he is able
to conform himself to the will of the Lord, in believing his promises, and
obeying his commandments. The word which we translate ( gets) signifies
to draw, or fetch out, being borrowed from such as work in mines, who dig in
the earth, and from thence bring forth gold, or silver, or other metals.

Verse 14. 15. For the merchandise of it is better then the merchandise of
silver: and the gain thereof better then fine gold. She is more precious then
rubies: and all things that thou can desire, are not to be compared to her.

HE makes good his position by comparisons: first, metaphorically equalizing
wisdom with gainful commodities: it is not like to dead stuff, or wares
which will lie upon a chapmans hand without vent, or utterance, but it is a
merchandise that is vendible, and as good as ready money. ^^condly, he gives
a precedencie unto it, and prefers it before precious treasures, and such as
are had in estimation, whereof he makes a special enumeration of three,
every one excelling other. The first is silver: the second is gold better then
that: the third precious stones, which are richer then both, and adds a
fourth more general, and comprehends the former, and all other things of like
sort, whatsoever is desirable, or men can set their hearts upon. For God
bestows these treasures upon his enemies, and wisdom upon his friends, and
children only: these treasures are of earthly matter, but wisdom is
celestial and heavenly: these treasures are uncertain and of no continuance;
but wisdom is constant, and everlasting: these treasures are many times
hurtful, and pernicious both to soul and body; but wisdom only useful and
profitable: these treasures are fugitive, and leave a man at his death, when he
has most need of comfort; but wisdom then stands to him, and ministers
then most consolation to his conscience: these treasures procure no favor
before the judgment seat of God; but wisdom brings then acceptance and
glory.

Verse. 16. Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left* hand honor
and riches.

FRom the general effects of wisdom he descends to her spiritual benefits,
which are parts of that blessed estate before propounded, and proves that it is
better then gold and silver, and other delectable things, in that it is the
cause and principal means whereby good men obtain the fruition of them, and
some of them are external blessings and concern the outward man, and these are
contained in this verse: some are internal, and concern the inward man, and
these we shall find in the two next. And here he uses an elegant Prosopop^^*
ascribing to wisdom the person of a wealthy Lady, or bountiful woman, who is
never empty handed, but has alwaie^ princely gifts in a readiness to bestow
upon her favorites and followers, and amongst which that which is first
mentioned, is more then any potentate, or all creatures are able to give; and
that is, length of days, or a long life, whereof the greatest plenty of
earthly commodities are appurtenances, and attendants. And this she ever
grants with limitations* if it stand with the good welfare of her friends: if
it inableth them to be serviceable to their maker, and profitable to th^^
brethren, and thrifty for the increase of their own happin^^ if it detain
them not too long from their eternal rest, a^^ presence of their Savior, and
the enioyment of immortal blessedness. Honor sometimes, and to some persons,
dignities, titles and preferments* and always unto all, a
reuere(...)stimation, in the hearts, and by the testimony of the godly, unto
whom their graces appear: yea the very wicked do fear them, and stand in
dread of them; according to that saying of Micah, They shall be like a young
Lion among the s^^k^ Micah 5. 8.
of sheep. And albeit the tongues of maleuolent men be commonly pressed to
traduce both them and their ways, yet many of those that are most depraved may
truly say with the Apostle Paul; We approve our selves to every man's conscience
in the sight 2. Cor. 4. 2. 3.
of God. We might bring the ungodly men's own behavior in their extremities
for clear confirmation of this: whose prayers do many of them sooner crave
when they are in terrors? whose counsels do they more willingly ask in
distresses? whose care and fidelity do they more securely depend upon for
their children, and their estates, when death will permit them no longer to
manage their affairs? do not these things argue that they repute them to be
holy, to be wise, to be righteous, faithful and trusty? And can this good
opinion be had of them without honor? yet all have not this in like measure,
nor attain to this forthwith so soon as they entertain wisdom: for the
virtues of many lie hidden for a time, and appear not to the world, but
through the virulent tongues of some they and their actions are misdeemed, and
hardly censured of others, and many are persuaded indeed that they are grievous
offenders whom God approves to be faithful and faultlesse: but this is not a
perpetual infamy, neither shall it always cleave unto them. For God will not
fail in due time to clear their innocence according to his promise in the
Psalm, saying: Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust in him, and he shall Psalm.
37. 5. 6.
bring it to pass. He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and
thy judgment as the noone day. And in the same verity the Apostle fully
agrees with the Prophet, though he apply it to an other purpose, when by
opposition of contraries he says, Some men's sins are open before hand, and
go before unto inagement; 1. Tim. 5. 24. 25.
but some men's sins follow after. Likewise also good works are manifest
before hand, and they that are otherwise cannot be hid.

And to honor he adioyneth riches, whereof though wisdoms enemies be also
partakers, and that in abundance, yet are they not made equal therein with her
friends and servants: for they are not both enriched with the same hand,
neither are they given them for the same cause, neither do they enjoy the
fruit and benefit of them in the some manner. It is the hand of Gods providence
that ministers to the wicked, and it is the hand of his favor and kindness
that ministers to the godly. And it is not by way of extenuation called a left
hand, but only to declare that he is liberal with the one, as well as with the
other, he blesses the righteous with them, as with ornaments and rewards, for
a recumpence of their service, but he curses the wicked therewith as with
gyues and snares for a punishment of their sins: the righteous have true
right in them, and good use of them, and sound comfort with them: but the
wicked are usurpers, and therefore punishable for their intrusion, and they
either half starve themselves through niggardize, or else glut themselves with
volupruonsnesse, or are filled with toilefull troubles, sorrows, enuies,
fears, and manifold vexations; by all which it appears that the wealth of
the godly is the peculiar gifture of wisdom, and yet not such as is
communicated to all: for it will be burdenous to some, and dangerous to
others, by raising up their minds with pride, or drawing down their affections
to the world, by means whereof they should have less communion with Christ,
or participation of his heavenly riches, and therefore be will not lay too
heavy load on them that cannot well bear it, nor sat them with over much who
are so subject to surphets, but stinteth and dieteth them, as parents do their
children, and yet they shall be sure to be provided for with enough, and freed
from the peril of want and penury.

Verse. 17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness; and all her paths are peace.

IN the premises were specified the blessings which wisdom brings to the
outward man; and in this present sentence are added certain desirable graces
which it works in the inward man, as that it refreshes the heart with sweet
delight and ioyfulnesse, establishes the conscience with peace and
tranquillity, which he seems to mention for prevention of the exception that
corrupt flesh and blood is apt to take, and the quarrels which it is wont to
pick against Gods holy wisdom, as that it is painful, and requires more
labor and travel, yea and the obedience to it is sower and bitter, denying us
the delights that others have, requiring more strict and austere behavior then
others use: and this is not all, but it makes life unpeaceable without rest and
quietness, by procuring many molestations and troubles. There is no such
matter of tediousness, and restlesnes, (says he) for her ways, viz. the
work and duties which she prescribes (it being a borrowed speech taken from
travelers: for every good service well performed is a step toward heaven, and
a proceeding toward endless bliss and happiness) are ways of pleasure,
viz. minister much spiritual joy, and delectation to the soul of a regenerate
man, notwithstanding they be very distasteful to corrupt nature: as is auerred
by our Savior, saying; Take my Mat. 1. 29. 3^
yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly, and ye shall find
rest to your souls; for my yoke is easy, and my burden 1. Ioh. 5. 3.
light: and also by Saint John, flatly, and in plain terms denying that his
commandments are grievous. And all her paths are peace; all that Christian
conversation which she appoints and directs her attendants to walk in,
tends to the comfort of their hearts by the assurance of Gods favor and love
to them: for their sincere obedience is an infallible testimony of their sound
faith, and that apprehends Gods justice to be satisfied by Christ, and so
their sins to be remitted: and so the Lord to be reconciled, and so their
fierce and vnquied conscience to be pacified. And this is agreeable to those
holy sayings of the Apostle: Being justified by faith, we have peace with Romans
5. 1. 2.
God through our Lord Jesus Christ by whom also we have access by faith into
this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, etc.
The kingdom of God is not meat and Romans 14.
drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

Verse. 18. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold on her: and happy is
every one that retains her.

THe last and largest spiritual blessing which wisdom brings, he has
reserved to the last place, for the knitting up of all, and that is everlasting
life, and all the fullness of felicity with it; for it is a means, instrument,
and pledge of our restitution to a better state then we lost in Adam: which is
made lightsome by a similitude of the tree of life planted in the midst of
Paradise, which was to our first parents a sacrament of eternal life. She not
only restores us to this happy condition, but also conserueth and keeps us
in the same; as appears by the promise made to the faithful, in the
Revelation of Saint John. To him that overcomes I will give to eat Apoc. 27.
of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. Whereas
contrariwise, Adam being once overcome was excluded, and kept out of Paradise,
that he should never afterward taste of that sacramental tree. And as this
divine wisdom Genesis 3. 22. 23.
is so effectual to them that lay hold on her; so it is no less fruitful in
them, it fructifieth often, yea continually, and sends forth great variety of
Christian virtues; and therefore it is said in the Apocalypse, that this tree
bears twelve manner Apoc. 22. 2.
of fruits, and yields her fruit every month. Hereupon he concludes that
which he first expounded, that she does confer happiness, and make men
blessed, but withal he notes who they be, and what they do; not only such
as hear of her, speak of her, or look upon her, but take hold of her:
neither so alone (for that is not enough) but retain her also and hold her
fast.

Verse. 19. The Lord by wisdom has founded the earth, by understanding he
has stablished the heavens. Conen.


Verse. 20. By his knowledge the depths are broken up; and ^^^ clouds drop down
dew.

Wisdom having bin justly praised for her great bounty, and gracious
effects, is here further commended, and duly magnified in respect of the most
excellent, glorious, and illustrious cause of it: for it is that where of God
Jehovah, the eternal and original of all things, is the author, who is
described by certain works, wherein conspicuously he do exercise the same;
and these are in number four: whereof two are concerning the creation, in the
19. v; and two concerning the ordering and government, in the 20. v. and
according to these he would have all the rest to be considered.

Touching the first, it is said that the Lord by wisdom founded the earth:
under which he comprehends the seas also. Which kind of speech he uses,
not because he has laid any thing under the earth, as a foundation or
groundwork, whereupon it is sustained like other buildings: (for it hangs
upon nothing) but to note the sure and stable standing of it, as if it had a
foundation answerable to the building.

Touching the second he says, by understanding (and as the word signifies)
aptly, and trimly frames, and likewise makes firm, and sure, and safe from
perishing, and constant in the courses, and reuolutions of the starrie moveable
spheres, so long as the world endures, the heavens, whereby he means that
that is over us, the celestial bodies, motions, and influences, and beneath
these, all the regions of the air.

Touching the third, it is said, By his knowledge the depths are broken up,
that is, he claue the depths, made the fountains that run along within the
earth, to cleave asunder, and to break forth of the bowels of the earth, and
to run in the channels of the same, and the same issuing out of the entrails
of the earth, have also fit currents for their courses upon the earth: for we
may see what meet and convenient discents are ordained for them from dales to
valleys, and from valleys to valleys, from well heads they have gutters to
convey them to small brooks, and the smaller brooks run in rilles, and the
rilles pass out into greater rivers, and the great rivers have a ready passage
prepared for them to flow into the Sea; otherwise some places would be turned
into bogges or fennes, and made unfruitful; others would be drowned up, and
made uninhabitable, and few or none would be so commodious for men, and other
creatures, as now they are.

Touching the last, he says, The clouds drop down dew: whereby he means
rain, and other falling moisture of all sorts, which are vapors ascending out
of the earth, to the end that being distilled in the air, they might return
again with greater virtue to water the ground. And this is obseruable for the
manner, that it comes moderatly with drops, and not excessiuely with
streams: if he should open the windows of heaven, and let it gush down, as
he did in Noah: time, it would drown up, and destroy all; but trickling down
in this mild sort, is comfortable for men, and beasts, and profitable for
corn, grass, herbs, trees, and all kind of plants both for their growth and
fruitfulnes. Thus God is magnified by his works of creation, conservation, and
providence, that each of those is done by his wisdom, and understanding, to
show his Alsufficiencie in performing his promise to them that embrace his
wisdom.

Verse 21. My son, let not these things depart from thine eyes: keep sound
wisdom, and discretion.

Mezimma.
HEre we have an application of the former discourse: for out of the same he
infers an exhortation, or rather renews that which he had before
propounded, and confirms it with fresh and fit arguments. The exhortation is
delivered first negatiuely in the manner of a caveat, Let not them, either
wisdom it self, or the reasons brought to require obedience to it, depart
from thine eyes, either forgotten, or carelessly neglected. The simile is either
taken from Archers, which intentiuely aim at the mark they shoot at; or from
Pilots, or sailers, who with all possible diligence labor to retain the sight
of the Lode-starre to direct their course accordingly; or from wise travelers
who most heedfully mark their way, and therefore have their eyes constantly
upon it, lest through their negligence they should miss the same, and wander
into bypath: or from the use of philacteries, and writings of the
Commandments upon the edges of their garments required in the Law, that they
should not only wear them, but with all heed respect them.

Next affirmatively, keep, viz. mark, and remember, set thy delight upon, and
practice: let judgment, memory, affection, and conscience retain sound
wisdom, not humane, vain inventions, not the devices of men's brains, which
to carnal reason seem glorious and excellent, but that which God does
inspire, and ratify in his own holy word; this he calls that which is true,
and sound, and solid matter, as if all other things, especially fleshly
policies seem rather to be, then to be indeed, and rather shadows, then
substances. Discretion] The word signifies cogitation or thinking, or good
aduisement: for that although wisdom come from God, and be in our selves, and
in our minds; yet he would have us use our minds and cogitations to the
attaining of it, and constant meditation after it is attained.

Verse 22. So shall they be life to thy soul, and grace to thy neck.

Unto this precept he adds diverse great and gracious promises for life,
honor, and safety, etc. and therefore faith he, So they, the wisdom and
grace of God by this means entertained, shall be life to thy soul shall
quicken thee in the inward man, and shall be as the seeds of eternal life,
animating thy soul, as that does thy body; which without these is but a
spiritual carcass, like to a senseless, liuelesse, and spiritlesse body. For
the state of none without grace, is better then that of the Gentiles, without
knowledge, of whom it is said, that having their understanding darkened, they
were alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that was in them,
because of the hardness of their heart. And therefore in diverse places we shall
find exhortations to embrace the word of God with sound knowledge of it, upon
this ground: as, Keep my commandments, and live: and my law as the apple of
thine eye. Prou. 7. 2.
And Isai. 55. 3. Incline your ears to me: hear and your soul shall live.

And grace to thy necke] Ornaments of honor, like to chains or jewels
wherewith great personages are wont to deck themselves, as well to set forth
their dignities, as to adorn their persons: for with both these are wisedoms
children graced: they of hie degree, being the sons and daughters of God, and
more honored with spiritual graces, and holy behavior then any other can
possibly be with silver and gold, or any kind of jewels, though never so rich
and costly: so that they need not be ashamed to come into any presence,
especially of God, they need not be afraid of contempt, and disgrace, for good
men will reverence them, though in the world never so poor and base, and none
w^ll despise them but contemptible persons* who also thereby shall get more
shame themselves for their folly, and be filled with reproach by Gods righteous
judgment.

Verse 23. Thou shall walk in the way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble.

Verse 24. When thou lie down thou shall not be afraid: yea, thou shall lie
down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.

AS life was promised as a recompense to godliness: and after that honor as
an ornament to life: so here is safety added as an individual companion of
them both, and a good man shall not fail of abroad, or at home, waking, or
sleeping, in the day, or in the night: abroad, and in the day he shall be so
far from ruin and mortal hurt, as that he shall not so much as dash his
foot against a stone: at home, and in the night, he shall enjoy such freedom
from fear, as that he shall not so much as break his sleep for it. Then
(says he) thou shall walk in thy way safely, viz. thou shall live without
peril in thy whole course: for as it is true being literally taken, that in
his travels and iourneys he shall from God and his Angels find protection, so
he shall also in all other his affairs, which according to wisdom he shall
walk in: for they are also called the ways of men: for she shows us which
be safe, and which be dangerous, and as well how to walk, as where to walk,
procuring also Gods direction, defense* and blessing. And thy foot shall not
stumble, viz. no harm shall befall thee whilst thou art where thou should
be and do that which thou ought: for otherwise bodily calamities may
befall the best that shall fail of these, though not to his destruction, as
the case of the good Prophet does witness, whom God caused a lion to kill for
breaking his 1. King. 13 2^
commandments: and notwithstanding righteous and innocent men be also exposed
to violence, and many seeming hurts, yet all their afflictions and sufferings
do rather confirm them to stand the faster, then turn to be stumbling
blocks, whereby they shall fall. When thou lie down, and all the while thou
keep thy bed, which wisdom will not permit to be beyond measure, thou
shall not be afraid, thou need not dread any peril; When thou lie down,
thy sleep shall be sweet, peaceable, comfortable, and delightful, as dainty
food is to the taste of man, while thou dependest on God; for the heart, that
is refreshed in the day with the feeling of Gods favor, will relish the same
in the night, and be supported with the assurance of his protection. David
confirms this unto us by his own experience: Thou have put more gladness in
my heart, then when Psalm. 4. 8 9.
their corn and wine increased. I will lay me down and sleep in peace, for
thou Lord makes me dwell in safety. And though Peter knew nothing but that he
should be both arrained and condemned to death and likely enough also to be
executed on the morrow; yet resting assured that the Lord in goodness would not
fail him, he slept so soundly in prison and irons, under the custody of so
many armed soldiers, that the Angel was driven to smite him hard before he
could awake him, so little was he troubled at the eminent peril, which all the
people, good and bad concluded that he lived in.

Verse. 25. Be not afraid of any sudden fear, neither of the desolation of the
wicked, when it comes.

THe safety in the other verse promised, is in this commended, and showed to be
the more desirable by that sound confidence, and comfortable boldness which
is adjoined to it, being for the certainty and lawfulness of it commanded by a
precept that contains in it the force of a promise, Be not afraid, viz. thou
have no cause to fear, neither shall thou be perplexed with fear: and that
he will as well give the grace of boldlesse to the godly, as require the
exercise of it, the Psalmist testifies, saying; He shall not be afraid of
evil tidings; his Psalm. 112.
heart is fixed, he trusts in the Lord. And as here, so in other places we
find imperative speeches to stand for firm speeches: Psalm. 37. 3.
as, Trust in the Lord, do good, dwell in the land, and be fed assuredly,
viz. Thou shall dwell in the land, and not fail to be fed, and have all
sufficiency ministered to thee. Affiance, and holy security is set forth by the
contrary, with the circumstance of time, Be not afraid* or thou shall not fear
sudden fear; the desolation of the wicked when it comes; even then when
perils shall horribly dismay the wicked, and when plagues, and fearful
judgments shall utterly sweep them away, thy heart shall be quiet and
peaceable, resting assured of Gods mercy and goodness, and shall be freed from
the judgments that fall on them, or at least be safe from the sting thereof:
no poison, no venom, no hurt shall proceed from them; only so much thou shall
suffer, and be partaker of, as shall make thee the better if thou live, and
hasten thy happiness if thou die. This amplification is of no small
importance, but the same whereby other holy writers do much magnify the
marvelous mercy of God, and the admirable felicity of his people* Job was
animated with it by Eliphaz, in this manner: He shall deliver the^ in six
troubles, and in the seventh, there shall none eu^^ Job 5. 19. 20. 21
come unto thee. In famine he shall redeem thee from death, and ^n war from
the power of the sword. Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue;
neither shall thou be afraid of destruction when it comes. And elsewhere
after this sort: When other men are cast down, thou shall say, there is
lifting up. And David Job 22. 29.
insisteth upon the point at large in one of his Psalms, when he says: Thou
shall not be afraid for the ^e^rour by night, nor for Psalm. 91. 5. 6. 7.
the arrow that flies by day, nor for the pestilence that walks in
darkness, nor for the destruction that destroys at noone da^: A thousand
shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not
come near thee. But with thine eyes thou shall see the reward of the wicked.

Verse. 26. For the Lord shall be for thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot
from taking.

THat which he had spoken before by way of commandment or promise, he now
confirms and makes good by a strong and invincible argument; namely, the
omnipotent efficient, and worker of this fortitude in the hearts of his people,
and the preserver of their safety: The Lord shall be for thy confidence, he
shall support and sustain thy hope, he shall encourage and establish thy
heart, and shall keep thy foot from taking, because it is an old custom for
the wicked to lay snares and spread nets for the feet of the godly: and as
common a thing as for fowlers and hunters to set snares and traps for birds,
and beasts; therefore the Lord does graciously deliver his from being taken in
the same. And when he himself does lay his nets and his grins for the ungodly;
he will most prouidently take order that his own be not entangled therein. The
like allegory is used by the Prophet for this same purpose: Psalm. 91. 3.
Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the
noisome pestilence.

Verse. 27. Withhold not the good from the owners thereof, when it is in the
power of thine hand to do it.

NOw Solomon prescribes those duties which properly belong to the second Table
of the Law, as the former from the fourth verse hitherto did to the first.

And herein he requires, 1. Benificence, that we be helpefull to our
neighbor. 2. Innocence, that we neither think nor do him hurt.

For our benificence or well doing, he would have us to perform as much as we
can in this verse; and as soon as we can, and is convenient, in the next. He
inciteth men hereunto by the rule of equity and justice, in that the neglect
of it to them to whom it should be showed, is a detaining of a due from them
to whom by right it belongs. Withhold not good, but readily minister it,
whether it be defense, relief, counsel, comfort, or whatsoever else is
expedient and necessary, from the owners thereof, which have deserved it, to
whom it has been promised, which stand in need of it, or to whom any way it
belongs, though not by a civil interest, yet by a Christian right, though
they cannot exact it, yet if God have allotted it to them, and call upon thee
to offer it, and out of mercy and kindness freely to bestow it. If power be in
thy hand to do it, if it stand with thy ability and calling, provided also
that thou so give unto one, that thou be not of necessity compelled to defraud
others which are near to thee, to whom thou art more bound. That liberality
and well doing is a duty, that our poor distressed brethren have a right in
it, that the not exercising of it, is an unjust detention of a due from them to
whom it is owing, our Savior Christ himself has already witnessed, Mat. 25.
and will further make good, as all ears shall hear, and al eyes shall see, by
his last sentence, and execution of the same at his glorious appearance. And if
it be a sin not to relieve them that be in want, much more then violently, or
fraudulently to take or keep ought from the right owners, though men have
never so much power in their hands to bear them out in it; and therefore Job
durst not lift up his hand against the fatherless, though he saw his help in
the gate, viz. though the bench, and the Judge, and the Magistrates would have
backed, and maintained him in his injustice.

Verse. 28. Say not to thy neighbor, Go, and come again to morrow, I will
give it thee, when thou have it by thee.

BEfore he proved benificence to be a necessary duty when our neighbous need
requires help, and our ability suffices to yield it, because in this case
God* has made us stewards, and put into our hands some part of the portion
which he has appointed to others, and therefore in conscience we are to
repute them the owners of it, and our selves the debtors till we have made
payment thereof; and then he directs the manner of it, that it be seasonable
and timely, and consequently that it be done willingly, and with cherefulnesse.
And this he intimates by prohibiting delays unto those that are in present
want, and come in hope to sue for speedy succor, whom pitilesse men are wont
to turn away with the worthless alms of vain breath, and guilefull
promises, saying; Go from me now, and come again another time, and to morrow,
hereafter I will give it thee. Where in the first branch, they include their
neighbor with an uncomfortable repulse: in the second, they require of him a
double labor: in the third, they shake him off, and illude him with a
frivolous promise: for such misers do seldom mind a morrow, or any day
ensuing, wherein they propose seriously to show any mercy, but only make these
semblances and shows, that they might not seem professedly to be churlish
Nabals. But say that their intent is according to their speeches, yet what know
they whether they shall live till the morrow, or then they have ought to
bestow, or their brethren may ever return to receive it* or whether through
want of present relief, his life, health, or state miscarrie not? And
therefore says Saint Paul, Whilst we have opportunity Gal. 6. 10.
let us do good to all. specially to them of the household of faith. And it
much comforted Job in his heavy affliction, that he had not suffered the eyes
of the widows to fail. And this is Job. 31. 16.
the praise of Gods bountiful goodness to his people, and creatures, that he
gives them all their meat in due season. But Psalm. 145. 15.
withal the Wiseman does explicate his own meaning, and shows in what case
he does forbid this manner of dimission with procrastination: When thou have it
by thee, if thou be able to satisfy him, in granting his request, otherwise
not: For many may do that to morrow, which they cannot to day, and want means
to perform that now, which in time to come they may well accomplish: and for
such it is not unlawful to reserve themselves for a fitter season; neither
will it be amiss for them to make a faithful promise of their future
benignity, both to refresh the heart of their afflicted brother with the
testimony of their love, and to bind themselves to the more certain
performance of it.

Verse. 29. Tacharash.
Devise not* evil against thy neighbor that dwells securely with thee.

Having proved it to be needful that we do all good offices seasonably to our
neighbors, he dehorteth on the contrary side from doing any injury to them,
which in it self is unjust and sinful, and yet is made the more grievous by
circumstances. As first, in respect of the manner thereof, if it be purposely,
and perpensedly practiced against them: for sundry vices do conspire together
in that work, as malice, craft, voluntary iniquity, and wilful contempt of
Gods Commandments: and herein the principal faculties of the soul are euilly
occupied: as affections, wit, and mind, with the abuse of the tongue, and
corporal members also: for the word signifies such industry and pains
taking, such art and travel, as is wont to be used in the tilling of the land,
and plowing of the ground. Against the heinousness of this offense, Micah
denounces a judgment, saying, Woe be to them that imagine mischief, and
Micah 2. 1.
work wickedness on their beds: when the morning is light they practice it,
because power is in their hand. And Eliphaz observed Job 4. 8.
it to have been the bane and undoing of many whom he charge to be agents of,
and accessarie to their own destruction in this manner: I have seen, they
that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness* reap the same. Secondly, it is
aggrauated by the subjects, the persons wronged, against whom this mischief is
plotted, thy neighbor that dwells with thee, if they be our friends that
depend on our love, and rest in an opinion of our faithfulness toward them,
or at least are without fear that any unfaithfulness, treachery, or
perfidious designs should proceed from us. Iudasses are to be reckoned among
the wo^^ sort of people, which will both kiss a man, and betray him at one
time, with the same mouth. Nothing troubled David more in the extremity of all
his troubles, then the indigne behavior of Achitophel, a dislembling, fained,
and counterfeite companion; and therefore letting pass the open violence and
malice of his professed foes, he takes most to heart, and most bitterly
complains of the most horrible falsehood of that most faithless hypocrite.
Surely (says he) mine enemy did not Psalm. 55. 12. 13. 14.
defame me, for I could have borne it; neither did mine enemy exalt himself
against me: But it was thou O man, my guide, and my familiar, which delighted
in consulting together, and went into the house of God as companions.

Verse 30. Strive not with a man without a cause, if he have done thee no
harm.

AS the practice and attempt of all hurt against others is to be avoided,
according as the word evil indefinitly forbidden, does implie; so we have a
more particular admonition to take heed of contentions, specially when we be
not compelled by injuries offered, to maintain our own righteous causes, or
to punish, or repress sin in others, but shall contrary to love, peace,
neighborhood, and equity molest and disquiet harmless and innocent persons.
Hereby does Esaias exaggerate the tyranny, and due punishment of those which
oppress the Church, and Gods righteous servants: Woe to thee that spoilest,
and thou wast not spoiled: and dealest treacherously, Isai. 33. 1.
and they dealt not treacherously with thee: when thou shall cease to spoil,
thou shall be spoiled; and when thou shall make an end to deal treacherously,
they shall deal treacherously with thee.

And this inhumanitie is yet more inhumane, if they be accused, and molested,
that deserve well at ones hand, and have their love and kindness requited with
indignity, and above al, if they be pursued and oppressed for their graces,
for their goodness, for their services to God, and well doing. Now these words
contain no warrant for private revenge, or wreaking our anger on every one who
gives us just occasion of offense: for the aggrauation of a greater sin, is
not an approbation of a less: it is an intolerable cruelty to vex the
innocent, and it is a sinful part also to be revenged on our faulty enemies.
In the mean while no law of God nor man does forbid to expostulate either
publikly or privately before the Magistrate, with him that has wronged us, yea
to convince him of injury (if we be able) provided that it be done
moderatly, mildly, with hatred of sin, and that it may be reformed, and in
mercy to the sinner that he may be reclaimed.

Verse 31. Envy not the oppressor, and choose none of his ways.

BEcause the premised precepts and promises are the left regarded, by means of
the hie prosperity of impious persons that contemn them, and of the deep
aduersi^ie of god^ men which observe them, he therefore in the conclusion^
this Chapter describes the contrary estates and condition of them both, not as
they seem unto sense, but as they no^ are, and in time shall appear more
plainly to be in truth. An^ hereunto he makes a way by dissuading good men
from distemper, discouragements, and disorder at the sight of wicke^ and cruel
men's fortunate successes. Envy not the oppressor viz. Let not the abundance,
or promotion of them that are given to violence, insolency, or impiety,
grieve, or disquiet the heart, though it be no easy matter for good men to
behold the same without vexation: and choose none of his ways be not alured by
his example (how well soever he succeeds) to follow him in the same steps.

Although the second clause be annexed to the former, as ^ second exhortation,
yet it carries the force of an argume^ from the effects: because this kind of
emulation, if it proceed without controlement, is wont to work much passion at
the first, and to draw men to imitation at the last. Wherefore David giving the
same caveat, does seek in like manner to prevent the same mischief. Fret not
thy self for the wicked neither Psalm. 37. 1. 7. 8.
be envious for the evil doers. Fret not thy self, because* the man that
prospers in his way, because of the man the brings wicked devices to pass.
Cease from anger, forsake wrat^ Fret not thy self in any wise to do evil.
And whether it be David, or Asaph that wrote the seventy third Psalm, the
Prophet (whosoever he was) testifies by his own experience* what force there
is in bad men's prosperity to trouble good men's minds, and how perilous this
trouble is to pervert the ways. My feet (says he) were almost gone: For I
was enuio^ Psalm. 73. 1. 2.
at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.

Verse 32. For the froward is an abomination to the Lord: and his secret is
with the righteous.

HE makes it to appear by good reason that there is no cause why wicked men
should be envied, nor safety in conforming our selves to their example,
forasmuch as froward persons, and such as peruersely go on in their cruelty,
and other wicked courses, rejecting al admonition to the contrary, are an
abomination to the Lord, abhorred extremely, and perfectly hated of him. For he
sets it down in the abstract to declare that he has them in full
detestation. It is not said, they are abominable, but abomination it self, as
odious as may be, and such as are loathsome to look upon. Moses his speech to
Pharaoh does declare what affections, and effects the sight of any abomination
is apt to work: Lo, shall we sacrifice Exodus 8.
the abomination of the Egyptians before them, and they not stone us? Now who
sees not the most lamentable case, and desperate misery of those with whom the
Lord is so highly offended, be their external wealth and advancement never so
great? A Kings implacable anger brings down the greatest subjects, as
wretched Haman felt; and who then would admire him that lives, and is like to
dye in the most grievous displeasure and indignation of the living God? Against
these he sets the state of the godly* that he has them in estimation, and
is much delighted with them, as the effects of his favor do show. His secret
is with the righteous. His hidden counsels, especially touching their own
salvation, the hidden and mystical knowledge of his will (which an natural
man cannot attain unto, as S. Paul witnesses) is by his 1. Cor. 2.
word and spirit reueiled unto them, and so it is not to his enemies, or to any
whom he has* not chosen for friends, according to our Savior his own
testimony: Henceforth I call Ioh. 15. 15.
you no more servants, for the servant knows not what his master does, but I
call you friends. For all things which I have heard of* my father, make known
to you. And the same does David commend as an honorable prerogative, wherewith
God uses to grace his faithful servants, how mean or contemptible soever
they seem to be in the world. The secret of the Psalm. 25. 14.
Lord is with them that fear him: and his covenant to give them understanding.

Verse 33. The curse of the Lord is on the house of the wicked* but his
blessing on the habitation of the righteous.

HE confirms the former position by the effects of his hatred and love on
both sides: The curse of the Lord, his plagues and judgments are threatened,
and prepared, and in time shall be executed upon the house of the wicked;
though it be never so stately a palace, but his blessing, his promise, his
grace, and good providence is upon the habitation of the righteous, though it
be never so base a cottage: where, by house and habitation, he understands
the dwelling, the state, the ways, and persons belonging to them.

Verse 34. Surely he scorneth the scorners: but gives grace to the lowly.

THe former sentences declared the severity of God against all kind of sinful
men; but in this is showed what a special quarrel he has against iesters,
scoffers, and mockers, at his word, and admonitions, those hellish Atheists
which deride his ordinances, and serves them in their kind, both because of
all others they are most arrogant, and presumptuous, and none do so much
vilify and despite him, as they do, and for that they be pestilent and
plaguie persons, causing others also to think basely of Gods most glorious and
sacred Oracles; and therefore he scorneth them, requiteth them their own
measure, and returns that upon themselves, which they can but offer and
attempt against him: they would have his name to be contemned, he makes them
and theirs to be abhorred, they desire to bring his worship into reproach, he
does fill their faces full of shame: he laugheth at their ruin and
destruction which is coming upon them: he laugheth at their terrors, cries
and rorings when they are in their torments; when they would seek him, he
turns his face from them; when they stand in need of faith and repentance,
he keeps it away, and withstands them. And to these are opposed humble men,
which demean themselves in a contrary manner: for they scoff not at the words
of God, as these scorners do in their pride, but with fear and reverence,
hearken to it, fear and obey it, wherefore also they find contrary success,
God testifying his love unto them, and especial regard of them, by working
grace in their hearts, with his holy spirit, which has ever been an infallible
pledge of his favor. Saint James declares the means whereby men become
scorners, and that is, by being proud; and likewise teaches after what sort
the Lord does scorn them, namely, by detaining of grace from them, which does
argue his hatred and displeasure, and therefore so frames he the opposition:
God resists the proud Iam. 4. 6.
and gives grace to the humble.

Verse. 35. The wise shall inherit glory, but fools do bear away Merim.
shame.

BEcause humble men are accounted simple, and proud men wise; and sin
brings many to preferment, and grace occasioneth diverse to be despised in the
world; he therefore to raise up the discouraged hearts on the one side, and to
take down the insolent minds of the other, does pronounce the lowly and godly
to be wise, and the proud, scornful, and wicked to be fools: and that these
wise shall have an answerable honor, as those that be rising and in way to
promotion, and such fools shall have a proportionable contempt, as such as be
falling, and in the state of ignominy. The wise shall inherit glory, viz.
enjoy praise, and estimation in due season, when they come to their years,
though for a while, during the time of their nonage they live obscurely, and
sustain many reproaches, and when they have it, they shall keep it, and use it
as their own, as freeholders their inheritances which are lawfully descended
to them, whereas the applause and promotions of the wicked are but borrowed, or
stolen, and therefore of no continuance with them. The possession of this
glory is of many taken in the earth, the hearts and tongues of men honoring
them in this life, but the full fruition thereof shall be in heaven, and that
perfectly* and perpetually, with the fullness of all other felicity.
Contrariwise, fools do bear away shame; wicked sinners play the fools
egregiously taking up for their portion, (as the word does well signify) and
voluntarily choosing shame, those things which will bring them to shame and
reproach: as their pr^de their pomp, their carnal excellency will do either
amongst men in earth, or before the judgment seat of Christ in the day of the
Lord. This exaltat^^n of the godly, with other sundry blessings, and the
confusion of the wicked, with many sorts of calamities the Prophet Isaiah does
confirm^: Behold, my servant shall eat, and ye shall be hungry: Isa. 65. 13.
14. 15.
behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty? behold, my servants
shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed: behold, my servants shall sing for joy
of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of
spirit: and ye shall leave your name for a curse to my chosen: for the Lord
shall slay thee, and call his servants by a new name.

CHAPTER. IIII.
Verse. 1. Hear O ye children, the instruction of a father, and give ear to
understanding.

IN this Chapter Solomon confirms the same which he had handled in the former
Chapters. And herein he exhorts his readers to hearken to his lessons, and
carefully get, keep, and make much of the heavenly wisdom of God, to the
fourteenth verse. Secondly, he dehorteth from the society and practice of
wicked men, to the twentieth verse. Thirdly, he gives an admonition, not only
to embrace his instructions, but also to use them to the government of their
hearts, speeches, and all manner of behavior, to the end of the Chapter. And
in all these he delivers little or nothing by precept, which he does not
also approve to them by reason.

To the end that he might the better win the affections of his scholars, and
challenge not only attention to hear him, which he expressly requires, but
obedience to his words, which by consequence is inferred, he begins his
speech with a preface, and therein mentions the relation that is between him
and his scholars, how they coming to learn are become his children, and he
appointed by God to teach sustaineth the person of a father, and accordingly
gives fatherly instructions proceeding from love, and delivered with authority.

Verse. 2. For I do give good doctrine, therefore forsake not my law.

ALthough those personal respects might be of good force to move them, yet he
thinks it not enough to urge his own jurisdiction, or their duty for
loyalty, but produces other arguments to show the equity of his demand: as one
is the excellency of the matter, which he does propose unto them: I do give
you a good doctrine, that which is wholesome, pleasant and profitable to an
upright heart: it is not heretical, erroneous, seditious, wanton, or any
infectious or dangerous discourse: it is no common, triuiall, or worthless
pamphlet: it is no fancy of man's brain, or superstitious tradition of flesh
and blood, but that which is sound and fruitful, for mind, heart, manners,
state and government: I utter noble and divine sentences, which bring present
consolation, and inuesteth men with eternal felicity. Hereupon he forbids
us to forsaks his law, in mind, in profession, or in practice. For who that is
well in his wits will reject or neglect a thing so good, so delightful, so
profitable, so comfortable, and the same so freely offered.

Verse. 3. For I was the son of my father, tender and only beloved in the
sight of my mother.

THe example and testimony of David is brought as a second reason for the
warrant of his teaching, and the goodness of his doctrine; for he deals with
them no otherwi^^ then his own father dealt with him; and look what doctri^^
himself had received of so kind an instructor, the same a(...) he faithfully
delivered for their instruction. In this verse he acknowledges his parents
loving affection: In the next he relates his fathers wholesome precepts. For
I was the son of ^^ father, whom he most dearly and entirely affected above
t^^ rest of his children, Only beloved in the sight of my mother, whose heart
was so much knit unto me, as if she had had no other son, and therefore
could seldom endure me to be out of (...) presence, although she had borne
other sons also, as appears, 1. Chron. 3. 5. But what means Solomon by
this? w^^ 1. Chron. 3. 5.
does he publish to the world how dearly his parents affected him? Because he
would have it known that their gre^^ love was a principal cause of his good
education; and (...) therefore he was well taught, because he was much set by.
And bearing the same good will to his spiritual children, as his father did to
him, he would imitate his father by testifying (...) love in giving good
counsel.

Verse. 4. He taught me also, and said unto me: Let thine hea^^ retain my
words; keep my commandments and live.

Having alleged the motives of David's documents and instructions, the singular
love he bare unto him; he now begins to recite the matter thereof, which
consists of exhortations, dehortations, and promises promiscuously
intermingled; and in all these he recommendeth unto him, and inciteth him unto
the intentive regard of sound and saving knowledge: and first, he prepares him
to a serious observation of his counsel in this verse, and afterward
delivers the perticulars of his advice in those that follow. That his sayings
might be of the greater force, and dwell the longer with him, he requires that
they may have a due manner of acceptance, that the ear be not only employed
in receiving of them, but the heart and mind also: neither does it suffice that
they be once apprehended, but constantly held fast (as the word signifies)
and therefore adds also another clause keep my Commandments, keep them in
memory, keep them in affection, keep them in practice. He makes a proffer
of large extent, and offers a gift most desirable; namely, life, both
temporal, and eternal, with all happiness belonging to them both: but most
emphatically set down in the imparatiue mood, and live; wherein he both
prescribes a duty, and therein gives direction, and makes a large promise;
as if he should have said; Be provident in yielding obedience to my
commandments that thou may live, and assuredly thou shall live, and that
most blessedly.

Verse. 5. Get wisdom, get understanding: forget not, neither decline from the
words of my mouth.

HEre he lays down the proposition and maine point of his whole oration, Get
wisdom (says he) ge^ understanding, viz. call, cry, dig, search, and use
all good means for an exquisite and settled knowledge, with the faculty of
conceiving, and discerning, whereby thou may be kept from errors: forget
not, let no good instructions regardlesly slip out of thy memory: Decline not
from the words of my mouth, break not through contempt or negligence those
precepts and rules wherewith I inform thee, for the attainement and usage of
this heavenly knowledge.

Verse. 6. Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee, love her, and she shall
keep thee.

BEcause as much mischief comes by casting off that which is good, as by
mere refusal of it, he presses the point of perseverance, warning his son
that he should by no means give over his good beginnings: he would not have
him forsake wisdom, either ceasing to learn it, or desisting from the
exercise of it; and allureth him to this good persistance by the benefit of
constancy, she shall preserve thee, (says he) she shall preserve thy heart
and mind from sinful lusts, and other corruptions: she shall keep thee from
the practice of evil behavior: she shall defend thee from shame and reproach:
she shall protect thee from plagues and punishments. Now he teaches him not
only why he should retain wisdom, but how he may be able to do it, and so
receive preservation from her; and that is, by setting his delight upon her,
love her, and then she shall keep thee, for no man does easily depart from the
thing which he loves, but charily lays up that which his heart is set upon,
and keeps it safe with all heedfulnesse. Why does God eternally preserve his
people? because he loves them. And why do they perpetually cleave unto him?
because they love him. Who (says Saint Paul) shall separate us from the love
of Christ? Shall tribulation, or anguish, Romans 8. 3^.
etc. That in the Canticles is not impertinent to this purpose: Set me as a
seal on thy heart; for love is strong as Cant. 8. 6.
death; jealousy is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are fiery coals;
many waters cannot quench love, if a man would give all the substance of his
house to buy love, he would utterly despise it.

Verse. 7. Wisdom is the chief thing, therefore get wisdom, and with all thy
getting get understanding.

THat he may the stronglier confirm his admonitions going last before, and the
more directly infer this exhortation ensuing, he extolleth wisdom with due
and deserved praise, ascribing to it the principal place of excellency, and
preferring it before all things in the world, as Solomon proved by comparison
in the former chapter; and then it follows that it must needs be worth
getting, worth keeping, worth loving, etc. and therefore he had good reason
also to persuade him with all his possessions to compass it, that he should
use all opportunities, and commodities, and whatsoever he enjoyed, as a means
to further him in knowledge, and to have nothing in such estimation, though it
be never so dear unto him, as not to depart with it for the increase of
grace, and exercise of goodness, if otherwise he cannot obtain the one, or
perform the other. For he cannot have a hard match that makes a purchase of
virtue, how great soever the price be that he pays for it, because every
parcel of it ouerualueth all the most delectable things of the world: it is
that treasure which he that found, is commended by our Savior for selling all
that he has to purchase the field wherein it was hidden: and it is that rich
pearl, which the wise Merchant Psalm. 13. 44. 45.
did well to buy with the sale of all that he had.

Verse. 8. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: she shall bring thee to
honor, when thou do embrace her.

Verse. 9. She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace, a crown of glory
shall she deliver thee.

Having gotten her, though it cost him dear, he requires that he use her
well, by making much of her, and extolling her, which is done by a reverent and
honorable entertainment of her: for so he explicateth himself, in
conditioning that she be embraced, which is done when the word is 1. These. 2.
13. Gal. 4. 14.
received, as the word of God; when the Ministers are respected, as the
messengers of God: when obedience is yielded as to the voice of God: when she
is magnified with a wholesome tongue, and glorified with a godly life. And to
him that shall perform this duty, he shows how she will requite it with her
favors, saying; she shall promote thee, either to a earthly dignity, or to a
heavenly. (For that which God says, God in wisdom says, Them that honor
me, I honor.) And Solomon 1. Sam. 2. 30.
found it verified in both, and that in ample and large measure, she shall
give to thine head an ornament of grace, and set upon thine head a blessed
crown, as Chap. 1. 9.

Verse. 10. Hear O my son* and receive my words, and the years of thy life
shall be many.

Verse. 11. I do teach thee in the way of wisdom, and lead thee in the right
paths,

HItherto (as it seems) Solomon has related the words of his father David
produced by way of testimony, both to establish the hearts of his auditors* or
readers, and to ^u^^fie his own doctrine, which ^ee had, and does communicate
unto them, for that David, so worthy a person, did out of his affection so
counsel him, as he advised them, and now proceeds in his own words, or
rather in the words of God, suggested unto him, and written by him, for the use
of his children, to whom he speaks in the first verse of this chapter,
having begun his speech in the plural number, as speaking to all, in this and
those following, he continues in the singular, as if he would direct his
speech to every particular. The matter which he handles is not new, but a
renewing of that which he had formerly delivered, which he does, to auerre the
soundness, the vtility, and the necessity of it: the precept for hearing was
delivered chapter the first, verse the eighth: the duty of receiving
instruction was required chapter 2. verse. 1. the promise of long life has been
made, chapter 3. verse 2. and 16. the testimony also of his instruction was
given in the second verse of this chapter, saving that there he vtteredit more
generally, and here he does it more specially; there simply, and here
tropically, and in a brief allegory, comparing his reader to a trauelle^,
himself to a guide, and Gods word to the way: there he says, I give you a
good doctrine, and here, I do teach thee in the way of wisdom* and lead
thee in the right paths. My sayings, with the r^st of the Sc^iptures duly
observed, are able to make thee wise to salvation, being profitable 2. Tim. 3.
15. 16.
for doctrine, for repro^fe, for correction, for instruction in righteousness
that thou may be perfect, and thoroughly furnished to all good works.

Verse 12. When thou go, thy steps shall not be straightened, and when thou
runnest, thou shall not stumble.

BEfore he commended his doctrine for the wholesomnes, equity, and goodness
of it, and now for the fruit and happy success which it causes, it make our
course of life comfortable, and free from peril, even then when we seem to
be in most hazard; which argument has been erst produced, and is now
repeated: but with some addition, and further amplification, then was before in
the third chap. verse. 23. it was said, Thou shall walk by the way safely, and
thy foot shall not stumble. And now that safety with easiness adjoined to it
is argued, and illustrated elegantly by an allegory when thou go, thy steps
shall not be straightened but thy path shall be broad enough without straining of
thy foot, or slipping beside: which mischief befalls those which go over
bridges, or upon steepes, or in such like passages and places which are too
narrow. And this he does yet further enlarge by way of gradation, saying, When
thou runnest, thou shall not stumble: To go surely without danger of
stumbling, though but a soft pace is a good thing; but to run swiftly without
harm is a harder and happier matter, seeing that he that makes much haste
sees not the peril that is before him: and yet this is the blessed condition
of all those that walk in the way of wisdom, partly because they have the
Lord himself to be their guide and keeper, and partly because he has given
his Angels charge over them, to keep them in all their ways: and they shall
bear them up in their hands, lest they d^sh their feet against Psalm. 91. 12.
a stone. But our Saviors saying in the Gospel may seem to contradict this
Scripture, as contrary unto it: for he affirms that the way that leads to
life it strait, and the gate narrow, etc. For answer unto which objection,
observe that Christ speaks there, of the exercise of godliness and religion,
which is strict and not so broad as fleshly men's lusts and appetites do desire;
and therefore they that will pass through the same unto heaven, must restrain
themselves from the excessive liberty of sin by mortification, and contain
their affections and behavior within the compass of Gods holy will: and
here Solomon declares the effects and reward of godliness and religion, that
God does protect them, and make their paths wide and broad before them, for
consolation and safety.

Verse 13. Take hold of instruction, let her not go: keep her for she is thy
life.

HEre we have an end of the first point of this Chapter which as he entered
into with the testimony and authority of his father, so he also concludes
almost in his words for there is no material difference between this, and the
fourth verse of this present chapter. Wherein he says, L^^ thine heart
retain, or hold fast my words: keep my commandments, and live: which in
sense accords with this text, Take hold of instruction, let her not go:
keep her, for she is thy life. The same precept in effect is given here, and
there, that we persist constantly in goodness. The reason is for substance the
same in both places, though in the one it be alleged as ^ promise, live thou,
or thou shall live: in this other there is a secret threatening mingled with the
promise, and so they jointly intimate the wonderful benefit of perseverance,
and the extreme peril of reuolting, she is thy life, if in preserving of her
thou do keep that which of all other things is the mos^ precious, even thy
very life, thy spiritual life, thy eternal life but if thou be remiss, and
careless of her, if thou reject an^ cast her off, nothing can counteruaile thy
damage, thou departest with the prime of all thy possessions, thou destroye^
thy self, thou losest thy life for ever.

Verse 14. Enter not into the path of wicked men, neither wa^ in the way of
evil men.

Verse 15. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it: pass aw^

FOr as much as not only the company* but the conuers^ation of lewd persons
is contagious, and noisome, and therefore their example is pernicious, and
pestilent, he therefore aduertiseth those which will learn any good of him to
take heed of it: and not alone to stay proceedings therein, but if it be
possible, to prevent the beginnings, and not at all to practice any of their
sinful actions, and therefore says he, Enter not into the way of wicked men,
do not set any foot into their disorders, and sinful course of life: for
hardly can a man be reclaimed that has tasted of the pleasures and
deceitfulnes of sin. Neither walk in the way of evil men, follow them not
in their exorbitant and dissolute behavior: Avoid it, keep from it with
detestation of it, as the word imports, abhor it, set thy self against it,
as thou would against infection and poison: pass by it, come not nigh it,
for fear thou be taken, and ensnared with it: turn from it, with all speed
possible, if thou have so much as set one foot toward it: pass by, divert
thy course another way, and keep as far off as thou can. In all these
words he prosecuteth his admonition with similies, taken from travelers, whose
wisdom is to shun all suspected by-pathes, and whatsoever places do
threaten any peril unto them. Saint Paul does agree with Solomon not in words,
but in meaning, when he warns the Ephesians to have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11.
but to reprove them rather.

Verse 16. For they sleep not, unless they have done mischief, and their
sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall.

Verse 17. For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of
violence.

HE confirms his counsel for the abandoning of graceless men's practices by
reasons: whereof one is taken from the vehement desire which wicked men have to
commit wickedness, and that is such as through vexation cannot sleep, unless
they either do some hurt themselves, or cause others either to do, or receive
harm: their greedy appetite for working mischief is like to a hungry man's
stomach which is empty of food, who going supperlesse to bed can take no
rest, his belly does think his throat is cut (as we say in our proverb) and
therefore will not suffer him to enjoy his sleep. Experience we have of this
in Achab, who was sick with grief, and indignation, that he could not
compass Naboths 1. King. 21. 4.
vineyard. And such a ravenous desire of villainy we read to have been in
Ammon, who pined away with sorrow until he could have his purpose to satisfy
his lust upon his sister Thamar. So has he made their violent affections to
accomplish evil, to appear by the effects thereof. Now does he show the
cause from whence they proceed, and that is the great delight which they have
in naughtiness, which is declared by a comparison of the like, namely, of
bread, and wine, meaning thereby all other food also. They eat the bread of
wickedness, and drink the wine of violence, viz. their sin is meat and
drink unto them, and they take as much contentment in playing lewd prankes, as
Epicures do in feasting.

Verse 18. For the path of the just is like the shining light that shines more
unto the perfect day.

Verse 19. The way of the wicked is a darkness, they know not whereat they
shall stumble.

IT appears by the causall, for, that an exhortation to walk in the way of
good men, is as well understood, as the dehortation from walking in the paths
of evil men, is expressed, because he strengthens both by an argument taken
from the contrary condition of both sorts. He compares the way, or the life
and state of the godly to the light, which in the Scripture signifies
knowledge, grace, safety, comfort, and honor, Contrariwise, the life, and
state of the wicked is like to darkness, full of ignorance, contempt* peril,
horrors, and all kind of miseries. Now to light, viz. the happiness of the
righteous, is promised a growth, and increase: the beginning is like the
dawning of the day, and the proceeding, as a fiery sunshine morning, and the
fulness, and perfection which is perpetual, and without declining, is like a
noonetide, or the midst of a Summers day. And likewise on the contrary side,
the degrees of wicked men's courses and miseries are also intended, albeit they
be not expressly mentioned: they are like the darkness of an evening, which
waxes blacker and blacker, even until midnight, whereof it is that they shall
fall into snares, and pits, sooner, or later, most certainly; but where or when
they know not. The one sort therefore begin their journey at day breaking, and
so have a little mixture of darkness at the first, and finish it at midday:
the other set forward about Sunsetting, and so see somewhat while it is
twilight, and stumble on till midnight, and then rather break their necks,
then come to the end of their journey.

Verse 20. My son, attend to my words, incline thine ear to my sayings.

Verse 21. Let them not depart from thine eyes, keep them in the midst of
thine heart.

THe more important any service is, the more subject commonly men are to the
neglect of it, and the sooner grow to remisnes in it: and that causes the wise
man so often to call for attention, as we find in the beginning of every part
of this Chapter this charge to be urged, that his son should hear, and
hearken, and hold fast, and keep, etc. This duty therefore we see here
again required: My son, (says he) attend to my words, and sayings, etc.
Hearken diligently to the things that I shall speak, and utter in my words and
sayings: Let them not depart from thine eyes, viz. let them not be forgotten,
for we best remember those things that be in our sight. See chap. 3. 21. Keep
them in the midst of thine heart, viz. hide them deeply and surely in thy
mind. See chap. 2. 1.

Verse 22. For they are life to them that find them, and health to all their
flesh.

A Promise is as hardly believed, as a precept obeyed: and therefore as he saw
it expedient to inculcate the one, so he finds cause to reiterate the other;
as here we see he does, both for the eternal felicity of every one which
embraces the counsel of wisdom, and his temporary welfare. Touching the
former, he says, his sayings are life to them that find them, as he said
before, chapter 3. 22. they shall be life to thy soul: touching the latter he
says, they shall be health to all thy flesh, shall preserve in health, and
safety of thy body, so far, and so long as it shall be good for thee; and
under the same he comprehends all other earthly blessings which are gives for
the use of the body, and cheerefulnes of the mind, and the comfortable
condition of this present life. For it is evident that here is a Metonymia of
the effect for the cause, and a Synecdoche, one benefit being promised for many.

Verse 23. Above all keeping, keep thy heart: for out of it are the issues of
life.

THe two former verses are an introduction to this, and to the other four
remaining, wherein are prescriptions for a holy and virtuous life: this
requiring a strict care for the governing of the inward man, and those
containing instructions for the ordering of the outward man. The Lord knows
that the heart of man (and so the whole soul, for the which the heart is put
(being a most noble and principal part of the same) is subject to manifold
assaults and temptations from the devil, and the world, and to many
deceivable lusts, and traitorous corruptions within it self, and therefore
charge that it be well looked unto, and kept with watch and ward: and the
extent of this heedfulnes he sets forth by comparison that it be more
intensiue, and serious, then any others, then for house, then for money, then
for bodily safety, then for natural life: no peril is so certain, as the
danger of that: no hurt is so fearful, as the wounding of that: no loss is
so grievous, as the spoil of that. And therefore to make it appear that he is
not so earnest without a cause, he renders a reason for his admonition, for
out of it are the issues of life. All our actions good or bad, proceed from the
heart, as the fountain from whence all the behavior springs, and the root
from whence it grows: although upright hearted men have their frailties, and
fall into some faults, yet they are not imputed to them for parts of their
life: and notwithstanding men of wicked hearts do some good offices, and
perform many actions that are profitable to others, yet they are not esteemed
from the streams that flow from their souls, or any good fruit that they
bring forth: for a good man, out of the Mat. 12. 35.
good treasure of his heart brings forth good things: and an evil man* out
of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil things. For as our
Savior says, that out of the heart proceed Mat. 15. 19.
evil thoughts, murders, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemy: so
also is it to be understood, that thence do flow holy meditations, chastity,
purity, mercy, liberality, true testimonies, and gracious speeches.

Verse. 24. Put away from thee a froward mouth, and put perverse lips far from
thee.

IN giving direction for outward carriage, he begins with the words and
speeches, which are declared by the cause and instruments of them, the mouth
and lips, where all perverseness, frowardness, and naughtiness of what kind
soever, against the first or second table is forbidden. And this he puts in
this place, because of all duties next to the ruling of the heart, the guiding
of the tongue is most necessary and difficult. And therefore Saint James says,
He that can bridle his Iam. 3.
tongue is a perfect and complete man. And yet so expedient it is, as that he
that seems to be religious, and refraineth not his tongue, his religion is in
vain. The metaphors which he uses do carry the force of reasons: implying
unsavory and Iam. 1. 26.
sinful communication to be odious and hurtful, as those of abandoning and
casting far off, for so we deal with things that are venomous, contagious,
and loathsome to the eye, and smell, or other senses: and likewise the
Epithete, froward or perverse does intimate, that a man is as much deformed by
his leaud talking, as by a wry mouth.

Verse. 25. Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eye lids look straight
before thee,

AS the tongue is well to be governed for the words, so are the eyes for their
aspects, and looks, and consequently all the rest of the senses, with the
instruments thereof. Let thine eyes look right on, etc. let them not wander,
nor look a squint, but directly to that which is good, and just. It is:
borrowed speech taken from such as hold the plow, or dee such other work, who
must look right forward, and not o^ either side, much less backward: or from
travelers, or runners in a race, whom it concerns not to gaze about, looking
here and there, but diligently to attend upon their way, or the races end. It
is requisite to take heed to the eyes, as to the windows of the mind, or
brokers of the heart, which may procure good motions and desires, or poison the
soul wit^ worldly, wanton, unchaste, proud, envious, or other corrupt
cogitations. By the abuse of this sense, and that of hearing, sin first
entered into the world, and by the same takes occasion to disperse her venom,
and bring men daily to destruction.

Verse. 26. Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be ordered aright.

IT is the familiar custom of the Scripture to call the actions of men's lives
by the name of their ways, or the paths of their feet, as Psalm. 119. Thy word
is a lamp to my feet, and a light to my paths: And, I thought on my ways,
and turned m^ Psalm. 119. 105. and 59.
feet to thy testimonies. And in that sense we are to conceive of them in this
place, so that he informs all men what to do, and how to walk in a
Christian conversation; wherein he requires both wariness, and strictness,
and to that end he commands us to ponder the path of our feet, by weighing
our works in a balance, to assure our selves that there be nothing too much,
nor nothing too little, and as far as is possible, to avoid all extremities
both of excess, and defect, the we may keep due measure in every thing we
take in hand which must be done by the rule of certain warrant, and not by
opinion, or conjecture. The latter clause is an explication of the former, when
he says, Let al thy ways be ordered aright, have an eye that not one of thy
works alone, or a few be done in such manner as is fit, but that every of them
be rightly guided by the prescript of holy wisdom, and Gods sacred word. This
saying is agreeable to that of Saint Peter, As he that 1. Pet 1. 15.
has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation: and to
that of Saint Paul, Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever Phil. 4. 8.
things are honest, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are of good
report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think of these things.

Verse. 27. Turn neither to the right hand, nor to the left: but thy foot from
evil.

HE insisteth still in the same precept, exacting precise and accurate
proceeding in the good way of Gods commandments without diuerting to any
by-pathes of sinful lusts, of fleshly reason, of carnal policy, of humane
inventions, of all incitemens from the devil, or men, or our own corruptions.
This phrase of declining to the right hand, or to the left is frequent in the
Scriptures, and forbidden in many places: as, You shall observe to do as the
Lord your God commands Deuteronomy. 5 32.
you, and shall not turn either to the right hand or to the left. And,
according to the sentence of the law which they Deuteronomy. 17. 11.
shall teach thee, thou shall do, thou shall not decline from that sentence
either to the right hand, or to the left. We must not therefore walk only by
measure, but by line, yea by a straight line; Gods truth is the Kings high way,
which we are bound to keep without declining to either side, either with a
wicked purpose, or good meaning, either to take upon us ought that is not
warranted, or to neglect any duty that is commanded: and so we shall remove our
foot from evil, by speedy reforming of that wherein we are faulty, and
constantly refraining from that which is unlawful.

CHAPTER. V.
Verse. 1. My son, attend to my wisdom, and bow th^^^ Mezimmoth.
ear to my understanding.

Verse. 2. That thou may regard discretion, and thy lip keep knowledge

AS the former chapter was for the most part^ confirmation of the third, so is
this of the principal points of the second, both in soliciting men to listen
unto wisdom, and demonstrating the need and use thereof for the shunning of
subtle and pernicious harlots; and therefore according ^^ his wonted manner he
first prefixeth a brief exhortation, as proeme, or preface before his
discourse, and then dila(...) more largely on the matter in hand, even that
subject which he has chiefly chosen to deal in. The former part is an
exhortation contained in these two verses; the former where^ (inciting us to
attention) is almost word for word agreeable with the second verse of the
second chapter, and the second verse of the fourth; and the latter proposes
the end and ^^ of this attention, which is first in the mind, secondly in ^
mouth. For the mind, he says, that thou may regard dis^tion, the word
signifies subtle, and witty thoughts, viz. ^dome and prudencie, which is
gotten by a diligent and ^ous meditation of things to be spoken, or done; and
for t^^ mouth, and thy lips keep knowledge. And therefore the d^ of all ^s, a^
^he should have said, Stir up, and apply thy (...) and affe(...)s, and lend
the outward senses also of the bo^ to the (...) ^hou may neither conceive
evil in thy mind. ^ willingly ^^re any evil, or vanity with thine ears, but
the thou may have the word of God in thy mouth, and thy ^^ be fe^^ed
against the lips of an harlot, which allure vn^ lewdness.

Verse. 3. Although the lips of a strange woman drop as an ^onie comb, and her
pala^e is smoother then oil:

Verse. 4. Yet her latter end is bitter as wormwood, as sha^pe as a two edged
sword.

THe better to preserve men from this foul and damnable sin of adultery, he
does first discover and describe the fallacies, and mischieuo^snesse of the
filthy harlot, to the seventh verse.

Secondly, he admonishes to beware how they have any thing to do with her,
and so bring misery on their own heads, to the 18. verse.

Thirdly, he prescribes a remedy to prevent it, which is the lawful and
honest use of marriage, and kindness ^o their own yoke-fellowes. In these
verses, and some that follow, the whorish woman is very lively painted forth in
her colors, to the end she may be, not only the better known, but the more
detested; she is called, a strange woman, because she estrangeth her self from
God, from her own husband, from chastity, and all goodness; and for what
other cause, see chap. 2. verse. 16. Her words are very alluring, and full of
enticements; the misery which she draws men into, is wonderful loath some,
and painful, according as the similitudes do express. Albeit the naughty
woman's words are pleasant to flesh and blood, in as much as they tickle the
senses with promise of joys and delights, so that they may be compared to the
honey comb, which is most sweet to the taste: and though her speeches are most
plausible and smooth, so that they may be resembled to oil which hurts not the
^^nderest skin, but rather suppleth it, yet for all this her effects are most
grievous to be borne; so that they may be likened to wormwood, which exceeds
i^ bitterness, and the evils which she brings men to are deadly, so that they
may be justly called a two edged sword: for howsoever at the beginning sh^e
brings solace and comfort, and tells that her lover may be secure from
fear of danger yet in the end she works to him shame, beggary,
hearts-griefe, destruction, and damnation, as after shall more plainly appear.

Verse. 5. Her feet go down to death: her steps take holden hell.

AS her lips or her speeches were guilefull, and pestilent, promising sweet
pleasure, and bringing bitter torments, so are her feet, (that is, her goings,
and by them is meant he^ actions and the rest of her carriage) most noisome and
hurtful, and go down to death, lead to destruction, both temporal and
eternal: and her steps take hold on hell, carry her self and those that
follow her headlong into perdition; as if he should have said, both she and
her associates are at hels brinke, and are ready unrecoverably to be plunged
therein: see chap. 2. verse. 18.

Verse. 6. Lest thou should ponder the path of life, her wa^^ are moveable
that thou can not know them.

HH aggrauateth the peril of her misbehauiour by her art and cunning, in
cloaking her practices: and it seems to proceed from a second Prolepsis, or
objection which might be made by such as seek liberty to converse with her.

If she prove so dangerous and wicked, I shall quickly find

Her ways are so variable, and her dispositiun so mutable, or unto foxes, and
badgers, or such like wild beasts, which have many haunts, and many holes, and
therein many ^^ses and turnings, by means whereof they are hardly taken. Of
this her artificall dissimulation Solomon speaks in another place, saying,
Such is the way of an adulterous woman; she Prou. 30. 20.
eats and wipeth her mouth, and says, I have not committed iniquity.

Verse. 7. Now children hearken to me, and decline not from the words of my
mouth.

Verse. 8. Remove thy way far from her, and come not near the door of her
house.

Upon the description of an harlot, he infers a two fold admonition, one
general, and the other special: the general is to embrace his words, both
with attention, and obedience, that men should hearken unto them, and not turn
away from them; and these he opposes as an antidote unto her enticing
allurements. Here therefore is set down the harlot on the one side, and
Solomon, yea the Lord himself on the other; she soliciting to hearken to her,
and the Lord persuading to hearken to him; she seducing and leading men to
lewdness, and he rightly informing them, and detecting her lewdness. The
special drift is to teach us that we avoid this wretched harlot, whereby is
forbidden not only all unlawful, dishonest and unseemly company with her,
gazing on her, talking with her, etc. but all coming near to her, and as much
as we may, her very sight and presence: for gunpowder is no more apt to take
fire (if it come near to it) then our corrupt nature to be provoked to this
sin; and therefore also he would not have us to come to her house, or the
place where she is, yea to the very doors of her house, because this disease
is so dangerous, that the place it self is full of peril.

Verse. 9. Lest thou give thine honor to another, and thy years to the cruel:

Verse. 10. Lest strangers be filled with thy wealth, and thy labors be in the
house of a stranger.

HEre follow the reasons taken from the discommodities following, and flowing
from this sin:

whereof some are Outward and bodily, verse. 9. 10. Inward, and belong to the
mind, v. 11. etc.

Of the outward, the first is the forfeiture of a man's honor and dignity,
which the person that defiles himself with uncleanness, does as it were take
from himself, and give to others, not to enjoy (for one cannot duly be
honored by another ignominy) but to deface and spoil him of it. He does
then thereby expose himself, and his estimation to obliquie and contempt, that
every one which hears of his filthy facts, should have him in derision, and
despise him. The latter clause of this sentence does induce us to think that
this is the sense of the former; when he says, and thy years to the cruel,
where give, is referred indifferently to both, and it is evident to al, that a
man may take away life from his neighbor, but make no benefit of it to
himself, never any can possibly live by another man's death: therefore these
words do declare the second discommodity of whoredom, the endangering of his
life, and years that are behind, to the cruel, viz. to any that shall
fiercely pursue him: her husband, or other friends that are dishonored by it,
her other lovers; her corriuals inflamed with envy and spite; her self, who
sometimes poysoneth those which she has had to do withal, that she might the
more freely prostitute and give over her self wholly to others whom she better
likes: or the hand of the Magistrate, whose office it is to cut off adulterers,
who stirred up by Gods judgment, may prove very sharp in pursuing of him, and
with as great severity as if he were cruel, though properly for that he is not
to be so called, but just and righteous. The third is the loss of his goods,
which in the Hebrew text is called strength, and labor, because thereby he had
obtained them: by which terms he does vpbraid him with sottishnes and folly,
which would so wretchlesly, and sinfully depart with that whereupon he
bestowed his strength, and which he compassed not without great pains and
travel. And this is yet further exaggerated by the persons upon whom it is
conferred, viz. strangers, and forrainers, not only not of his own blood, or
alliance, to whom he is bound in special manner, by the law of good nature,
but also not of his friends, to whom he owes the second duty of kindness. As
if he should have said: Thou shall not only consume and wast that patrimony
which has been descended upon thee, or been bequeathed to thee, that neither
wife, child, brother, or friend, or those that are nearest unto thee shall be
the better for it, nor thy self have the fruition of it but shall feed, yea
in rich strumpets, bawds, ruffians, and ill companions with that which thou
have got by the toil and labor of thine hands, and earned dearly with the
sweat of thy brows.

Verse 11. And thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy Nahamta.
body are consumed.

NOw we come to the inward discommoditie, the grief and vexation of the
heart, which this impure behavior produces: which is argued partly by the
cause, and partly by the effects: the cause is, the wasting of his flesh and
body, which unclean persons (if they escape death) do fall into: for besides
that, ordinarily they spend their strength, with their goods, and good names,
and the hazard of their lives, and become weak and feeble: how many filthy and
loathsome diseases do they fall into that give themselves unto this sin:
some so far, that in the end their very bowels fall out, and there is great
force in this argument: for albeit this mischief befall not all adulterers,
yet not one can secure himself as free from the peril of it. The effects of
their grief are two: first, their crying, in this verse: secondly, their
complaining, in the three next. Their mourning and crying for the bitterness of
it is resembled to the roaring of a lion, for so much the word imports.

Verse 12. 13. etc. And say, How long have I hated instruction, and my heart
despised correction? and have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined
mine ear to them that instructed me?

THe complaint of the whoremonger is here specified, wherein he bewaileth the
hainousnes of his sin, and the grieuousnes of the punishment; yet it is not
the wise man's intent to give unto whoremongers any promise* or note of true
repentance, by these sayings: for he declares what misery should bring them
unto it, and extort it from them, and not what grace it should work: for many
are driven to make this confession which never repent of their sins, nor come
to salvation. The holy Ghost therefore brings their own testimony,
witnessing how they are plagued, and not how they are converted: the sin
which he acknowledges is not the direct act of adultery, or fornication, but
that which went before, and made a way for the same, which was contempt of
instruction, and reproof; which he aggrauateth by the manner, that it was with
hatred thereof, and the hatred from the root, even from his heart, and
therefore vehement and deadly: and the effect that followed upon it, that he
was disobedient unto those which were set over him, and had authority to teach
him. It is as if he should have said: How long have I hated instruction and
correction? What a beast was I, and void of common sense so to detest that
information and discipline, which would have done me so much good, and rejected
all that wholesome advice and counsel, which they that were wise, and knew
what was best for me, which were also my friends, and showed their faithfulness,
did minister unto me?

Verse 14. I am almost in all evil, in the midst of the congregation and
assembly.

THe punishment which he bewaileth is aggrieued partly by the quantity and
measure of it, partly by the quality and manner of it. For the former, it is
of large extent, and very general; he says that he is almost in all evil,
there is scarce any misery which he is free from; he is covered with shame,
he is pinched with want, he is tormented with pain, he is plagued in his
name, in his goods, in his body, in his soul, in himself, and those that
belong unto him: for the latter, it is conspicuous, and notorious: he says,
that he is in this case in the midst of the congregation and assembly, either
for that his facts, and misbehauiour are censured by the Magistrate to his
often rebuke, and infamy in the public assembly; or because his plagues were
universally known to the multitude, and all men understood what filthiness he
had committed, and what calamities he now sustained. By the same argument, and
after the same manner Job describes the miserable condition of the wicked,
they are destroyed, and as it were ground to pieces in the gate.

Verse 15. Drink waters out of their own cisterne, and running waters out of
thine own well.

THe scope of these words, and others following, is to persuade men to a
contrary course, namely, to a chaste, clean, and honest conversation, alluring
them thereunto by a promise of an happy state and condition, contrary to that
of the whoremaster, for he opposes Gods blessing and plenty to that bitter
cup of curse and penury, which those wretched sinners were driven to
acknowledge that they had drunk of so deeply: wherein thou must note also that
honor, and bodily welfare, and comfort of heart, being opposite to the
disgrace, diseases, and vexation of mind, are to be understood as well as
maintenance for the estate, though that only, and none of them be expressed.
Drink waters out of thine own cisternes. In the land of Israel, and the
countries bordring upon it, wels, and cisternes of water were very precious,
and esteemed for possessions of great worth, as appears by the estimation
Abraham and Isaac had them i^: and so much may be collected from the speech of
the woman of Samaria to Christ, Art thou greater then our father Jacob that
gave us this well and Ioh. 4. 12.
drank thereof himself, and his children, and his cattle? For water was the
ordinary and common drink (though they had also wine) and sweeter and better
then ours is: so then this being a principal commodity is put here for all
others. And whereas he does say, drink, it is a precept, and an encouragement
mixed together: as if he should have said, Keep thy self honest, and beware of
that beastly woman, that so thou may retain thine own possessions, and
enjoy the comfortable use and benefit of them.

Verse 16. Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, and river: of waters in the
streets.

17. Let them be only thine, and not a strangers with thee.

18. Let thy fountain be blessed, etc.

LEt thy fountain, etc. Look so to thine own estate as that thou may be
able to communicate to others, and be not niggardly, but liberal to
distribute to those which be in wa^^: and the rivers of thy waters in the
streets, viz. Let those good things wherewith the Lord has endowed thee, be
made profitable for the comfort of many, and even for the public benefit of
the place where thou dwell. So that where the sinful adulterer had not
enough left to maintain himself, a good man that in conscience, and fear of
God flies from that sin, shall have wherewith he shall be able to relieve
many others. Let them be thine own. He means not but that others should have
the use of them, as need requires, according to the former verse, but that
they should be rightly possessed, and not riotously spent. And not the
strangers with thee, vz. Bring not to pass by thy folly and disorder, thou
should bestow them upon thy lust, and make vile companions either owners of
all, or to share equally with thee, and to have as much to do with them as thy
self.

Let thy fountain be blessed. Be virtuous in keeping thy vessel in holiness
and honor, avoiding the lust of concupiscence: be merciful in ministering to
them that be in necessity: and be provident not to spend thy goods upon
unworthy persons, and thy fountain, thy state and possessions shall be
blessed, God by his providence, and goodness shall prosper them.

And rejoice with the wife of thy youth. Hitherto he has prohibited adultery,
and given men warning to beware of it: and now he prescribes a remedy, which
whosoever shall use, shall undoubtedly be delivered from the peril of it: and
that is, the love and kind usage of our own yoke fellow: which love is here
intimated by the effect of it; rejoice, viz. with the wife of thy youth, take
pleasure and delight in her; live cheerfully with her whom the Lord has first
matched with thee, as most naturally loving, and to be beloved. And so ought
men also to deal with their second wives, and such as are matrones, and
ancient. Bathshebah deserved to be as much beloved of David, as Michol, and no
doubt she was a great joy and comfort to him.

Verse 19. Let her be as the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe: let her breasts
satisfy thee at all times: and err thou in her love continually.

ANd this is illustrated by two comparisons, one of the Heart, and the other of
the Roe-bucke; both which do exceedingly love, and in their love follow after
their mates, the Hind, and the Roe. Let her breasts satisfy thee at all
times. The means to nourish and preserve this love is, to continue a constant
liking of, and contentment with her person, that as it was pleasing to thee
when thou did first set thine heart upon her, and make choice of her; so no
infirmities should cause thy mind to be alienated away from her, and dote upon
others. Let her breasts, etc. her presence, and personage, and the use of her
body satisfy thee, as well delight thine eyes, and otherwise suffice, as the
milk of the mothers breasts does content the appetite of the infant. At all
times, not only in the flower of youth, and freshness of beauty, but
afterward when fairness and natural beauty shall be decayed, even during
the whole season you shall live together. And err thou in her love, spare not
to be inamored with her, and rather have too high an opinion of her, then too
mean: think her for thee, and in thine eye the beautiful of all others:
walk with her, talk with her; be most kind and loving unto her, and let her
be most acceptable and pleasing unto thee.

Verse. 20. For why will thou my son, be ravished with a strange woman, or
embrace the bosom of a stranger?

THere follows the conclusion of this whole matter upon the premises inferred:

wherein 1. He shows that there remains no cause at all why a man should
give himself to whoredom, and deal perfidiously with his wife. verse 20. 2.
He shows the dangerous estate of them that break wedlock to commit
whoredom. verse. 21. 22. 23.

The former he propounds by way of question, demanding why, as if he having
gathered his arguments together, he should have thus said: Wherefore my son,
seeing whoredom has so many and so great discommodities and discomforts
following on the one side, and a good wife brings so many, and so great
comforts on the other; what cause or reason is there, why leaving or forsaking
thy wife, thou should give thy self unto an harlot, and commit wickedness
with her? (for under honest words of embracing her bosom, he understands the
filthy act of adultery: forasmuch as he that is so impudent and audatious to
do the one, will not be ashamed, or afraid to practice the other.) If there
were no comfort to be found in the company of a lawful wife, yet the
discommodities that follow upon a whore should dissuade thee from her. If there
were no mischief from a whore, yet the solace which a lawful yoke fellow will
yield, would make thee prefer her before the harlot.

Verse. 21. For the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he
pondreth all his goings.

THe latter part of this conclusion touching the dangerous estate of
adulterers* he declares by general reasons, which are common to other sins
with this. The first is from the clear sight of Gods eyes, which is such, as
all the ways of all men are seen of them, and so clearly, distinctly, and
perticularly, as if they lay, or were purposely set one by one over against his
eyes, so that he need not to turn back, or so much as to turn a side to
look upon them. This argument is increased by his curious noting and observing
all our paths, which is enlightened by a metaphor of weighing them, as the
Goldsmiths does his gold and silver in a pair of balances.

Verse. 22. His own iniquity shall take the wicked himself; and he shall he
holden with the cords of his sins.

Verse. 23. He shall die without instruction, and for that in the greatness of
his folly he goes astray.

THe second argument whereby this danger is manifested, is taken from the
effect of wicked men's sin, and by way of gradation, His own wickedness
(says he) shall take the wicked himself, howsoever for a time the adulterer,
or any other ungodly man may go abroad freely, and be out of all trouble, yet
at the last his sin, and Gods judgment for them, like a Sergeant, or
Constable, or other officer shall apprehend him: for his conscience shall
check him, and summon him before the tribunal seat of God, besides the
external curses and plagues that shall seize upon him, and he shall be held
with the cords of his sin, his guiltiness and punishments, the terrors of
his heart with plagues and miseries shall, as Iaylors, bind him with such bonds
or irons, as it were, as that he shall not be able with wit, or wealth, or all
the means he can use to free himself, and escape from Gods vengeance. At the
last, death and destruction, as the Lords executioners shall ^^ke away his life
from him, and torment him with the (...)ned f^r ever. Now all this shall befall
him for want of instruction, because he refused to be instructed, and go^th
astray in his great folly, turns out of the good way of ho^^nesse and
righteousness, and wandreth in his carnal reason, and fleshly lusts, and
according to the peruersenes of his obstina^e and wilful heart, which of all
follies and madness is the greatest, grossest, and most palpable: no child is
so silly, no idiote is so simple, no frantic person is so deuoide of
understanding, no beast is so brutish, as he that will reject Gods wise
counsel to satisfy himself in his sinful desires.

CHAPTER. VI.
Verse. 1. My son, if thou be surety for thy friend, if th^^ have stricken
hands with a stranger,

Verse. 2. Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, th^^ art taken with the
words of thy mouth.

THe instructions contained in this chapter are of two sorts. Some are caueats
to beware of vices: some precepts to embrace the doctrine and rules of
wisdom, which direct to the exercise of virtue, in the 20. 21. 22. verses.
Three kinds of vices are forbidden: one which carries a show of duty, and
amongst unwise men is very plausible, and that is rash suretiship, in the five
first verses: the next is a neglect of duty, and stands in omission of that
which ought to be performed, and that is slothfulness, in the six next: the
third is that which is contrary to duty, and is the practice of that which is
sinful and evil, and this he distributeth into many perticulars, whereof
diverse he taxes together, and more briefly condemns, in the 16. 17. 18. and
19. verses: and one he pursues more largely with a set discourse and
prosecution, and that ^s the sin of whoredom in the twelve last verses.

Of this rash suretiship, he 1. Describes the peril. verse. 1. 2. 2.
Prescribes the remedies for it. verse. 3. 4. 5.

To show the danger, he thus speaks in effect: My son, if it so fall out
with thee, (as sometimes it does with unadvised men) that thou become a pledge
or surety for thy neighbor; or have given thy hand, bill, or bond for a
stranger, to whom thou do owe no such special duty, do not esteem it a
light matter; but know that thou art entangled in a snare, like to a bird in a
net, or a Dear in a toil; and that which is an heavy case, thou art ensnared
with the words of thy mouth. For a man having given his word to another, and so
he for whom he undertakes make default of performance, and himself not well
able to discharge it, is become a servant, or captive (so far as the sum
extends) to him to whom he has given his word or bond, he is fallen into
the creditors hand, who may take the forfeiture, and so overthrow his state and
family* or he may arrest him, and keep him in prison, or chase from place to
place, that he shall be able neither to manage his calling* or with comfort,
safety, and liberty to enjoy the society of his neighbors.

Verse. 3. Do this now my son, and deliver thy self, when thou art come into
the hand of thy friend, go humble thy self, and solicit thy friend.

Verse. 4. Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eye lids.

Verse. 5. Deliver thy self, as the Roe from the hand of the hunter, and a bird
from the hand of the fowler.

THe remedy to be used in such a distressed estate is here proposed, which
consists in submissiue humiliation, and importunate supplication. He
persuades a man ^uertaken this way, and in hazard to be overthrown, to
hearken to his counsel, saying, Do this now my son, deliver thy self, for as
much as thou art come into thy neighbors hand, lest the sna^^ entrap thee, or
be hurtful to thee or thine, in as much as tho^ art fallen into the power of
the creditor, do thine endeavor to be delivered out of it, use all good
means for thine indemnitie, in most humble manner, and be importunate, and
almost impudent in pressing thy friends or neighbors: as the creditor, that he
would deal favorably in the time, or in the sum, or in other cases, as there
is occasion: the debtor for who^ thou art bound, that he would find means by
himself, or his friends to make payment; and friends that they may help thee
with counsel, or their favor, or their purse, if need require, and they be
able. Now if any think this a base thing to humble himself, it may be to his
equals, yea peradventure to his inferiors, Solomon tells him that he must
consider that he is now fallen into his hands, and thereby is become captive,
and as it were a servant; and therefore as the case now stands must make no
difficulty to seek, and sue, and to pray, and entreat, as an humble suppliant.

In this he requires celerity, and present proceeding: delays Verse. 4.
are dangerous, and therefore in such a business by all possible means to be
avoided; wherefore, says he, Give ^^ sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to
thine eye lids, go in hand with it this present day, and defer it not so
long as the no^ morrow, before thou go to bed, or take any rest, withal
speed and diligence seek thy security, and obtain thy freedom.

Finally, as he admonishes that this be done speedily, and Verse. 5.
without delay, so does he advise to do it carefully, and without remissness,
and that by the example of brutish creatures. As therefore the Do, and other
beasts, labor by all means to escape the pursuit which is made after them; or
as the souls strive to get out of the net wherein they are entangled; so
(says he) endeavor thou with might and maine, to come out of these cumbersome
bonds of suretiship.

Verse. 6. Go to the Ant, O sluggard, consider her ways, and bewise.

BEcause unadvised suretiship is more easily seen, and confessed to be the
cause of diverse men's calamities, the^ idleness is, and men be more ready to
hearken to admonition, and to be warned of it; he therefore dealt mild her in
the reproof of that sin, then of this slothfulness: for he sets roughly
upon the sluggard, he does not son him, or child him at all, but rather
checketh and chideth him, and that in sharp manner. This vice he disgraceth,
and condemns by three arguments: first, by the absurdity of it, and of their
behavior which give themselves unto it, in the 6. and 7. verses: secondly, by
the duration, and continuance of it, for that it holds them in bondage which
once fall into, in the 9. and 10. verses: thirdly, by the evil event that will
follow upon it; namely, penury and want, in the eleventh verse. To show the
absurdity of it he brings the example of a brutish creature, of a weak,
small, and contemned creature, to condemn their wretchlesnesse which give over
themselves to lithernesse; for it is a shame for men endued with reason, not to
provide so well for themselves as the silly creatures which are void of
reason; but he does not only send the sluggard to ma^ke their examples, but
puts him to school to them, and makes them his master, that they should teach
him, and he should learn more wisdom and understanding. Go to the Ant,
says he, as if he should have said. There are many things that might
persuade thee to labor, as Gods commandment, and ordinance; his promise to
them that obey it; his punishments on them that are disobedient; their own
necessity for the support of their estate; the example of painful and
industrious men: but I will urge none of these, but that which may make thee
ashamed, y^ example of the feeble Ant; consider her ways, observe her
industry and diligence; and be wise, let her sedulity provoke thee* shake off
thy sluggishnesse, and henceforth be painful and provident: for what greater
point of wisdom is there, then by obeying Gods precepts both to provide for
our selves, and be partakers of his gracious promise: or wh^^ greater folly,
then to deny to God our own endeavor (...) our own good?

Verse 7. 8. Which having no guide, ouerseer, or ruler, pro^^deth her meat in
the summer, and gathers her food in h^^uest.

TWo things he commends in the ant, or ^mmet: (...) one, her readiness,
that she works voluntarily with^^^ compulsion: the other, her providence (if
we may so call (...) that she trauelleth seasonably, and whilst time serves.
It (...) said that she has neither guide, ouerseer, or ruler, she has ^^^ther
captain, or leader to show her the way; nor task (...) or other like officer
to appoint to her her task, and call vp^^ her for the doing of it: nor king,
or ruler to punis^ her negligence, or want of ^orecast, nor to reward her for
her diligenc^ And in this respect, another kind of creature is praised in
(...) 30. chapter. The locusts have no king, yet go they forth (...) Prou.
30. 27.
them by ^ands, showing their prudence: he says, she lab^reth, bea^ing, and
drawing food, and matter for her (...) with such travel and pain, as is
almost incredible: that (...) one cannot do alone, two or more combining
themselu^^ together will effect: in summer, viz. when the air is (...) and the
way dry and smooth, and in the harvest, when grain^^ of corn lie here, and
there, scattered abroad, which in (...) are not to be had, and this to the end
she may provide, and (...) up against the time of need. The application hereof
is co^cealed by Solomon, but to be searched out by the reader, an^ declared by
the interpreter; and it consists partly of a^prehension, and partly of an
instruction. In the reprehens^^^ the sluggard is taxed, and obbraided, both
with regard (...) of his own good, and the contempt of the presidents of
d^^^gence, which are proposed unto him, and those gouerno^^^ which are set over
him: as if he should have said, Of ho^ much blame art thou worthy which have
so many leaders (...) conduct thee in the way: so many to call upon thee, and
urge thee to thy duty: so many commanders, and rulers in the family, in the
Church, and in the Commonwealth, both to encourage thee in thy diligence, and
to censure, and punish the contrary, and yet notwithstanding thou pass thy
time in sloth, and neglect the opportunity, and lay up nothing for the time of
need? In the instruction every man is taught to use the benefit of the summer,
and harvest of youth, and health, and opportunity to lay up, and provide
against the time of age, sickness, and other impediments, or necessities.

Verse 9. 10. How long will thou sleep, O sluggard? when will thou arise out
of thy sleep? yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the
hands to sleep.

THe continuance of his slothfulnes, or sleepines (for all is one, or at least
they are individual companions, the one begetting the other: for idleness
fills the body full of humors, and abundance of humors causes much sleep)
he obiecteth by way of expostulation: How long will thou sleep? Consider how
much time thou have lost; for he that sleeps moderatly, yet commonly
spends the third part of his life therein: whereunto if thou add all the
rest of thy time that thou have idly, and unprofitably spent, thou shall
easily see what little cause thou have to bestow any more in that sluggish
manner; and therefore why will thou not break off and make an end? This rebuke
is very emphaticall, as if the Lord himself were by a man's bed side to call
him to reckoning for the loss of his time, and to rowse him out of his drowsy
sleep.

Verse 10. A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to
sleep.

HEre he painteth out the sluggard in lively colors, and to expose him to
scorn, brings him expressing his own sloth in his own words, Let me have
(says he) a little sleep, a little slumber; let me yet a little fold my hands
and arms together, as they are wont to do that purposely set themselves to
sleep.

Verse. 11. So shall thy poverty come as on one that trauelleth, and thy
necessity as an armed man.

LAstly, he declares the effect and issue of this, and that is poverty; which
is allegorically threatened to come with speed and violence, the sluggard
resembled unto a slothful way fairing man, that makes no speed to go with
company, or to travel at due hours, and poverty to the thief that comes
upon him to take his purse: necessity shall therefore overtake him suddenly,
as a swift traveler does him that walks slowly, dreaming therefore that he
has wealth, and goods for many years, he is fallen into debt, and grown to
be a beggar even before he thought his estate had been declining; and as
necessity makes haste, and is felt before it is fores^ene, so it makes as
strange an assault, it is better weaponed then the sluggard, and so too hard
for him, it will pe^force have that which it comes for, and bereave him of
his substance, and cannot be resisted. We see this verified in many, whom
neither great patrimony left unto them, nor wit, nor strength, nor f^iends,
nor entailes, nor any other means could preserve from ruin, and utter
undoing; idleness made them unthrifty, and riotous and unthriftiness and riot
consumed all their ample possessions.

Verse 12. A naughty person, a wicked man walks with a froward mouth.

13. He winketh with his eyes, he speaks with his feet, he teaches with
his fingers.

14. Frowardnes is in his heart, he deuiseth mischief continually, he sows
discord.

Having reproved the vice that seems a virtue, and that neglect of duty
which of many is scarce acknowledged to be a vice, he comes to the third
sort, those misdemeanors which are notoriously known, and cannot be denied to
be grievous offenses: and first he describes the lewdnes of the person: and
secondly, proves the pernitiousnes of the vices: and thirdly, threatens a
plague and judgment to be executed on him at length for both. The person is
notified both by his properties, and by his effects: by his properties, that he
is naught, ungracious, and dissolute, a man of Belial Beli gnol.
, that will bear no yoke of government, either of God, or man: one that lives
as though there were no law, of no worth, beli iagnal.
that profits nothing, or beli iagnaleh.
shall rise to nothing, and is good for nothing, or a man of iniquity. Thus is
he styled and entitled: for the Hebrew composition will bear any of these
significations, or all of them.

Then follow the effects, that he is very infectious, and apt to corrupt
others: as first, by his words, he walks with a froward mouth, it is his
guise and custom to speak profanely, irreuerently of God and his ordinances:
or that uses to lie, to swear, and forswear, to flatter, to slander, to
backbite, or to carry tales; the which abuse of his speech he sets forth
by comparing them to a mouth perverted, or drawn aside.

Then secondly by his deeds, that he does notably abuse

And hereof he assigns the cause to be the wickedness of frowardness; which
he does aggrauate by uttering the same in the plural number: for he says
not, frowardness* but frowardnesses; noting thereby that his heart is filled
and stuffed with such matter, from whence it is that it runs our with such
words, gestures, and actions, as are before spoken of. And further to decipher
him in his damnable behavior, he discovers the manner of his practices, ^e
imagines mischief: signifying that the natural corruption which is in him,
being common to all men, increases, and confirms by devising, and in his
mind, and thoughts, as it were, forging mischief, no otherwise then a Smith,
Potter, or other Artificer does his works. Whereunto yet another circumstance
is added to make his sin out of measure sinful, that he is incessant in his
diue^^ish a^tempts. Whereas the Smith, and other workmen, works, forgeth, and
frames sometimes, and sometimes rests, this man is forging, and framing
villainy perpetually, and that to the hurt of many others: for his whispering,
flattering, lying, storming, back biting, etc. causes contention, and raises
up strife, even among friends.

Verse 15. Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly sudden shall he be
broken without remedy.

HEre follows the threatening of the plague and calamtie to such a man, which
is no less then destruction i^ self: which is amplified by the manner of it:
first He shall b^ broken in pieces: he shall not have a small wound, but a
deadly wound, and utter undoing in his estate, name, body, and soul: secondly,
it shall be suddenly, unexpected, not feared, before ever he thought of it,
which causes it to be the more horrible and hideous: and thirdly, it shall be
without remedy which no policy, nor power, no wealth, nor friend, nor other
means whatsoever, shall be able to prevent, or remedy. The Prophet Isaiah
does in an elegan^ manner denounce the same saying: This iniquity shall be
unto you as a breach ready to fa^ Isai. 30. 13. 14.
swelling out in an high wall whose breach comes suddenly, ^ an instant: and
he break it, as the breaking of a potters vess^ that is broken in pieces, he
shall not spare.

Verse 16. These six things does the Lord hate* yea seven a^ an abomination to
his soul.

IN the premises we have seen the wicked person by sundri^ arguments
described, and here we shall find the pernitio^^nes of diverse vices euicted,
and in the first place in a more general sort, he recites the manner of them,
six, yea seven, these certain number for uncertain: for the Lord detesteth
many more then these, and as much also is offended with them, but a few are put
for all: and it seems that these are here mentioned, as companions of
slothfulnes, and therefore are censured next after it, as being commonly
attendant upon it; and these he proves to be odious, and men ought to loath
them, and likewise very dangerous, and men ought to fear them, because God
hates them: which he first expresses in plain words, and afterward
amplifieth by a correction, saying, they are an abomination to his soul,
speaking of God, as of a man for our capacity, and the more effectual
affecting of us. God abhors nothing but that which is evil, and loathsome,
and nothing is better which he abhors, neither can there be any safety in
doing that which is so offensive to him: being disgraced therefore by that one
argument, they are manifested to be vglesome, and hideous; and as noisome, and
perilous, as if the vileness thereof had been painted out by many others.

Verse 17. A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood:

18 An heart that deuiseth wicked imaginations: feet that be swift in running
to mischief:

19 A false witness that speaks lies, and him that sows discord among
brethren.

THese verses contain a particular enumeration of those six things, and that
seventh which the Lord hates in such detestation. The first is pride, which is
set forth by the sign thereof, a hautie eye, for that chiefly shows it
self in the eyes. The second is lying, and untruth, which is declared by the
instrument wherewith it is uttered, the tongue, which also therefore is made
hateful to God. The third is violence and cruelty, howsoever practiced; but
because the hand commonly is the agent of it, and is stained therewith, it is
specified. The fourth is the plotting, and devising of mischief: whereof
because the heart is the chief worker, and the spring also from whence it
follows, it is subject to Gods displeasure, and detestable in his sight. The
fifth is the delight in ill doing, and the committing of it with greediness,
when men are pressed and ready to any sinful actions; which is argued by the
signs and effects, that the feet are swift, do make ha^^ and run thereunto.
The sixth is slandering, or giving wrong information against any man by
accusation, or witnesse-bearing, o^ any manner of reporting. This makes the
efficie^t, the party guilty of it ob^oxious to Gods displeasure. The la^t is
to be a makebate to raise discord amongst loving friends, and to set them at
variance, which before were at peace, and lived in concord. He therefore which
does so, prouoket^ the Lord, and makes a greater discord between God an^
himself, then possibly can be between neighbor and neighbor.

Verse. 20. My son, keep thy fathers commandment, a^ forsake not the law of
thy mother.

SO many vices having been reproved, he now incerteth^ precept to furnish the
mind with knowledge and wisdom, for the prevention of those crimes, if we
be yet clee^e from them, or to be cured of them, if we be faulty in them, as
also to be well fenced against that which he is yet further to exaggerate
that loathsome and detestable sin of adultery, which he has so often
inueighed against already:

where note An exhortation. verse. 20. 21. And the reasons of it. verse. 22. 23.
24.

The exhortation is propounded in a Proper speech. ver. 20. Metaphor. verse. 21.

The former is, keep thy fathers instruction: for which, se^ chap. 1. verse. 8.

Verse. 21. Bind them continually upon thine heart, tie them about thy neck.

THe second is bind them, etc. For which see chap. 3. ver. 3. But here is
added continually, which was not in the former place; to teach, that the heart
or mind of man should be always exercised in the doctrine of God, even then
when he has not opportunity to speak of it.

Verse 22. When thou go, it shall lead thee: when thou sleep, it shall
keep thee: when thou awakest, it shall talk^ with thee.

THe reason follows, and is taken from the sweet and comfortable effects of
Gods doctrine, delivered, privately or publicly, in all the actions and times
of our life; which he distributeth into three sorts, walking, sleeping, and
awaking: after sleep again, when we walk, viz. when we are exercised in the
ways and works of our calling, she shall lead us: viz. she shall guide and
direct us, that we wander not into any evil way that may be displeasing to
God, hurtful to our selves or others. See chap. 3. verse. 23. and 14. verse. 12.
When we shall lie down to sleep, she shall keep us, and be as it were a
watch unto us, that we sleep securely. See chap. 3. 24. It shall talk with
thee when thou awakest, it will be as a familiar friend to us, conferring with
us in the night, in the morning, in the day time, of Jesus Christ, of the
remission of sins, of the mercies of God, of the promises of the word, and of
all heavenly and spiritual matters.

Verse. 23. For the commandment is a lamp, the law is light, and reproves of
instruction are the way of life.

HE confirms this reason by an argument taken from the excellency and virtue
of this doctrine, which is clearly set down by familiar comparisons. The
first, of a lamp, whereof there is great use in the night; the second of
light, whereof there is singular use in the day: the third, that it is a beaten
way, whereof there is great use for passengers, and travelers, which he
amplifieth by an argument from the less to the greater: if the corrections and
rebukes of it are so, what are then the mild directions and promises? and from
the end whither it leads; namely, to life, viz. eternal blessedness. So
that whereas we and our ways are nothing else but night and darkness, and
know not which way to move hand or foot, but to our destruction, the doctrine
of God is for the night, a canale, and for the day, the Sun, that we may
see, and journey in the ready high way of salvation. The Psalmist has the very
like saying, acknowledging to God that his word was a lamp to his feet, and a
light to his paths. Psalm. 119. 105.


Verse. 24. To keep thee from the evil woman, from the flattery of a strange
woman.

FInally, he commends this doctrine of God, and these corrections of
instruction, by the end and use of them; namely, the preservation and safe
keeping of a man from the danger of infection by an harlot, whereby he means
also sin of any sort, though he purposely name this rather then any other;
partly because it is often the fruit of idleness, which he has even now
impugned in this chapter, and partly because the young man, whom he professes
there to teach, is commonly much addicted thereunto. See chap. 2. verse. 16.

Verse. 25. Lust not after her beauty in thy heart, neither let her take thee
with her eye lids.

NOw he comes to the dehortation whereby he disswadeth from her:

which he 1. Proposes, verse. 25. 2. Enforces with confirmations. verse. 26.
to the end of the chapter.

Of the former there are two parts; first, an admonition, that he do not in
his heart lust after, or suffer his heart to be ensnared by her beauty; and
that for two reasons, both because Matthew. 5. 28.
even that alone is a degree of adultery, as our Savior has taught, as also
for that if the heart (which commands all) be overcome, it will never cease
to work upon all the parts of the body, the eyes, ears, tongue, etc. until
the very act it self be accomplished. The second is a caveat, that she take
him not with her eye lids: wherein he compares the eye lids, and countenance
of an harlot to a net, or snare, and the harlots heart, and her self to an
hunter, or fowler, and the party allured by her wanton looks, to the bird, or
beast caught in a net.

Verse. 26. For by means of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a morsel of
bread, and the adulteress will hunt for precious life.

HEre he backeth his admonition and caveat, with such forcible considerations
as might best work upon his reader, and make him to know how much it
concerns him to regard them; whereof two are here noted; the one, that this
cursed sin draws a man into poverty, or beggary rather; the other, a
shameful death, or that which is in stead of that, and worse then that, an
everlasting death. Touching the former, he says, For an harlot, or by means of
an harlot, a man is brought to a morsel of bread, from plenty, to penury;
from variety of dishes to one kind, and that is dry bread; and from
sufficiency and fullness, to a short pittance, even one morsel, and many
times this is to be asked at another man's door, or at least to be given as an
alms from another man's hand. See for this, chap. 5. 10.

The latter is loss of life, which all the attempts of the adulteress (the
married woman breaking the bands of wedlock) do tend unto. She hunteth for
precious life, wherein he likeneth her to a cruel hunter, which pursues an
Hare, or other beast, not to catch only, but to kill it: which though she do
not directly intend and aim at, yet she effects and brings to pass: for
through her allurements, the person committing folly with her is exposed to
the rage of her husband, whose indignation is implacable, the sword of the
Magistrate, proceeding severely against him, if not for the same crime, yet for
some other thereby occasioned; and the wrath of God, who will either inflict a
temporal punishment, to the utter destruction of the body, or else power down
intolerable plagues upon the body and soul for ever. And this so prodigal
expense of life is hereby the more condemnable, in that it is precious, of such
an excellent creation by Gods own hand, or inspiration rather by his breath,
and carrying such a stamp of his glorious image, and capable of such eternal
bliss as Christ has purchased with his own blood, and every one shall enjoy,
which through sin does not make forfeiture of it.

Verse. 27. Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt?

Verse. 28. Can a man go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burnt?

Verse. 29. So is he that goes in to his neighbors wife: whosoever touches
her shall not be innocent.

Having formerly laid down his positions, he now handles them more at large:
and because of the security and presumption of men, flattering themselves,
(that notwithstanding all this which is spoken, and other men's ill success in
the practice of this sin, they shall escape well enough, especially if they
have wit, or wealth, or others helps whereby to shift for themselves, and
avoid the penalty) he more at large confirms that he said touching the
grieuousnesse and certainty of this punishment, by two comparisons of the like
or equal, and another of the less. The comparison of the like is as if he
should have said; As it is impossible for a man to take coals of fire from the
hearth, and put them into his bosom, betwixt his garments and body, and burn
neither; or to tread on burning coals bare foot without scorching his feet: so
it cannot be that a man should have carnal company with another man's wife,
without making himself guilty, and feeling the flame of Gods indignation, and
incurring the judgments formerly mentioned. Job has a saying not much unlike
to this, rendering a reason among others, why he so ^eedfully shunned this
mischievous sin of adultery: It is a f^re that consumes to destruction, and
would root out all mine Job 31. 12.
^ncrease.

Verse. 30. Do not men despise a thief if he steal to satisfy his soul,
although he be hungry?

Verse. 31. And if he be found, he shall restore seven fold, he shall give all
the substance of his house.

THe second kind of comparison whereby the point in hand is cleared, is taken
from a lesser sin, namely, theft, being far inferior to adultery, because
Gods law has not so much condemned it, because he has appointed no such
severe punishment for it: because that the thief takes away more remote
possessions, and such as are of less value and estimation: the whoremaster the
nearest, the best, and that which is dearest unto him, the heart, the use of
body, the fidelity of his wife: the thief commonly bereaueth a man but of part
of his goods; the whoremaster attempts to defraud him and his of all, or of as
much as he can, leaving a spurious and bastardly seed in his house to usurp
his inheritance, or other possessions after him. And yet the thief escapes
not scotfree, notwithstanding that need drives him to steal. For first, he
draws upon himself shame and reproach, and is made very contemptible thereby,
as both this text affirms, and others testify. Job showing the vile estate
of certain base companions, says, Men shouted after them, as at a thief. See
also Jeremiah Job 30. 5.
48. 27. And then he hazardeth his estate thereby, either to overthrow it, or
much impair it: for look how often he is apprehended and taken, so often he
shall be driven to make restitution according to the law, though it be again
and again, yea even seven times and more, a certain number of times for an
uncertain: which is to be paid, though it cost him any thing, yea all that he
has, yea though his liberty go also for it.

Verse. 32. Who so commits adultery with a woman, lacks understanding: he
that does it destroys his own soul.

NOw let us see the inf^rence: if there be so much peril and hurt in a
smaller crime, what safety can there be looked for in this heinous offense? If
the needy thief smart so for that fault, how sharply and extremely shall the
adulterous male factor be punished for his egregious and enormous wickedness?
He debaseth him beneath the thief; first, in the folly of his mind, as the
cause of this his vicious behavior, he is more absurd and brutish then he, and
has less wisdom and understanding. Secondly, in the consequence of his
wretched life, and unclean conversation, he destroys (...) soul, he does
offer violence unto his life, and after a son becomes a murderer of
himself, by provoking God speedily to slay him, and eternally to damn him,
besides other plagues following, whereunto he makes himself liable.

Verse. 33. A wound, and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be
done away.

HE dwells upon this matter of the adulterers punishment, that he shall
find there shall meet with him, or fall upon him a wound, or stroke, even a
deadly stroke upon his body and mind, inflicted either by the Magistrate, the
adulteresses husband, or God himself. And ignominy upon his name, even such
reproach as shall stick to him, living and dead, and shall never be done away,
so that besides the peril of this life into which the adulterer does throw
himself, he does expose himself to perpetual reproach.

Verse. 34. For i^lousie is the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in
the day of vengeance.

Verse. 35. He will not regard any ransom; neither will be rest content,
though thou give many gifts.

HE declares the efficient of the threatened punishment to be inflicted upon
the adulterer, namely, the wronged husband of the harlot, to whom God will
discover his villainy wrought against him, and whom he will raise up, as his
instrument to pursue that wicked caitife, prosecuting and following the matter
against him with all severity. And in these words he meets with, and
refelleth the vain illusion of the filthy person, who trusts either not to
be detected, or not much to be molested, hoping that he shall find his
paramours husband very mild and favorable. Nay* says the Lord, Tho^ have
given him just cause of jealousy, and therefore thou shall find him full of
wrath and indignation; look for no favor at his hands, he neither will nor
shall spare thee, if he strike thee not himself, yet he shall deliver thee
into the hand of the Magistrate to be punished, he will not conceal thy
lewdness, but publ^sh it to the world for thy shame and infamy: yet, says
he, I hope fair words may prevail much, especially gifts and rewards, I will
hire him to be silent, and to put up the injury offered; and if a small sum
will not suffice, I will give him a greater; if one gift will not prevail, I
will add more unto it, and bestow many: hereunto the Lord replyeth that he
shall be made inexorable, that the sight of a bribe, or any thing offered for
the deflouring of his wife* shall the more imbitter him; and offer as many and
as great as thou will, yet all shall do thee no good, thou shall for all this
be plagued and shamed.

Now we must not conclude hereupon that this sentence at all times shall
certainly be executed: for many husbands are not acquainted with the
indignities of this kind, which are offered unto them; and many knowing of the
dishonesty and faithlesnesse of their wives, are as bawdes unto them, and
accessarie to their naughtiness, suffering and allowing them to be whorish
and filthy: but every adulterous whore-hunter may justly expect this, when God
sets in with them, and takes the matter into his hand, they know not how
soon their wickedness may come to light, and how fierce and angry a man may
be made, whom they little suspect to be so implacable.

CHAPTER. VII.
Verse 1. My son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee.

IN this chapter Solomon confirms from his own experience, that which in the
two former chapters, or elsewhere he had testified, touching the fraudulent
and pernicious practices of the harlot. The parts are three: the first is, an
instigation to the studious keeping of wisdom and knowledge, in the five
first verses. The second is, a narration of those things which he had seen
and observed in her impudent behavior, and answerable success, to the 24.
verse. The third is an application of the same unto his readers, as an
admonition and warning unto them, in the four last verses.

In the first verse, the Prophet returns again to his general exhortation
of receiving, and keeping the doctrine, which he propounds, and is the same
with the beginning of the second chapter.

Verse 2. Keep my commandments, and live; and my law as the apple of thine
eye.

TO set an edge upon his exhortation, that it might prevail the better with
us* he adds a promise of life, and that he does after a most emphaticall
manner, commanding us to live; thereby teaching, how present, and certain the
happiness is that belongs to the obedience of his precepts. After he
expresses the manner how he would have us to keep his doctrine, by a
similitude, viz. as the apple of the eye, as that which is most precious unto
thee: for a man will ward, and keep off violence from his head, before all
other parts of his body, and regards the face more then any other part of his
head, and he respects the eye more then any other part of the face: for the
eye is the light of the whole body, and therein the black, or apple of the
eye, is most dear unto him; which appears also by the other Scriptures: as
Psalm. 17. 8. Keep me as the apple of thine eye. And, He that touches you,
touches Zach. 2. 8.
the apple of his eye.

Verse 3. Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thine heart.

Verse 4. Say unto Wisdom, Thou art my sister, and call Understanding thy
kinswoman.

HE delivers the same precept in allegorical speeches: and first, he
requires to bind them upon our fingers, that they may be as rings thereon,
and for memorandums, as we use to tie a thread or silk about our fingers, to
put us in mind of matters not to be forgotten, and to write them upon the
table of our heart, viz. that they may be as a tablet hanging on our breast: as
chap. 3. 3.

As if he could not satisfy himself in this argument, he delivers the same
thing in another similitude, wherein he attributes a person to Wisdom, and
requires that there be such inward friendship and familiarity betwixt us and
her, as if she were our sister, and nearest kinswoman. It is a pleasing thing
to brothers and sisters, if they love as they ought, to live together in one
house, as Lazarus, Martha, and Mary: Ioh. 11
or if by occasion of marriage they live in diverse houses, yet they delight one
in another, and feast together, as did Jobs Job 1.
sons and daughters. And thus conversant and familiar ought we to be with
Wisdom, and so much the rather because we are strangers in the world, and
hated of the world, because by this kindred and affinity with Wisdom, we
become of kindred and alliance with our Savior Christ.

Verse 5. That they may keep thee from the strange woman, from the stranger
that flattereth with her words.

LAstly, he urges this precept thus often and many ways delivered, by an
argument from the end and fruit, which is to keep us from this foul and
grievous sinning against God, whereof he names one in stead of all, namely,
adultery, which he did before. Chap. 2. 16. the 5. 3. and 6. 24.

Verse 6. For at the window of mine house, I looked through the casement.

Verse. 7. And behold among the simple ones, I discerned among the youths, a
young man void of understanding,

Verse 8. Passing through the street near her corner, and he went the way to
her house.

Verse 9. In the twilight in the evening, in the black and dar^ night.

THere follows now a lively representation of the former doctrine touching
adultery, under an example in fact; whereof the wise man himself who relates
it, was an eye witness. And first he shows the occasion, or opportunity that
was offered unto the harlot, whereby she had matter to work upon, in these two
verses. Secondly, the means which she uses to effect her purpose, and draw an
unwary person to this sin, unto the 21. verse. Lastly, the event and issue,
in 21. 22. 23. verses.

The occasion and opportunity was that she espied a heedlesse person within
her danger, whom she might seize upon as a fit pray for her. And he is
described first, by his ignorance, and simplicity, he calls him a fool,
yea, which is more, ^ man void of heart, viz. of understanding, judgment, an^
wisdom. Now he is so called, not that he is a natural, (for harloss are not
wont to single out them above other men) b^^ because he had not the fear of
God, which is the beginning ^ wisdom, nor any good regard to keep himself
from sin by avoiding the inducements to it.

Secondly, by his age, calling him a young man, youth, or stripling; thereby
noting, that that age is the most slipperie time of our life, and most prone,
as to many other sins, so especially to this.

Thirdly, the place is noted where he saw him, viz. in the Verse 8.
street, at the corner that leads to the harlots house, like a silly fly in
the cobweb, where the spider had liberty to come upon him at her pleasure.

Lastly, by the time when he wandered that way, that is, in Verse. 9.
the twilight, when it began to grow dark, at the cockshote time, as it were,
the season that fitteth the whoremaster, or harlot: according to the saying of
Job: The eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight.

Verse 10. And behold, there met him a woman, with the attire of an harlot, and
subtle in heart.

Verse 11. She is loud and stubborn, and her feet abide not in her house.

Verse 12. Now she is without, now in the streets, and she l^eth in wait at
every corner.

THe former words declare how the simple young fellow cast himself into
perils, by approaching so near to the harlots den: in these, and others that
follow, we see her taking the advantage by coming out unto him, and
artificially getting him into her paws. And for this purpose the wise man
notes both what a one she is, in the whole course of her behavior, to the 13.
verse, and with what art and skill she manageth this business, in the others
following. And one thing whereof he takes notice, and whereby he describes
her, is her apparel, wherein she was tricked, and trimmed, unbeseeming the
modesty of a sober Matrone, or the honesty of a chaste woman. The second is,
her inward deceit, and guilefulnes, in that she was of a subtle heart. The
third is, her unwomanly Verse. 11. 12
disposition, and properties* she is a babbler, and full of tattle, she is
stubborn, perverse, and rebellious to God, and her husband, she is a gadder
abroad, and every where given to allure, and corrupt all those whom she can
entice into her company.

Verse. 13. So she caught him, and kissed him: and with an impudent face said
unto him.

NOw we shall see how she plaieth her part in exercising h^^ craft and
cruelty, to work the ruin of the warilesse fool, which is casting himself
into her hands. And this she does partly by uncomely actions: partly by
countenance, showing a brazen face, without fear, or shamefastnes: and partly
by dissembling speeches, such as hereafter follow. Her uncomely actions here
specified are three. The one is, that she laid hold on him: she should not have
endured him to lay hold on her; but for her to lay hold on him, was beyond all
womanly modesty: the other, that she kissed him. A wife can scarce without
bashfulnes kiss her husband, but is rather to expect it from him, then to
prevent him in it; but for a woman to offer it to a stranger is a most
shameful part.

Verse 14. I have peace offerings with me: this day have I paid my vows.

Verse 15. Therefore came I out to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face,
and I have found thee.

FIrst, by her dissembling and enchanting speeches, as with a call, she
allureth him into her house, offering him a bait which might persuade him unto
it, and covering the net or hook that might terrify him from it; the bait
is, good cheer a motive that prevails much with young men, who commonly are
much given unto their appetite. The manner of the Israelites, and that
according to the law of God, was, that in the Lords offerings, the fat and
blood being offered, part of the flesh should go to the Priests, and part to
him that brought it: whereof they made a feast, (for it was somewhat rare to
eat flesh:) And (alluding to this) S. James says, Ye have nourished your
selves as in the day of slaughter. Now the better to cover her plot, and that
he should not suspect her treachery, and mischievous purpose, she pretends
first, piety and devotion toward God, to whom she had offered sacrifice,
which was an ordinary work of religion, yea she had made vows, and performed
them, which was extraordinary, and less usual: secondly, great love, and good
affection toward him, whom she much desired to be better acquainted with, and
to make partaker of her beneficence and kindness. For this cause I am come
forth to meet thee: as if she should have said, Because I bear thee most
entire good will, as soon as I saw thee, I longed for thy company, and
therefore I have not sent a messenger, which peradventure would be more remiss,
and slack in entreating of thee, but am come my self to request that I may
be beholden to thee to go with me, and what good luck is this that I meet
so happily with thee?

Verse 16. I have decked my beds with couerings of tapestrie, with carved work,
linen of Egypt.

Verse 17. I have perfumed my bed with ^irrhe, aloes, and cynamom.

Having prevailed to bring him to supper, she now persuades him to stay all
night, and take a lodging with her, and (which she would have him understand)
that she needs not to excuse, as too homely, base, and course, but such a one
as will well serve a right good man, and to that end does set it forth by the
ornaments, furniture, and sweetes of it: as if she should say, Thou shall have
a very commodious bed, and chamber, with curious curtains, and couerings, with
a carved bedsted, with fine sheets, with sweet perfuming of all: I have
provided to delight all, or most of thy senses; as thy taste has already been
pleased with meats and drinks, so shall thy sight be with the ornaments of
thy room, and lodging, thy touch with the softnes of thy lawnes, and thy smell
with odoriferous perfumes: take a good offer therefore, and refuse it not, thou
shall perceive thy welcome, and thy good entertainemen, thou shall be lodged
like a Prince.

Verse. 18. Come, let us take our fill of love till the morning: N(...)h.
let us solace our selves with loves.

NOw that the whore has brought him to his chamber, or got him to bed, she
begins to discover her purpose, and soliciteth him to the very act of
adultery; and for the same alleges such reasons as may persuade him unto it,
and preuenteth such doubts as may dissuade him from it; Come (says she) let
us take our fill, and as it were make ourselves drunk with love; meaning
thereby the satisfying of her filthy desire and lust all night long. Her
reasons are two, one from the cause, that it is an act of love and good
fellowship, that thereby they shall bestow the time together like friends: the
other is the effect, that it will be sweet, pleasant, and delightsome to them
both.

Verse. 19. For the husband is not at home, he is gone a long journey.

Verse. 20. He has taken a bag of money with him; and will come home at the day
appointed,

HEre the naughty-packe does secure him of safety, the he needs not to cast
perils, nor dread any hurt that will come by it, for he might have said:

What if thy husband come in the mean time, and taken

No fear of that, for he is not at home; neither does she

But what if he come home, though it be late, and find me

That cannot be; for he is gone a long journey, and has taken by such a time,
and not before: for the long absence of her husband is confirmed by two signs:
the one, the great sum of money which he took with him for his expenses;
and the other, the set day wherein he appointed to return.

Verse. 21. With much fair speech she caused him to yield, Likchah.
with the flattering of her lips she forced him.

HItherto of the inticement; here follows the lamentable and tragical issue
and effect thereof, which was, that he first did yield unto the sin, and
after did sustain the grievous punishment thereof. The principal means
whereby she did persuade him, was her speech, which was both large and
delightful; for she used many arguments: she answered all objections, her
habit, her catching and kissing of him no doubt did work upon him, but the
poison which did most intoxicate him was from her tongue. That which we
translate fair speech, is in the original, doctrine, or discipline, and he
uses the same as comparing her unto a schoole-mistrisse, but of impurity, and
impiety, and her followers to scholars, or ^ouices learning of her: because
foolish men in their sottishness do put themselves to school to such a
teacher, rather then to lend their ear to the holy doctrine of the Lord. The
holy Ghost also declares the degrees of his falling, and as it were the steps
of his descending. For first, she bowed and inclined him; that is, she moved
his heart, and made it tractable to her persuasions; and after drew, or rather
drove him violently to it with her words.

Verse. 22. He goes after her straight way, as an ox goes to the slaughter,
as a fool to the correction of the stocks.

Verse. 23. Till a dart strike through his liver, as a bird hastes to the
snare, and knows that it is for life.

BEfore it is said she moved him, yea she enforced, and now she has sped him:
for she has made him to follow her into her house, unto her table, into her
chamber, into her bed, and into her shameful sin: thus we see the first
effect of her practices, the corrupting of him with that abominable
filthiness: the other, namely, the punishment and misery is here described by
three comparisons of the like, as an ox to the slaughter, hoping that he is
going to his stall or pasture, when he is led to the slaughterhouse, or
shambles to be knocked on the head, or have his throat cut. The second is, as a
fool led to the stocks for correction as a malefactor carried to prison, and
kept in bonds, until a dart strike through his liver, until the day of
execution, when the dart, or sword, or other instrument wherewith offenders
were wont to be put to death, did pierce his body, and take away his life. The
third, as a bird hastes to the prey, flying swift, and making speed to the
place, where she looks for food, and finds a net, grinne, or limetwigs,
whereby she is entangled, caught, and killed.

Verse. 24. Hearken now therefore, O children: attend to the words of my mouth.

Verse. 25. Let not thine heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her
paths.

HE applies here that which in the premises he had reported, exhorting his
scholars to hearken unto him, and not suffer their hearts to incline to her
ways, or their feet to wander in her paths: as if he should have said, Give
ear to me my sons, and listen not to the harlot, whom God forbids you to
hear, and to whom if ye hearken, ye may evidently foresee your own ruin in
this simple young man's destruction.

Let not thine heart decline to her ways, viz. do not so much as in thy mind
like of her leaud or wicked dealing, and wander not in her paths, suffer not
thy self to be beguiled by her to follow her courses, or be induced to
consent to her wicked motions.

Verse. 26. She has cast down many wounded: yea, many strong men have been
slain by her.

Verse. 27. Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death.

HE fortifieth his exhortation with reasons: the one is the mischief which she
has done to others: the other is the certain peril to all them that haunt
her. The former he alleges by way of preoccupation, to prevent a shift of him
that is unwilling to be admonished, and take warning by the example formerly
produced: Object. It was but one man's hap and misfortune to speed so ill (says
he) I will not be discouraged by the hard success of one, or of a few. Answ.
She has been hurtful to diverse, many have been cast down and wounded by her,
utterly overthrown and spoiled in their state, credit, soul and body. Object.
But a few simple fellows. weak men, of no parts, wanting wit to look unto
themselves, or power to maintain their own safety. Answ. Yea, many strong men
have been slain by her, whereof one amongst the rest was Samson, etc. To show
the certainty of the peril, he says, her house is the way to hell: touching
which, see chap. 2. 18. and chap. 5. 5.

CHAPTER. VIII.
Verse. 1. Does not Wisdom cry? and Understanding utter her voice?

Verse. 2. She stands in the tops of the high places, in the way, in the
places of the paths.

Verse. 3. She cries at the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming
in of the doors.

Having in the former chapter dehorted from the sin of adultery, and therein
described the harlot with her entising speeches, and set down the effects
thereof: he now opposes wisdom to the harlot, her doctrine to the harlots
enticements, and the effects of the one to the effects of the other: where we
are to observe, first, what preparation she makes to this business of
instruction, in these three verses: secondly, the tenor of her oration and
speech, whereby she endeavors to persuade and instruct men in the rest that
follow. For preparation she addresseth her self to be most audible, and easy
to be heard, and uses the best means to have an auditorie, and many to hear
her. Her care to be heard is argued by the earnestness of her calling, and as
it were the contention of her speech, in that she is said to cry, and utter her
voice, because she knows that her matter is good, and most necessary, and
men's ears very deaf toward her, but wide open to all words of folly,
whereby the heart may be poisoned and infected, and therefore she does not
deal indicatiuely, and by way of affirmation, but interrogatiuely, and by way
of expostulation, does not wisdom cry? which is as if she should say, I
demand of you, answer me out of your knowledge and experience, whereas ye
hearken to folly, and wicked men, and sinful women entising and alluring to
evil, is it because ye are not taught, and called on by wisdom, by the son
of God in his ministers and servants? Will ye then leave a reverent matrone,
and hearken to a filthy strumpet? will ye forsake the Ministers of God, and
listen to seducers, and impostours, the ministers of Satan? For providing of
auditors she presents her self to the congregations and public assemblies,
by the ministry of the word she publishes her counsels, and promises in the
Churches, and meetings of Christians, and this he expresses by a simile taken
from the manner of the civil state, as the Magistrate causes his proclamations
to be promulgated in most public places, where the Herald or crier may be
above the rest, and be best seen and heard, where is greatest frequencie and
concourse of people, as in ways whereby multitudes pass, and in the market
place, and the gates of cities, especially where they were wont to keep their
Courts, and Sessions, and came together for all matters of great importance.
See chap. 1. 20. 21.

Verse. 4. Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice i^ to the sons of men.

Verse. 5. O ye simple, understand wisdom; an^ ye fools be of an
understanding heart.

IN this oration the Lord Jesus in the person of wisdom, first commends his
doctrine to the twelfth verse. Secondly, describes his own holiness, to the
two and thirtieth verse. Thirdly, makes application of all unto his people,
from thence to the end of the chapter.

That his doctrine may be the better accepted, and work the more effectually,
he directs his speech to the subjects thereof, the persons whom he deals
with, persuading them to be attentive unto it. And then he describes by the
adioynt of their conditions, as in respect of their outward state some of them
are more noble, and of higher degree, called men, in such a word as many times
signifies their greatness, as those that are acquainted with the tongue
wherein this Scripture is written do well understand: as in the fourth Psalm,
O ye sons of men, viz. O ye mighty personages, how long will ye turn, etc.
Some base, as the word does always intend when it is joined with that before
spoken of, which signifies excellency, as it is used in the 49. Psalm. Both
high and low, both sons of men, and sons of Adam, says the Hebrew text:
and the words follow in the same place do interpret his meaning: both rich and
poor. Again, some of them are prudent and wise, some of them are clean
contrary. Of them he makes two sorts: simple ones, such as are settled in no
one opinion, but are easily carried any whither, as a scather with a puff of
wind, and fools, which are such as having entered into a false opinion, or
evil course of life, will with very great difficulty be drawn from it, or
not at all, unless the Lord put to his merciful hand and reclaim them. And
yet is the case of neither of them desperate* for it is not impossible for the
spirit of God to establ^sh the sim(...) with wis^dome, and to make the fool to
be of an understanding heart: for the precept of God commanding them to be
such, contains in it a promise for their encouragement, that if they will not
be wilful they shall be framed to be such. See chap. 1. verse. 22. 23.

Verse. 6. Hear, for I will speak of excellent things, and the Negidim.
opening of my lips of right things.

HEre he begins to set forth his doctrine by the worthiness and foundnesse
of it. For the former he says, he will speak of excellent things: the word
signifies Princes, viz. principal sayings and sentences, as far excelling
others, as Princes do inferior persons. For the latter he tells us, that
the opening of his mouth, that which he had uttered by it, is of right things,
which are called right, righteousness, or straitness, because they lead us
directly to eternal life and happiness, without any turning either to the
right hand or to the left: and it is set down in the abstract, being
rightnesse, rather then right, and in the plural number, being called
rightnesses, rather then rightnesse, to prefer it for the singular virtue and
holiness, before all humane words and writings: for they are altogether
crooked, or have some crookedness in them, or are imperfect in measure of
purity, which in this is most perfect, complete, and absolute.

Verse. 7. For my mouth shall speak the truth, and wickedness is abomination to
my lips.

HE makes good his general assertion by the enumeration of particular
adjuncts wherewith his doctrine is graced, thereby first proving it to be found
and right, in this verse, and the two next following, and then to be worthy
and excellent, in the tenth, and eleventh verses. The first of these is verity;
he says that his mouth, and the instruments therein contained, the palate by
name, (by which the voice is framed) put for the person speaking, shall speak
the truth, or the whole truth, an heavenly truth, a divine truth: whereas other
writings are either altogether untrue, or have untruths mixed with truths, or
at least contain but an humane truth, not equal to this which has light
without darkness, and verity without fashood, and nothing but that which is
celestial, and suggested by Gods holy spirit, and wickedness is an
abomination to my lips: he cleereth and confirms this by the contrary, which
is lying, in stead whereof he names wickedness, which he says his lips
abhor, viz. he does so abhor it, and has it in such detestation, as that
it is impossible it should proceed out of his lips.

Verse 8. All the words of my mouth are righteousness, there is nothing froward,
or perverse in them.

THe second is justice, or righteousness, all that he commands is lawful
and good, all that he forbids is unlawful and evil; all that he promises
is equal to be performed, all that he threatens is worthy to he executed:
and this he makes clear by the contrary, there is nothing froward or perverse
in them, nothing that is wicked and ungodly is affirmed, or enjoyed, or
allowed, or cloked, or any manner of way, or for any purpose pronounced and
uttered therewith.

Verse. 9. They are all plain to him that understands; and right to them that
find knowledge.

THe third is perspicuity, and easiness to be apprehended, and so by the
assistance of Gods spirit not hard to be practiced: which is set forth by a
comparison of that which is Necochim.
placed right over against a man, or by a way that lies directly before a man's
eyes, yet this saying is limited by the subjects, all promiscuously discern
not this, for they are very obscure to many, but such as are iuditious, which
embrace the doctrine of wisdom, which have sought understanding at wisdoms
school, and there found it, these see the evidence and cleerenesse of Gods
holy counsels, and heavenly mysteries, because they are revealed unto them by
his spirit, which none shall fail to receive that seriously, and in
uprightness seek^ him in his word, and the ministry thereof.

Verse. 10. Receive mine instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather then
choice gold.

Verse. 11. For wisdom is better then rubies: and all things that may be
desired are not to be compared with her.

HE proves the excellency, pretiousnesse, and delights ^ his doctrine by
comparison, with silver and gold, a^^ whatsoever desirable things; and
therefore as it is more excellent then they, so we ought to prefer it before
them by setting our desire more upon it, and taking more pains for ^ then for
any, or all of them. Receive mine instruction (says ^ and not silver, viz. get
it with greater industry then the would use for silver, as may appear by
that which follows: for it is not his purpose here to condemn silver
altogether, but to put it behind grace, whereunto it is so far inferior,
which is meant also of the gold and Iems, etc. ye^ some case the words may
literally be understood, as if instruction and silver cannot be both possessed
together; then s^^ he, Receive mine instruction, and not silver, be sure to
en^^ thy soul, how poor soever thou be in thine estate. The Hebrews were
commended by the Apostle for obeying t^^ precept, and following this counsel,
who suffered with ioy^^^ spoiling of all their goods, knowing that they had a
better an ^^ during substance in heaven. For which see chap. 3. 14. 15.

Verse. 12. I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge Gnormah.
of witty inventions.

Our Savior having so largely and so worthily extoll^^ his word and Gospel,
does encourage his people to embrace the same according to his direction, by
that al sufficie^cie which is in him, both to inform them with knowledge and
understanding, and to perform all his promises which he does make unto them;
and first he tells them for their comfort that he is not only wise, but
wisdom it self, even the wisdom of God: he is also goodness, he is also
power, as the Apostle testifies. But here he mentions this attribute, 1.
Cor. 1. 24.
and assumeth this title, and partly because his Gospel, and ministry, is
commonly of fools condemned of folly, and partly because it is his office to
be the teacher of his Church, it belongs unto him to dictate all the
Scriptures, and to inspire the Prophets and holy men for the writing of them:
it belongs to him to qualify all his Ministers, whether Apostles, or
Prophets, or Evangelists, or Pastors, or Teachers, and to give them gifts of
knowledge fit for their calling: it belongs to him to illuminate the minds of
his servants, and to work the effect of his ministry within them. Being then
the promptuarie and treasury of wisdom for the use of the whole Church, and
every member thereof, in all ages and places, he animateth them by this, that
his store of wisdom can never be exhausted, because he not only has great
store thereof, but is it, and that in an infinite perfection. I dwell with
prudence, the word translated prudence is often taken in the evil part, for
craft and subtilty, and many times in the good part, especially in this book:
as in the first chapter, and 4. verse: to give sharpness of wit, etc. And so
it is here, for holy discretion whereby a man is directed what to do, and what
to leave undone: where to go, and where to stand still: where to speak, and
when to be silent: but especially to avoid the snares which the devil, the
world, and our own corruption have set for us: this does Christ not only for
himself, but for the use of his people, which is his inheritance and
everlasting possession. The word inhabiting, is used in like sense in the
prophecy of Isaiah. For thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth
Isa. 57. 15.
eternity: I find out, not only in my self, but also cause them that
reverence and esteem me, to seek and find witty inventions, such advised
and considerate cogitations, as whereby my servants do not only procure good
to themselves, but prevent and hinder the evils which their enemies seek to
bring upon them.

Verse 13. The fear of the Lord is to bate evil: pride, an arrogancy, the
evil way, and a froward mouth do I hate.

HE commends this prudence and wisdom by the gracious fruit of it, (as may
be collected from the coherence) the fear of God, wherewith Christ as
Mediator, an^ our Savior, was most plentifully enriched in his own person,
according as Isaiah prophesied of him: The spirit of the Lord shall rest upon
him, the spirit of wisdom, and understanding: the spirit of counsel, and
might, the spirit of knowledge and the fear of the Lord. With the same also
does he indue the members of his mystical body, and therein a princip^ part of
their wisdom does consist, as he has formerly testified: The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom. An^ Prou. 1. 7.
as the fear of the Lord is so blessed a fruit of wisdom, ^ is the hatred
of sin as notable an effect of that: which he sets forth by the
particular subjects of those odious vices, which men ought to abhor, and his
people by virtue of this fear shall be made to abhor in that manner (though
not it so full measure) as he himself does abhor them. The fear^ of the
Lord is to hate evil: Sound religion and godline^ (whereof reverence or the
fear of the Lord is one of the principal parts) works in those who are
furnished therewith, the hatred of evil, what kind soever it be, whether it
bee^ heart, or behavior: whether it be of word, or action: whether it be of
omission, or practice: whether it be against the first table of the law, or
second: and by special name these that follow, Pride, and arrogancy, being
loathsome corruptions, arguing the soul, wherein they reign, to be void of
a^ sense of sin, and banishing all true love from among men, there is no
sound piety, or grace, where they bear sway, and grace brings lowliness,
and causes an humble spirit. The evil way: whereby he means all evil
deeds which wicked men walk in, even as the traveler does in his way, and
the froward mouth, which usually speaks perverse things against God, or man,
or both, do I hate, both as God everlasting, the second person in trinity,
and as Mediator clothed with man's nature, according to the saying of the
Prophet, Thou love Psalm. 45. 7.
righte^usnes, and hate iniquity, because God, even thy God has anointed
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Our Savior professes this
as rendering a reason why his Gospel and grace should cause his people to hate
evil, and that ^s, because he himself does, who will conform, and make them
like unto himself, he is the fountain from whence the dreams of every good
grace shall be derived to their souls.

Verse 14. Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am understanding, I have
strength.

HE proceeds and goes forward in setting forth his marvelous, abundant,
yea absolute and infinite wisdom: and first he adds, that counsel is his,
(for he is both of the privy counsel of his Father, and the only aduiser of
his Church, all policy without him is folly, all the directions which he
gives not are seducements, and misleadings) and therefore the Prophet calls
him Wonderful, Counselor, and sound wisdom; the word signifies substance,
meaning sub^antiall Tushijah.
advice and counsel, such as never fails: I am vn^erstanding; he changes
his phrase to teach that counsel and ^isedome are so his, that they are
essential in him, and per^ect, without increase, decrease, or mutation: to
this he ad^yneth another attribute, I have strength; which is here mentioned,
to show that he has power to execute his purposes and counsels: and Isaiah
calling him Wonderful, Counselor, Isai. 9. 6.
titleth him also the mighty God: and by this he gives his ser^ants to
understand that he is omnipotent, to make supply of all their wants, minister
defense against all their perils: there is no good thing which he cannot
perform to them; there is ^o evil or hurt which he cannot keep from them.

Verse 15. By me Kings reign, and Princes decrees iu^^ice.

Verse 16. By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth.

IN that which went before Christ has declared what he is and what he has,
how well he is stored with all sufficiency and perfection for the use of his
(...)ople, and creatures: are now he begins to show what he does, and what
he gives how he imployeth his wisdom and power for the good ^ mankind in
these two verses; and what blessings and fauou^ he bestows upon his own
people and servants, in all the follow to the two and twentieth verse. For the
good and benefit of mankind he says that by him Kings reign, etc. s^nifying
that he is the author of all authority, which is ^^ necessary for the
preservation and welfare of humane soc^tie: there is no power, or potentate,
(whether they be sou^raignes, or subordinate ministers of justice) but they
are fr^ him, as the Apostle says, and by his secret assistance and providence
Romans 13. 1.
they discharge their functions. For whether they d^ wisely consult or
determine what to do in the states they geuerne, or mightily execute that they
have decreed, they doe^ all by him, qualifying them with these gifts of
providence, i^stice, courage, power, and other such like, whereby they (...)
fitted for their places: by him, and his secret disposing, the rise to their
dignities: by him, and by his protecting ha^ they are supported, and defended
in their offices, that they be not exposed to the violence of tumules, and
rebellions, and ^^ outrage of the disordered multitude: nor cut off by the
conspiracies and treacheries of dissembling traitors: by him the sit on their
thrones, or benches, and there pronounce s^tence, handle matters of state,
execute laws, and determine^ causes. And this is not so in the Church alone,
and where region is established, but amongst Idolaters, amongst Infide^ and
Heathen, in all the earth, in all the world, where there^ any government: if
there be any good policy, or equities among them, it proceeds from him,
and is by his appointment.

Verse 17. I love them that love me: and they that seek me ^rly shall find me.

IN the former two verses he mentions his provident care in a general manner
for all states, in setting up, and establishing governors and rulers for their
defense and government, and thereby they are preserved in peace and safety,
and have protection from the injuries which otherwise one would offer to
another: now more specially he professes his grace, mercy, and goodness,
unto his servants, which religiously and holily worship him; and first he
notes the principal cause there of which is on his part viz. his own love:
for this is the root, and fountain of all his favors to us: and secondly,
the moving cause (though not meritorious) which is on our part, and that is,
our love toward him, which proceeds from his unto us, and being commanded by
his law, has a promise of recompense in his Gospel. And both of these are
accompanied with gracious effects as well for faithful endeavor to have
communion with him, as for happy success to attain thereunto: they that
seek me early, which pray unto me, labor to find me in my word, and frequent
all religious exercises ^infully, carefully, and diligently, as men use to rise
betime in the morning, and apply themselves earnestly to deal in business of
greatest ^oment and importance: shall find me, obtain my graces, and enjoy the
comfort of my merits, presence, and favor.

Verse 18. Riches and honor are with me, yea durable riches, and righteousness.

Verse 19. My fruit is better then gold, then fine gold, and my reuennues then
choice silver.

HE amplifieth the success of finding him, by the commodity which they shall
obtain with him, and that is, spiritual and heavenly endowments, which he
compares, and prefers before the most desirable benefits and fortunes (as
they use to term them) of this life, and that is riches, and honor, which
almost all do most greedily affect, and labor for, they shall be intiched with
such wealth, and advanced to that glory which incomparably surpasses all
earthly substance and dignities in every respect, but especially in two: first,
the riches and preferment of this life are transitory and uncertain: a man
may be wealthy to day, and need^e to morrow* now a great man, and shortly
after of no reputation: much applauded for the present, and within a short
while inueighed against, or derided: but these riches are permanent, and
durable, such as neither the just can sret, nor the moth consume: and so is
this honor also not subject to mutabilitie, and lost^, Secondly the goods and
preferments of this world are gotten, or kept many times with much injustice,
and wrong; and therefore the one sort of them in stead of both are called
riches of i^i^uitie: but righteousness does evermore so season Luke 16.
these treasures and promotions of grace, that no such imputations can be laid
upon them, and therefore for their incomparable excellency he does again (as
he had often before) extol them above those things which most men's affections
do grealiest dote after, and their minds do most highly esteem of, namely,
gold and silver, the very gods of all worldlings: my fruit, the gifts and
graces which grow from the sappe^ my spirit* is better then g^ld, yea then fine
gold, and my reuernues, which I give to be enjoyed of them which enjoy me, ^
better then choice silver, though it have been never so often fined and tried.

Verse 20. I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of
judgment.

HE does explane his own words, and interprets his riches, his fruit, and
reuennues, etc. to be sanctification of life together with the internal graces
of the soul. I cause to walk in the way of righteousness, I teach men which
embrace me by my word, and stir them up by my spirit, to deny ungodliness,
and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world, etc. and in the midst of the paths of judgment, without going on either
hand, but in the plain way of vprightnes. His intent is not here to put men in
hope of a perfection in this life, or to charge all those to have no communion
with him which sometimes swerve from the right way, and fall into injustice, but
to promise direction to them that desire the right way, and to comfort them
that pro^cede on in sincerity (though not in fulness of purity and goodness)
and when sinfulnes is not the way wherein they walk, though sometimes they
miss their way, and stray aside, which when they do, he will show them their
errors, rebuke their hearts, and reduce them to the right way according to his
promise: And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the
way walk in it, when thou turnest to the right hand, and Esai. 30. 21.
when thou turnest to the left.

Verse 21. That I may cause them that love me, to inherit substance: and I will
fill their treasures.

LAstly, the excellency, and profitablenes of the righteousness, in the former
verse promised, he proves by the end or effect of it which is to make us
perfectly happy: and this he amplifieth, first, from the matter of it, that it
is solid, stable, and firm, calling it substance, or that which is, as if all
other things were rather shadows and shows, then matter of subnce. Secondly,
by the perpetuity of it, with one property in it, noted in the word inherit,
as if all other things were but borrowed wares, and moueables, or leases at the
best, and this only and properly our own, and a matter of inheritance.
Thirdly, by the fulness and plenty of it, I will fill their treasures, as if we
had al other things delivered us sparingly, and in smaller number, weight, and
measure; but this more liberally, and with far more large and ample
copiousnes. Much of this is again confirmed by him in the new Testament, where
he compares the earth to a thing that has no stay, and heaven to an
everlasting habitation; and calls the earthly estate the least, and the
heavenly the greatest: commodities of the world he terms the unrighteous
Mammon: and possessions above, the true treasure.

Verse 22. Jehovah has possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his
works of old.

THe son of God proceeding to manifest himself, and to publish the knowledge
of his divine nature, sets forth both the eternity of his being to the 30.
verse, and of his happiness, to the 32. verse.

The eternity of his being is proved by this, that he was before the
creation, to the 26. verse, at it, to the 30. verse. Now he says, Jehovah
possessed me in the beginning of his way: I the eternal word of God was with
God the Father at the beginning of his way, when by the creation of all things
he was about to give manifest and plain testimonies of his Majesty, and I
was of one and the self same essence with him, and the holy Spirit, he then
possessed me, as his Son, and as his wisdom, before his works of old, before
any thing that ever he made, even those which were first, and of all others
most ancient.

Verse. 23. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth
was.

SO much, as in the lump, or chaos: by the eternal decree of God I was
ordained, and had as sure a calling, as if I had been anointed to the office
of Kingdom, Priesthood, and Prophecy, to be Mediator for, and head of the
Church in time to be founded, and everlastingly to be saved.

Verse 24. When there were no depths I was begotten: when there were no
fountains springing with water.

Verse 25. Before the mountains were settled: before the (...) was I begotten.

WHen there were no depths was I begotten, and to speak after the mannet of
men, brought forth: I had my person from the person of my Father from all
eternity, and to continue for ever.

The perticulars of the creation here reckoned up are very worthy to be
considered, as first the depthes, that is to say, channels wherein the seas and
rivers run, and wherein the standing waters make their abode, all which are
receptacles, and as it were the vessels and cisternes wherein the waters are
contained, which otherwise would ouerflow the earth, and make it unfit both for
man, and other beasts to live upon: secondly, the fountains, which are as the
eyes (for so the Hebrew Mangianoth.
word signifies) through which the seas do look out here and there among the
hills; and as the issues of the seas by which they send forth waters, which
being delivered from their salt and brackish taste, by being strained through
the earth, serve men, and other creatures for singular and infinite uses, of
moistening, cooling, and cleansing, etc. And because they are so useful, God
does as well replenish them with plenty Cholalti.
of water, wherewith it is said here they abound, or be great with: the
similitude is taken from female living creatures, which in competent time after
their conception, are ready to bring forth their young which they go with.

The third is the mountains, of which he says, that they are settled, the
Hebrew word says, drowned: that is to say, laid so deeply, that the roots
and bottomes of them lie in the seas: and the lesser hills also, as in the rest,
his glorious workmanship appears.

Verse. 26. While as yet he had not created the earth, nor the fields, nor the
height of the dust of the earth.

THe next (after mention of the earth made and perfited) is the open field, or
country, the plain, or champion, which is fit for corn, grass, traveling,
carriage, etc. he calls these the height, or top of the dust of the world.
The word R^ash.
signifies the head, meaning the most delicate or principal parts of the
earth, which by a Menonymie, or Synecdoche, he calls the dust of the world.

Thus we see Christ preferring himself in priority of time, and consequently
in every other respect before all creatures, where the principal thing which
he professes concerning himself are his eternal communion with his father,
who ever has, and does enjoy him, and his chief possession, and next his
eternal designation to the office of the Mediatorship: lastly, his eternal
generation to be the son of God. We see also the creatures with whom he does
compare himself, generally the whole earth, first imperfect, v. 23. secondly
finished, v. 26 and perticularly the depthes* springs, hills, fields, etc. And
all is in effect as if he should say, Jehovah possessed me, in and before the
beginning of his way: then when he begun to manifest and make himself known
by the creation of the world, before he wrought any of his works, before he
could say [ then] that is, before all time: and from the very beginning I was
anointed, and set up, having wonderful power and authority with him: more
perticularly, when there was yet no earth, that is, no mass of water, nor
earth, which is the matter of all things; before there was any depth, which is
one part of that mass, was I begotten: before there were any fountains laden
with water; before the great mountains, which are as it were the foundation of
the dry land were fixed: and before the lesser hills was I borne, and had my
being; before the Lord had made the earth, or the fields abroad, and the most
commodious, delightful and goodly places of the world.

Verse. 27. When he prepared the heavens, I was there: when he set a compass on
the face of the depthes.

Verse. 28. When he established the clouds above: when he established the
fountains of the depth:

Verse. 29. When he gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass
his commandment: when he appointed the foundation of the earth.

IN the premises our Savior Christ declares that he in his existence,
nature, office, and person was eternally before the creation, and in these
verses that he was present at the creation: wherein we must know that he was
also an agent, and fellow-worker with the father, and so much is testified in
the Scriptures: for S. John says, In the beginning was that word, Ioh. 1. 1.
2. 3.
and that word was with God, and that word was God. The same was in the
beginning with God. All things were made by it, and without it was made nothing
that was made. And Saint Paul agrees with him in the same point: By him were
all things created that are in heaven or earth, visible or invisible, whether
Col. 1. 16. 17.
they be thrones, or dominions principalities, or powers, all things were
created by him, and for him; and he is before all things, and by him all things
consist. And herein he relates the works of God, first in the heaven;
secondly, in the air; thirdly, in the waters; and lastly, in the earth.
Touching the first, it is said that he prepared the heavens, viz. God the
Father both made and garnished them in a beautiful manner: and for the
largeness and circuit of them it is said, he set them to compass the face of
the depth, viz. to surround and encompasse all the inferior bodies, both of
the water and earth; and of himself, that he was there, not as an idle
spectator, but as a ioynt-worker, as we have already proved. Touching the
second it is said, that he established the clouds, viz. appointed and set them
by the word of his power in the firmament, that they might not break, nor fail
down, or be dissolved untimely and vnseasonablie, but kept and preserved
there, until he would have them to power down their dew, or rain.

Touching the third, he first mentions the waters within the earth, viz. the
great depths, almost bottomless gulphes; and of these it is said, that he
established the fountains of the deep keeping them within the bounds and
compasses which he had set them below in the ground, and not to break out
immoderately, to the annoyance of the earth, for the use and benefit whereto
they were created: and secondly he specifieth the waters upon the earth, to
which, because they would be unruly, and over whelme the dry land, and all the
creatures upon it, he gave his decree for the bounds and lists of the same, how
far it should go, and how far it should not go, that the waters thereof
should not pass his command, exceed the limits wherewith he had bounded them:
he uses a Pr^s^p^peia, ascribing a person to the seas, and compares them to
servants, or subjects which receive commands from their superior. The like
saying is also uttered by the Lord himself, in Job, Who has shut up the sea
with doors when it break forth, Job 38. 8. 10. 11.
as if it had issued out of the womb? when I brake up for it my decreed plac^*
and set bars and doors; and said, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further;
and here shall thy proud wa^^* be stayed. Touching the last, it is said, he
appointed the foundations of the earth, viz. made it so firm and stable, that
it should perpetually remain immovable. The sense of all this is, as if he
should have said, When Jehovah made and garnished the heavens, and set them as
a circle drawn about the earth, then and there was I working and framing them
with him: when he fastened the clouds above, and fountains which are s^
strong, as, though the waters of the deep be great and violent, yet are they
not broken up: likewise when he made the seas, and appointed bounds and limits
thereunto by a statute and law, beyond which it cannot pass, and when he
placed the earth, that, although it hang wonderfully upon nothing yet is so
firm and immovable, as if it were raised upon a sure and strong foundation,
answerable to the building: when a^^ these things were done, then, and there
was I, not as to look upon them, but to associate the Father, and the holy
Ghost i^ working.

Verse. 30. Then was I by him, as one brought up with him and I was daily his
delight, rei^ycing always before him.

Verse. 31. Rejoicing in the habitable part of the earth: or delights were in
the sons of men.

Having thus set forth and proved his eternity, he proceeds to set forth his
felicity, partly in the delight which he both gave to his Father, and received
from him before the world: wherein also is to be understood that the holy
Spirit the third person in Trinity, communicates with them both and partly in
the delight which since the world was made he takes in the world generally,
and specially in the sons of men. The former is set down in borrowed
speeches, wherein Amon. Meshacheketh.
applying himself to our capacity, he compares himself to an nursling,
smiling and laughing with his nurse; and to a little child, sporting and
playing before his father. The latter is set down, first, in one of the same
borrowed speeches, laughing, and sporting in the habitual part of the earth,
that is, taking pleasure in the creatures, beholding therein the fruit of the
most absolute wisdom, power, and goodness of the whole Trinity. And
secondly in plainer speech, my delights, yea my Shagnashugnai.
double delight is in the sons of men, as they were all first formed and
fashioned in Adam, bearing before his fall the stamp and print of Gods image,
for wisdom, holiness, and righteousness; and foreseeing, and preordaining
that glorious estate whereunto they were to be restored after man's fall, to be
made like unto himself, and to be incorporated into him, and with him, by the
merit of his sufferings, and obedience, together with the efficacy of his
spirit, and grace to inherit holiness, honor, and immortality for ever.

Verse. 32. Now therefore, O ye children, hearken to me: for blessed are they
that keep my ways.

Wisdom having propounded her heavenly doctrine, comes now to make use of
it, and to apply it by exhortation to her children. The sum of her
exhortation is, that for as much as she is so excellent, as has been before
delivered; therefore they should hearken unto her, and walk in her ways;
hear her doctrine, and continue in her precepts.

And in this exhortation he proposes A duty: A reason of it First, briefly
set down. Then more at large laid forth.


The duty is briefly set down in these words; My children, hearken to me: the
duty is inferred upon the premises, now therefore: as if he should have said,
Wherefore, seeing the matter whereof I speak is so excellent; seeing all
wisdom, knowledge, counsel, strength, etc. are mine, and I bestow them with
riches, and honors also on those that love me, seeing I am the eternal Son
of God, Creator of the world; perfectly happy in my self, and yet delighting
in the sons of men, it concerns you to hearken unto me.

Unto this he adds a reason taken from the effect, blessed are they that
keep my ways: which is an argument of greatest weight and force that can be
used. For what is it that all men seek but happiness?

Verse. 33. Hear instruction, and be wise, refuse it not.

Having thus briefly laid down the exhortation, and the promise; he amplifieth
both: and first the exhortation, wherein he persuades to three things: the
first is, that we hear instruction, because they that will hearken to him
must hear his instructions, yea rebukes and corrections also (if need so
require) for herein especially she makes trial of our obedience. A bastard
will after a sort sometimes hear doctrine and consolation; but he is a
natural son of wisdom that will hearken to her checkes and reproves. The
second is, and be wise, which is the effect of Wisdoms instruction, and
reprehension: for the word of God is able to make us wise to salvation; and
therefore aduising to be wise, he inciteth us to those means whereby we may
attain unto wisdom. The Tiphragnu.
third is, refuse not; the word signifies both to put away, and to fall away,
or to make a defection. It is a great indignity offered unto Wisdom, to refuse
and put her away, when she offers her self to us in her instructions, and
worthy are they to perish in their folly that shall so do: but it is yet a
more unworthy thing, having in some sort yielded to her, to revolt from her,
and cast her off; for she never gives to any man the least cause so to deal
with her.

Verse. 34. Blessed is the man that hears me: watching daily at my gates,
waiting at the posts of my doors.

HEre he amplifieth the promise* first affirming that he is blessed that
performs the duty of hearing wisdom, which he proves by the reward* in
the next verse, and by the contrary in the last. And first, in this verse he
describes that attention and hearing of wisdom by the manner of it,
prescribing therein assiduity, and continual attendance by a comparison taken
from the custom of clients and suitors, who wait day by day, and hour by
hour, at the gates of Princes, Counselors* and other great men, to exhibit
their petitions and to get their causes favored, heard, and ended, which is
the constant exercise of religious services.

Verse. 35. For who so finds me, finds life; and shall obtain favor of the
Lord.

THe reward promised to such as hearken unto wisdom: for their blessedness
is life it self. He that finds me: which attaineth to the sound and saving
knowledge of me with faith, and lays hold on me by faith, and communicates
of my graces by the spirit, finds life, viz. both enjoys the certain
assurance and comfort of eternal life: for, I am, says he, the resurrection
and the life: I am the way, the truth, Ioh. 11. 25. and Ioh. 14. 16.
and the life: he adds that such do got favor of the Lord, which is the
cause of life before promised, and the very life of Psalm. 63 3.
life it self, according to the saying of David, Thy loving kindness is
better then life.

Verse. 36. But he that sins against me, wrongeth his onne soul: all they
that hate me, love death.

LAstly, he both cleereth and confirms his former promise by the contrary;
where fin^ing against wisdom, is opposed to the hearkening to her, and
finding of her. For no man finds her not, but he that either wilfully
refuses to seek her, or contumeliously rejects her, offering her self unto
him: and wronging his own soul, is opposed to finding of life: for as the one
is recompensed from Gods free gift, so the other is punished for his own
desert, and through his wilfulnes does open injury and violence (as the word
imports) unto himself, unto his life, unto his soul, by throwing both soul
and body headlong into perdition, so that he must needs be found accessarie
to his own death, destruction, and damnation. The same in effect is delivered
in other terms, in the latter part of the verse, where they that reject
wisdom are charged to hate her: (for indeed none but her enemies do deny her
entertainment) and they that labor not to find that everlasting life, have
this imputation laid upon them by wisdom (who knows all things, and can
best judge of every thing) to love death, which they do in effect, though not
in affections: for they love the poison of sin which will bring death, the
eating whereof is as sure as death: and in this sense the fondest parents which
in extreme indulgence forbear to give their children correction, are said to
hate them, because they do the work of hatred by neglecting the duty of love.

CHAPTER. IX.
THis Chapter does contain a brief recapitulation or summarie almost of all
the former eight Chapters: containing, first, the holy instructions of
wisdom, in the person of a Princess or great Lady making a banquet.
Secondly, the deceivable and enticing flatterings of sinfulnes and folly, in
the person of a smooth and guilefull harlot.

Verse 1. Wisdom has built her house, and hewn out her seven pillars.

Wisdom, or wisedomes] viz. The most absolute and sovereign Wisdom, the
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the perfect wisdom of his Father, ( has built her
house) that is, the Church, which is so called, 1. Tim. 3. 15. ( and hewn out
her seven pillars) that is, has most firmly founded, and perpetually
supporteth it with his own hand: which is more powerful for it, then many
pillars and buttresses are to sustain a material building: whereby also is
intended, that the Churches safety is accompanied with beauty, as having
pillars hewn out and polished, and not made of rough stones without
garnishing. And this the Lord does, and publishes, that his people should seek
and serve him with boldness, and hope, without dread of danger or contempt, as
being called unto a place so sure and glorious.

Verse 2. She has killed her victuals, mingled her wine, and prepared her
table.

MEntion was made before of wisdoms house, and the strength of it: and here
of her hospitality and housekeeping in it; where heavenly things are
represented by earthly, and the bounty and magnificence of the Lord, by the
plentiful provision of a liberal feast-maker. For the graces of his Spirit, by
the ministry of the word, are compared to dainty meats, and delicious
wines, either spiced, or mingled with choice kinds of cool waters, whereby in
those hot countries they were much refreshed. Whereunto is added the
circumstance of readiness; that there needs no tariance or long waiting, but
al things are in order, and commodiously prepared for present refection of the
guests. Our Savior Christ utters a like parable in the Gospel with the same
circumstance, saying, Tell them which are bidden; Behold, I have prepared
Matthew. 22. 4.
my dinner; mine oxen, and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready:
come unto the marriage. This illustration of the Gospel by the resemblance of a
sumptuous feast, and dainty cheer, is frequent in the Scriptures both as well
in the old Testament as in the new: as for example, we may read in the
prophecy of Isaiah: In this mountain (meaning his Church, Isai. 25. 6.
according as he does in this place) shall the Lord of hoasts make to all
people a feast of fat things; a fealt of wine on the lees, of fat things full
of marrow, of wine on the lees well refined.

Verse 3. She has sent forth her maids, and cries upon the highest places
of the city.

IN the former words was showed what preparation wisdom made for her feast at
home, and in these what course she takes to inuit the guests abroad. Her
maids are sent forth as messengers into the streets, and gates and market
place, which commonly are frequented with greatest multitude and concourse of
people, to call as many as they can meet with: not that maids or matrons or
any women are allowed to be ministers: but he prosecuteth the allegory, every
part of it correspondent and suitable to other. As Christ himself, understood
by wisdom, is compared to a Lady: so his Prophets, Apostles, Pastors, and
Teachers, are resembled to maids, which in regard of sex are most meet to
wait upon women. For in that place of Matthew where he is said to be a King,
that is, the feast-maker, his messengers are termed men-seruants, and not
maids or women.

Verse 4. Who so is simple let him come hither, and to him that is destitute of
wisdom she speaks.

HEre is a description of the guests y^ be meet for this feast, which in show
seem most unmeet, as being most unlike the mistress of the feast: and these
are simple persons, destitute of spiritual understanding yet so as they feel
the want of knowledge, and the weight of their ignorance, and lean no longer
on worldly wisdom. For their case does most of all require supply
considering their necessity, and these will most greedily (as I may say)
devour and eat of wisdoms delicate instructions, and none will be more
thankful to acknowledge her favors then they, as finding her so gracious and
merciful unto them: contrary to the contrary sort of ignorant persons, whose
blindness causes them to think that they are not blind: and their
affamishment has utterly killed their appetites, so that their souls do
loathe and abhor all wholesome food; and therefore they take them for their
greatest enemies, who offer any relief unto them.

Verse 5. Come and eat, and drink of the wine that I have mixed.

THe exhortation which Wisdom uttered by her maids is again repeated, to
express the serious desire and true meaning of the messengers, and mistress in
calling of the guests; and to let them know also that as they are bidden by way
of inuitation, so they are commanded by way of summons, and therefore to
address themselves thereunto with all expedition. And because it is not their
presence only that is required, but a profitable vse-making of the undeserved
favor that is showed unto them, therefore they are before hand informed to what
end they are sent for; to eat and drink of the delicates prepared: which is
to receive the merits and graces of Christ, with the promises of God, and to
make them their own by faith, and particular application.

Verse 6. Forsake the foolish, and live ye, and walk in the way of wisdom.

NOw she gives rules of direction to them that were called, the better to fit
them for her family: as first for their company, that since they are to have
society with the Saints in the Church, they are to separate themselves from
the sinners of the world. Whereunto she persuades them by the good effect
ensuing, that the gain of everlasting life will counteruaile and ouerpoise the
loss of all worldly and fleshly friends.

The other is for conversation, that for as much as they are to dwell with
wisdom (for all the guests are domestical and of the household) that
therefore all their ways and behavior be holy and agreeable to wisdom.

Verse. 7. He that rebukes a scorner ^urchaseth to himself shame: he that
rebukes the wicked gett^^h himself a blot.

HItherto has been showed how the message of salvation was sent by Christ, and
brought by his Min^sters: now here is declared how it is received of the
people. And first, he brings such as be incapable of it* namely, desperate
wicked men, being altogether incurable, whom the Scripture terms scorners
And these will attempt to blemish and shame all those that shall admonish them.
As charging them sometimes with arrogancy, malice, indiscretion and
hypocrisy: sometimes with schism, sedition, covetousness, and other
misdemeanors: and if these imputations can take no hold on them, as grounded
on no probability, then they fall upon their mean estate, and parentage, and
education: for so they dealt with the Lord Jesus Christ himself: Mat. 13. 35.
Is no^ this the Carpenters Son, is not his mother called Marie?

Verse. 8 Rebuke not a scorner, lest he hate thee, etc.

IN the former verse was showed, how scorners use to deal with them that
rebuke them: and here the holy Ghost teaches how we must deal with scorners:
namely, sithence we shall needlesselie stir up hatred against our selves, and
perform no good to them, that therefore we desist from them and let them
alone. Wherein notwithstanding good discretion is to be used, that none which
may be corrigible be rejected for a scorner, but such as upon sufficient
trial have declared themselves by a continued obstinacy to be so. And in th^s
case also though private reproves are to be spared, yet (...) they publicly
be pursued by the ministry, and censured by the Church, and punished by the
Magistrate. For is it eq(...) that their contemptuousnesse should purchase
favor to their rebellion, and liberty for them to sin freely without
controlement? As the example of their licentiousness and obstinacy is a
precedent of evil to many, so let the stroke of their punishment and disgrace
be a terror to all.

Verse. 8. But rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee.

9. Give admonition to the wise, and he will be the wiser: teach a righteous
man, and he will increase in learning.

NOw he comes on the contrary side to commend the competent hearers of
Wisdom, upon whom good lessons are well bestowed. And they are described,
first by their willing receiving of instruction, that they love them the better
that shall deal plainly with them. Secondly, by the good use they make of it,
increasing both in knowledge and practice of understanding, and therefore are
called wise and righteous. For in a seasonable and faithful reproof, a man of
wisdom will discern the love and upright affection of the reprouer, who
wishes so well unto him, as that he will conceal nothing from him, which may
tend to his hurt; and therefore detecteth whatsoever peril his soul is in,
and the mischief that is like to befall him touching his estate or credit, or
ought else that is dear unto him. And consequently entertaining so good an
opinion of him that bestows the admonition, he must needs value his counsel
accordingly, and make his best benefit thereof with constant progress in sound
judgment and goodness.

Verse. 10. The beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord, and the
knowledge of holy men is understanding.

Having so much commended Wisdom and so earnestly persuaded men unto it, he
shows now wherein it does consist that men might not be deceived by the
counterfeit color of it, describing it:

First, by the matter, that is, true piety and religion, called commonly in the
word, the fear of God, because it is an essential part thereof: and this is
not a case contingent, as though wisdom and piety might sometimes concur in
one person and sometimes be disseuered: but necessary and perpetual, the one
being always the beginning of the other.

Secondly, by the manner, that is, not the knowledge of natural things that is
in Philosophers: nor the knowledge of civil affair, that is in Politicians:
nor the historical and artificial knowledge of points of religion that is in
hypocrites: but the mystical knowledge of the mysteries of salvation, which
the spirit of God does reveal to the hearts of Christians* Whereas the holy
Ghost speaks at large in the Epistle to the Corinthians. Chap. 2. 9. 10. 11.
The things which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard, neither came into
man's heart, are, which God has prepared for them that love him. But God has
revealed them unto us by his spirit.

Verse. 11. For thy days shall be multiplied by me, and the years of thy life
shall be augmented.

12. If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self: and if thou be a
sinner, thou alone shall suffer.

AFter the description of wisdom, whereby it may be rightly discerned, is
here proposed the profit and reward of it, whereby we are persuaded to embrace
it: and that is,

First, in a peculiar, namely, long life: which is not so to be understood as
though it were perpetual, and so of absolute necessity: for then good men must
grow to be old men, and all which die young, should die wicked and damned: but
that God has the keeping of their lives in such good safety as they shall
never be taken away before due season: they shall not die so soon, as that it
would be better for them to live longer: nor live so long, as that it might be
hurtful they died not sooner. The point does Eliphaz truly expound to Job,
and all other righteous persons: Job 5. 26. Thou shall go to thy grave in a
full age as a crop of corn comes in due season into the barn. Now all
grain is not of equal proportion of growth: some is sown before others, and
yet is cut down after them: some is sown after others, and comes to
maturity before them: so that good husbands dispose not of their harvest by
measure of time, but by the ripeness of their corn: and two extremities they
prouidently avoid; neither too hastily to inn the fruits of their fields or
trees, for so they would wither away: neither to defer the gathering of them
after they be ripe, for so they would drop off, and shed, and grow to
rottenness. Afterward he declares the recompense of wisdom in general:
that the possession and practice thereof is not only a service to God, nor
alone for his sake so often required: but redoundeth also to the profit of them
that be owners and performers of it. And to this is opposed the contrary state
of those perverse and wilful scorners, that howsoever their desire and purpose
is to do mischief to others, yet all their malice returns on their own
heads.

Verse. 13. A foolish woman is always babbling, shoe is ignorant, and knows
nothing.

THus much has been spoken of wisdoms wholesome banquet, which the Lord to that
end proposed, that we might be allured unto it. Now follows the feast of
Folly, which she makes to the end, that she may poison her guests, and God
discovers, for this purpose that we might avoid it. And here, as also in
that which follows, she is described by her qualities and behavior,
carrying the right stamp and print of an harlot. One thing is, that she is
given to much talk, to make a noise: which was the note of the whorish woman,
Chap. 7. 11. The meaning here is, that sinfulness and Satan, by the mouths of
sinful persons, do pretend many reasons to justify any wicked cause, and use
cunning persuasions to draw men thereunto; as the unchaste woman does flow with
entising speeches. And though she have a lavish tongue, yet we know (according
as we use to say) that none is so bold as blind Bayard. The drift is, that the
factors for folly, such as labor to promote sin, be utterly destitute of
saving understanding, which was called before, the knowledge of holy men.

Verse. 14. She sits at the door of her house, on a seat in the high places
of the City.

HE continues still the allegory, resembling wickedness to an harlot, whose
property is to be abroad in the streets to meet with companions, and to entice
men to folly by her looks and behavior: which also sin does by her
subtilties to seduce men's souls. And yet she goes not as an ordinary
strumpet, or a vagabond, but takes state upon her like a courtizan. She
sits on a seat in the street, which was Cissae.
wont to be a sign of honor. As Job 29. 7. When I went out to the gate,
through the City, when I prepared my seat in the street. And the word
signifies a throne or chair of estate, which was for Princes, or principal
persons, and not for men of mean condition: whereby the holy Ghost intimates
that sin seduceth not only by smooth and subtle allurements, but by high
place, and great countenanc, as having many Nobles, and great Potentates to be
her agents.

Verse. 15. To call them that pass by the way, that go right on their way.

THis is the end and purpose of her being in the streets, To do mischief
there: not only to confirm and harden such as be already entered into leaud
courses, but to pervert and draw away those that be inclined to any goodness.
As Saint Peter observed: They speak great swelling words of vanity, alluring
through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness 1. Pet. 2. 19.
those that were clean escaped from them that live in error, promising them
l^berty, and they themselves are servants of corruption. For whiles the devil
holds wicked men fast in their wickedness, he does but as it were keep his
own, which like to tame fowls are always ready at his hand, to do what he
will with, but when he draws men of better hopes into his net, he seems to
make a prey of Gods game, and to catch that which was erst flowne from him.

Verse. 16. Who so is simple, let him come hither, and whosoever is void of
understanding, to him she speaks.

WHo so is simple, etc.] That is, which being ignorant discerns not his
blindness, but has conceit of wisdom and knowledge.

Let him come hither, etc.] To the company, counsel, and practice of Folly.
And to him that is destitute of understanding she speaks, viz. that have no
knowledge of their own, nor be willing to go to Wisdoms house to get any.
She knows that silly men (deuoide of heavenly knowledge although they
abound with natural wit, and fleshly policy) are easily entreated to hearken
to her persuasions, and to be allured to her baits: and therefore directs
her speech to them with undoubted hope of success, both to take, to hold fast,
and to kill them: whereas those which are endued with holy wisdom will either
suspect her enchanting call, and keep off far from her, or else break her
net, and escape away upon the sight of their peril, notwithstanding that
sometimes they be ensnared by her

Verse. 17. Stolen waters are sweet, and hid bread is pleasant.

THis verse contains an event that follows their ye^lding to Follies
allurements, that at the first they find delight and pleasure, and great
contentation in their entertainment.

He alludeth, as it seems, to the disorders that are wont to be in harlots
houses, wherein at the meeting of companions they use to have a feast, and all
the provision is of stolen stuff. Either servants filch from their masters,
or otherwise they steal from their neighbors, hens, and geese, and duckes.
and connies, and venison, and such things as they can come by: which is called
his food, because as they cannot justify it, so they dare not let it be seen,
but dress it covertly, and eat it secretly in the midst of the night, in the
most inward and closest room of the whole house. And whatsoever is so gotten,
and ^here made ready is very delicious unto them, though it were but bread and
water.

Verse. 18. But he knows not that the dead are there, and that her guests are
in the depth of hell.

HEre follows another event ensuing upon the former; that as they had
pleasure at the first, so they must have pain at the last: as their
entertainment was with delight, so shall their reckoning be with destruction.
It is said, he knows not: that is, every one of them that be tractable to
her call, have the peril of their state hid from their eyes.

That the dead are there, etc.] That all that give themselves to such courses
are strangers from the life of God, and in the power of the first death; and in
the depth of hell, that is, are as certain to be damned in the world to come
(unless God give them repentance) as if they were already in hell fire.

CHAPTER. X.
THE PARABLES OF SOLOMON.

Verse. 1. A wise son makes a glad Father; but a foolish son is a heaviness to
his mother.

PArables.] That is, wise and ^^^ue sentences written by Solomon, but ins^^red
by the spirit of God, for the information of the mind, and the institution of
the life, according to the rules of Wisdom, Justice, and Piety. The other
nine Chapters being prefixed as a preface to these, contained a continued
discourse, wherein the commendation of Wisdom, and the exhortations to many
good duties were prosecuted with variety of arguments: whereas in these that
follow, for the most part, are set down brief sayings, every verse almost
comprehending a whole point in it self, not growing upon dependence of that
which went before, nor ministering the occasion of that which comes after. Yet
sometimes it falls out otherwise, and diverse verses together have dependence
one with another, as will ^ppeare in some place of this present Chapter. A wise
son, that is, a virtuous and towardly son or daughter, makes a joyful
father, or mother: and a foolish son, that is, a sinful and ungracious
child, is an heaviness, and grief to his mother or father: yet it is not
without cause that the mother is rather put in the latter clause, then the
father: for that sex is the weaker, and more impatient of such a cross: and
usually contemptuous children be bolder to contemn the mother then the father,
as Chap. 15. 20. A foolish man despises his mother; as Rebeccah was more
troubled with Esau then Isaac was: and very often the mothers by too much
indulgence and fondness are means of their childrens vices; and so it is
said, A child set at liberty makes his mother ashamed: Chap. 29. 15.

Verse. 2. The treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but righteousness
delivers from death.

THe treasures of wickedness.] That is, the greatest abundance of wealth which
is evil gotten, and evil used, or possessed by an evil owner, profit
nothing: do him no good at any time; but least of all at his death, or in time
of misery; for so it is intended by the Antithesis, and expressed, Chap. 11.
14. Riches avail not in the day of wrath, but righteousness: that is,
uprightness of heart, and holiness of behavior, delivers from death; that
is, from destruction, and all other hurtful dangers. Yet not by any merit of
man, but by the mercy of God through Jesus Christ. By which saying, the Wise
man would have it inferred, that the most prosperous success of sinful men in
their sinful ways, although never so gainefull, does prove at the last to be
nothing worth: for their greatest getting (if it were of precious jewels, as
many as would fill a treasury) is insufficient to ward off, and to fence them
from the violence of misery when it shall assault them, or to confirm their
hearts so as they may be able to sustain the force thereof, and that
contrarily well doing, grace, and a good conscience (howsoever they seem for a
time to be a needless, disgraceful, and troublesome burden) yet a season
will come, the use of them will be seen and enjoyed, when no weapon or arms,
no sword, shield, helmet, brestplate, or the most complete armor of proof,
shall so much bestead a soldier in the heat of the battle, as these will
help the heart of a Christian with comfort, and his soul with safety, when
he is beset about with perils, or must depart with his natural life.

Verse. 3. The Lord will not famish the soul of the righteous: but he casts
away the substance of the wicked.

THese words be inferred upon the former, as an answer to a secret objection
that might be made against them: Why should it be thought that men get no
good by gathering riches in what manner soever? They stand them in stead in
time of dearth and scarcity; when others that want them, though never so just,
are like to perish. Now here he shows the case to be otherwise. Good men are
not unprovided of food because they are unfurnished with wealth: and sinful
men have no assurance of provision though they have riches: for the Lord will
not famish the souls of the righteous, that is, will not suffer the men
themselves to starve, though they have never so little: But will cast away the
substance of the wicked, that is, he will deprive them of the possession, or
use, or virtue of it when they are in greatest need.

Verse 4. A deceitful hand makes poor: but the hand of the diligent makes
rich.

THis verse also contains an answer to an other objection, which might rise
out of the words immediately going before. If food and maintenance be the gift
of God, and they that have little shall be kept from want, and they that have
great store shall be stripped of all; to what end should men travail and take
pains? the wisest way is to give over all labor. Now this he refuteth by
showing the means whereby righteous men use to receive this food and
provision from Gods hand, and that is by sedulitie and diligence in their
vocations. And therefore he demonstrateth the contrary effects of contrary
men; namely, of slothful persons, and such as be industrious and painful.
Slothful persons fall into two evils: the one is the practice of deceitfulnes,
called here a deceitful hand: the other is the burden of poverty, which is a
punishment inflicted upon them both for fraud and idleness. They that be
diligent have their reward yielded unto them, that they thrive and prosper by
the labor of their hands: and though their wealth be not so great in
quantity, yet the smalnesse thereof is recompensed in quality and good use of
it; and therefore is called, precious riches, Chap. 12. 27. And so they have
neither need nor disposition to give themselves to deceitful shifts, as
sluggards.

Verse 5. He that gathers in summer is a son of understanding: and he that
sleeps in harvest is a son of confusion.

THe drift of these words is to teach men to redeem the time, and make the
best advantage of the seasons, comparing opportunity to summer or haru^st,
when the fruits of the earth are ripe, and ready to be gathered; and the
persons to whom it is offered, to husbandmen that have commodities growing in
the fields. And therefore as we judge him prudent which so stirs himself,
and hasteneth his people to cut down his corn, and to inn it when it is
ripe, and the weather is seasonable: so God here calls him ^ son of
understanding, that is, a wise man, which takes time while time serves, for
any good purpose and occasion. And as the world cries, fie on him that
sleeps in harvest, that is, does no more labor or look to his affairs,
then if he were in a dead sleep, and so sustaineth the loss of all his crop,
by means whereof he overthrows the state of all his family: so the Lord
terms him a son of confusion, or which brings confusion, that is to say,
misery and shame upon himself and his friends, which strives not to take his
part of Gods blessing in due season.

Verse. 6. Blessings are upon the head of the righteous: but iniquity shall
cover the mouth of the wicked.

BLessings] That is, all kind of happiness, every good gift of God that is
fit for them* as peace, plenty, grace, and health, etc. All shall be upon the
head of the righteous: meaning upon the whole soul and body of every faithful
holy man. And they are said to be on the head, because they come down from
above, and light as it were upon the head, and so descend to the other parts.
But iniquity, the vengeance of God executed for violence and sin, shall
cover the mouth of the wicked, shall take away all excuses and defenses from
him. Now here is somewhat understood in the former cla^se, and expressed in the
latter: and somewhat understood in the latter, and supplied in the former.
Blessings are upon the head of the righteous, and therefore do open his mouth,
viz. to praise God, and maintain his own innocence: and judgments (called
here violence or iniquity, by a metonymie of the cause) are upon the head of
the wicked, and so close up the^^ mouth.

Verse 7. The memorial of the just shall be blessed: but the name of the
wicked shall rot.

THis is one particular of the blessings mentioned in the former verse, that
that which is nearest to a man, as his name, shall be in estimation, and good
account. The remembrance and mention of him being absent alive, and when he is
dead, shall be acceptable, and with his praise and commendation: But the name
of the wicked is cursed, and therefore had in hatred and detestation, even as
much loathed as the stink of his carcass, that lies rotting in the grave. All
the contumelies wherewith the godly are pursued, take no effect against them,
to work their perpetual dishonor: and albeit for a time, through slanders,
columniations, and scoffs, they are among the sons of Belial, base and vile
persons, much vilified and contemned; yet no reports, or imputations, no jests
or derision can make them contemptible: he that decked them with the light of
grace, maugre the malice of the devil, and all their adversaries, will also
adorn them with the brightness of glory, what practices soever there be to
keep them in obscurity and reproach. Who of all Gods people which commit their
ways unto the Lord, according to his precept, have not at the first, or at the
last, either sooner, or later, their righteousness Psalm. 37. 6.
brought forth as the light, and their judgment, as the noone day, according
to his promise? And in like manner, all the applauses which are given to
unworthy men, the great boasts that are made of them, well near universally
by the mouths of all* every man magnifying them with praises, as sometime they
did the false Prophets, and Pharisees; yet he will so detect their vicious
behavior, and make them appear so odious, as that either in the present, or
future ages, they shall be a proverb of obloquie: or if it fall not out
sooner, their shame will be immeasurable at the day of the Lord, and so shall
be honor of the righteous.

Verse 8. The wise in heart will receive commandments: but the foolish in
talk shall be beaten.

THe wise in heart, etc.] That is, such as have saving knowledge, and
conscience, will receive commandments, will hear and obey the word of God
without replies and cauils against it: but the foolish in talk, he that
abuses his lips to murmuring and frivolous objections, shall be beaten, that
is, shall be plagued for his contempt.

The sense will be plain, if the supply be made in both clauses of the
opposition, in this manner: the wise in heart will readily receive
commandments, and therefore shall be rewarded: but the foolish in heart will
be foolish in talk to reject commandments* therefore he shall be punished.
T^ obedient may expect such in reatie as diligent and faithful servants
receive from the hands of kind and good masters: and such as shift off all
services with objections, replies, a^^ gainsayings, shall be used like to
contumacious and stubbo^ne bondslaues.

Verse 9. He that wal^eth uprightly, walks boldly: but he that peruerteth
his ways shall be known.

HE that walks uprightly,] That is, does carefully look to his ways with an
honest heart: walks surely, having both the affection, and ground, and
effects of Christian bol^nesse: but he that peruerteth his ways: that is, does
allow himself in any course, though never so secretly: shall be known his
sins shall be detected.

The sense of the whole verse may be thus expressed: He^ that walks
uprightly, walks surely; because his faithfulness shall be known to his
praise: And he that peruerteth his wan^ walks dangerously; because his
leaudnes shall be known to his shame. Let us (says Ecclesia^tes) fear God
and keep he Eccle. 12. 13. 14
commandments: for this is the whole man. For God will bring every work unto
judgment: with every secret thing, whether: be good or evil. The Lord when he
comes (says Saint Pau^ 1. Cor. 4. 5.
will lighten things that are bid in darkness, and make the counsels of the
heart manifest: and then shall every man have pra^^ of God. Both these holy
writers are so to be understood, the all the goodness of the good shall be
reueiled unto their praise and none of their corruptions: and all the vices of
the wicke^ discovered to their confusion, and none of their good work for
approbation.

Verse. 10. He that winketh with the eye works sorrow: and he that is foolish
in talk shall be beaten.

THis confirms the latter clause of the former verse, That they that pervert
their ways shall be known, though they do it never so secretly, which is
meant by the winking of the eye. Yet by this it shall appear that it is
known, because it shall be punished. For as they practice mischief against
others, and many times work them sorrow: so they certainly bring mischief on
their own heads, and procure sorrow to their own souls. And yet all winking
is not condemned: but that which tends to hurt, when men wink wiles. The
Apostle beckned or winked at John that he should Ioh. 13. 24.
ask who it was that should betray Christ, and yet this was well done of him;
for he showed a reverend regard of Christ, that he would not be loud and
audacious in his presence. If they pervert their ways openly by being foolish
in speech, open judgment shall be executed upon them for their open sins,
and thereby their mouths shall be stopped.

Verse 11. The mouth of a righteous man is a welspring of life: but iniquity
covers the mouth of the wicked.

IN Israel, and in the countries bordering upon it, it was a great benefit to
have wels of water, both for the use of men and of the cattle, and therefore
things of great account be many times compared to them in the Scriptures, and
here the mouth of a righteous man is so called in a double respect, both for
the constancy of good conference (according to the similitude, for such
springs as were continual, and would hold out as well in summer as in winter,
were said to be wels of living water: Genesis 26. 19. as also, and especially for
the good effect, that they be instruments sometimes to beget, and usually to
confirm and refresh the life of the soul. The latter part of the verse has
been expounded in the sixth verse.

The exposition stands thus: The mouth of a righteous man does always flow
with wholesome words; and therefore shall be continued open with blessings: But
the mouth of a wicked man does always flow with hurtful words: and therefore
shall be stopped with violence.

Verse 12. Hatred stirs up contentions: but love covers all trespasses.

HAtred: and all uncharitable affections, as envy and wrath, stirs up
strife: works all kind of revenge and mischief, as backbiting, vpbraiding
with former faults, and very often procures iniust criminations. But love
covers all trespasses: by forgiving them and reproving them in friendly
manner, and by concealing them from all those, to whom the knowledge of them
has not come, or does not appertain. The opposition is thus framed; Hatred
stirs up contentions, and blazeth abroad men's inf^^mities; but love seeks
peace, and covers all trespasses.

Verse 13. In the lips of him that has understanding, wisdom is found: but a
rod shall be for the back of him that is destitute of understanding.

THese words need no further explanation, then the supply of that which is to
be understood in both the clauses. For this seems to be the sense of them: In
the lips or speech of him that has understanding wisdom is found, which
keeps judgments and punishments from him: but in the lips of him that
wants understanding folly is found; which brings judgments and punishment
upon him. The first hemistich, or former part of the verse, is the same simply
set down, and without allegory or metaphore, as was comparatively uttered in
the eleventh verse, by the similitude of a wel-spring.

The latter part is the same in sense that was in the eighth and tenth verses:
for there it is said; that the foolish in talk shall be beaten.

Verse. 14. Wise men lay up knowledge: but the mouth of the fool is a present
destruction.

HEre is declared by what means wise men attain to that ability and
sufficiency of fruitful speeches, by due attention to that which is spoken to
them or which they read: or by diligent observation of things which they
behold. Those they lay up, as a man would his treasure, in a safe place. As
therefore a provident thriftie husband, which has gathered together a stock,
will be ready upon short warning to make a purchase, or upon any good occasion
to disburse a sum of money: so he that is faithful in seeking knowledge, and
applies both heart and memory to hold it fast, and keep it, shall readily in
convenient time draw out the good things which he has learned, either for his
own use, or the benefit and profit of others. Which is contrary in careless
and heedlesse persons: for they will be as forward to speak as any others: but
that which is within the heart, will quickly be at hand to come out at the
lips, and that is poison, and venom, and pestilent matter, which will
certainly hurt themselves, and be dangerous to other. So then thus stands the
opposition: wise men lay up knowledge, and therefore their mouths are a present
preservation: but foolish men reject knowledge; and therefore their mouths are
a present destruction.

Verse. 15. The rich man's goods are his strong city: and the fear of the
needy is their poverty.

THe rich man's goods are his strong city, etc.] That is, wealthy worldlings
do trust to their possessions when they have great store. For he speaks not
of any safety that they have by their goods; but which they seem to themselves
to have; as is plainly expressed, Chap. 18. 11. They are as an high wall in
his imagination: and it is sometimes the fault of good men in their
infirmities, to repose too much confidence in outward things, when they abound
with them; as even David himself acknowledged of himself; In my prosperity I
said, I shall never be moved: Psalm. 30. 6. On the other side, the want of
earthly substance does fill the hearts of unregenerate poor men with fears of
famine and misery. And Gods own people are not always free from the assaults
thereof, by reason of the imperfection of their faith.

Verse. 16. The labor of the righteous tends to life: but the revenues of
the wicked is sin.

THe labor of the righteous tends to life, etc.] That is, the goods that
good men usually get by travel (though many times they are descended to them
by inheritance, or bestowed upon them by gift, or by some other lawful means
brought to their hands) tends to life, viz. both of soul and body in this
world, and for the world to come: whereas the riches of ungodly men are always
abused by them, and made the occasions and means of unrighteousness. The
opposition is this: the riches of the righteous do tend to goodness, and so
to their life: but the wealth of the wicked does tend to sin, and so to their
death. For every man's substance is a means of his benificence and well doing,
or an occasion unto him of sinning: either it induces him to show mercy, and
to do good, which the Lord will recompense with life and blessedness: or else
he is thereby incited to pride, cruelty, voluptuousness, riot, prodigality, or
nigardize, or other like exorbitant courses, whereby he makes himself liable
to Gods curses, and his own perdition.

Verse. 17. He that regards instruction is in the way of life: but he that
refuses correction goes out of the way.

HH that regards instruction.] That is, which yields reverence, attention,
and obedience to the ministry of Gods holy word; is in the way of life, he
takes the right course to obtain everlasting salvation: but he that refuset^
correction, which will not endure to hear his sins rebuked; goes out of the
way, both depriueth himself of eternal life, and walks toward destruction.
All sorts of men are passengers, traveling as it were in a journey unto their
place: if they follow the direction of Gods messengers, whom he has appointed
for guides, they shall find the law of God a direct path to lead them unto
present and future happiness, and that everlasting: but if they scorn to be
showed where, and how far they have wandered awry, and will not be conducted
unto the right way of repentance and reformation, they cannot but straggle up
and down in the bypath of iniquity, until they desperately perish.

Verse. 18. He that hides hatred, is a man of deceitful lips; and he that
utters slander is a fool.

Having in the former words declared the peril of them that refuse admonition,
he describes here the persons that use to do it, and they are of two sorts:
some are hypocrites, that pretend and make a show of favor and good liking,
and yet nourish deadly hatred in their hearts: others are professed contemners
of that which is taught: but yet picking a quarrel against the man that
delivers it, as though the fault were wholly in him, and just occasion were
given to reject all that he teaches. But the Lord, which knows the ground
and root of their calumniations and cauils, imputes them to their proper
cause: and that is, the sinfulness and folly of those malicious despisers.

Verse. 19. The sin cease not by the multitude of words: but he that
refraineth his lips is wise.

HE seems still to proceed in the prosecution of the matter spoken of in the
seventeenth verse, that men take an evil way for themselves, which refuse to
be reproved. The words immediately going before these, declare how some reject
it, by inward hatred and bitterness of heart, and yet outwardly make semblance
of great love and friendship: others break out into open profession of their
coffeehouse and malice, by reproching those that would help them out of
their sins: and here comes a third sort, which would shift off all rebukes,
by denying, defending, cloking, or coloring their faults by excusing, and
extenuating matters that are charged upon them. But all is in vain; the sin
will not be blown away with breath: and therefore he shows that it is a
point of wisdom to give place by silence, and to take the blame upon them.

Verse. 20. The tongue of the just man is as sined silver: but the heart of the
wicked is little worth.

HE sets forth the excellency of the speech of godly men by comparison;
resembling it to silver that is purged and sined from the dross that was in
it: because a good man will be careful of his tongue, not only that there be
no mixture or filthiness and lewdness in his words; but also to avoid all
superfluous and idle babbling, and so to open his mouth with holy wisdom.
Which is contrary in the wicked; because there is a contrary fountain in him
of sinfulnes and corruption, and no matter of virtue and grace, which are the
springs of all wholesome speeches. Thus therefore stands the Antithesis: the
tongue of the just man is as sined silver; because his heart is precious: but
the tongue of the wicked is as dross; because his heart is nothing worth.

Verse. 21. The lips of the righteous do feed many: but fools die for want of
wisdom,

BEfore was declared the excellency of a good tongue, and well seasoned
speech: and here are the effects of it commended, namely, the good that is
wrought by it, the souls of many being edified therewith, and receiving grace,
and grows for salvation and comfort, as the body does obtain strength, and
nouriture, and refreshing, by their means that minister wholesome food unto
it. And this is illustrated by the concontrary effect of wicked and ignorant
persons, that they are so far from ^eeding others with knowledge and
wisdom, that they suffer themselves to be starued to death and destruction,
through the want of it.

Verse. 22. The blessing of the Lord it does make rich: and he adds no
sorrows with it.

THe purpose and drift of these words is, to show the preeminence that Gods
people have above the men of the world: that whereas the wicked have nothing
but their own hands, and carnal means to trust unto for their estate, such
as be godly, have God to provide for them; and his goodness only does make
rich, and they only are enriched by him. But because his enemies have usually
more st(...) of goods then his children; and thereby it may seem, that either
men may be rich without his blessing, or else that he is more provident for
sinners then for Saints; therefore he shows the difference; That troubles and
vexations are intermingled with the goods of the wicked, and his servants are
freed from them. Yet it is not so to be conceived, as though no good men had
any troubles with their riches; and that whosoever do find grief and
perturbations in these earthly things, were deprived of the blessing of God,
and testimonies of his favor: but this is the meaning, that so far as he
does bestow them, and they depend upon him for them, so far they escape from
vexations: so that the cares and troubles grow merely from their own
infirm^ties.

Verse. 23. It is a pastime to a fool to commit wickedness: but wisdom is the
delight of a man of understanding.

IT is a pastime to a fool to commit wickedness, etc.] That is, sinful men
take great pleasure in doing that which is evil, as if it were a sport or
recreation to them: and it is as much joy and refreshing to him that is godly
wise, both to get wisdom, and to perform all the good exercises thereof. That
which the one of them vehemently delights in* and has in admiration, the
other abhors, and has in detestation; and so contrary, according unto their
contrary hearts, contrary affections, contrary conversation, contrary estate
and condition; these being as filthy beasts that seed on the ^^a^gh, or
carrion of the flesh, and these as holy men which live by the wholesome food of
the spirit.

Verse. 24. That which the wicked fears, shall come upon him* but God will
grant the desire of the righteous.

THe condemnation in the world to come, which ungodly men through the
guiltiness of their consciences are often summoned unto, when God shall draw
their soul out of their body, they shall certainly fall into. And those
judgments, and miseries of this life, which they most hate, though they hope to
escape them, they are in danger to bring upon themselves.

And that which is most desirable, and will be most comfortable to
Christians, the Lord which knows what is most acceptable to them, and
profitable for them, will in due season bestow upon them. For the best men (out
of their corruptions which are not wholly abolished, though much diminished nor
fully subdued, though they have lost their sovereignty) do sometimes cast their
affections upon those things which are not expedient, and those in great favor
he detaineth from them. Moses and Jeremy desired greatly to be exempted from
the burden of ministry, and to lead a private life; but God neither
respected their happiness so little, nor the benefit of his people, nor his
own service to be performed by them, as to yield to their desires.

Verse. 25. As the whirlwind passes, so is the wicked no more* but the
righteous is an everlasting foundation.

THe meaning of the word is, that ungodly men, howsoever they flourish for a
time, yet do suddenly come to ruin and destruction; as the whirlwind
swiftly blows over, and is less constant, and permanent, then the ordinary
wind is, though there be no stability in any. But when it is said, they are no
more, he does not intimate any mortality of their souls, as though they
should be wholly dissolved as brute beasts: for their souls are everlasting
as well as Gods people, and their bodies shall be raised up again at the day
of the Lord, as well as the Saints: but it is their hope and happiness, and
not their being that perishes, they shall never recover any good estate any
more. Now against th^se are set the righteous, whose soul and body, and
blessedness, have a settled safety, as a foundation that can never be removed.
So that this is the opposition: the wicked are as a whirlwind, and so are no
more: but the righteous are like a firm foundation, and so perpetually remain.

Verse. 26. As vinegar is to the teeth, and smoke to the eye; so is the
slothful to them that send him.

AS vinegar, etc.] That is, too much vinegar, or other things that be sharp
and sour, do set the teeth on edge; and smoke does bring both smart and hurt
to the eyes: so does the slothful person, or he that is given to any other
leaud behavior, work vexation of heart to them that send him, or commit
matter of moment unto him. For it is as natural to them to be careless of
their business, and untrusty to such as employ them, as it is for vinegar to
retain sowrenesse, and for smoke to pierce the eyes: and by this means God
pleases to plague some, and to chasten others, and to admonish others. Diverse
take more pleasure in sinful sluggards, then in godly faithful servants, unto
them it is a due recompense to find and feel them false and pernicious: many
are too too heedlesse in their choice, and not afraid to give entertainment to
the worser sort, and therefore many times they are scourged by them: and
sundry do learn experience by such a success, to be more wary afterward,
and therefore observe the wicked to avoid them, and have always such as fear
God in greater estimation.

Verse. 27. The fear of the Lord increases the days: but the years of the
wicked are cut short.

THe fear of the Lord etc.] That is, true piety and religion, with the
exercise also of justice and righteousness, ^ncreaseth the da^es; That is, as a
means it preserves those that are endued with i^, from an untimely death. But
the years of the wicked shall be cut off. Their ungodly and sinful course of
life is sometimes an instrument to bring them speedily to their end; as by
surfets and evil diseases, or falling into the hands of the Magistrate, or by
quarrelling, and such like: Sometimes it provoke the Lord to stay them in the
midst of their race, and not to suffer them to come to that age, which by
their strength and constitution of body they might have attained unto. And in
this sense the Prophet says in the Psalms; that the wicked shall not live out
half their days. sal. 55. 23.


Verse. 28. The patient abiding of the righteous shall be gladness* but the
hope of the wicked shall perish.

AFter that the children of God have once embraced his promises, afflictions
and tentations do usually ensue thereupon, that it would seem to sense and
fleshly reason, that misery and troubles were the only rewards of piety and
obedience, and nothing else performed to them that trust in his word. Now
therefore he shows that a better state and condition remains for them:
that their sorrow shall be turned into joy, and their mourning into gladness,
when the Lord shall deliver them from troubles, and fulfill all his promises.
Which is illustrated and further amplified by the contrary case of the wicked:
which howsoever now they seem to have the pre-eminence, and are most likely to
prevail hereafter, shall yet be deprived of their present prosperity, and
frustrated of all future expectation. This then is the opposition: The hope of
the righteous shall prevail, and bring them gladness: but the hope of the
wicked shall perish, and so work them sorrow.

Verse. 29. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright man: but fear shall
be to the workers of iniquity.

BY the way of the Lord, is meant the whole administration, both of his word,
whereby he makes his will known, and of his spirit whereby he gives grace,
and of his providence, whereby he protecteth his servants, and performs all
good things unto them. By every one of these means, does he establish and
confirm both the hearts and states of such as be faithful. But as for the
wicked, howsoever he suffer them for a time to proceed in their ungodly ways
without any great crosses, yet at last he executes such judgments upon the^,
as the very sight thereof causes them to quake and tremble. Thus stands the
opposition; The way of the Lord is strength to the upright for preservation,
and therefore it works boldness; but it weakeneth the wicked for destruction,
and therefore it brings fear.

Verse. 30. The righteous shall never be removed: but the wicked shall not dwell
in the earth.

THe righteous shall never be removed.] They shall never be removed from Gods
favor; they shall never be removed from the constant graces of the spirit in
their souls; or hurtfully, in the way of a curse, from an outward good estate;
nor unseasonably be cut off from the earth. Now because some of these
judgments do seem sometimes to fall upon some righteous persons, who for a
season be ecclipsed of grace, and separated from the fruition and comfortable
sight of Gods kindness, and favor toward them; and their estate in appearance
is wholly ruinated and overthrown: therefore the word does well bear it,
agreeable to the meaning of the holy Ghost, to say; tha^ the righteous shall
not be removed for ever. Though they seem to be cast down for a time, yet
they shall be restored again afterward. The contrary is here affirmed
concerning the case of the wicked, who shall certainly fall unless they
repent: they shall not continue in that estate wherein they are most grounded,
and have greatest establishment: they are so far from enjoying eternal life
in heaven, as that the vengeance of God will not permit them long to keep
their own breath, or to hold the outward possessions of the earth. The
opposition therefore in effect is this; The righteous shall never be removed,
but have an habitation for ever in heaven; but the wicked shall be removed, and
not suffered so much as to dwell in the earth.

Verse. 31. The mouth of the righteous will be fruitful in wisdom: but the
tongue of the unrighteous shall be cut out.

THis verse agrees altogether in substance of matter with the eleventh; only
the comparison is altered: for there the tongue of a good man for the constant
store of holy speeches, was resembled to a plentiful fountain; and here, to a
fru^tfull tree, or fertile field: and there the wicked for leaud speeches, was
threatened to have his mouth stopped; and here to have his tongue cut out: that
is, the judgments of God upon him for his ungracious and cursed speakings,
shall strike him as mute and dumb, as if the tongue were cut out of his head.

Verse. 32. The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable: but the mouth of
the wicked speaks froward things.

THe meaning of these words is, that a righteous man knows and regards what
is best pleasing to God for him to speak, and what is most grateful to good
men to hear: and what does deserve acceptatio^ at any man's hand for
faithfulness and truth; and therefore he will use his lips to utter it: but
the wicked neither knows nor regards these things; and therefore he
vomiteth out only perverse speeches, such as tend to rebellion against God, the
damnifying of men, and the annoyance and hurt of his own self.

CHAPTER. XI.
Verse 1. False balances are an abomination to the Lord: but a perfect weight
pleases him.

Under false balances are comprehended all unjust weights, lines and measures.
And therewithal is condemned whatsoever kind of guile, and deceit may be
found either in the buyer, or seller. As when that which is sold is defective
either in quantity, or quality, not being fit for the use that it is bought
for, or not correspondent to the price that is paid for it, or not answerable
to the testimony that is given of it. And with these does Amos charge the
wicked wealthy men of his age: They make the Epha or measure small, and the
shekell, or price great, and falsify the weights of deceit. That they may buy
the poor for silver, and the needy for shoes, and sell the refuse of their
wheat. So on the other side in the buyer, when he shall fail of all meet
proportion between the price that he paieth, and the commodity that he
buyeth, giving far less then the worth and value of it. And where it is
said, They are abomination to the Lord, it is not meant that his quarrel is
against the insensible creatures, but he is displeased with the iniquity of
the persons, which make, use, keep, or allow them. Whereby the other clause
may be better understood, that the Lord is pleased with such as do uprightly
use them, and with love of equity, exercise it in their traffic, and
covenants.

Verse 2. When pride comes, then comes contempt, but with the lowly is
wisdom.

WHen pride comes, that is, when it grows to maturitie, having power to
puff up men's hearts, and showing it self in words, or works, in countenance,
apparel, or gestures, then comes contempt, that is, shame then approaches,
and is near at hand, marching in the next rank after this lofty heart, and
insolent behavior. As is to be seen in many who having been first lifted up
in their own haughty minds, were afterward cast down by Gods righteous
judgments, either into phrensies, or gross sins, or ruin of state, or
obloquie for their former hidden faults now published at last to their great
d^sgrace. The other part of the antithesis, containing the honor that does
accompany humility, is argued by consequent, in this manner: when pride
comes, then comes folly, which ever brings shame: but when humility
comes, then comes wisdom, which is never without glory.

Verse 3. The vprightnes of the just shall guide them: but the frowardnes of
the transgressors shall destroy them.

BY uprightness is not meant an extrauagant well meaning without further rule
or warrant, as though good intents were competent guides of our ways to
salvation: but the sincerity of an heart faithfully, though not perfectly,
willing to believe and obey that which it knows, and resolutely though not
absolutely, desirous to know that which God shall reueile unto it. Now this is
said to guide righteous men, that is, shall procure good direction from the
Lord, both for his service, and their own happiness, and make them tractable
to follow the same. Contrary to this is the condition of the wicked, who are
not led with vprightnes, but carried with peruersenes, and therefore misled by
the same to their undoing. For thus stands the opposition: the vprightnes of
the just shall guide them in the way, and so preserve them: but the frowardnes
of the wicked will keep them from the way, and so destroy them.

Verse 4. Riches avail not in the day of wrath: but righteousness delivers
from death.

THese words seem to contain an anticipation, or preventing of an objection,
which might be moved against the latter point of the former verse. What speak
you of destruction to come upon wicked men? I trust you will not extend it to
all: for many of them are substantial wealthy men, of great state and
ability. Who can destroy them? What shall their power, and riches do the
while? To this it is here answered, that riches avail not in the day of wrath:
their wealth can neither withstand the strokes of God, nor lessen them, nor
make them any whit the more able to bear them, when his anger does execute
judgments, and when his judgments declare his anger. But righteousness is that
which delivers from death, and all other miseries, that the sting thereof
shall never make any man miserable.

Verse 5. The righteousness of the upright shall direct his way, or make his way
straight, or even: but the wicked shall fall in his own wickedness.

HEre he adds to that which he had begun in the third verse, and shows
that sincerity and righteousness do not only lead men to a good way, and
tell them what is their duty, and fit to be performed, but makes the way
passable for them, and them constant and prosperous in it. The which again is
opposed the way of the wicked, even their own sinful course of life, being
crooked and cragged, and rough, and rugged, and full of manifold perils,
wherein at last they fall and perish. In appearance the path of grace and
goodness is so full of troubles and difficulties, as that it should be
impossible for any man to go along in it, and not be stopped, or turned aside
before he come to his lives end, and yet a good conscience finds ease
therein: and the broad way of sin wherein the world walks, seems very
plain and pleasant, as also void of all annoiances, or dangers, but every one
that trauelleth in it meets with many external crosses, such as they never
doubted of; or internal terrors and vexations, such as they never dreaded, and
at last proceeding on impenitently, they stumble at, and are overthrown by one
judgment or other: or death, in the end, as an unavoidable quicksand, does
swallow them up, and destroy them for ever.

Verse 6. The righteousness of the upright delivers them: but the
transgressors shall be taken in their own wickedness.

THis verse, as it may appear, is annexed to the former for confirmation of
the point therein contained, that righteousness does direct the way of upright
men, both to holy conversation, and happy state. Against the which a doubt may
rise from the show of the contrary, because that good men are sometimes plunged
in great calamities, and sometimes in great transgressions: and therefore their
way seems as indirect, as if they were wicked, and their righteousness to do
them as little good as if they had none at all. Now this scruple he remoueth
by showing what benefit it brings, that then especially they have the use of
it, when they fall into such distresses. For then the fruit thereof is most
for their comfort when it shall deliver them out of dangers, out of troubles,
out of fears, out of temptations, out of sins, and from destruction. Yet not
by strength of it own, but by the power of God: no^ according to their
worthiness in way of desert, but according to his goodness in way of reward:
not extended to all men that do good works, but restrained to upright men
whose works are good. And for the cleerer illustration of their blessed estate
he brings in for contrary, the miserable condition of the wicked, opposing
transgressors to upright persons; the^ mischief to the others justice: their
peril to the others protection: the one part enclosed in the net of troubles
is yet assured of safe escape by means of their graces, the other abroad at the
bait of prosperity shall certainly fall into snares by means of their
wickedness.

Verse. 7. When a wicked man dies, his expectation perishes, and the hope of
his power shall perish.

THe meaning is, that every sinful man's affection of hoping, and happiness
hoped for, and strongest means to attain to his hope, shall end with his
life, and die at his death, and vanish away at the time of his destruction.
Riches and greatness cause him to trust much to himself, and his own
sufficiency for the accomplishment of great exploites, and the perpetuity,
with increase of prosperity and happiness; but the end of his life will be
the period of all his abundance and excellency. For the rich man (as it is in
the Psalm) shall not Psalm. 49. 18.
take away any thing with him when he dies his glory shall not go down
after him. No might (were he the most puissant potentate under heaven) can
rescue him out of the hand of the grave, or erect him a good estate in it, or
resist damnation laying hold on him.

Verse 8. The just escapes out of trouble, and the wicked shall come in his
stead.

GOds favor and goodness does not free his servants from afflictions, but
delivers them out of afflictions. Whereinto he casts the wicked, though
they be not always of the same kind with those which the godly suffer, but
worse and more durable, and such as are mixed with Gods wrath, and poisoned
with the sting of their own evil conscience. So that the saying of the
Apostle is verified, that judgments begin 1. Pet. 4. 17.
at the house of God, but end with, or rather perpetually continue with the
ungodly and sinners. The wicked laugh, when the godly weep, and greatly insult
when they which fear the Lord groan under heavy pressinesse; but the time
will come when the one shall obtain freedom from calamities, and the other be
compelled to take their turns to fall into them: then he that mourned with
grief, shall exult with joy, and he that triumphed with gladness, shall
howl with desperate woe and sorrow.

Verse 9. A hypocrite with his mouth corrupts his neighbor: but the
righteous shall be delivered by knowledge.

DIssemblers, and such as make a show of godliness, but deny the power
thereof, are commonly most ^urtfull seducers, corrupting men's hearts with
hurtful speeches, either deprauing that which is good, or justifying that
which is evil, and so they infect their minds with erroneous opinions, and
stir up their hearts to sinful lusts, and pervert their ways with ungodly
behavior. But now to prevent the fears of the good, that they also are like
to be drawn into mischief, because there are so many hypocrites, and to take
away the cloakes and shifts from the wicked, which lay all the blame of their
sins on others which mislead them, he shows the means whereby this hurt
may be avoided, and that is, by getting knowledge, and being righteous: namely,
to retain vprightnes of heart, and a good conscience, and to be acquainted
both with Gods will, and the guilefull delusions of these dissembling
peruerters, whereby good men are made wary, and so shielded from the
pestiferous tongues of such perilous flatterers. For they prevail to infect
none but such as are ignorant, or careless of the government of their ears,
or behavior.

Verse 10. In the prosperity of the righteous the city rejoices, and when
the wicked perish there is joy.

IN the prosperity of the righteous] That is, when things go well with them,
the city rejoices, that is, the honest and well disposed citizens, and
countrymen be inwardly glad, and outwardly declare their joy, by cheerful
countenance, and speeches, and other means, as opportunity serves to express
the same. And so do they also at the death, and overthrow of oppressors, and
tyrants, and other wicked persons, by who^e fall the people rise, and whose
ruin is the repair of the city. He gives no allowance to private revenge,
that any man in hatred of him from whom he has received injuries, should take
rejoicing at his downfall: for Job cleereth himself by an oath of that
imputation, saying, If I rejoiced at his destruction that hated me, or was
moved to joy when evil came upon Job 31. 29.
him. Neither have I suffered my mouth to sin, by wishing a curse unto his
soul, etc. Neither is it lawful to delight in the misery of a creature,
especially such an one as man is, bearing the stamp of Gods image, although
lamentably defaced in the wicked* but the consequent of evil men's ruin is the
subject of good men's joy, and that is the tranquillity of the Church, the
freedom of the righteous from the wrongs they sustain, the public welfare
ensuing thereupon.

Verse. 11. By the blessing of the righteous the city is exalted: but it is
subverted by the mouth of the wicked.

THe meaning is, that just men are very beneficial to the societies of men by
their religious, prudent, and profitable speeches, for so the word blessing
signifies in many places: and so it is here meant, as the Anti^^esis shows:
and so a poor man in adversity, may as well be an instrument of good to his
country, as a rich man in prosperity, as Solomon testifies, Eccles 9. 15. On
the other side, the wicked with his mouth and hurtful words, does work
mischief among whom he conuerseth. And this seems to be placed next after
the former sentence, as a reason annexed unto it, for the confirmation of it;
for there is due cause why the advancement and prosperity of just men should
be as it were celebrated with the mirth of the people, for as much as they
have benefactors raised up unto them, who will destinate their own wealth and
preferment to the general good of many; and why they should conceive so much
comfort by the death or fall of ungodly persons, sithence the whole town,
city, or country is delivered from the mischief or danger of a common spoiler.

Verse 12. He that is destitute of wisdom, despises his neighbor: but a man
of understanding will keep silence.

A Foolish man which has a beggarly heart, as the words Chasar leb.
signify, being void of sound judgment, and sanctified knowledge of Gods holy
will, desires to vilify others, especially such as fear God, and to make
them appear base and contemptible. And this is done sometimes in bitter anger,
by railing, reuiling, and contumelious r^proches; and sometimes in scurrill
mirth, by girding jests and laughter; and sometimes in hidden craft, by false
reports and slanders. But they which have more wisdom, will frame themselves
to better behavior: they will not only keep silence from offering that
indignity to them that provoke them not thereunto, but will also forbear to
requite them with reproaches, which have not spared to seek their disgrace. For
so does David testify of himself in this case: I am as a man that hears
not, and as a dumb man that opens not his mouth. Psalm. 38. 13.

Verse. 13. He that goes about as a tale bearer, discovers a secret, but he
that is of a faithful heart, concealeth a matter.

IN this place, and in the ninteenth of Leuiticus, verse. 16. and elsewhere the
holy Ghost compares busi-bodies, and such as delight to deal in other men's
matters, to petty chapmen, and pedlers, which carriewares about, selling in
one place, and buying in another, and two marks of lewdness he brandeth them
with; as first, that they have false and unfaithful hearts: and then that they
have loose and blabbing tongues that can keep no counsel, but tell all that
they hear. They will draw on men by their news and reports to open their
minds and secrets unto them, which after they will publish to others. From both
which vices he cl^areth all good men, their hearts are faithful, and their
tongues are s^lent to cover such matters as love requires them to hide, and
duty and conscience do not bind them to lay open.

Verse. 14. Where no counsel is, the people fall: but where many counselors
are, there is health.

WHere there is counsel) Where godly and holy instruction for guiding the
heart and behavior, and grave and prudent advice for government of state,
either domestical, or public, do fail, there the people do fall, that is,
the governors themselves, and they that are in subjection to them, do run
into many mischiefs of grievous disorders, and miserable destruction. For what
in that case is to be expected from superiors, but violence and oppression?
And what from inferiors, but falsehood and disobedience? And what from all
sorts, but impiety and wickedness? And what then from God, but heavy strokes
and punishments? But where many counselors are, which be faithful, and give
wise and wholesome counsel, and that is also embraced and followed, there is
health, that is, religion and justice, peace, plenty, and safety, with Gods
gracious favor and blessing.

Verse. 15. He that is surety for a stranger shall wholly be broken: but he that
hates those that clap hands, is sure.

HIs purpose here is to give men admonition to beware of suretiship: which he
does infer by two reasons, first, from the hurt and danger which they run into
that be not well advised therein: and secondly, from the peace and safety
which they enjoy that heedfully avoid the peril thereof. Now he does not
absolutely condemn all suretiship (for then would Paul have never undertaken
for Onesimus) but rashness only therein is that which is here, and in other
places reproved. For it may sometimes be a work of mercy to become surety, as
well as to lend, or give. By stranger, is not meant al, or only unknown
persons. For it may fall out to be a duty of Christian love that way to help
and relieve some such as we were never before acquainted with, and a near
neighbor, a familiar friend, a kinsman, a brother may in this case be a
stranger to us, when it is not safe to undertake for him. As first, if there
be like to grow detriment to the borrower, as taking money, or any other
commodities upon hard conditions, and at unreasonable rates, or for needless
expenses, and vnthristinesse, or any way to the hurt of his state or
conscience. Secondly, if it tend to the hurt and damage of the lender, that he
is in danger to be defeated of his own, and to sustain loss by our ^eanes,
if we our selves are to be entangled by it, the sum and value of the debt being
more then we are able either to pay, or well to spare: when ones own
creditors by that occasion, must be defrauded of their due, when our wives,
children, and families, which have also an interest in our substance, shall be
robbed of their portion and ma^ntenance, and bereaved of the fruit of their
own labors. Then he shows a remedy against it, to hate such as clap hands,
that is, to hate and fear to be clapper of hands our selves, for the
ratifying and confirmation of promises in this unadvised suretiship, and so we
shall be safe and sure in this behalf. Provided yet, that we take not other
courses that be cousen-germanes to it, and as dangerous and hurtful as that
is: as negl^gently without all care and regard to run into debts and arrerages,
or venturously without due consideration of men's faithfulness, and ability to
lend forth our money, wares, or cattle, and so to put our state into the hands
of strangers.

Verse. 16. A gracious woman maintains her honor, as strong men keep riches.

A Gracious woman] Which is endued with the fear of God, and the heavenly gifts
of the holy Ghost, does maintain, that is, does both get and hold a reverent
estimation and credit, as strong men be of ability to obtain wealth, and
riches, and to defend that which they have. A man with great strength, being
also industrious and prudent, through labor and ^rauell, will in time compass
no small commodity: and so will this godly woman by her piety, modesty,
meekness, with all other good endowments of mind, and virtues of
conversation, purchase unto her self great praise and commendation from those
whose liking* approbation, and testimony is of any value. Likewise mighty men
(especially when they are well armed) hold fast their money and substance, it
is not easy to rob them of their goods, but a more difficult matter it is to
bereave and spoil an honest religious matrone of her truth chastity, and
goodness, whereby she should be exposed to shame and reproach.

Verse. 17. He that is a merciful man rewards his own soul: but he that is
cruel troubles his own flesh.

BY a merciful man, is meant such a one, as with a tender and pitiful heart
does good both to the bodies and souls of men according to their need, and his
own ability. And freely also remitteth wrongs, and passes by offenses without
reuengement. Where it is said that he rewards his own soul, the sense is,
that he procures to himself both for soul and body a reward from God, and
that as certain, as large, and continual, as if the fullness of power were in
his own hand, to bestow upon himself as much happiness for as long time as his
heart could possibly desire.

But he that is cruell] Which either in violence or rigor uses to offer men
hard measure, or shuts up his compassion from them that are in affliction,
that he will no way relieve or seek to comfort, troubles his own flesh, that
is, hurts his own body, and in like manner his soul also.

Verse. 18. The wicked works a deceitful work: but he that sows
righteousness, shall receive a sure reward.

THe wicked works a deceitful worke] He is continually practicing of some
evil, which will never fail, to make his expectation to fail. But he that
sows righteousness, which constantly, and conscionably is exercised in doing
good, shall have a sure reward, partly in this life, with a competent measure
of comfortable prosperity, and perfectly in the life to come, with glorious
immortality. The sense will be the better discerned, if the opposition be set
down in this manner: The wicked works a deceitful work by sowing of
iniquity, and therefore shall be deceived in his reward: but the godly works
a faithful work by sowing of righteousness, and therefore shall receive a
sure reward.

Verse. 19. So r^ghteousnesse leads to life, and he that follows evil
seek^th his own death.

TH^^ vers^ is inferred upon the former, by way of explication, to show what he
meant by the deceivable work of the wicked, and the sure wages of the
righteous And first he begins with the latter, according to the manner of
the Hebrews, declaring that life, understanding thereby immortality, and all
the blessedness annexed unto it, is that sure reward which a^^ godly men may
undoubtedly exp^ct: and destruction both of soul and body eternally, is the
end whereunto the decei^full work will bring wicked men, which do so much
deceive themselves by a greedy desire of satisfying their sinful lusts.

Verse. 20. They that are of a froward heart are abomination to the Lord: but
they that are upright in their way, are his delight.

BY froward in heart, he means not only such as are inclined to anger and
bitterness, which are of a crabbed, sour, and churlish disposition; but all
that are wilful in any sinful course, though with never so great mirth and
laughter. Yes many times excessive pleasure, and sporting and merriment, with
good fellowship, as men account it, is the very subject of the^r frowardness,
and that which they so obstinately stand in. And though they pretend reason for
their doing and seem smoothly to defend it, without perverseness, yet the
heart being settled in resolution of it own purpose, the Lord takes nonce of
it, and therefore abhor^eth them for the present, and will make his judgments
to manifest his detestation of them hereafter. But they that are upright in
their way and heart, (as the other are froward in heart and behavior) are
greatly beloned of God now, and shall more fully see, and feel, and enjoy the
comfort and happiness of his favor in time to come.

Verse. 21. Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished, but
the seed of the righteous shall escape.

THough ungodly men have many friends, and such as be mighty: though they
join all their forces together to aid and defend one another, or all of them
one, yet they shall not be able to minister any help or succor when the Lord
takes them in hand to plague them. On the other side, though righteous men
seem to be in great peril, and have fewer friends, and those also poor and
feeble, yet they shall go out and be delivered, and not only so, but their
children and posterity also shall be preserved: so that whereas many strong
wicked men cannot deliver one, one weak godly man shall deliver many.

Verse. 22. As a jewel of gold in a swines snout: so is a fair woman that
lacks discretion.

AS a ring of gold, or any other ornament does not adorn but misbecome a
swine, no more does beauty, stature, stength, wit, apparel, wealth, or any
other external thing, bring true praise or commendation either to man or
woman, which wants true wisdom or understanding. For no gifts of nature, or
of the body are true ornaments, but rather blemishes, and eye-sores, without
grace: fair jewels cannot yield excellency to foul creatures, but are
defaced and disgraced by them, as the filthy sow would defile the most
precious ring, by digging in the dirt, and wallowing in the mire, and doing
other like facts whereunto the swinish beast is accustomed. Now wicked women,
and graceless men, are more foul and brutish then the dirtiest hog,
tumbling in the filth and stink of pride, wantonness, unchastity, riot,
contention, and such other vices: if what color then soever their faces be,
or of whatsoever feature their persons be, or how gorgeous soeue^ their
garments be, or how great soever their dignicies be, the Lord, and wise men
discern nothing in them but deformity.

Verse 23. The desire of the righteous is only good: but the hope of the
wicked is indignation.

WE must beware here that we justify not all the wishes and desires to be
good, which righteous men conceive, nor condemn all to be unrighteous which
conceive any wishes and desires that be not good: for then should Deuid be
excluded out of the number of the righteous, or else his desire of having
Bathsheba, or wishing to know the number of the people should be allowed. But
he understands the maine stream of their desires, the course and current of
their hearts is to godliness and goodness, though sometimes they corrupt
nature in themselves, and the tempestuous temptations of Satan do violently
drive their thoughts another way; which is wholly contrary in the wicked. For
they desire nothing but mischief and evil, and therefore in the end they shall
receive nothing but misery and punishment, which will be so great and so
grievous, as will make them rave and rage with madness and fury, especially
because they looked for a better state. Thus then stands the opposition: the
desire of the righteous is only good, and therefore their hope shall end in
consolation: but the desire of the wicked is only evil, and therefore their
hope shall end in indignation.

Verse 24. There is that scatters, and is more increased: but he that spares
more then right, comes surely to poverty.

THey that disperse their goods, this way and that, bestowing them upon such as
are in want and necessity, or otherwise employing them for the public benefit
of many, they that are ^eadie and willing to part with their goods or money, for
the relief of such as are in want or necessity, or to any other good uses,
are said to scatter them: and such take the best course to increase them, as
sowing of corn is a means to help a man more and more.

And this he delivers with great wisdom and warines, saying, that some are
more increased and not all: for many scatter upon dice, and cards, and dogs,
and whores, and such like, and they may look to be stripped of all the rest,
rather then to add to that which they have. On the other side, he that
keeps in that which he ought to lay out, and spares that which duty
requires him to spend, does play the evil husband for the impouerishing of
his own estate.

Verse 25. The liberal soul shall wax fat, and he that gives plentifully
shall power forth.

THese words have affinity with the former part of the verse next before, and
are joined to it pattly in way of explication, and partly in way of
illustration. And therefore first he shows who obtain that blessing to
increase by scattering, and that is they whose liberality begins at their
hearts: and then he declares the prosperous success there of by a similitude
from wel-springs, which receive as much water inwardly, as they send forth
outwardly, which, if they should sail of issue, would also fail of fulness,
the waters diuerting their course some other way, where they might have better
passage, or else infusing themselves in the earth, and mould of the adjacent
places round about, and so make a quagmire. The same comparison does Isaiah use
for the same purpose: The Lord shall satisfy thy soul continually in drought,
and Isai. 58. 11.
make fat thy bones: and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring
of water, whose waters fail not.

Verse. 26. He that withdraws corn, the people will curse him: but blessing
shall be upon the head of him that sells corn.

IT is not unlawful to keep in corn, as Joseph did in the time of plenty to
be provided against scarcity and dearth: but when we may spare it, and others
need it, then to withhold the selling thereof in hope to raise the price, this
tends to a common hurt, and therefore will cause a common complaint of the
people against us. But on the other side, blessing shall be on his head that
sells corn, he shall not only have the good testimony and prayers of men
beneath, but the blessing of God himself from above descend upon him. Provided
that his heart be upright therein, not so much respecting the price in
self-love, as the profiting of his brother in Christian charity: and that he
use all other due circumstances accordingly. As to sell that which is good at a
reasonable rate, and perform it in due season, and full measure and such like.

Verse 27. He that diligently seeks good, shall get favor: but he that
seeks evil, it shall come to him.

HE that seeks carefully with an upright heart to benefit those among whom
he lives in any good manner, takes the best way to win the hearts of the
people, and is like to have the hearts of good men knit unto him, and certain
to obtain and enjoy Gods favor and loving kindness. And he that plotteth, or
practices mischief against others, of all others shall be most hurt thereby
himself. For the Lord is not unacquainted with the ways of men, with their
desires, endeavors, and actions: and he loves those who with a faithful
heart addict themselves to weldoing, and will incline the affections of men,
whose kindness is worth any estimation, to be kind unto them: and he will
also requite to hurtful and malignant miscreants their own measure, according
to our proverbs, Self do, self have: also, He that does watch harm, shall
not fail to catch harm. And notwithstanding that their mischievous designs
take none effect, (as Balaam could not obtain his purpose to curse Israel) yet
the very attempt, yea the desire shall not escape without punishment, which
shall be inflicted upon them in due season.

Verse 28. He that trusts in his riches, shall fall: but the righteous shall
flourish as a branch.

HE that so reposeth upon his wealth, as that for love, and desire thereof, he
is willing, and in confidence thereof he is bold to sin against God; he which
hops it will keep him from troubles, or rid him out of troubles, or any way
confer happiness to him, this man shall surely be brought down, and fall
into mischief. And so by the same proportion, shall all those which trust to
men, or to wit, or ^o any other creature. On the other side, just men are all
on the mending hand; they are well planted, they grow in a fruitful ground by
the rivers of water, they have the Lord Jesus Christ for their root, they have
God the Father to dress and keep them, and therefore they shall flourish as a
branch which grows and has green leaves. The drought of adversity shall
not hurt the^, the dewes of wholesome prosperity shall not fail them. They
shall have safety for their bodies, graces of their souls, competency for
their state and all good furtherances for their everlasting glory. Thus
stands the opposition: The wicked trust in their riches and they shall fall
like rotten boughs; but the righteous trust in the Lord, and they shall grow
like flourishing branches.

Verse. 29. He that troubles his own house shall inherit the wind, and the
fool shall be servant to the wise in heart.

HE is said to trouble his house, which does mispend his goods, and misguide
his affairs, and misgouerneth his people that dwell with him. That either does
corrupt them with sinfulnes or molest them with frowardnes, or afflict them
with misery. When he either makes them patients to bear the burden of his
folly, or agents to commit folly with him. He shall inherit the wind, that
is, shall bring all to nothing. His substance shall fly up like smoke into
the air, and nothing be left to maintain him on earth. And when all his
goods are gone, his liberty must go after. This fool shall shall be servant
to the wise in heart, that is to one who is more provident, discreet and
careful for his state and household. They were wont in great wants to sell
themselves for servants, as the Egyptians did in Joseph's time. And for great
debts Genesis 47. ^9.
to be taken by the creditors, and either made their bondmen, or else sold to
others. And one of these, says he, is like to be the case of this unthrifty
trouble-house.

Verse. 30. The fruit of the righteous is as a tree of life, and (...) that
wins souls is wise.

THe meaning of these words is, that a godly man is very plentiful in bringing
forth fruit, and his fruit exceeding profitable to them that receive it.
Especially his instructions, consolations, prayers, and other spiritual means
that he uses, to convert, or confirm the hearts of his brethren. And he
himself also is not without the fruit of his own fruit; which is intimated
here by pronouncing him wise that wins souls, that is, which with desire
and endeavor faithfully and discreetly, by Gods own means, according to his
place and calling either does draw men out of their sins and ignorance, or
else fails of success therein, not by his negligence, and want of love; but
rather by their stubbornness and want of will. And herewith the Prophet does
satisfy himself, whatsoever should be the issue of his ministry. Now says
the Isa. 49. 4.
Lord that formed me from the womb to be his servant: that I may bring Jacob
again to him, though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the
eyes of the Lord: and my God shall be my strength. On the other side we dare
not take upon us to justify the hearts and states of all those which have been
occasions of any man's conversion, if it be not their fruit: nor to ertenuate
the efficacy of every unregenerate man's ministry, that his doctrine should
win none to salvation. It is granted without question or gainsaying, that he
may prepare before and build up after, and we remember not any such stint or
restraint spoken of, but that he may also convert, especially before his life
is stained with any sinful behavior, that might bring his ministry into
contempt. The power of preaching stands in the ordinance of God, by the work
of his spirit, and not in the person of the messenger that does publish it.

Verse. 13. Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed on earth: how much more
the w^^ked and the sinner?

THe matter which he is about to speak of, is both certain and weighty, and
such as concerns every man to look to in regard of his own case: and
therefore he presixeth this word, Behold, to move all to serious consideration
of that which is to be said. And that is first touching the godly, that they
must be corrected for their faults when they offend, even in such manner and
measure as holds some proportion with their offenses, though not in equality,
for then who should be able to abide it? The word recompense, therefore in this
place is not taken for reuengement, or punishment proceeding from Gods
indignation, but a loving chastisement, though it be sharp, according to the
threatening of parents to their children, whom they be far from hating, or
hurting: I will surely pay you for this. And that it should appear that
nothing is intended against them, for the peril of their everlasting state,
there is a limitation annexed, that it is to be only in the earth. Next he
shows the condition of the wicked, that if the righteous escape not scotfree,
they must in no sort be spared, but feel more heavy and fearful
punishments, though not in the earth, yet in the world to come.

CHAPTER. XII.
Verse. 1. He that loves correction, loves knowledge: but he that hates
correction, is brutish.

HE that loves instruction] Which does apply himself to seek it, by those
means which are ordained of God for his people to be instructed by, and
accepts and makes use of it, when it is offered to him, he loves knowledge,
that is, has it in due estimation, and truly desires it, and therefore shall
also accordingly obtain it. But he that hates correction, which refuses all
instruction, but especially will not endure to be reproved, or corrected, he is
brutish, a beast in a man's shape, a fool in a high degree of folly, both for
an ignorant mind and rude behavior, and wretched condition.

Verse. 2. A good man gets favor of the Lord: but a man of wicked
imagination w^ll he condemn.

A Good man, which sets his heart to devise of goodness, and performs the
same in practice, gets favor of the Lord, that is, enjoys the assurance
and comfort of his loving kindness in his soul, and the good effects thereof
both in soul and body, and every other way. But a man of wicked imaginations,
etc. It is the description of a wicked man by a periphrasis, that he is as it
were made of sinful thoughts and purposes, and is in the midst of them.

A good man may sometimes have evil imaginations, as David had to destroy the
whole house of Nabal, but it was the imagination of the man, and he was not a
man of such imaginations. He will condemn, etc. The displeasure of God again^
him is declared by the effect, he will convince him, and find him guilty,
that is, pass sentence upon him, and cause execution to be done accordingly.
Thus then stands the opposition: A good man of godly meditations gets
favor of the Lord, who therefore will save him; but an evil man of wicked
imaginations, incurreth the displeasure of the Lord, who therefore will
condemn him.

Verse. 3. A man cannot be established by wickedness: but the root of the
righteous cannot be moved.

Sinfulness may seem to serve a man's turn, but in the end it shall appear
it never did him good. For howsoever it is an occasion of lifting many men up
on hie in prosperity, yet it gives them no sure footing in their state, but
down they fall, and then it had been better for them to have stood still on the
ground. Wicked men often grow greater, and faster then others, but their
settling is not so fast and firm, as the other part shows The righteous
though they be not so tall and spreading upwards, yet they take root the
stronger downwards: and though their boughs be shaken above, yet that will not
loosen his hold beneath. This is the opposition: The ungodly shall not be
established by wickedness, but his root shall be plucked up; but the righteous
shall be established by godliness, and his root shall not be moved.

Verse. 4. A virtuous woman is the crown of her husband: but she that makes
him ashamed is a rottenness in his bones.

A Virtuous woman, which fears God, and loves her husband, and is faithful
in her calling, is a crown to her husband, she is for his honor and credit,
and consequently for his profit and comfort. But she that makes him ashamed,
which either by her lewdness and rudeness, does bring him into contempt, or
at least makes him to hold down his head, or by negligence, pride and
wastfulnesse does weaken his estate, and brings him to want, she is a
rottenness in his bones, that is, a torment and corrasiue to his heart, as
grievous as the ach of the bones, or corruption of the marrow, which is more
painful and incurable then an ulcer in the flesh. The Antithesis is thus: A
virtuous woman is the crown of her husband, and so a great joy and gladness
to his heart: but a vicious woman is a shame to her husband, and as a
rottenness in his bones.

Verse. 5. The thoughts of the just are right: but the counsels of the wicked
are deceit.

GOdly men are not altogether void of thoughts that are not right and
allowable: sometimes Satan casts in matter to turn them out of the right
course: sometimes their own flesh will play it part, and stir up desire of
commodity and praise, and pleasures, and such like in them: but these are as
the muddinesse that may be for a time in a good fountain that is troubled:
these they allow not: these they resist, and judge themselves for; and
therefore God takes notice only of them that are good tending to his service
and glory, their own salvation, and the benefit of their brethren. On the
other side, the counsels of the wicked, that is, their devices, plots, and
purposes in themselves (for they are here rather the work of the mind then of
the tongue, and opposed to the thoughts of the godly) are deceit, tending
either to the circumuention and wronging of others, or to the cloaking and
hiding of their own sinfulness.

Verse. 6. The talking of the wicked is to lie in wait for blood: but the mouth
of the righteous will deliver them.

THese words are not to be understood to mean all sorts of wicked men, but
such as are malicious: and their speeches too, of such as they malign, do
principally tend to the insnaring and catching of them, and that to their
destruction so far as they can effect it: if not by violence upon their
bodies to the taking away of their lives, yet by oppression otherwise to the
ruin of their estate. Now the contrary is to be found in the godly, who use
their lips as much as in them is, to succor such as the wicked lie in wait
for: either as P(...) nephew did, by discovering the practices against them, or
being suitors for them, or clearing their innocence. And this ^^ spoken of their
endeavor, and not of the event, for that ^^ many times otherwise.

Verse. 7. God over throws the wicked, and they are not: b^ the house of the
righteous shall stand.

WHen the state of the ungodly which are not God^ chosen, changes from
prosperity to adversity, it seldom stays till they be utterly destroyed,
both themselves, and their houses: This word, are not, signifies a slaughter
and killing, as it is spoken of the murdering of the infants by Herod, Mat. 2.
18. Ier. 31. 15. In Rama was a voice heard, mourning, and weeping, and great
lamentation: Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted,
because they were not. But here is more understood, then the loss of natural
life, and that is, the perdition of soul and body. And yet not the extinction
of either: for the soul shall never vanish away, nor the body for ever: they
shall not find so much mercy at Gods hands. Their being shall not cease, but
their comfortable and well being. They shall be everlasting, everlastingly to
bear the burden of Gods wrath, and to suffer the insufferable torment of
death and damnation. But the house of the righteous, that is, he, and those
things which appertain unto him, shall be preserved from being over thrown to
ruin. His soul may be assaulted with tentations, and his body afflicted with
many maladies, and many blasts of crosses and afflictions may trouble him sore:
yea both himself and his estate may seem to come to an end, but it is only as
a tree transplanted, and not extirpated, or rooted out; for as much as it is
set in better ground: or as an house removed and taken down, to be made a
firmer, and more beautiful building, but fall down and perish it does not.

Verse. 8. A man shall be commended according to his wisdom: but the froward
in heart shall be despised.

AS every one is more wise and godly, so shall he have more true praise and
honor: Sometimes, and very often the wicked shall commend him, commonly the
righteous, and always the Lord himself, but most of all at the last day,
before all men, and Angels, as our Savior tells us in the 25 of Matthew.
Contrariwise the froward in heart, such whose hearts reject al good instructions
and graces, shall be despised, and brought to contempt among men in this life,
or their faults break out after they are dead, or be manifested before all the
world at the day of the Lord. This is the opposition; He that is upright of
heart shall be commended for his wisdom: but he that is froward of heart,
shall be despised for his folly.

Verse 9. He that is despised, and is his own servant, is better then he that
boasts himself, and lacks bread.

HE that is despised, that is, of mean estate, for which the foolish proud
worldlings commonly have men in contempt* and is his own servant, that is*
industrious and d^ligent by labor to provide himself of things that be
needful, (and so ever they may truly be called their own servants, that are
faithful in another man's service) is better then he that boasts himself,
that is, which stands upon his reputation, and yet lacks bread, has little
or nothing to maintain himself withal: for bread is put here for all manner
of necessary provision. He is the better man, and in the better state whom the
Lord does more regard; which does perform the better offices to his brethren;
who does eat the labors of his hands, and comfortably enjoys the fruit of
his travails; whose wisdom and providence all wise men take notice of and
commend.

Verse 10. A righteous man regards the life of his beast, but the mercies of
the wicked are cruel.

THe purpose and drift of these words tends to this, that every godly and
righteous man is also merciful: and that no wicked person can possibly have
any true pity or compa^sion in him. A righteous man, every one that fears
God and is faithful, regards the life of his beast, his love and kindness and
good dealing is so plentiful to men, and especially those which depend upon
him, and be of his charge, and at his finding, that it flows over also to the
cattle, and creatures which he owneth or uses or is put in trust to look to,
or has opportunity offered to preserve from hurt or perishing. But the
mercies of the wicked, those actions and ways of theirs which carry the
fairest show and color of mercy, are cruel^, have cruelty mixed therewith,
either in purpose or manner or event ensuing thereupon: either the hurt only
benefiting an other: or do a good turn to a man in a smaller matter, and
mischief to the same, in a greater; by poisoning the soul, under pretense of
pleasuring him by some outward commodity: or laying a bait for him, by giving
a trifle, to draw him into his net, for the overthrow, or impairing of his
estate, etc. And if there be such cruelty in their kindness, in their
liberality, in their mercy; what is to be looked for in their hatred, in
their displeasure, in their wrath and fiercenes?

Verse. 11. He that tilleth his land, shall be satisfied with bread: but he that
follows the idle, is destitute of understanding.

HE that tilleth his land] Which is industrious and faithful to do good in
any honest vocation: although he instanceth in this one work of husbandry, a
set service very laudable and praise worthy, for the common utility, and
general necessity of it, shall be satisfied with bread, shall have
competencie of all things that are needful for him, and that with comfort and
good contentation, if he be godly and religious also, and not prodigal, or
greedy of gain: for piety brings contentment: but it is as possible to
fill up a bottomless gulf with water, as to satisfy a voluptuous person
which deuoureth wealth as fast as he gets it; or a ravenous worldling whose
heart and desire is like to hell and the grave, incessantly hungry. But he
that follows the idle, vain fellows, which give themselves to no good trade
or occupation, and is idle as they are, is destitute of understanding, plaieth
the fool, and shall feel the smart and pain of it, with miserable and
grievous penury, as wanting means of maintenance, and the help of friends to
relieve him, and resolution of mind to undergo so heavy a burden with
patience.

The opposition is: He that tilleth his land is wise, and shall be satisfied
with bread: but he that follows the idle, or is idle (for that is the
meaning) is destitute of understanding, and shall be filled with poverty. So
is the supply made: Chap. 28. 19.

Verse. 12. The wicked desires the defense of them that be evil: but the root
of the righteous gives it.

WHen the ungodly do come into perils, and afflictions, and troubles do come
upon them, all their hope of help rests wholly in men, and those not the
godly which might direct them, or pray for them, but sinful persons as bad as
themselves, whose favor and power they trust unto, but in vain, for they are
deceived by them: but the righteous are not, or need not to be driven to such
shifts, the Lord Jesus Christ their root undertakes their preservation, and
does not only make a show thereof, but effectually performs it.

Verse 13. The evil man is snared by the wickedness of h^s lips, but the wise
shall come out of adversity.

AS wicked men do maliciously abuse their tongues to the hurt of others, so
also many times they ouershoo^e themselves so far as that advantage is taken
of their words to their own peril and hurt: they either alienate their
friends, or provoke their enemies, or expose themselves to the will and power
of them that lie in wait for them, or cast themselves into the Magistrates
hand, for sedicious or contemptuous speeches: finally, by committing of one
absurdity, or other, they are entangled and caught, as a bird in a net, or a
beast in a toil: as on the other side the godly do oftentimes help
themselves out of troubles by the wisdom of their speeches. For sometimes the
equity of their cause is found out and favored by reason of their forcible
and good arguments used and pressed in their apology* sometimes their mild
behavior and softnes of speech much works upon their adversaries, being not
implacable, to pacify their displeasure, and to mitigate their fiercenes:
sometimes friends are solicited, and persuaded by their wise discourse to stand
in their defense, or to intercede for them: and always their prayers to God
are effectual for their help and succor.

Verse 14. A man shall be satiat with good things by the fruit of his mouth,
and the recompense of a man's hands shall God give unto him.

A Man shall be satiate with good things, etc. That is, shall be recompensed by
the Lord with great blessings, for the good usage of his tongue, when he
speaks to Gods glory, and the edification of his brethren, or for justice
and equity in the behalf of them that are wronged, and injuriously dealt
with. He will stir up men to love him, and show kindness unto him, yea those
sometimes which be of great place, and able to do him much good, as it is
said, he that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the King
shall be his friend, Prou. 22. 11. But especially he himself will bestow upon
him all good things for this life, and graces for everlasting life, and glory
for life everlasting. And ^he recompense, etc. And so shall every man's good
works be also rewarded with mercy and favor, though there be nothing in them
of desert and merit.

Verse 15. The way of a fool is right in his own eyes, but he that hears
counsel is wise.

THe way of a foole] The wicked course and behavior of a sinful person, whom
God reputeth a fool, (for it is not understood of an idiot, as may appear by
the comparison between them, chap. 26. 12. Scest thou a man wise in his own
conceit* there is more hope of a fool then of him) is right in his own eyes;
he likes of it, and allows himself in it, as safe and good for him to walk
in, and consequently rejects all good advice, and admonitions: But he that
hears counsel which suspecteth his own judgment, and receives direction
from them that are wise and godly, and obeys it, he is wise, shows the
wisdom that he had before, and learneth more, and finds the fruit of it by
good effect.

Verse 16. A fools wrath is made known the same day, but a prudent man
covers shame.

THe meaning of the holy Ghost is not to condemn all kind of anger: for it is
one of the powers of the soul which God created as an ornament in men, and
godly anger is a part of Gods image in him, and a grace commended in Moses,
Elias, Elisha, and our Savior himself, and he that is always altogether
destitute of this does provoke God to be angry with him, for want of zeal
and hatred of sin, but it is a passionate anger that is here reproved, which
is not a power of the soul but an impotencie. He that conceiueth the other is
an agent, and does a service to God: but he that is mo^e^ with this, is a
mere patient, and sin has in that case prevailed against him. Now it is
said that a fool will be known the same day, that is, suddenly and speedily,
as soon as he is pr^uoked, he will show it by out cries, reuilings or
threatenings, ^^ other such like signs of choler: But a wise man, so far as
his wisdom works, and his natural corruption and infirmities break not
out, will hide shame, that is, will suppres^e his anger, and pass by the
injuries offered to him, and not disgrace himself by returning reproachful
speeches to him that has done him the wrong.

Verse 17. He that speaks truth, will show righteousness* (...) a false
witness uses deceit.

HE that speaks, ordinarily in his common speech, the which is true, will
show righteousness, that is, will carry himself justly and further
righteousness with his testimo^ie, when he shall be publicly called thereunto*
But a false witness, a false man becoming a false witness, will vs^ d^^eit,
(...) make a show of truth, and peradventure vtte^ (...) part thereof, but with
such craft and cunning, as shall ^e co(...) ^^ righteousness, and hurtful to
any good cause. For the loue^ the truth causes the one to utter it constantly
in pri^at^, and therefore he will with good regard promote the same in public,
where it is more to be honored, and will do the more good: and the other
being an enemy to equity and justice, cannot easily be induced to deal
faithfully, and soundness for the same.

Verse. 18. There is that speaks words like the pricking of a sword: but the
tongue of wise men is health.

THere is, a brood and company of sinful fools, which speak words like the
prickings of a sword, that is, dangerous and pernicious, which pierce deeper to
the hurt of men's names and states then the edge and point of a sword does to
ones body. But the tongue of the wise is health, their speeches are wholesome
and helpful both to themselves and others. The former sort are as cruel and
hurtful manslayers who abuse their weapons to sheading of blood, and the
latter as merciful and helpful Surgeons which address themselves to bind up
wounds, and apply plasters for the curing thereof, to the preservation of men's
lives.

Verse. 19. The lip of truth shall be stable for ever, and a lying tongue but
for a moment.

THe meaning is, that such as speak the truth in uprightness will not vary
in their talk, but tell the same tale again, and be like to themselves in
that which they shall say, whereas liars be in and out, affirming and denying,
and speaking contradictions in the same matter. The true man is made stable and
constant in his testimony and assertions, partly by exercise, in that it is
his custom to utter nothing but verity: partly by his affection, which cannot
brook variable affirmations; partly by the benefit of memory, which is much
confirmed by the unchangeable matter of truth which he first delivered: and of
all these helps the liar is destitute, and therefore it is no strange thing to
find him so uncertain, and variable in his sayings.

Verse. 20. Deceit comes to the heart of them that practice mischief, and joy
to the counselors of peace.

DEceit comes to the heart, etc. That is, sorrow and grief comes to the
hearts of them that plot mischief against others by advice or attempt, when they
shall find themselves deceived in their devices. For as much as they are often
de^e^ted of their purposes, their power failing their wills; where^^ they
conceived some notable exploits of hurt, and traveled with villainy, they
bring forth a lie, and see all their pro^ects frustrate, when that which they
absolutely presum^d of, is t^tally prevented. And be it that they succeed in
their attempts according to their desires (as Achab seemed to get as good an
estate in Naboths vineyard, as counsel could devise (yet the consequent thereof
fails, the event of it is nothing answerable to their precedent hopes, they
looked for glory* and ^^t with shame, they concluded of comfort and felicity,
and find nothing but vexation, trouble and misery. But such as use their
thoughts and words to move men to be at peace with God and their neighbors,
and to walk in the way of peace and good prosperity, shall not fail of the
comfort of their faithful and wholesome counsel. For God will bless them,
and me^ will love them, and their own consciences will continually minister
matter of joy and consolation unto them.

Verse. 21. The punishment of iniquity shall not befall the just, but the
wicked are full of evil.

AFflictions and corrections may come upon the righteous, but no reu^^ging
curse tending to destruction* as if they were abiects. Wholesome medicines
(such as crosses are to the godly) are not wont to be ministered in hatred, and
with purpose to kill, but in mercy and love, for recovery of health, and
conservation of life. But the wicked are full of evil, both of guiltiness and
continual practice: according to the corruption of their hearts, which the
righteous are purged from, and therefore also of those punishments which the
righteous escape.

Verse. 22. The lying lips are abomination to the Lord: but they that deal
truly are his delight.

THe sense is plain enough of it self, if the supply be made of that which is
understood in both clauses. The Lord abhors lying lips, that is, those
persons that abuse their lips to lying, which will also be false in their
deeds: and he is well pleased with them that deal faithfully, which will
likewise be true in their words. And by this saying, the spirit of God does
intimate the wretched and damnable estate of those which use falsehood ^n their
speeches and actions: for what can tongue express, or mind apprehend, more
horrible and hideous, then Gods indignation, proceeding from the g^eatnesse of
his hatred, when he has a creature in per^ect detestation? And therefore also
on the other side, the blessed condition of just and true men is notified, with
whom the Lord is so well pleased, as that he respects them with singular
contentment, they are his favorites most de^re unto him, his joy and pleasure
is in them, and then what evil can befall them, or what good, that is truly
good, can be detained from them?

Verse 23. A prudent man concealeth knowledge: but the heart of fools
publishes foolishness.

A Prudent man* he that is of good discretion, and has learned to be wary and
circumspect, concealeth knowledge, not that he shuts it up altogether,
without any use or benefit of it to others: for that were contrary to the
profession which the Prophet makes of that wherein every godly man ought to
follow him; I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, but I have
declared thy truth and thy salvation; I have not concealed thy mercy and thy
truth from the great congregation. Psalm. 40. 10. And that were contrary to the
testimony which is given of wise men, Chap. 15. 7. The lips of the wise do
spread abread knowledge. But he will observe all good circumstances of
speaking, that it ^ee in time and place, when good opportunity does require
it, and good effect is like to be wrought by it. And contrariwis^ the heart of
a fool which leads his tongue (for guide it he does not) does set the
tongue on work either to vtte^ bad matter, or that which is good in bad manner
that every man may see the folly which is in it.

Verse. 24. The hand of the diligent shall bear rule: but the deceitful shall
be under tribute.

THe hand of the diligent, that is, diligent men who use their hands, or other
members of their bodies, or else their minds to some honest and profitable
travel according to their calling shall bear rule, and attain to some good
place of estimation. But idle persons whom want and other occasions draw to
deceitful courses to shift for themselves, as we have showed in the fourth
verse of the tenth chapter, shall be made underlings, and brought into
subjection and seruilitie, if not of authority: for notwithstanding that
diverse of them have not power to command, or to punish, yet they are so much
regarded and feared for their uprightness, as that their superiors oftentimes
as well as their inferiors, be afraid to fault in their presence, and are
more willing that greater personages should have knowledge of their offenses
then they. So then their diligence is a means either to promote them to great
place, as many times it comes to pass, or else to win them credit and
reverence in lower places.

Verse. 25. Heaviness in the heart of a man does bring it down: but a good
word rejoices it.

Heaviness of heart, that is, such sorrows or fears as are not godly, and
effects of faith, but proceeding from infidelity, or carnal respects,
especially being excessive, does bring down the heart, not humbling it kindly,
so as pride may be taken away, but either filling it with discouragement, or
distemper, against which the Prop^et wrestled with sundry conflicts: Why art
thou cast down my soul and art vnqui^^ or tumultuous within me. Psalm. 42. 5.
Now withal he prescribes the remedy whereby this disease of hurtful sorrow
and pensiveness may be cured, and that is with good words. For the
comfortable speech of a friend, but especially the wholesome word of God,
declaring the remission of si^s, and the favor of God, expels the
heaviness of the heart, and and refreshes it with joy and comfort.

Verse. 26. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, but the way of
the wicked will deceive them.

THe righteous* that is, every godly man who has attained to uprightness*
though not to p^rfection of righteousness, is better then his neighbor, is
better beloved and graced of God, and more esteemed of godly wise men, and has
that in him which makes him more commendable then any other that is
unrighteous and sinful: and so his way is answerable to his hope. But the
wicked desiring, and seeking, and expecting an excellency above others, are
notwithstanding contemptible, and grow in time to be contemned, and so their
way deceives them.

Verse. 27. The deceitful man ros^eth not that which he took in hunting: but
the riches of the diligent man are precious.

THe deceitful, etc. That is a prouerb^all kind of speech, signifying that
they sh(...) not enjoy nor have the benefit of that which they get by craft and
falsehood. If the whole similitude be fully set down, the meaning will the
better appear. Even as hunters many times when they take a prey, yet taste not
of it, nor fare the better for it; (for dogs may eat it up, or some other
occurrent may fall out to deprive them of it, as many lets come between the
mouth and the morsel) so unjust and deceitful men, though they attain to
wealth and riches, may be assured that they shall never have any sound profit
or comfort by them. Where by the way may b^e seen the different end of the
hunting that was used in those days, and of this which is practiced of many in
our times. They made it an exercise for profit, and thereby as it may appear,
provided food for themselves, and the families wherein they lived, as is to be
seen in the example of Esau himself, who used to bring home venison to his
father. But it is ordinary now with diverse to bestow a great part of their time
to hunt merely for pleasure, without any commodity. They voluntarily defraud
themselves of the prey which they take, their households have not the better
cheer by their hunting, but the worse. They consume themselves, and wast their
goods, and impouerish their wives and children, by following their sports, and
neglecting their estate: by feeding so many dogs, as that thereby they fail
both of care and ability to provide for their people. But the riches of the
diligent are precious: that is, those things which they that are both faithful
and industrious do gain and get by lawful means,, shall do them good, and
serve for their comfort.

Verse. 28. Life is in the way of righteousness, and in that pathway there is no
death.

LIfe, etc. The meaning is, that they which are righteous me justified by the
merits of Christ, and sanctified by his spirit* and obedient to his will in
working that which is agreeable to his word, are in state of life everlasting.
The life of grace they have possession of already; the life of glory is assured
to them by the life of grace: whosoever has the one, can never fa^le of the
other. And therefore it is said that there is no death in that part. They are
delivered from the first death, which has power over all sinful men in this
world: and they shall never come into the second, which is the portion of
reprobates in ye world to come. And this is confirmed by the testimony of
Christ himself, saying, Verily, verily* I say unto you, he that hears my
word, and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not
come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life.

CHAPTER. XIII.
Verse. 1. A wise son hearkeneth to the instruction of his father: but a
scorner will hear no rebuke.

A Wise son, that is, a godly and prudent child of either sex; male, or
female, son, or daughter, will receive, observe and obey the good lessons and
counsel both of father and mother. But a scorner, that is, an obstinate
sinful person, will hear no rebuke that is, he will be so far from
profiting by the reproves of any, though he be a friend, though a brother,
though a most tender father, that he will not so much as brook or bear it,
without contempt at the least, of the party which rebukes him; little
regards he who admonishes him, though he have never so great authority: or
of what faults, though they be never so manifest, or heinous, or dangerous; or
with what mind, though out of greatest love, and for his greatest good: or in
what manner, though most mildly, and with all lenity and kindness.

Verse. 2. A good man shall eat the fruit of his mouth: but the soul of the
transgressors, violence.

THe meaning of the first part of this verse is, that godly men shall be
blessed, both for, and by their gracious, wise, and seasonable speeches: and
consequently for their religious and righteous behavior; and to this in the
other part is opposed the condition of the godless: that their souls, that
is, themselves, at least in their souls, shall be required with violence for
their cruelty, and other evil deeds which they have done: and consequently for
their wicked words which they have spoken. So it is all one in sense with the
fourteenth verse of the twelfth Chapter, where it is said: that a man shall be
saciate with good things by the fruit of his mouth; and the recompense of a
man's hands, shall God give unto him.

Verse. 3. He that keeps his m^uth, keeps his life: but destruction shall be
unto him that opens his lips wide.

HE that keeps his mouth] Which is considerate and wary in his words, never
speaking but when he ought no^ uttering any thing but which is true and
convenient; he ke^pe^h his life, provided for his safety, peace and quietness.
B^ he that opens his lips, or s^rideth too wide to leaud speaking (for so the
word signifies) as a har^ot prostitutes her self, o^ spreads her body to
filthy companions. Ezech. 16. 25. destruction shall be to him: he is like to
meet with much trouble, and at one time or other, to be quite overthrown and
come to utter ruin, as a thing broken to pieces and made good for nothing.

Verse. 4. The sluggard lusts, but his soul has naught: b^^ the soul of the
diligent shall be made fat.

THe sluggard lusteth] That is, negligent and idle persons have strong
affections to riches and credit, and all things which are in request and
estimation, but his soul has naught, they go without that which they long
for, their wishes g^ no wealth, they fail of their desires, through the want
of constant endeauours to effect them. But the soul of the dilige^ shall be
made fat, that is, the industruous persons themselves which painfully labor in
some honest vocation, shall all be^ competently provided for, and many of them
diverse ti^es shall attain to plenty and abundance. For soul in the
Scriptures is often taken for the whole man, and fatness for a goo^ estate and
prosperity.

Verse. 5. A righteous man hates a false matter: but it c^seth the wicked to
stink, and be ashamed.

THe meaning is, that all that are truly just and godly, will (...) from bad
causes, words and deeds, with ha^ed thereof, so far as they appear unto them
to be unlawful. At least it is the duty of all good men so to do, though
sometimes peradventure they fail in practice But contrariwise the wicked do
not so, but take pleasure in sinfulness, and thereby are brought to disgrace
and reproach, especially in the sight of God and good men, and often also
ordinary men, such as are merely civil, yea ungodly men and sinners do
loathe them, and speak evil of them for their lewdness. Thus stands the
opposition: The righteous hates a false matter, and therefore gains reverence
and honor: but the wicked loves a false matter, and therefore is made odious
and shameful.

Verse. 6. Righteousness preserves him that is upright in his ^ay: but
wickedness overthrows the sinner.

Righteousness, etc.] That is, Gods favor, grace and goodness for
righteousness, and by it does protect both the bodies and souls of such as
are of a sincere heart, and holy behavior. And wickedness overthrows the
sinner, or man of sin, as it is in the original text, it is always a cause
by desert, and many times a means by occasion to draw down misery and
destruction upon him. For the Lord does deal with men according to their
ways, establishing the just and righteous, and casting down into misery such
as be stubborn and re^ellious, according to the saying of the Prophet: With
the Psalm. 18. 25. 26.
^ercifull thou will show thy self merciful, with an upright ^an thou will
show thy self upright, with the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with
the froward thou will wrestle.

Verse. 7. There is that makes himself rich, and has nothing: and that makes
himself poor having great riches.

THere is, etc.] That is to say, diverse men take diverse unlawful courses
concerning their estate. Some boast themselves to be rich, when they have
nothing: being poor and in debt, they make show of great wealth, by keeping a
great ^ort. Others, feign themselves poor, when they have great substance,
they complain of want, and go barely, and fare hard, and would make the world
believe that they are nothing worth at all.

Verse. 8. The riches of a man are the ransom of his life: but the poor
hears not the rebuke.

THe meaning of these words seems to be, that howsoever there is in diverse
respects very good use of wealth and riches, yet many times they bring danger
to the owners thereof, who are driven to deaprt with them for the preservation
of their lives. And though poverty be not without sundry inconuemences, yet
poor men are more free from the contentions of envious persons then those of
higher place and degree. Notwithstanding, it comes not to pass always
necessarily, that every rich ^an is brought into such trouble, no^ that every
poor man escapes from all rebukes and molestations, but he speaks of that
which often befalls the one, and seldom the other, especially in regard of his
estate.

Verse. 9. The light of the righteous shall rejoice: but the candle of the
wicked shall be put out.

THe light of the righteous] That is, the good estate and prosperity of godly
men, rejoices, is stable and increasing: as i^ is said of the sun, from whence
the similitude is taken, that he rejoices like a mighty man, to run his
course. And likewise here is joy ascribed to it in respect of the effect, for
that it makes righteous me^ not without due cause to be joyful. ^ut the candle
of the wicked, their wealth, credit, dignities and pleasures, o^ whatsoever
fleshly men have in admiration, or delight in, are but like to a candle light
in comparison of sunshine, and shall be put out: even suddenly be taken from
them, or by degrees, in continuance of time consume away, and vanish to
nothing. The opposition stands in this manner: The light of the righteous
endures for eu^r, and therefore is full of joy: but the candle of the wicked
will soon be put out, and therefore is full of sorrow*

Verse 10. Through mere pride does man make contentions; but with the well
advised is wisdom.

ONly by pride] That is, wheresoever strife grows, there is pride, at least
in one of the parties contending: if not on both sides. Sometimes it stirs
up men, and imboldneth them to offer wrongs: sometimes imbittereth men; and
makes them wayward against the right: sometimes it causes the one to be
careless of dealing according to equity, and the other to be impatient of
bearing any injuries. Yet notwithstanding this condemns not all kind of
contending, but the frowardnes of the faulty persons in it. It is lawful to
give a rebuke and c(...)ection, if it be done upon good grounds, with an
upright heart, and in due manner, though it be the occasion of some jar or
debate, and he only is to be blamed, which receives not the admonition. And
so to stand in the cause of God is commendable, (for the Prophet reproves them
that contend not for the truth) and they are to be charged with the Esai. 59.
4.
sin of contention, which oppose themselves against good causes. Neither are
such here to be taxed as defend their state, or by the help of the Magistrate
and laws, against those which go about to defraud or defame them. Neither yet
are they to be reproved by this, that follow suites against malefactors to
bring them to just punishment. Provided always, that in these cases the cause
be weighty, their proceedings equal, and their hearts free from all malice
and revenge. But with the well advised is wisdom, they which have discretion
and judgment in themselves, or be willing to hearken to advice and counsel
of others, will beware of unnecessary controversies. The opposition is this:
Only by pride and folly does men make contentions: but with the well advised
is wisdom and humility to follow peace.

Verse 11. The riches of vanity shall diminish: but he that gathers with the
hand shall increase them.

GOods ill gotten, and wealth attained unto by unlawful means, shall not
prosper, but either wax less and less, or per^sh together on a sudden, or at
least depart from the unjust owner, and become another man's: but he that uses
honest labor and diligence, does take the right way to thrive, and daily to
grow richer. Falsehood, and injustice, usury, and other such like noisome
courses, are commonly preferred before the best and most profitable vocations,
as seeming to promise the greatest commodities; and manual trades are out of
request, for that they require pains, without likelihood of any ample
recompense; but Gods curse pursues, and at last ouertaketh those deceitful
people, and evil workers, and either strippeth them of their lives, or of
their substance, according to the threate: As the Partridge sits on eggs,
and hatcheth them not; so he that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave
them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool. And his
blessing so prospers those his diligent servants, that their wages and estate
is augmented much above that which was expected.

Verse. 12. The hope that is deferred, makes the heart sick: but when a desire
comes, it is a tree of life.

THe hope deferred] That is, when the thing hoped for, is not obtained
according to his expectation that hoped for it, but is put off from one time to
another, it brings great grief and affliction: but when the desire comes,
when a man has that which he long wished for, it is a tree of life, that is,
very pleasant and comfortable, and heals the spirits which were weakened by
the former delay: especially, if the prayer of faith have prevailed with God to
obtain the gift as a pledge of his favor, as Abraham's did for Isaac, and
Isaacs did for his sons, and that of Hannah for Samuel.

Verse 13. He that despises the word, he shall be destroyed, but he that
fear^th the commandments, he shall be rewarded.

HE that despises the word, etc.] That is, every one is in a dangerous case,
and at least certain to perish in the end, who contemptuously rejects the
holy Scriptures: which because the Lord does as it were speak in them, and
declare his will by them, are called his word: and that for the perfect
agreement and consent of all the parts, is set down in the singular number, as
if it were but one. Neither is this punishment threatened only to the contemners
of the books, and sentences, and texts of the Scriptures, but likewise to the
despisers of the ministry thereof. But he that fears the commandment,
which reuerenceth, and loves, and makes conscience of the whole doctrine of
God, he shall be rewarded with peace, and blessings of this life, and glory
and blessedness in that which is to come.

Verse 14. The doctrine of a wise man is a welspring of life, to depart from
the snares of death.

THough the meaning of these words has been showed, and prosecuted already in
the eleventh verse of the tenth chapter, yet we will add somewhat to the
explication thereof. When it is said therefore that the doctrine or instruction
of a wise man is of such force, it is to be understood of wholesome and sound
doctrine, such as he receives from God, and delivers to his brethren; for
wise men sometimes draw their instructions from their errors, and now and then
from grosser corruptions: as David did, when he gave direction to Ioab, how he
should cause Vrijah to be made away. And as the lesson ought to be sound for
the matter; so must it be reasonable for the manner: as spoken in due time; in
meet place; and fitly applied: wherein Ioabs friends much failed, though
otherwise the men were godly, and their words very true and weighty. And yet
further to these must be added of his part, that will drink of this lively
fountain; an attentive ear, and believing heart to hear and embrace the
doctrine. And then it will be constant, and not dried up like ditches or ponds,
that are fed with rain water: it will be comfortable, and refresh the hearts
of them that are in affliction: it will be profitable, and make them that
receive it, fruitful: it will be necessary and forcible to deliver them from
sin and destruction, though therein the similitude be altered: for that is
meant by turning from the snares of death.

Verse. 15. Grace gives good success: but the way of the transgressors is
rough.

GRace] That is, the work of Gods holy spirit, begetting piety and
righteousness, does give good success: it makes good men to deal wisely and
prosperously in all their affairs. But the way of the transgressors is rough.
Their life is unhappy and full of many vexations. The sense and opposition
stands thus: Grace gives good success, and therefore the way of the
obedient is plain and comfortable; and sinfulnes brings evil success, and
therefore the way of the disobedient is rough and troublesome.

Verse 16. Every wise man works by knowledge: but a fool lays open his
folly.

EVery wise man] Whosoever is prudent, works by knowledge: enterpriseth and
manageth his affairs discreetly and with judgment: and so declares his
understanding. On the contrary side, he that is indiscreet and foolish, goes
rashly and rawly about his business, and so bewrays openly, and publishes
abroad his ignorance and foolishnes. So both sorts make manifest what they are,
and what is in them, by the constant course of their ways, and proceedings,
and not by some one action, or a few works. Although wisdom be never
deceived in any matter, yet wise men are sometimes, and both fail, and fault
as well in that which they do, as in the words which they speak, as the
blemishes of David, Solomon, and many holy men recorded in the Scriptures do
show. And some things the wickedst sinners have well acted touching the matter,
and external circumstances, but neither with a good conscience, nor constancy.

Verse. 17. A wicked messenger falls into evil, but a faithful ambassador
heals.

A Wicked messenger] Or servant, which either undertakes unlawful errands, or
services, as Rabshakeh did, when he was sent by his master to blaspheme and
defy the Lord and his Church; or deals vntrustily with them that use him in
a lawful business, or is injurious to them to whom he is sent, either by
concealing any thing from which were fit for them to hear, or adding any thing
which were meet to be suppressed, or doing his message in indecent manner, or
returning an answer so as may turn to their hurt: he shall fall into evil:
Gods heavy hand and judgments by one means or other, shall sooner or later,
light upon him, as the two churlish and imperious captains sound with their
fifties, which were sent for Elijah. But a faithful ambassador or messenger,
he that faithfully performs his charge, whether public or private, does
heal, is a means and instrument of good to his master, whose mind he freeth
from fears and griefs, and so heals the maladies thereof, as a Physician
cures the diseases of the body. He is also helpful to them, to whom he is
sent, by delivering comforts comfortably, and lenifying that which is harsh and
sharp, and mending that which is amiss, and by love and discretion pacifying
contentions, and furthering peace; whereupon by consequence he also procures
his own comfort. So stands the opposition: A wicked unfaithful messenger
hurts, and therefore shall fall into evil: but a godly faithful messenger
heals, and therefore shall receive good.

Verse. 18. Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuses instruction: but he
that regards correction shall be honored.

Poverty, etc.] Every one that rejects knowledge, or the means whereby it
is to be obtained, shall either fail to get wealth, or not long keep it, or
have it and hold it in judgment, without the use and comfort. And as he shall
be needy, so shall he also be base, shame shall come upon him, and cover him.
Some are made contemptible and vile by poverty and want, and some by the
filthiness of their sins though they abound with wealth. They may have
riches, but not honor: they may have cap and courtesy, but not reverence and
estimation. But he that regards correction: which hearkeneth and yields
obedience to wholesome counsel, and profits by chastisements, shall be
honored: shall either attain to riches and preferment: or be of good account,
and well thought of (especially among the wise and godly) in a meaner condition.

Verse 19. A desire when it comes is pleasant to the soul: but it is
abomination to fools, to depart from evil.

THis sentence depends upon the verse before going, where the promise in the
latter clause of that, is amplified by the effect in the former of this: for
here it is said, that he which regards correction shall be honored; and here
it is added, that when such a desirable gift is bestowed, he shall have joy
with his honor, which obtains it. And the threatening in the former clause of
that, is aggrauated by the cause in the latter of this: for there it is said,
that poverty and shame shall be to him that refuses instruction; and here it
is proved to be just and equal, that it should be so, because he is wholly
deuouted and given over to wickedness. The coherence and agreement of one part
with the other will be the more evident, if that be supplied which is
understood in both. It is abomination to wise men to continue in evil, and
therefore the desire accomplished will delight their soul: and it is
abomination to fools to depart from evil, and therefore the punishment
inflicted will torment their souls.

Verse 20. He that walks with the wise, shall be the wiser* but he that
uses the companic of fools, shall be the worse.

BY walking here with the wise, is meant the society and conversation with wise
men* and that is a means of knowledge and virtuous behavior to them that have,
and use the opportunity of it, and so thereby they are made the better: whereas
on the other side, they that associate themselves with sinful fools, and
join in fellowship with the wicked, are more corrupted with sin and folly,
and so become the worse. For great is the force of company and example, of
daily parle and conference. The words of good men are medicinable against
vices, and their piety, sobriety, patience, humility, love, kindness, and
other virtues are a shining light to show their associates the way to all
goodness, and as a guide to conduct them therein: and the mouth of sinners
does breathe out poison and ^nfection, and all their ways no less contagious
to such as adioyne themselus unto them, then the leprosy or pestilence.

Verse. 21. Evil pursues sinners: but that which is good rewards the just.

BY eu^ll, is meant the punishment of sin which is resembled to the reuenous,
strong, and swift kind of creatures, and wicked men, to them that are weaker,
and slower, and so chased by them, and made their prey. Now as affliction and
misery will in this manner come upon the ungodly, as the wages of their
rebellion, so blessings and comfort shall come to the ungodly, as a recompense
of their obedience. So that Both good and bad are followed, and shall surely
be overtaken, the one with plagues, and the other with mercies; and neither
sort known how many they are, or of what kinds, or when they will come, or
where they shall find them: but the wicked may justly dread the worst to be
punished by them, when they shall be most burthenous unto them, and the godly
may look for the best, to be blessed therewith in the fittest season. For so
we read in another place: The wicked works Pro. 11. 18. 19.
a deceitful work: but he that sows righteousness shall receive a sure
reward. So righteousness leads to life, and he that follows evil,
seeks his own death.

Verse. 22. A good man shall leave inheritances to his childrens children: but
the riches of the sinner is laid up for the just.

THe meaning is, that the godly person not only himself enjoys his goods
whilst he lives: but when he dies, leaves the same to his children; in such
sort, as that also their children through Gods mercy inherit the same. Again,
the wicked man is so far off from leaving his goods to his posterity, as that
by Gods providence they oftentimes are rolled from him upon the righteous
person; who is as it were his heir against his will. Yet this is not so to be
taken, as though it held universally and perpetually in every person. Many good
men have no children at all; many good men have no children su^uiuing them:
many good men's posterity ends in their immediate issue: many good men leave
their children poor and in mean estate. So on the contrary side, diverse
wicked men leave their lands and riches to their own children, though impious
also like their parents: and they convey them to their seed after them, which
in like manner possess them; as the Prophet says in the Psalm. Thou fillest
their bellies with thine hid treasure: their children have enough, and leave
the rest of their substance for their children. But he speaks of that which
comes often to pass, though not always, and which are the readiest means
for such effects. He that would provide well for his posterity, cannot find
out any way so good for his childrens estate, as to be godly himself. And if
the Lord withhold that blessing from him, he may recompense it by making his
children inheritors of grace and salvation: and if either he give him no
children, or children of no piety and goodness, he will undoubtedly
counteru^^le it with increase of heavenly gifts and glory for his own soul.
And he that gives himself to iniquity and sin, does as much as in him lies,
to subvert both his estate and family: and if that both stand, notwithstanding
the course he takes, to bring them to ruin, then as David said in the
forecited Psalm. his portion is only in this life, and his punishment reserved
to be the larger in the world to come.

Verse. 23. Much food is by tillage for the poor: but some are consumed by
indiscretion.

BY food, he means all such things as are needful for the use of man's life;
and by much, he understands a fit and competent measure; which diverse times
grows to be large and ample. And this do poor men often attain unto, when
they are provident, and diligent in managing their affairs; and by name in the
work of husbandry: and so it holds in all other honest and lawful
vocations. Now again on the contrary side: some are consumed by indiscretion.
For many a one who has a good stock, and fair livings, and fruitful
grounds, by neglecting labor, and not ordering things aright, wastes all that
he has, and falls into great want and necessity. His folly, his sin, his
riot and rechlesnesse brings him to the ground how high soever he grew. They
are like to the axe striking at the root of a tree, which the tallest top, or
most spreading branches are not able to defend, but must fall down themselves
and be broken.

Verse. 24. He that spares his rod, hates his son: but he that loves him,
chasteneth him betime.

HE that spares his rod] Which withholdeth due correction from his child when
it is needful, hates his son, becomes his enemy, though not in affect on,
yet in effect by omitting a duty so necessary for his welfare. But he that
loves him unfeignedly, with a sound affection, and the love of a godly father,
corrects him betime. The words in the Original tongue are of great force:
for this betime, which seems Shicharo.
to be an aduerbe, is there a verb, and signifies to rise timely in the
morning; and diligently to seek: so that it signifies as well the due care
which good parents have for the nurturing of their children, as their
providence to do it in good season, whiles they be tender and young, before
they grow to strength and stomach, and so either utterly refuse, or little
regard all fatherly correction. And that which we translate correction, does
also signify instruction: so that the sentence may Musar.
thus be well englished: He that loves him hasteneth chastisement, and
instruction to him. And those are meet to be joined together, sometimes stripes
with admonitions, and always admonitions with stripes. For the smart of the
flesh, and the pain of the body will bring small profit to the soul, unless
they hear their fault declared, and ^aue direction how to reform it.

Verse. 25. The righteous eats to the contentation of his mind: but the belly
of the wicked shall want.

THe righteous] All those which are religious in heart, and upright in their
ways, eat, that is, enjoy all good things, as they shall not be starued
through want of food, so they shall not be destitute of clothing, or lodging, or
habitation, or any other thing that is needful for them: either they shall
abound with plenty, or be provided of that which is sufficient. Sometimes they
have no great store for their eyes to look upon, yet living by faith and not
by sight, they have always enough for their souls to be satisfied with. But
the belly of the wicked shall want, and their backs also very often and
according to the course of the law, many of them live in hunger, and in thirst,
and in nake^nesse, and in need of all things. And albeit Daut. 28. 48.
this judgment is not executed upon them all, yet commonly some other more
heavy and hurtful is inflicted upon them that escape it. And of neither of
them which get most, nor of them which fare best, it can be truly affirmed,
that they eat to the contentation of their minds: for though they have much
(...)h in their hands, and much meat at their tables, and much wine in the
bowls, yet they have not much, nor any contentment in their hearts, for they
remain insatiable.

CHAPTER. XIIII.
Verse. 1. A wise woman builds her house: but the foolish destroys it with
her own hands.

A Wise woman] Such a one as is both godly and ^iscreet, builds her house is
helpful and profitable, to the state and family of her husband, and her own.
But she that is foolish, being destitute of grace and good providence, how much
wit soever she has: for many times the most witty wines, are the least
thriftie huswiues, destroys it, undoes her husband, her self and children,
and overthrows the whole household, either by her pride, and immoderate
expenses to maintain that, or by her luxury and sweet tooth, or by her
gossiping, and company keeping, or by her slothfulness and idle behavior,
neither getting, nor keeping, nor ouerseeing her people, nor any way besteeding
her husband with help.

Verse. 2. He that walks in his uprightness fears the Lord: but he that is
lewd in his ways, despises him.

BY walking, and ways, is meant in the Scriptures, the ordinary, usual, and
common course of men's behavior: and by uprightness, the sincerity and
faithfulness of their hearts, contrary to fraud and guile, which pretends
one thing, and purposes another, in them which make a show to do service to
God, in that wherein they only or principally purpose some carnal end to
themselves: and by fearing the Lord, is understood true piety and godliness.
So that the sense of the former clause is, that every one which accustometh
himself to well doing, unfeignedly, without hypocris^e and halting, is
undoubtedly the child of God, and truly religious. But he that is le^d in his
ways, that leads a wicked life, whether openly in the sight and view of the
world, or secretly, so as is known only to the Lord, and his own conscience,
despises him does actually, and indeed show contempt to God by violati^g his
laws, howsoever he may bear himself in hand, and make others to believe that
he does much reverence him.

Verse. 3 In the mouth of the foolish is the rod, or wand of pride: but the
lips of the wise preserve them.

IN the mouth of the foolish, in the usual talk of wicked men, especially
when they are of an hautie heart and high minded, is the rod of pride: such
speeches as proceed from pride, and whereby they strike at others, and are
commonly smitten themselves: either man taking advantage of them, or God
inflicting punishments for them. But the lips of the wise: such words and
answers as in humility they utter to men: and such prayers and petitions as
they send up to God, preserve them, protect themselves, and others also from
hurts and dangers.

Verse. 4. Where none oxen are, the crib is empty: but much increase comes by
the strength of the ox.

BY oxen, he means those kind of laboring cattle, which are applied to
plowing, and other works of husbandry; and where they are not, or not set to
work; there the crib is empty, and so is the barn also, food for man and
beast fails: but much increase comes by the strength of the ox: abundance
of corn, and necessary provision, arises by the travel of cattle, and
laborers, in diligent plowing and husbandry. For therein the work of the
beasts, the industry of men, the virtue of the earth, the multiplication of
grain, do all concur together with the blessing of God upon them.

Verse. 5. A faithful witness will not lie: but he that tells lies, will be
a false witness.

A Faithful witnesse] He that makes conscience, and is resolved before the
judgment seat constantly to testify the truth, will not usually, nor in his
common speech tell untruths; but he that tells lies will be a false
witness: whosoever accustometh himself to lying in private, will not stick
to forswear himself, and bear false witness in public. For the fear of
God is of no force with him to deter him from it; and falsehood he loves,
and truth he hates; and therefore will be as froward to promote the one, and
to oppose the other, if they may do ^t with impunitie.

Verse. 6. The scorner seeks wisdom but finds it not: but knowledge is
easy to him that is prudent.

THe scorner] That is, very sinful and contemptuous persons; (for it is a
collectiue, and meant of all: or at least of diverse of them) seeks wisdom:
by wisdom we may understand the true knowledge of Gods holy will; and where
it is said the scorners seek it: the meaning is that some of them make show of
seeking, and seem so to do, being present at those means, and outwardly
dealing in those exercises, whereby others truly seek, and effectually find
knowledge. And as these use the means without any desire of having wisdom,
so others would have it: but contemn al those means whereby it is offered, and
to be received, trusting to their own wit and carnal reason. And a third sort
seek it, and are willing to have it, and at the Ministers hands would gladly
obtain it; but only upon their deathbeds, or in great extremities, not in
love to God, or sincere affection to his word, or in holy liking of his graces,
but only in terror and passion, that they might escape hell and damnation; or
the present dangers wherein they stand. Hereof the Prophet speaks in the
Psalm, saying; When he slew them, they sought him, and they returned and
sought Psalm. 78. 34. 36.
God early. But they flattered him with their mouth; and dissembled with him
with their tongue. For their heart was not upright with him, neither were they
faithful in his covenant. And therefore being so affected, it is not strange
that their success is no better. For though our Savior says, that every one
which seeks Matthew. 7. 8.
finds, yet it is to be understood of every such one as seeks faithfully,
and in due manner. But knowledge is easy to him that is prudent. We must not
so conceive of these words, as though men of understanding could increase their
wisdom and graces, without industry and pains taking: but that when they
have used diligence in the exercise of Gods ordinances, they may know for
certainty that they shall speed well, and be stored with all such graces as
will lead them to life everlasting. And therefore we see the sense of this
sentence expressed in the second chapter of this book. If thou call after
knowledge, and cryest for understanding: if thou Prou. 2. 3. 4. 5.
seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for treasures: then shall thou
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.

Verse. 7. Depart from the presence of the foolishman, and from him whom thou
know not to have the lips of knowledge.

DEpart, etc. Break off society and fellowship with the ungodly person, be not
familiar with him. Not that it is altogether unlawful to have any dealing with
the wicked in common duties, but to be joined too near unto them. We are not
simply forbidden to buy or sell, or to eat or drink with them sometimes, when
upon due occasions we are called thereunto; so that we willingly make not
choice of their company: but to join in marriage with them, to make them
privy to our counsel, or to use them as inward and special friends, this is
here forbidden, and this is unlawful. And from him whom thou perceiuest not to
have the lips of knowledge, that is, separate thy self, and converse not,
especially confer not with such as from their ignorant minds use to talk
ignorantly with their tongues. And yet his meaning is not that we should
forbear all speech with them that want knowledge; or speak not according to
knowledge: for they have most need to be instructed: but he does admonish us
to beware both of them that breathe out pestilent and contagious words to
pervert others, and resist the truth contentiously, and will never be brought
to see their own ignorance and error.

Verse 8. The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way: but the
foolishnes of fools is deceit.

THe wisdom of the prudent] That knowledge and understanding which any man
has that is truly wise, is to understand his way, is given of God, and used of
him for the direction, and guidance of his heart and behavior. But the
foolishnes of fools, all the wit and skill that is in the wicked: (for
howsoever that carries a show of wisdom, yet the substance of it is folly,
and though foolish men use to call them wise, yet the wise God calls them
fools) is deceit, whereby themselves are beguiled both in opinion of that they
are, and in expectation of that which they hope for: and whereby they beguile
others also, either in their souls, or in outward matters.

Verse 9. Sin makes fools to agree: but among the righteous, that which is
acceptable makes agreement.

ONe wicked man loves another for his sins sake, and is the more willing and
desirous of his company for his lewd conditions. The word which we translate
making to agree, Ialits.
does signify to do the part of an Interpretour between men of different
languages, by whose means they mutually understand each others words, and of
an ambassador between Princes sent either for the making of a league, or for
the confirmation of love between them: and the messengers which Baradoch
Baladan the King of Babel sent to Ezechiah are so called, 2. Chron. 32. 31. But
among the righteous that which is acceptable, etc. The meaning is, that
goodness, even such as is approved of God, and pleasing to good men, does
unite the minds of those which are godly, and makes them loving and kind
every one to other. This caused Jonathan so earnestly to set his affection upon
David, and to have him in such estimation, because he saw him to be full of
grace, and valor, as himself was also. And this caused David likewise so
gladly to entertain the love of Jonathan, with constant care to requite the
same unto him, and his posterity. What made the league between them so firm,
and the bond of amity so stable, but this that they were both godly, both
wise, both valiant, both resolute against Gods and the Churches enemies, the
Philistims?

Verse 10. The heart knows the bitterness of his soul, and a stranger shall
not meddle with his joy.

THe heart of a man] That part of him which is the fountain of life, and seat
of affections, knows the bitterness of his soul, feels inward anguish, and
has experience of pearcing sorrows: the meaning is that the fears and heart
grief of them that have a troubled conscience, are more felt of themselves,
then known to others. And a stranger, any other besides himself shall not
meddle with his joy: cannot discern how great his comfort is, being the same
that S. Peter calls, an unspeakable joy. No grief is so great, as that which
1. Pet. 1. 8.
lies upon an afflicted conscience: much less may a sleepie conscience (which
never yet apprehended the hideousnes of sin, the heat and flame of Gods
indignation, and the insufferable torments of damnation) be able to conceive
what a heavy burden an afflicted soul does go under: neither is it possible
for him (whose heart the Lord has not refreshed with the remission of sins,
and the sight of his gracious presence, and the fruition of Christ, and the
assured hope of eternal happiness) to comprehend what admirable consolations
he that is soundly humbled, does enjoy after his anguish and terrors.

Verse 11. The house of the wicked shall be destroyed: but the tabernacle of
the righteous shall flourish.

THe house of the wicked] The wicked himself and his whole estate, shall be
destroyed; shall be overthrown and rooted out by the curse of God: either
suddenly, and all at once; as it is to be seen in some, or in continuance of
time, and by degrees, as it falls out to others. But the tabernacle of the
righteous, his habitation himself; and those things which belong unto him,
shall flourish, shall be blessed of God and made prosperous. For the one has
all the threatenings of the law, and the curses of the Almighty directed
against him, and who can repel the force and violence of such artillery? And
the other is planted, watered, and preserved by Gods own hand, and therefore
he is undoubtedly well rooted, and happy. The former part of the verse is a
simile taken from castles or buildings assaulted with enemies; and the latter
is a metaphor from trees and plants commodiously growing.

Verse 12. There is a way that seems right to a man: but the issues thereof
are the ways of death.

THere is a way] Namely, a lewd and sinful course of life, that seems right
to a man, which wicked men persuade themselves to be free from dangers. It is
agreeable to their lusts and carnal reason, it makes either for their
pleasures, or profits: they have been long acquainted with it; they have found
prosperous success by it; they see the greater personages, and number of men
to travel in it; and therefore conclude of safety therein. But the issues
thereof are the ways of death: it is certain that the beginning of it, and
first step into it, did tend to death; but when they have proceeded in it, they
shall come at the last to their iourneys end, and that is to be destroyed for
ever.

Verse 13. Even in laughing the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth
is heaviness.

THis is to be understood of the ungodly, and such as are privy to themselves
of some great evils; who even in laughing, amidst their sports and greatest
delights, have gripings of fears, and vexations in their hearts. And the end
of that mirth is heaviness, when their pleasures are ended their pains will
begin: their mirth was mingled with many secret heart-bitings, but their sorrow
shall be pure of it self, without all mixture, and have neither hope nor
comfort to delay the bitterness of it. The former condition of the godly, that
wherein they lived before their deliverance by Christ was confirmed unto them,
is a pattern of the present estate of the wicked, and it we have related unto
us by the holy Ghost himself, saying, that through fear of death, they were
all their life Heb. 2. 15.
time subject to bondage. Now if the case of such be no better, even then when
it is at the best, what will become of them at their death, and after, before
the judgment seat of Christ, and eternally, when they shall lie under the
wrath of God, and suffer the full and perfect punishment of al their rebellions?
If a malefactor be affrighted amongst his companions, where seems to be
nothing but safety, before his apprehension, shall he be able to behold the
face of the Judge, to hear his sentence of condemnation, and to endure the
execution and punishment of death without terror and torment?

Verse 14. He that is of a froward heart, shall be satiate with his own ways:
and a good man with that which is in him.

HE that is of a froward heart,] Which sets his heart upon lewdnes and
evil, and declineth every day, waxing worse and worse, shall be satiate with
his own ways, even sated and filled full, with the plagues and judgments
which his own deserts shall draw upon him. And a good man with that which is
in him, shall abundantly enjoy both inward comforts, and outward happiness,
for his constant uprightness, and holy behavior. For as the ways of every
man be disposed according to his heart, so does the Lord yield retribution to
him for recompense, answerably. The more evil he finds to be in any, the
more judgments he will heap upon him; and as others have their souls
seasoned with virtue, grace, and sincerity, the greater measure of bliss and
felicity they shall receive at his hands.

Verse 15. The foolish believes every thing: but he that is prudent takes
heed to his steps.

THe foole] He that is silly for his own soul, and ignorant without
understanding of the matters of God, believes every thing, rashly giving
credit to every vain tale that is told him: and harkening to every deceiuer
that misleadeth him. But a prudent man, he that is of a settled judgment, and
provident for his own safety, takes heed to his steps, examineth first what
weight and soundnes there is in that which is spoken, before he consent to it,
either in persuasion or practice. And this sentence has place especially in
point of greatest importance, and of highest nature, such as tend to the
service, or dishonor of God, such as concern the everlasting welfare or woe
of man: in these the fool has his ears open to all, or much that is
affirmed, excepting the truth, an impostor, the messenger of Satan, a champion
for sin shall be heard, when a faithful Minister of God, bringing clear
warrant for his sayings, shall be rejected. And in these a godly wise man will
be considerate, he will not embrace all that a seducer will be re^die to
deliver: he will not set his foot in the ways of sin, wherein deceivers
solicit him to tread. Whosoever will prevail with him in these material
causes, must produce his witness, even Gods own testimony, either directly,
or by consequent, to confirm his saying.

Verse 16. A wise man fears, and departs from evil: but a fool rages and
is careless.

A Wise man] He that is religious, and truly godly: when he is rebuked or
hears Gods threatenings, or beholds Gods judgments, or foreseeth plagues to
come, by the present view and sight of sin, fears, his heart trembles,
both in respect of Gods displeasure, and the mischief like to follow, and
departs from evil, both purges his heart by humiliation, and redresseth his
way by reformation. But the fool rages and is careless: a sinful person
scorneth when he is rep^^^ed, and p^^^umeth of impunitie and freedom from all
pe^^^s^ (...) at him that gives the admonition, and fauou^^th the sin which
is reproved, and therefore frequenteth the practice of it the more, and with
greater liking, rather then departs from it.

Verse. 17. He that is hasty to anger commits folli^, and he that plotteth
mischief is hated.

HE that is hasty to anger, is suddenly moved to distempered passions, before
he has advisedly examined the cause of offense: commits folly, breaks
out into some absurdity or injustice by word or deed: and he that plotteth
mischief, which dissembling his displeasure, intends revenge, and sets
his thoughts on work how to effect it: is hated, is abhorred of God, and
detested by those that find out his malicious practices. His waspish and
chollerick humor has drawn him into sin against God, and malitiousnes
toward his neighbor: and therefore as he exercises the works of unjust
hatred, being an adversary to the Lord, and righteous men, so he causes
himself to b^^^stly hated, and dealt withal as an odious miscreant.

Verse 18. The foolish do inherit folly: but the prudent are crowned with
knowledge.

THe foolish] Such as will learn no wisdom, nor practice any goodness,
inherit folly; shame and other punishments are due unto them for their
ignorance and sinfulnes, and shall in time also light upon them. But the
prudent are crowned with knowledge, such as are discreet and godly wise, shall
receive the glorious fruit of their understanding and obedience. For by being
crowned, is meant commonly in the Scriptures, honor and dignity: and for the
certainty of the reward on both sides, he speaks of that which is to come,
as if it were presently performed.

Verse. 19. The evil shall bow before the good, and the wicked at the gates of
the righteous.

THe evil shall bow before the good] Sinful persons shall be depressed and
brought down, and godly men exalted and raised up: they shall crouch in token
of submission, and these shall have obeisance done to them in token of honor.
And the wicked at the righteous: the meaning is, that good men shall not only
be greater then the evil, but such as the evil must be driven to seek unto
for help and favor: as suitors use to wait at the gates of a great personage,
till either he come forth, or they be let in, and admitted to his presence.
This abiection of the wicked, and advancement of the godly, is not general to
all in this life, notwithstanding it often befalls many; but at the day of
the Lord every sinful wretch shall be taken down with miserable debasement,
and every faithful Christian shall be exalted to a glorious dignity, when the
one sort shall stand at the bar and be arraigned, and condemned with the
devils; and the other sit, as it were at the bench, with Jesus Christ, and be
made their Judges.

Verse. 20. The poor is hated, even of his own neighbor: but the friends of
the rich are many.

THe poor, he that is fallen into poverty, or disgrace with great personages,
is hated of his neighbor, they that dwell by him: and his kinsfolks and old
acquaintance, and such as were wont to be familiar with him, being yet but
carnal men, will alter their countenance and behavior toward him, and pick
quarrels against him, and take any occasion to alienate themselves from him.
But the friends of the rich are many: diverse fawn on the wealthy, and flatter
them, and make a fair show of love and good will; when as notwithstanding they
bear no such affection to them in their hearts.

Verse. 21. He that despises his neighbor is a sinner: but he that shows
mercy to the poor, blessed is he.

THis verse depends on the former, wherein was declared the property of
fleshly men, which will despise their friends and neighbors in their
necessity: and here is set down their state and condition which show such
unfaithfulness, that he which does despise his neighbor when he is poor and
distressed, shall be a sinner; that is, shall be charged with sin, Chotae.
and convicted of it, and plagued for it. The same word is so taken in the
book of Kings: where Bathsheba tells David, ^. King. 1. 21.
how needful it was for him to appoint his successor before his death, Else,
says she, when my Lord the King shall sleep with his father, I and my son
Solomon shall be sinners: that is, shall be counted as guilty persons, and
punished as offenders. Now this is illustrated by the contrary, the great
reward which they shall receive that pity poor men in their afflictions, and
seek to relieve and succor them in word* deed, and countenance: they are
pronounced blessed, such as shall abundantly partake of Gods favors and
mercies.

Verse. 22. Do they not err that imagine evil? but to them that think on
good things shall be mercy and truth.

THe question is not moved here in way of doubting, as though it were
uncertain whether they that study to do evil should speed evil or not, but
of assurance that they shall certainly fail of their hope and expectation. And
therefore the interrogation is put for a confident asseueration of that which
is affirmed: that never any wicked man could obtain his hope to his
contentment in his sinful devices. Either he comes too short of yt which he
concludes to do, or misseth of that happiness which he looked for in his
exploits, or falls into those troubles which he never stood in fear of. But
to them that think on good things, which set their minds to meditate of
performing good services to God and his people, in the best manner, to them
shall be mercy and truth: the mercy of God shall be manifested by the multitude
of his blessings upon them, and his truth declared by the fulfilling of his
promises to them.

Verse 23. In all labor there is abundance: but the talk of the lips only
brings want.

IN all labour] In every honest vocation wherein a man shall diligently and
faithfully employ himself, there is abundance, a competent measure of
provision to be found for his own maintenance, and a surplussage to bestow on
other good uses. But the talk of the lips only, bare and vain words, when a
man will labor with his tongue, and let the rest of his members be idle: when
the mouth shall be ready to discourse of his business, but the hands be
negligent to perform it; when words alone shall be used in stead of works,
that brings only want, fills him with need and poverty.

Verse. 24. The riches of the wise are their crown: but the foolishness of
fools remains folly.

THey which have wealth with godly wisdom, are made the more honorable by it
for their credit; for so much the word crown, does often import in the
Scriptures. And though sinful fools have never so great abundance of riches,
they nothing avail them against their foolishness. They be as ignorant and
more wicked then if they possessed nothing: their lewdness is not made the
less grievous and damnable by their great substance: and their absurdities be
more seen, and noted to their shame, then if they lived in a poor estate and
obscurely.

Verse. 25. A faithful witness delivers souls: but a deceitful one forgeth
lies.

A Faithful witnesse] Which both has sure knowledge of that which he
affirms, and an upright heart to do service to God, and good to his brethren
by his testimony, delivers souls, endeavors by declaring the truth to
help innocent men out of their troubles, and infamy whereinto they are
fallen, or like to come by unjust accusations, or false surmises of them. For
by souls, in the Scriptures is often meant the persons of men. As Exodus 1. 5.
All the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob, were ^euentie souls. But
a deceitful one, a false witness^, or crafty accuser, forgeth lies, as
sometimes he peruerteth the truth, and abuses it to cross justice and true
dealing; so if that will not be for his turn to effect his purp^^e, then he
inuenteth a lie, and sets a color upon it to destroy or molest his
harmless neighbors. For here does the holy Ghost oppose the deceitful to
the faithful, and forging of lies, to delivering of souls, in regard of the
effect that it works, because by that means many men are brought to danger
and destruction. And as this is understood of the whole man, that a faithful
witness will deliver him; so it is true concerning the part of man, the soul
so properly called, that a faithful witness, either Minister, or private
person, according as opportunity serves, will specially labor to deliver the
heart from sin, by testifying the truth of God against it, and so preserve
his brother from destruction. This is according to that which Saint James
speaks: Brethren, if any of you have erred from the truth, and some man has
converted Iam. 5. 19. 20.
him; let him know, that he which has converted the sinner from going astray
out of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of
sins. On the other side, the false Prophets, and seducers of all men, are the
most deceitful and dangerous, and do greatest mischief with their corrupt
doctrine and pestilent errors. The sense of this verse is agreeable to the
sixth verse of the twelfth chapter, where it is said, that the talking of the
wicked, is to lie in wait for blood: but the mouth of the righteous will
deliver them. There it was observed, and here it is confirmed that wicked men
mix their cruelty with craft and falsehood: For they lie in wait for blood, and
they are deceitful, and forge lies. And that a good man will have a good word
ready to help them that are oppressed. For the mouth of the righteous will
deliver them, and a faithful witness will deliver souls.

Verse. 26. In the fear of the Lord there is assurance of strength, and he will
be a refuge for his children.

IN the fear of the Lord] In soundness of religion, and true godliness, there
is assurance of strength, certainty of defense both for soul and body. And he
will be a refuge for his children. This is added to the former clause, as a
reason for confirmation of it. Godly men must needs be in good safety, because
they be Gods children, whom he in Christ has begotten to himself, by the
immortal seed of the word, and he does perpetually protect all his sons and
daughters.

Verse. 27. The fear of the Lord is a welspring of life to avoid the snares of
death.

AS religion was commended in the former verse to be forcible for the defense
of them that embrace it; so in this it is declared to be comfortable to them,
and profitable, as appears by the similitude of a welspring, whereof there
was great use in those hot countries, for the refreshing of men and cattle
that were thirsty: and the moystening of the earth, to make it the more
fruitful. And therefore it was given for a principal praise to the land of
Canaan, that it was a good l^nd, in the which were rivers of water and
founta^nes, etc. And Deuteronomy. 8. 7.
Achsah the daughter of Caleb, made a request to her father to give her a
blessing, that is, to do her a special favor: which was, that as he had
bestowed upon her a dry coast, a barren field, so he would also give her
springs of water, a more fertile Josh. 1. 5.
piece of ground, which he accordingly yielded unto her. And it is called a
Welspring of life, both for the constant fullness of it, as never failing, as
also in respect of the gracious effects thereof, because that blessedness in
this life, and eternal life in the world to come, does abundantly proceed from
it. To avoid the snares of death: that is, it both gives men instructions, and
works in them a care to fly from sin, whereby they would be otherwise
entangled to destruction. The same words are in the 13. chap. verse. 14. where
they have been already expounded.

Verse. 28. In the multitude of the people is the honor of a King: and through
want of people, comes the destruction of the Prince.

IN the multitude of the people] When the number of the subjects are increased
and prosper, it is both for the glory and safety of the Prince. And through
want of people, when they are few and feeble, comes the destruction of the
Prince: he is exposed to perils, as wanting power to defend his state and
territories; and to contempt also, contrary to the honor before mentioned.
Both the former clause of this sentence, and the latter are most truly
verified, when Princes are agents in the multiplying or diminishing of their
subjects. That King is duly honored who by his mercy, wisdom, fortit^^e and
good government, procures the welfare and increase of his people: and he is
subject to ignominy and mischief, which through tyranny and oppression does
cause the number of them to decrease.

Verse. 29. He that is slow to wrath is of great wisdom: but be that is of a
hasty mind exalts folly.

HE that is slow to wrath] Which is able to master the rage of his affections
so, that he will not be carried away to distemper; contrary to the rules of
lawful anger, is of great wisdom: has received from above in his heart,
that pure, Iem. 3. 17.
peaceable, and gentle wisdom, which Saint James speaks of; and does also
declare the same by his long sufferance and patient forbearance, when by
indignities and wrongs he is provoked. But he that is of an hasty mind, being
rashly moved to passion, without due cause of displeasure, or immoderately
offended, when the fault deserves not so much anger; exalts folly; does
openly commit it, as though he would lift it up that all men might see it.

Verse. 30. A sound heart is the life of the flesh; but envy is the rotting of
the bones.

A Sound heart] That is, a tender, kind, and compassionate heart toward them
that be in afflictions, with a desire to relieve and succor them: for the word
signifies an healing heart, such a one as wishes well to them, and studieth
how it may best comfort them, so free it is from evil will and despite, and
grudging at other men's good estate, is the life of flesh, brings health and
soundness to the whole man that has it. But envy is the rotting of the
bones; it is painful to the mind, and hurtful to the body, and will quickly
consume a man, and bring him to his end, as the diseases which lie in the
bones, and eat up the marrow.

Verse. 31. He that oppresses the poor, reprocheth him that made him: but he
that shows mercy to the poor, does honor him.

BY poore] He means, not only such as live in want and penury; but those
which are under the burden of any other afflictions, and unable to defend
themselves: and by oppression, he understands all kind of hard dealing,
whether it be by craft or force, or false accusations and slanders, or bitter
and contumelious speeches to bring them into contempt or hatred: He that thus
wrongeth any distressed person, reprocheth him that made him: that is, the Lord
who has allotted to him that poor estate. But he that shows mercy to the
poor, which does good, and ministers comfort to them that are in misery, by
helping the Lords servants, declares his love and estimation of the Lord his
master.

Verse. 32. The wicked man is pursued in his misery: but the righteous has
hope in his death.

THe wicked is pursued] The word which we translate pursued, Iiddache.
signifies to be thrust at, or to throw down: meaning, that when his calamity
once begins, he shall be driven on forwards until he fall into destruction.
But the state of the righteous is contrary, for he has hope, that is, not
only confidence and good expectation, but refuge and deliverance in greatest
extremities, yea in the very danger and torment of death it self, yea then
especially, and more then ever at any time before.

Verse. 33. Wisdom rests in the heart of him that has understanding: but
that which is in the heart of fools shall be known.

WIsedome] That is, holy and heavenly wisdom and grace, rests in the heart,
(continues therein, and dwells as in her house and habitation) of him that
has understanding: namely, of every such one as is of sound judgment and
sincere affection. And that which is in the heart of fools shall be known:
that sinfulness and corruption which they nourish in their souls, and take
pleasure in, will break out and discover it self at one time or other. The
agreement of the two causes together will the better appear, if that be
supplied which is understood in each of them, which may be in this manner;
Wisdom rests in the heart of him that has understanding, and will be
manifested; and folly inhabiteth in the heart of fools, and shall be known.

Verse. 34. Justice exalts a Nation: but sin is shame to the people.

IVstice] That is, true religion, and obedience to Gods holy commandments, and
the enacting, and executing of wholesome laws does exalt a nation; causes the
inhabitants of well ordered Commonwealths, and countries, and cities, and
towns, to prosper, and be commended. But sin practiced and not punished, is
a shame to people; it brings to contempt, and makes them infamous, and
draws down judgments on the places where it is committed and tolerated.

Verse. 35. The favor of a King is toward a wise servant: but his wrath shall
be toward him that causes shame.

THe favor of a King, etc. Every wise king, and all other godly great
personages, will take delight in, and show countenance unto their servants, or
officers, or any other that depend upon them, so far as they shall find them
diligent, obedient, discreet and trusty: and therefore will also be ready to
reward them, according as their faithful service shall deserve. But his wrath
shall be toward him that causes shame. He that by folly offends his
governor; especially if he discredit him and his house, by lewd pranks and
misdemeanors, must look to feel his masters displeasure, and that with
frowning checks, chiding, punishment, or displacing.

CHAPTER. XV.
Verse. 1. A soft answer turns away wrath: but a grievous word stirs up
anger.

A Soft answere] Gentle, mild, and peaceable speeches, [ turns away wrath]
pacify the indignation of him that is displeased. He speaks of that which
comes to pass most commonly, though not always: for sometimes men of a
froward and servile disposition are the more violent, by how much they are
mildlier dealt with: and sharp rebakes prevail most with such, to tame them
with fear, which would not be entreated with fair persuasions: [ But grievous
words] bitter, biting, and provoking speeches [ stir up wrath] not only
increase it in them, in whom before it was kindled, but kindle it in them who
before were kindly affected. Jacob was much indeared to Rachel, and bare much
with her infirmities, and great corruptions, yet when her own barrennes, and
her sisters fruitfulnes had stirred her up to envy, and her envy had made her
passionate, and her passion had caused her tongue to speak absurdly, requiring
Jacob to give her children, otherwise she could not live, it is said that his
anger was kindled against Genesis 30. 2.
her, notwithstanding his singular love; how then would he have taken the
matter if she had reviled him, and railed on him, if she had belied him, and
charged him with perfidiousnes, as denying due benevolence unto her, and
defrauding her of her matrimonial right, and yet could be ready, and strange
enough to beget bastards on harlots?

Verse. 2. The tongue of the wise sets forth good knowledge: but the mouth
of fools powers out folly.

THe meaning is, that godly prudent men will utter good matter, and their
speeches shall carry a grace and force with them, as being rightly placed, and
wisely ordered. And sinful ungodly persons on the other side, either vomit out
that which is hurtful, false, or vain: or else pervert and abuse that which
in it self is true and wholesome. Good men indeed through the defect of
wisdom and goodness, do sometimes fault with their lips, and fail to speak
that which is meet: (for the best attain not to the fullness of grace, and
therefore can do nothing in complete perfection) but the wicked do never
speak any thing well, albeit they always utter not that which is ill. When
Cayphas and Balaam were prophesying, and delivered the words of God, yet their
tongues were unsanctified, notwithstanding the matter spoken by them was divine
and holy.

Verse 3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the
good.

THe eyes of the Lord His certain sight and knowledge. He speaks of God
according to man, attributing eyes unto him, (which he, being a spirit, has
not) because we see with our eyes, and best know the things which we see: [
in every place] wheresoever any man is: [ behold] not only discern and
perceive, but purposely observe and mark, and that continually, as the form
of the word in that participle Tsophoth.
imports: [ the evil and the good] all sorts of men, together with their
hearts and ways. David said not that which concerned himself only in
particular, but which belonged to all mankind in general: he spoke not as the
son of Iesse, but as the son of Adam, and for all Adams children, and that
which every one might as truly affirm for himself, when he directed his
speech to the Lord in this manner: O Lord thou searchest me, and know me.
Thou know my down sitting, Psalm. 139. 1. etc.
and mine vprising: thou understand my thought afar off. Thou compassest
my path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways. Whither
shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I fly from thy presence, etc.

verse 4. A wholesome tongue is as a tree of life: but the frowardnes thereof
is as a breach made by the wind.

THe purpose and drift of this sentence is, to declare that the course and
custom of godly men's speeches is both comfortable and profitable to them which
know how to make use thereof: as was that goodly tree of life in Paradise,
continually bearing fruit, so pleasant and precious. On the contrary side, as
a blustering wind, which throws down trees and houses, does much harm: so
a violent and venomous tongue, causing troubles and calamities, is very
pernicious and hurtful.

Verse. 5. A fool despises his fathers instruction: but he that regards
correction, is prudent.

A Foole] A wicked and ungodly child, [ despiseth] either refuses to hear,
or else to obey [ his fathers instruction] that admonition or counsel which
his parents or other governors give unto him: [ but he that regardeth]
submits himself unto, and is bettered by [ correction] either in words or
deeds, given by whomsoever, having authority over him, [ is prudent] shows
wisdom, and receives the fruit of the same.

Verse 6. The house of the righteous has much treasure: but in the revenues of
the wicked is trouble.

THe house of the righteous] That is, either every righteous man has his house
replenished with great store of wealth and substance, or else a less quantity
does as well suffice him, God seeing it to be better and safer for him. And
whereas sometimes it falls out, that godly men have neither so much as
others possess, nor as themselves desire, and seem to stand in need of, it
grows from the defect of their godliness, for which the Lord corrects them
with some penury and want, and whereby their hearts fail of that fullness of
contentment, which more piety and grace would work in them.

The latter clause of this verse preuenteth an objection that might be made
against the former, in this manner: Why should righteousness be commended for
making the righteous rich, sithence sin seems to make the state of sinners
more prosperous then theirs? To this it is answered, that troubles are
intermingled with their wealth and possessions; as pains and toil in getting,
and cares and fears in keeping, and grief and anger in forgoing of all, or
any part of them.

Verse. 7. The lips of the wise do spread abroad knowledge: but the heart of
the foolish, that which is not right.

HE compares the lips of wise men to the hands of good seedes-men, who
skilfully, and in due manner and measure, at every step do scatter the corn
into the tilth: showing it to be a note of sound understanding, to take
opportunity wheresoever it is offered, at home or abroad, to direct their
talk to the benefit and edification of the company. On the contrary side, the
wicked, out of the evil treasure of their hearts, bring forth evil things,
uttering vanity, and errors, and noisome speeches, like those that make it
their work to sow Cockle, and Tares, and Darnell, or other weeds, which are
only venomous and hurtful. In the former part of the sentence, the heart is
to be understood, which ministers matter to the lips: And in the latter, the
lips are also meant, which are the instruments of the heart: as if he should
have said; The lips of the wise, out of that grace which is in the heart, do
spread abroad knowledge, and that which is right: and the heart of the foolish,
by the peruersenes of the lips, does spread abroad ignorance, and that which is
not right.

Verse. 8. The Sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord: but the
prayer of the righteous is acceptable unto him.

THe sacrifice of the wicked] Their best works, even those which seem most to
savor of devotion, and their very prayers themselves [ are abomination to the
Lord] sins which he abhors, and for which he will punish them: [ but the
prayer of the righteous] and all other their services which they faithfully
perform [ are acceptable to him] wherewith, through Jesus Christ he is well
pleased, and for the same will graciously reward them. For neither the
displeasure of God against his enemies, nor his favor toward his people, are
without efficacy and effect: his hatred is joined with justice, and will
certainly work the woe of him that shall provoke it: and his love is full of
goodness, and will make him blessed upon whom it is settled.

Verse. 9. The way of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: but he loves
him that follows righteousness.

THe way of the wicked] The whole course of his life and behavior: whatsoever
he says, and all that he does [ is abomination to the Lord] is filthy and
loathsome in his eyes, provoking him in anger to plague him. And this is not to
be understood only of the gross faults of sinful men, when they directly
transgress the law of God, but of every thing else which they take in hand, as
long as they walk after the flesh: as labor and travel; their meat and
drink; their sleep and necessary refreshings: though in exercises not
utterly unlawful; though in matters that be merely civil; though in actions
every way commendable for others to perform. And hereof the Apostle speaks,
when he says to Titus, that to Ti^ ^5.
the pure all things are pure; but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving,
nothing is pure, but even their minds and consciences are defiled.

But he loves him] Esteems him, and uses him as his own child; causes
his heart to feel the comfort of his favor, and will in due time make it
manifest to all the world how dear he is unto him [ who follows after
righteousnesse] which is not cold, or slow, or unstable in doing of good; but
with might and maine strives constantly to obtain the habit and increase of
goodness. The word signifies earnestly Mer addeph.
to pursue, being a Metaphor taken from the eagerness of wild beasts, or
ravenous fowls, or of any kind of creatures that live by the spoil of others,
which will run or fly, both fast and far, rather then be disappointed of
their prey. True it is, that all are not of equal graces, nor any one at all
times equally affected to that which is just and upright; but none must leave
off endeavor to seek it. Every man is to make it his gain, and to abandon
all the impediments which would stay him from it. The sense and meaning of the
words will be the better discerned, if that be supplied which is understood in
either part of the sentence, in this manner: The Lord abhors the way and
person of the wicked, because he follows iniquity: but he loves the person
and way of the godly, because he follows righteousness.

Verse 10. Instruction [is] evil to him that forsakes the way: [and] he that
hates correction shall die.

INstruction] Either wholesome doctrine publicly taught, or faithful
admonition privately given: [ is euill] not in it self (for the Scripture
calls it A pearl, and Holy thing in Matthew. 7. 6.
one place, and prefers it before silver and gold: and the richest Iemmes in
another) but it so seems to him that is Prou. 3. 15.
not willing to obey it: in whom also it is an occasion of distempered
passions, and hardness of heart: [ to him that forsakes the way] not to every
one that mistaketh the way, or through infirmity sometimes swarueth from it;
but to such a one as either obstinately refuses to choose and walk in the
right path of salvation, when the knowledge of it is offered unto him; or
wil^ully departs from it after that he has made some entrance thereunto: And
[ he that hates correction] which is imbittered by rebukes, and not bettered
by chastisements: [ shall die] is in danger to perish eternally at the last,
and to be surprised with some speedy, sudden, shameful, or cursed death in the
mean season: and before that, to have some heavy judgment to fall upon him.

Verse. 11. The grave and destruction are before the Lord: how much more the
hearts of the sons of men?

THe graue] The darkest places in the ground, or deepest places in the waters,
where any dead corpse is, or has bin covered, and consequently all others as
obscure as they, or lower then they, even to the very center of the earth: [
and destruction] the place and state of the damned spirits: [ are ^^fore the
Lord] he sees both how the bodies consume, and how the souls suffer, and
what be the thoughts of them that sustain such infernal torments: [ how much
more the hearts] the counsels, and purposes, and discourses, and motions of all
the faculties of the souls: [ of the sons of men] of every one in every age
that is descended from the race of mankind, so long as he lives on earth.
Yet is not this an argument from imparitie, in respect of God, as though it
were easy for him to behold some thoughts, and hard to find out others: (for
all are equally comprehended of him) but in regard of men, which with greater
difficulty attain to the knowledge of that whereunto their sense is not able
to reach, and with more facility discern that which is subject to their
senses: and so according to themselves they conceive of the Lord.

Now if they apprehend that he does continually observe and look upon things
that be so abstruse and hidden, they may be easily persuaded that he is not
unacquainted with that which is more conspicuous and apparent.

Verse 12. A scorner loves not him that rebukes him: neither will he go unto
the wise.

A Scorner] A leaud ungracious person, which obstinately has given over
himself to work wickedness, and derideth all that dislike of his ways: [
loves not him that rebukes him] but hates both the reprouer and the
reproof, the man and his admonition: according as was said before, that
instruction is evil to him that forsakes the way: [neither will he go to the
wise] nor be willing that the wise should come to him. He affects not the
company and society of them that be godly, because he knows that they will
look into his licentious life, and tell him plainly of his inordinate
behavior. If Achab took it so offensiuely that Elijah, although sent by the
Lord, should enter into Naboths vineyard, whereof he was taking possession, to
the molesting of him, as if an enemy were come upon him; when shall we
think, would Achab of himself have repaired to Elijah to confess his bloody
cruelty, to crave his prayers to God for pardon, and to seek direction for
the attainment and testification of his repentance?

Verse. 13. A joyful heart makes a good countenance: but by the sorrow of the
heart, the spirit is broken.

A Joyful heart] A glad and merry mind, especially having peace with God,
and pardon of all his transgressions: [ makes a good countenance] causes the
whole body to be more healthful, but most of all shows it self in the
cheerefulnes of the face: for the affections of the mind pierce into the parts
of the body, and chiefly appear and work in the countenance: [ but by the
sorrow of the heart] when it is carnal or excessive, [ the spirit is broken]
as the looks are marred, so the spirits are dulled, and men by sighings and
griefs are often brought to such extremities, as that they can hardly draw
their breath. The opposition stands thus: A joyful heart makes a good
countenance, and by the comforts of it, the spirits are refreshed: and a
sorrowful heart makes an heavy countenance, and by the griefs thereof the
spirits are oppressed.

Verse 14. The heart of him that has understanding seeks knowledge: but the
mouth of the fool is fed with foolishnes.

THe heart of him that has vnderstanding] The upright desire, and sincere
affection of him that is wise unto salvation, [ seeks for knowledge] moves
his lips, and ears, and senses, diligently to labor for increase of that
holy wisdom wherewith he is already endued: [ but the mouth of the fool is
fed with foolishnes] that is, leaudnes of life, and practice of evil, are as
delightful to the mind of a sinful person, as delicious food is to the mouth
and taste: and he that has a wicked heart, will be as greedy to satisfy his
lust at every moment, as he that has a dainty tooth will be desirous to feed
on delicate dishes at every meal.

And so it is agreeable to that which is in the fourth Chapter, where sinners
are said to eat the bread of wickedness, and to drink the wine of violence:
that is, It is meat and drink to them to do mischief. The sense and
opposition in effect tend to this, that the heart of a wise man seeks for
knowledge, and therefore his soul is fed with grace: and the heart of a fool
does hunt after folly, and therefore his mouth is fed with foolishnes.

Verse 15. All the days of the afflicted are evil: but he that has a good
heart, is at a continual feast.

BY the next two verses following it may appear, that by the afflicted is
meant such a one as (through defect of faith and contentedness) is troubled in
mind for poverty, or other outward calamities, because his worldly estate and
condition is no better. And of him it is said, that all his days are evil:
that is, His whole life, during those wants or crosses, or fears, till the
heart be helped by grace [ are euill] grievous, tedious, and full of bitter
vexations: but he that has a good heart] which is at peace with God, and
freed from the power of infidelity and sinfulnes, [ is at a continual feast]
is no more burdened with want at any time, then they which have variety of
dishes before them: and no less filled with delights at all times, then they
which are well satisfied with dainty meats and pleasant wines. For the
comparison is from the comfort and commodities of banquets, and not the surfets
and excess thereof. Yet this is according to the degrees of that goodness
which is in men's souls: so much godliness as they have, so much refreshing
they find in their affl^ctions: and because none can attain unto a perfection
thereof, therefore none shall be rid of all worldly griefs, and dreads, and
discontentments.

The sense and exposition tends to this purpose: All the days of him that
has an evil heart, are as grievous when he is afflicted, as if he were
pinched with continual penury: but all the days of him that has a good
heart, when he is afflicted, are as joyous as if he were at a continual feast.

Verse 16. Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure,
and trouble therewith.

BEtter is a little] A small portion of goods is more profitable and
comfortable, [ with the fear of the Lord] with godliness, causing a contented
mind with joy, and procuring Gods blessing for use, [ then great treasure]
then the abundance of wealth, [ with trouble] with sinfulnes which brings
trouble, namely fear, care, sorrow, and many curses with the check of an ill
conscience: for where Religion is not, there griefs and vexations will be: and
the more riches a wicked man has, whereby he may seem to be free from all
molestations, the more encumbrances he has, which are always ready to molest
him.

Verse 17. Better is a dinner of green herbs where love is, then a stalled
Ox, and hatred therewith.

BEtter] More laudable in the house, and acceptable to the guest: [ is a dinner
of green hearbs] very mean and slender fare: [ where love is] where is
concord and hearty good will: [ then a stalled Oxe] then great store of good
meat, and al manner of provision that appertains to a sumptuous feast: [ and
hatred therewith] an evil affection, either toward the parties bidden, or one
toward another. The al^enation of minds, through the hard opinion which one
has of the other, is enough to mar the feast, though the cheer be never so
great; but much more if there be also variance amongst them, if they break
out into bitterness, into contention, and brawling, and especially if
quarrels, and violence ensue thereupon.

Verse. 18. An angry man stirs up contention: but he that is slow to wrath,
appeaseth strife.

AN angry man] Such over whom wrath and passion has power, and in whom it
reigns, (for in the original text he is called a man of anger) [stirreth up
contention] increases dissension where he finds discord, and makes debate
where peace was before: [ but he that is slow to wrath] which can govern his
affections, and not be angry without cause, or beyond measore, [ appeaseth
strife] endeavors to pacify that displeasure which one man has conceived
against another: so that he is not only unlike to him that is given to anger,
and will not raise contention as he does, but takes a course quite contrary to
his, in reconciling them that be at variance.

Verse. 19. The way of the slothful is as an hedge of thorns: but the way of
the righteous is [as] a paued causey.

THe way of the sluggard] Not that leaud and licentious course of life which a
sinful slothful person does take, (for that seems plain and pleasant unto
him) but the good and honest conversation which he ought to walk in: [ is as
an hedge of thornes] appears to him to be full of difficulties and dangers,
as a path that is all ouer-growne with thorns and briars: and therefore either
he dares not enter into it, because he fears perils; or else he will not
proceed forwards, because he finds inconveniences: [ but the way of the
righteous] the use and exercise of those good duties which every godly diligent
man performs: [ is [as] a paued causey] plain, easy, and commodious: and
therefore he goes on in the same with good contentment and comfort.

Verse. 20. A wise son rejoices [his] father: but a foolish son despises
his mother.

A Wise sonne] A child that is endued with grace, and virtuously inclined: [
rejoices his father] brings comfort to both parents for his piety and fear
of God (if they themselves be religious and godly; otherwise it may be, they
will be the more vexed at it) for his obedience and dutiful behavior toward
them, and for his own good credit with all wise men that know his ways, and
the blessing of God upon his state: [ but a foolish sonne] such a one as is
given to be leaud and wicked, [ despises his mother] shows contempt to
mother and father, but especially to the mother, because he presumes to be
more bold with her, and because his state commonly does less depend upon her.
The opposition is thus to be conceived:

A wise son does honor his father and mother, and therefore does make them to
be glad: but a foolish son despises mother and father; and therefore causes
them to mourn.

Verse. 21. Foolishness is joy to him that is destitute of understanding; but a
man of understanding will wal^e uprightly.

FOolishnesse] Wickedness and sin: [ is ioy] desired, and committed, and
continued in with delight: [ to him that is destitute of understanding* a
sinful man that is without all saving knowledge, and heavenly wisdom: [ but
a man of vnderstanding] such a one as is godly wise, whose mind the holy Ghost
has enlightened with the sound knowledge of the word: [ walks vprightly]
orders his conversation aright, and that in the truth and sincerity of his
heart. Thus stands the opposition: Foolishness is joy to him that is
destitute of understanding, and therefore he walks peruersly: but wisdom is
joy to him that is a man of understanding, and therefore he walks uprightly.

Verse. 22. Without counsel thoughts come to naught: but by store of
counselors they shall be established.

WIthout counsell] When men in d^fficult and doubtful cases will trust to
their own wit, and consult with no others whether their enterprises be
convenient, and by what means they may effect them: [ thoughts come to nought]
either they grow weary of their attempts, or are defeated of their purposes:
or though they seem to succeed well for a time, yet their hopes are frustrate
in the end: [ but by the multitude of counsellers] which are wise, and give
faithful counsel, if their faithful counsel be hearkened unto, and obeyed:
[ they are established] in the Hebrew text the Verb is of the singular number,
but collectiuely spoken: meaning, that all Takum.
and every one of those thoughts which are so directed by counsel, shall have
a constant prosperous success at the last, if not at the first.

Verse. 23. A joy comes to a man by the answer of his mouth: and how good is
a word in due season?

A Joy comes to a man] A good man shall find either sooner or later, comfort
and gladness [ by the answer of his mouth] by the wholesome words which he
utters with his mouth, whether he answer to things demanded, or otherwise:
[ and how good is a word in due season?] that is to say, marvelous profitable
and delightful to himself and others, are faithful speeches discreetly
delivered, all meet circumstances of time, place and persons, being duly
observed.

Verse. 24. The way of life is on high to the prudent, to avoid from hell
beneath.

THe way of life] The way that leads to life, yea the very true life it
self: [ is on high to the prudent] is not worldly, carnal, and earthly, but
spiritual, holy, and heavenly: and therefore so far as any man is wise to
salvation, he thinks of heavenly things, and in all his behavior tends
toward heaven: [ to auoide] that so walking therein he may escape [ from hell
beneath] from death and destruction, and the place* of eternal torment, which
a sensual course of life, and the desire of earthly things will bring men unto.

Verse. 25. The Lord will destroy the house of the proud: but he will establish
the borders of the widow.

THe drift of this sentence is to show that the safety of no man's state does
stand in his greatness, nor peril of ruin in his smalnesse; but that Gods
displeasure does cut off the wicked, how strong soever; and his favor
protecteth the godly, though never so feeble. The Lord will destroy] at one
time or other, at once or by degrees, either by the wonted means of his
plagues and judgments, or by some immediate stroke from his own hand: [ he
will root out (as the word signifies) and utterly overthrow: [ the house of
the proud] themselves, their seed, substance, estimation, and whatsoever
belongs unto them: [ but he will establish] defend and maintain [ the
borders of the widow] those livings and possessions, or whatsoever else
pertains to poor helpelesse persons, of any sort, which want power to resist
their oppressors. Yet is it not so to be understood, as though they that were
without friends, were also always without wrongs; (for we read, and hear,
and see the contrary continually) but that it is not in any man's power to
spoil them at his pleasure: and when they are oppressed, he will take their
cause into his hands, in justice and anger to punish their adversaries, and by
grace and providence to recompense them. This is the sense of the opposition:

The Lord will destroy the house of the mighty, when they grow to be proud; and
establish the borders of the widows and weak ones, when they show themselves
humble.

Verse. 26. The thoughts of the wicked are abomination to the Lord: but the pure
have pleasant words.

THe thoughts of the wicked] Their desires, affections, purposes, imaginations,
and all the motions of their minds: [ are abomination to the Lord] such as he
presently beholds with detestation, and hereafter will pu^ish with great
severity: [ but the pure] godly men, whose hearts are purified by faith, and
which are upright in their ways, [ have pleasant words] they speak such
things as are just and acceptable in the sight of God, and good and profitable
for the use of the hearers.

The opposition stands thus: The thoughts of the wicked, and therefore also
their words are abomination to the Lord: but the words of the pure, and
consequently their thoughts are pleasant unto him.

Verse 27. He that is greedy of gain, troubles his house: but he that hates
gifts, shall live.

HE that is greedy of gaine] Which being discontented with his portion, does
rauenously covet after more wealth: [ troubles his house] subuerteth his own
estate, and draws misery upon his household and posterity: [ but he that
hates gifts] not that all receiving of gifts is sin, for inferiors may take
that which superiors bestow upon them in mercy: and superiors may accept of
that which inferiors present them with kindness: but bribes are here spoken
against, which are offered either to pervert judgment, or to buy justice:
whereas the former ought not to be yielded unto for the greatest sums of
money; and the latter should be granted without the least reward. And here is a
Synechdoche, one thing being proposed for a pattern of many others of like
nature. The Magistrates duty is set for an example of all others, and gifts
for all manner of unlawful gain and gettings [ shall liue] safely and
comfortably in this life, and gloriously in the life to come. This is the
opposition: He that is greedy of gain, and loves gifts, brings trouble to
his house, and shall die: but he that has a contented mind, and hates gifts,
brings peace to his house, and shall live.

Verse. 28. The heart of the righteous studieth to answer: but the mouth of the
wicked bableth out evil things.

A Good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things.
He meditateth what to speak, that he may utter such matter as is most
wholesome and profitable: and that not only when a question is demanded of
him, or he is otherwise spoken unto; but upon any other occasion, when it
concerns him to say ought: For the word [ answere] is more largely taken
sometimes in the Scriptures then we use it in our common speech, as Mat. 11. 25.
At that time Jesus answered and said, I give thee thanks, O Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, etc. [ but the mouth of the wicked bableth out evil things]
he can neither be silent, nor speak well; but is full of discourse, and
always prattling rashly, vainly, offensiuely, and leaudly.

The opposition stands thus: The heart of the righteous studieth to answer,
and therefore he utters things that be good: but the mouth of the wicked is
hastily and rashly set on work, and therefore he bableth out things that are
evil.

Verse. 29. The Lord is far off from the wicked: but he hears the prayer of
the righteous.

THe Lord is far off from the wicked] He is near unto them in his essence,
whereby he fills heaven and earth: and in his presence, whereby he beholds
their hearts, and all their ways: and in his justice, being at hand to punish
them. But he is far off in respect of his favor and help: yea even then
when they pray unto him in their manner: so that they get no more good thereby,
then if they should call upon one that is in another country. Upon which
occasion the Prophet exhorts men to seek the Lord while he may be found,
Esa. 55. 6.
and [to] call upon him while he is near. The cause thereof may be gathered
out of the eighth verse of this chapter, where the sacrifice of the wicked is
said to be abomination to the Lord. Who would willingly come nigh to that
which he much abhors? Who would not keep off from smelling of noisome sents,
or looking on loathsome sights? [ but he hears the prayer of the righteous]
accepts of it, and yields to it: is well pleased with that which they offer
to him, and grants that which they desire of him.

This is the opposition: The Lord is far off from the wicked, and rejects
their prayers: but he is near to the righteous, and hears their petitions.
See what has been spoken to this point in the eighth verse.

Verse. 30. The light of the eye rejoices the heart: and a good hearing makes
the bones fat.

THe light of the eyes] The beholding of delightful aspects [ rejoices the
heart] brings sound gladness to the soul that is seasoned with grace, and
looks on Gods favor, with his blessings: [ and a good hearing] where there is
comfortable matter related, and an attentive ear to hearken unto it: [ makes
the bones fat] procures health, and good disposition of the whole body: by
means whereof the bones are replenished with marrow within, and well stored
with flesh and fatness without: not that seeing serves only for the comfort
of the heart, and hearing for the health of the body; but each of them is
profitable both ways. And the same may be understood also, in due proportion,
of the other senses.

Verse. 31. The ear that hears the correction of life, shall lodge among the
wise.

THe ear that heareth] The person which enclineth his ears, together with his
heart, and yields obedience [ to the correction of life] to wholesome
reproves, whereby we are taught to live well, and directed to life eternal, [
shall lodge among the wise] shall be wise, and receive the reward of wisdom,
as a domestical companion, and fellow servant with other wise men in the
family and household of God.

Verse. 32. He that refuses instruction, despis^th his own soul: but he that
obeys correction, possesses his own heart.

HE that refuses instruction] Which disdaineth to be admonished of his
faults, and directed in his ways, [ despises his own soule] deals as
hardly with his own soul, in bringing shame and destruction upon it, as if it
were a thing that he despised, and were a mortal enemy unto: [ but he that
obeys correction] which listeneth unto, and is guided by wholesome lessons,
whether sharp or gentle, [ possesses his own heart] has the use and
ordering of his mind, and whole soul, and preserves it from the power of
death and damnation.

The opposition is this: He that refuses instruction, despises his own
soul, and casts it away; but he that obeys correction, regards his
heart, and possesses it.

Verse. 33. Before the fear of the Lord goes the instruction of wisdom: and
before honor goes humility.

BEfore the fear of the Lord] Before a man be truly religious and godly, [
goes the instruction of wisedome] he must be daily informed in the precepts
and doctrine of Gods holy will expressed in the Scriptures: [ and before
honour] either that celestial glory which is prepared for Gods people in the
life to come, or any comfortable advancement in this life, or the undoubted
note and credit of unfeigned faithfulness and piety, [ goes humility] such as
is not counterfeit, and merely in show, but proceeds from feeling of
corruptions, and sight of ones own unworthiness, whereby he is induced in
the meekness of his mind, to esteem others better then himself. The word
signifies properly, in respect of the deriuation of it, such a kind of
lowliness as is wrought by afflictions, though it be also sometimes more
largely taken. Now it is to be enquired, what connection there is between this
clause and the former, which will easily be found if we observe that the
virtue and reward here lastly mentioned, depend upon the duty and grace in the
former place specified: for with instruction there is required humility, and to
the fear of God there is adjoined honor.

CHAPTER. XVI.
Verse 1. The preparations of the heart are in man: but the answer of the
tongue is from the Lord.

IT is far from the meaning of the holy Ghost, to ascribe here freewill to
man, as though he had any absolute power to dispose of his own heart, though
by concession, according to the vulgar opinion, that seem to be granted: for
no man can think an evil thought without Gods providence, much less a good
thought without his grace: but the drift is to show, that albeit men devise
much, and have whole armies (as the word signifies) of cogitations in their
minds, and those placed in exact order, as it were in battle array, so that
they set down with themselves both what and how to speak, yet [ the answer
of the tongue is from the Lord] they shall utter that which God appoints, and
not always what themselves do purpose.

Verse 2. All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes: but the Lord
pondereth the spirits.

ALL the waies] The purposes, courses, and proceedings: the deeds that are
done, the words that are spoken, and the thoughts that are conceived [ of a
man] of him that is unregenerate, and has an ignorant mind, a proud heart,
and a sleepie conscience, are clean in his own eyes] seem commendable unto
him: he justifies and applaudeth himself in them: [ but the Lord pondereth
the spirits] searches narrowly, not only into the behavior, but the hearts
also of all men, as it were putting them into the balance, and examining them
by number and weight, whether they be pure and upright, as proceeding from
sincerity; or profane and hypocritical, as growing from corruption and guile.

Verse 3. Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be directed.

THe word which we translate [ commit] signifies to deuolue or role, meaning
thereby that is chiefly to be respected in every thing that any man does deal
in: by taking direction from his word, both for matter and manner: by proposing
a right end, even his glory, in the performance of it: by asking his help,
and waiting on his hand, as well for success as recompense: and thy thoughts
shall be directed, thy mind shall be informed in the right way: thy heart
shall be confirmed to proceed on with cheerfulness, and thou shall be lead
with a special guidance to think upon those means which will be most
effectual for the accomplishing of thy desire, if it be for his praise, and
thy good to have thy desire accomplished.

Verse. 4. The Lord has made all things for his own sake: yea even the wicked
for the day of evil.

THe Lord has made all things: By making is understood as well that
workmanship which was bestowed upon all the creatures for their form and
existence, as the works which he daily does in his perpetual government and
administration: for his own sake, for his glory, which is seen in his
wisdom and power, in his mercy and righteousness, with all other holy
attributes. And this he does not only propose to himself, as an end that
were meet, and to be wished, but commands and causes, as an effect that is
necessary and certain: even the wicked against the day of evil. This clause
is annexed, as a prevention of an objection that might arise out of the former
words: How truly may it be said that he has made all things for himself,
when reprobates, both men and Angels, continually set themselves against him?
Now to this he answers, that he gets no small honor by them that are most
ungodly and wicked: for sithence they refuse to yield him glory by their life,
and to acknowledge his goodness in the time of their prosperity, he will
glorify himself by their death, and manifest his justice in the day of their
destruction. And to that damnable estate they are foreordained by Gods
righteous decree, as it is intimated here, and expressly affirmed in other
places, and yet made worthy of it by their own unrighteous behavior: as is
noted in Pharaoh, and other obstinate rebels.

Verse 5. All that are proud in heart, are abomination to the Lord: though hand
join in hand, he shall not be unpunished.

ALL] All sorts and degrees of men, male or female, young or old, high or low,
and every particular person, of what condition soever, that are proud in heart,
whose hearts are lofty, and void of humility; and the heart is therefore
specified, because pride is seated in it, and flows from it, and that no man
should challenge to himself any immunitie from the wretched estate of the
proud, unless his heart be seasoned with humility. He that has an high
mind, though he bear a low sail, and keep a small port, without pomp and
bravery, may be as loathsome in the eyes of the Lord, as some others that set
forth themselves with greater shows. Yet note that he says not* all that
have pride in their hearts, for who can be fully freed from it so long as he
is clothed with mortality? but they that are proud in heart, and so be none
that unfeignedly fear God; for that manner of speech intends the habit or
dominion of pride, which is only in the unregenerate: are an abomination to
the Lord, he has them in detestation, and cannot abide them: though hand
join in hand, notwithstanding that they unite their forces, and combine
themselves together for their defense and safety, he shall not be unpunished,
not one of them shall escape the strokes of God, though for a time he defer
his judgments.

Verse. 6. By mercy and truth shall iniquity be purged: and by the fear of
the Lord men depart from evil.

BY mercie] That kindness and free love which the Lord bears to his elect, [
and truth] the faithful accomplishment of his promises (and in the same sense
are the same words taken in Chapter 14. 8. 22. To them that think on good
things shall be mercy and truth) [iniquitie shall be purged] as well original
guilt as actual transgressions, and all that is amiss in the nature, and
hearts, and ways of Gods chosen, shall be remitted and washed away through the
blood of Jesus Christ. That this is the meaning of this sentence, it appears
by the force of the word, that signifies to make expiation, which properly
belonged to Christ to do, though typically the Priests of the law were said to
expiate by the sacrifices which they offered. For he (as S. John witnesses)
which is our Advocate with the Father, is likewise the propitiation ^or our
(...) 22.
sins: [ and by the fear of the Lord] the knowledge of his will, the
reverence of his Majesty, and the regard of his savor, [ men depart from
iniquitie] they decline from wicked ways, and do those things which are
lawful and good. Yet neither of them are in full perfection, though both of
them in sincerity and truth. So that he declares the causes of justification
in the former clause, and the exercise of sanctification in the latter: showing
by whom sins are pardoned, in the one; and to whom the assurance thereof
pertains, in the other.

Verse. 7. When the Lord is pleased with the ways of a man, he will make his
enemies at peace with him.

WHen the Lord is pleased with the ways of a man] When any person leads a
holy and righteous life, with faith and integrity, according to the rule of
his word, [ he will make his enemies at peace with him] he will cause his
adversaries to lay aside their hatred, and bear good will to him, and deal
friendly with him.

This comes to pass often, but not always: neither would the holy Ghost
have it taken for a perpetual rule; for how then should that be verified which
our Savior told his Disciples, that they should be betrayed of their parents,
and brethren, Luke 21. 16.
and kinsmen, and friends, and be hated of all men for his names sake: which
we see usually come to pass also in our times: But this is the best means to
reconcile them unto us, and win t^eir love either sooner or later, as
experience diverse times declares. And this procures protection from God,
though malice be nothing diminished in them. And this may occasion them now
and then to do us a good ^^ne in a fit, as the Egyptians did to the
Israelites; o^ before they are ware, as Haman did to Mordecai, though they
bear no good affection to us.

Verse. 8. Better is a little with righteousness, then great revenues without
equity.

BEtter, more comfortable and profitable is a little, small substance or
maintenance with righteousness, when the man himself is just and godly, and
his possessions are well gotten and used, then great revenues, either a large
stock, and store of money, or any kind of riches, or lands, or pensions, or
commings in, whatsoever, without equity, which are unjustly come by,
unrighteously kept, or unlawfully spent.

Verse. 9. The heart of a man purposes his way: but the Lord directs his
steps.

MAny devices, intents, and resolutions are in the minds of men: but the Lord
directs his steps, his providence causes their determinations either to
proceed and take effect, (when they intend to do that which he has decreed to
have done) or else to be stayed and hindered, when they purpose to themselves
those things which he has not appointed. And because the whole course of man's
actions is resembled to a way, he therefore does call all his particular
proceedings therein, his steps.

Verse. 10. A sage sentence should be in the lips of the King: his mouth should
not transgress in judgment.

A Sage sentence] The word signifies a divination, being Kesem.
used very often in the evil part for the predictions of the Soothsayers and
Astrologers, and so is forbidden in the Law, Deuteronomy. 18. 10. And sometimes in
good part, as Isai. 3. 2. The Lord will take from ^^rusalem the strong man, and
the man of war, the Judge and the Prophet, the Diuiner or prudent man (who by
observation of causes can foresee what effects are like to follow) and the
aged. And in Micah. 3. 6. there is a threatening that night and darkness
(meaning Gods judgments upon their minds, or bodies, or both) shall keep them
from vision and divination. And so here it is prescribed as the Kings duty,
and commended as his virtue, and not reproved as his fault. And hereby is
intimated, that a wise equal manner of proceeding in all causes should be in
the lips of the King in the words and sayings of the Ruler, and sovereign
Governor, and of the subordinate Magistrates under him, who are deputed to
supply his place for him: his mouth should not transgress in judgment:
neither he nor they ought to pass or award any unjust sentence, or otherwise
utter unrighteous speeches, but deal uprightly toward every man in every
matter.

Verse. 11. The weight and balance of judgment are of the Lord: all the
weights of the bag are his work.

THe weight and balance of iudgement] Just, even, and equal measures, and all
upright and faithful dealing in every respect, are of the Lord, commanded and
appointed by him, according as it is said in the Law, Thou shall have a right
Deuteronomy. 25. 45. 16.
and just weight; a perfect and a just measure shall thou have, that thy days
may be lengthened in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. For all that
do unrighteously are abomination to the Lord thy God. [all the weights] the
great and the small, and of the middle size of the bag, which men use to put
into the bag for the better and safer keeping of them, [ are his worke] his
ordinance, found out and invented by his special providence and direction, and
warranted by his word, for the benefit of humane society, and preservation of
equity in the traffic of one man with another. Herein is a secret
admonition contained by consequence, that no man pervert them to fraud and
deceit, because that man is not only thereby damnified, but Gods own
ordinance is thereby violated.

Verse. 12. It is an abomination for Kings to commit wickedness: for the throne
is established by justice.

IT is an abomination: An horrible and loathsome thing, wherewith the Lord is
highly displeased, for Kings, for great and mighty men, and Magistrates of
every degree, to commit wickedness, to walk in impious, unclean, and
unrighteous ways: for the throne, their honor, and safety, and good estate
every way, is established by justice, made firm, and continued the longer, by
their faithful and upright behavior toward God and their people. The former
clause declaring what a grievous crime it is for men in high place to be
sinful and evil, is confirmed in the latter, by a reason from the contrary
effects, the safety and stability of their estates who duly minister justice,
and uprightly exercise virtue, intimating consequently that iniquity and sin
will undermine and ruinate the power and dignity of the greatest.

Verse. 13. Righteous lips are the delight of Kings: and the King loves him
that speaks right things.

THe latter clause shows what is the sense of the former, that when it is
said, Righteous lips are the delight of kings, is meant, that Kings and great
personages will affect such as speak with truth, wisdom and faithfulness.
This often comes to pass, but oftener fails, more mighty men favoring
flatterers and Sycophants, then such as are upright in their speeches. And yet
is there no untruth in the sentence, because the purpose thereof is to show
what is done by some, and ought to be done by all. It is therefore given as a
precept to Princes and superiors, to make much of them that speak plainly
with judgment and discretion: and an encouragement to subjects and inferiors,
to use their lips so, with expectation of favor thereby, if not from mighty
men in the earth, yet from the Almighty God in heaven.

Verse. 14. The wrath of a King is as messengers of death: but a wise man will
pacify it.

THe wrath of a King] His indignation, justly and upon due cause kindled
against his servants or subjects, is as messengers of death] does portend and
threaten some great punishment, if not present death, to the parties with whom
he is offended, if they fall into his hands: [ but a wise man will pacify it]
he will endeavor either by his own means, fit opportunity being taken; or by
mediation of others, who shall be better regarded, to assuage his anger.

Verse. 15. In the light of the Kings countenance is life; and his favor is as
a cloud of the latter rain.

THe meaning of this sentence is, that where the King and great personages do
affect, and make manifest their love, there is joy, and credit, and protection,
and preferment, and all such prosperity as man may be a means of: for so much
the word [ life] does import: and the same is amplified by the two similitudes
of lightsome and comfortable sunshine, and of fruitful and profitable
showers; especially those which they called the latter rain, whereby the ground
was refreshed after the drought and the corn was ripened before the harvest.
And yet are not all promiscuously, without difference, in so happy an estate
when superiors do set by them, unless the Lord do also grace them: for man's
friendship can never do good unto Gods enemies, as may appear by the condition
of Doeg, and of the noble man, upon whom the King of Israel 2. King. 7. 5.
leaned; and of the Priests of Baal, whom Iezabel maintained; and of the false
Prophets, whom Ahab respected.

Verse. 16. How much better is it to get wisdom then gold? and to get
understanding is more to be desired then silver.

HOw much better] It is so far better to seek and find heavenly wisdom,
and the knowledge of God rather then gold, yea even that which is fine and
pre^ious* (as the word imports) and silver, as that the ods and difference is
Charuts.
inexplicable; the greatness of it cannot be uttered; the one being of an
heavenly nature, and the grace of Gods spirit; the other being earthly, and
dug out of the ground: the one being durable, and everlasting; and the other
momentany and of no continuance: the one being peculiar and proper to good men;
and the other common to all, and communicated to the worst sort: the one being
a pledge and testimony of Gods love, and the other mingled many times with his
indignation: the one standing to a man, and comforting him at death, and in all
distresses; and the other failing him at his greatest need, and leaving him
helpless in the midst of his misery.

Verse 17. The path of the righteous is to decline from evil: and he keeps
his soul that keeps his way.

THe path of the righteous] The wonted and most constant conversation of all
good men, that which they most desire and endeavor, [ is to decline from
euill] to abstain from sin and iniquity, and all that may allure thereunto:
and contrariwise to perform, as far as in them lies, every Christian duty
that is required at their hands: [ and he keeps his soule] he preserves
himself both soul and body from destruction, and all kind of plagues, [ that
keeps his way] which orders his life aright, and walks uprightly in
obedience to Gods holy Commandments.

Verse 18. Pride goes before destruction, and an high mind before the fall.

PRide goes before destruction, etc.] That commonly comes to pass, that
before any great plague befall the wicked, they grow insolent and presumptuous,
setting forth themselves ambitiously, and seeking vainglory, in words and
deeds, in gestures or countenance: or at least their hearts are lifted up, as
it is testified in the latter clause. And where either stately or stubborn
behavior, or an hautie mind do go before, there some notable judgment of God
will certainly follow after, unless humiliation and repentance come between.

Verse. 19. Better it is to be of an humble mind with the afflicted, then to
divide the spoils with the proud.

BEtter it is] It is more comfortable, more honorable, more profitable, more
safe and easy, to be of an humble mind, or as the Hebrew word is, of an
humble spirit, not artificially in pride or policy to make semblance of
humility, or only by natural disposition to be less ambitions then many
others; but to have the true habit of humility, being beautified and
sanctified with the grace thereof, with the afflicted, albeit we should be
poor, or oppressed, or pass under any other crosses, as many, and the most,
and welneere all do, or have done, that are heartily humbled, then to divide
the spoils with the proud, then to prevail in our attempts, and get
victories for glory, and riches for state, with the proud, in that manner,
and with that mind, as violent and arrogant oppressors use to do.

He alludeth to the winning and sacking of Cities, and prefers the condition
of the people subdued, and spoiled of their substance, if they be lowly,
before the state of the warriers conquering, and carrying away the wealth, if
they be puffed up with pride.

Verse 20. He that hearkeneth to the word, shall find good: and blessed is he
that trusts in the Lord.

HE that hearkeneth to the word.] Which applies his ear, and mind, and heart
to the sacred word and doctrine of God, both written and preached, shall find
good, shall obtain all such graces for his soul, and blessings for his body,
as may testify Gods savor toward him: And blessed is he that trusts in the
Lord. This latter clause is an explication of the former, showing the good that
is promised, to be blessedness it self: a sufficiency of comfort and
prosperity in this life, and a full perfection of glory and felicity in the
life to come: and the attention required to be such as is accompanied with
faith, that the word be not only marked, but also believed; and God when he
speaks, have not only heed given to him, but confidence likewise reposed in
him.

Verse 21. The wise in heart shall be called prudent: and the sweetness of the
lips shall increase Doctrine.

THe wise in heart] He which is godly wise, and wise to salvation, who has
knowledge and sincerity mixed together in his soul, shall be called prudent,
shall show himself, be known, and justly commended, to be a judicious and
discreet person, both in the mouths of godly men, and in the consciences of
wicked men, and by good eff^cts at last in the sight of all men: and the
sweetness of the lips shall increase knowledge. The former part of the sentence
declares what good the wise do get by wisdom; that they attain to the
virtue and praise of prudence: and in this latter, what good they do by the
same to others, which is specified only in their words, in their well-seasoned
and comfortable speeches, called the sweetness of the lips, that thereby
grows increase of doctrine, to every attentive and diligent hearer, both for
admonition, instruction, consolation, and every other use, as opporportunitie
serves.

Verse. 22. Understanding is a wel-spring of life to them that have it: but the
instruction of fools is folly.

VNderstanding] The true knowledge of Gods holy will is a wel-spring of life,
a precious possession, as fountains were in those countries; and a
comfortable, constant, necessary, and effectual means of salvation, to them
that have it, whose minds are soundly illuminated, and their hearts graciously
seasoned therewith: but the instruction of fools, those persuasions which
sinful men use, and that advice which they give in stead of instructions, is
folly, corrupt and wicked for matter, and pernicious and hurtful for effect.

Thus stands the opposition: Understanding is a welspring of life to those
that possess it, and therefore the counsel of wise men is wisdom: and
ignorance is the fountain of death to them that are possessed of it, and
therefore the instruction of fools is folly.

Verse 23. The heart of the wise guides his mouth aright, and adds doctrine
to his lips.

THe heart of the wise] His knowledge and judgment, his prudence and
discretion, does guide his mouth aright, direct him when to speak, and when to
hold his peace, and what to say, and what to conceal. His love to goodness
induces him to declare that which is good; and his hatred of naughtines does
cause him to refrain from all words that are naught: and adds doctrine to
his lips, ministers matter of wholesome lessons for them to deliver. It
gets knowledge, and keeps it, and they being stored therewith, do utter
the same for the instruction of others.

Verse 24. Fair words are as an honey comb: sweetness to the soul, and
health to the bones.

GOdly and comfortable sayings rightly grounded on the holy Scriptures, and
fitly applied to the use of wel-prepared hearts, whether publicly or
privately, are as an honycombe, sweetness to the soul, they bring great joy and
gladness to an upright heart, as honey or other sweet things do much delight
the taste, and health to the bones, are means of good to the whole body, for
conservation of health, or restitution to it, by the cheerefulnes of the mind,
and the favor and blessing of God.

Verse. 25. There is a way that seems right to a man: but the issue thereof
are the ways of death.

THere is a way] An ungodly, but a common course of life, which all
unregenerate persons do take, that seems right to a man, wherein he
pleases himself: and being either blindfolded by lust, or misled by carnal
reason, custom, or company, thinks it not to be very displeasing to God,
or dangerous to himself: but the issue thereof are the ways of death, in the
end it will bring them to destruction, toward which they have been traveling
all their life time before. See chapter 12. verse 15. and chapter 14. verse 12.
where the self same words have been expounded.

Verse 26. The troublesome person brings trouble to himself for his mouth
does recoile upon himself.

THe troublesome person] Which takes a delight, and seeks occasions to
molest others which have done him no hurt, brings trouble to himself,
procures his own hurt or vexation of mind: for his mouth recoileth upon
himself, his false or malicious speeches, whereby he diffameth his
neighbors, or otherwise seeks to work their sorrow, turn to his own shame
and discredit, if not loss, or further punishment.

Verse 27. A wicked person diggeth up evil, and in his lips is as it were
burning sire.

A Wicked person] A naughty, leaud, and wicked man, diggeth up evil, secretly
under hand lays plots for the subversion of his neighbors state, whom he
maligneth, as pioners undermine the foundations of cities or houses: [ and in
his lips is as it were burning fire] he breaths out pernicious and evil
words, tending as much to the ruin and destruction of the parties against whom
they are spoken, as fire kindling upon an house does to the consumption both of
the building, and stuff that is in it.

Verse. 28. A froward person sows strife; and a tale-teller separateth chief
friends.

A Froward person] A man of frowardnes (says the original text) he that is
given to unquietness, and to be a busy body, perverting other men's words and
ways, and nourishing peevishness and sinfulnes in himself, [ sows strife]
raises contentions, and causes debate between man and man, which agreed well
together before: [ and a tale-bearer] a pickthanke, which under color and
pretense of love does secretly whisper in men's ears, and maliciously inform
them against their innocent and faithful wel-willers, [ separateth chief
friends] the word that often signifies a Prince, a guide, or captain, is
sometimes taken also for a principal friend, or, as we say, a Prince of
friends, as here and in the next chapter following, verse. 9. and Psalm. 55.
verse. 13. It was thou, O man, even my companion, my especial friend, and my
familiar. And Micah 7. verse. 5. Trust ye not a friend, etc. The meaning then
is, that he sets variance between those that were inward together, and
singularly affected one toward another.

Verse. 29. A wicked man deceives his neighbor, and leads him into a way
that is not good.

A Wicked man] He that is headstrong, and wilfully given to transgress the
laws of God, in regard whereof the original text calls him, a man of
violence, [deceiueth his neighbour] insecteth the minds of those with whom he
conuerseth, his errors, persuading them of the unlawfulness of that which is
unlawful, and of safety where is peril; and that that is evil which is good
and laudable, and sometimes necessary: [ and leads him into away that is not
good] corrupts his conversation with vices, and draws him unto such courses
as are both sinful and hurtful.

Verse. 30. He shuts his eyes to devise wickedness: he moves his lips, and
brings evil to pass.

HE] The wicked man formerly spoken of, [ shuts his eyes to devise
wickednesse] seriously sets his mind upon mischief, and would not have his
thoughts distracted and drawn away from it, by looking here and there upon
any objects; meaning that he is very intentive to invent that which may do
hurt: [ he moves his lips] he speaks softly, and whispereth; he deals
closely, and would not be known in his practices, lest he should be
prevented, [ and brings evil to passe] by his industry and secrecy does
many shrewd turns, and works much villainy.

Verse. 31. The gray head is a crown of glory, when it is found in the way of
righteousness.

THe gray head] Old age, whereof gray hairs and a hoare head is a sign, * is
a crown of glory] yields commendation to the aged person, and makes him
reverent, [ when it is found in the way of righteousnesse] when the old man
does show himself to be religious and righteous, whether he has led his life
in that manner from his youth, or whether he has bin converted to it now in
his latter time.

Verse. 32. He that is slow to wrath, is better then the mighty man: and he that
rules his own mind, is better then he that wins a City.

HE that is slow to wrath] Which will not be provoked to anger without due
cause, neither having due cause to be angry, will pass the bounds of
moderation and measure, [ is better then the mighty man] is more to be
commended for his strength and fortitude, then he that is bo^sterous, and
strong of body: [ and he that rules his mind] which represseth and keeps
under his intemperate passions and violent affections of every sort, [ is
better then he that wins a City] has greater power, and does a more worthy
exploit, then he which by force of arms does overcome and conquer whole
Cities, Castles, and Countries.

Verse. 33. The lot is cast into the lap: but the whole disposition thereof is
of the Lord.

THe lot] Which was much in use among the people of God, both for division of
lands, as Numb. 26. 55. and for other causes, as appears in many places of
the Scriptures [ is cast into the lap] into some secret or close place; and
that which was most ordinary with them, is put for many other, as hats, fists,
pots, boxes, or whatsoever else: [ but the whole disposition thereof] the
particular ordering, guiding, and government of of it, [ is of the Lord] by his
immediate providence, without either chance, art, or labor. And under lot he
comprehends all other accidents which are thought to be merely casual, and
wholly subject to fortune.

CHAPTER. XVII.
Verse. 1. Better is a morsel of dry bread, and peace therewith, then a house
full of sacrifices with strife.

BEtter] More comfortable, safe, and wholesome, [ is a morsel of dry bread] a
crust (as we use to say) without any other cates or dishes, slender fare, a
small pittance, and that also course and homely, [ and peace therewith] if
there be Christian love, quietness, and good agreement, [ then an house full
of sacrifices] great abundance of dai^ty cheer, as they used to have when they
offered peace offerings, as may appear chap. 7. verse. 14. And to that custom
S. James seems to allude, Iam. 5. 5.
when he says, You have nourished your hearts as in a day of sacrifice or
slaughter.

Verse. 2. A discreet servant shall have rule over a leaud son, and he shall
divide the inheritance among the brethren.

A Discreet seruant] A faithful, painful, and wise servant, though a
bondsman, [ shall have rule over a leaud sonne] shall be preferred before a rude
and dissolute child, and sometimes be set over him as a governor: [ and he
shall divide the inheritance among the brethren] shall be as one of them, and
have a portion among them, and be a^ it were in the room of the eldest
brother, having the chief hand in making division of the goods and lands
between the other sons and daughters.

This indeed is sometimes verified according to the letter and words of the
sentence, that servants be made Executors to their masters, and guardians to
their masters children: but the drift hereof is to show, that they which are
low may be exalted by virtue, and they which are high, may be brought down by
vice: that wisdom prefers diverse above them that might have been their
betters, and folly depriueth many of those prerogatives which otherwise they
should have enjoyed.

Verse. 3. The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold: but the Lord
tries the hearts.

THe fining pot for siluer] Goldsmiths have their vessels, wherein they prove
and try the gold and silver from dross and corruption: [ but the Lord tries
the hearts] he alone searches them, and knows them; and none but he by
grace can purify them, though man by art can refine metals, and make them more
precious.

Verse 4. The wicked man gives heed to false lips: and a liar hearkeneth to
the naughty tongue.

THe wicked man] He that is given to work mischief, [ gives heed to false
lips] willingly listeneth to the shrewd words that men that abuse their lips to
falsehood, do speak: [ and a liar listeneth to the naughty tongue] he that is
wont to tell lies, and other ungracious tales, is glad to hear lies, and other
speeches that are malicious and hurtful.

Verse 5. He that mocketh the poor, reprocheth him that made him: and he that
rejoices at his adversity* shall not be innocent.

HE that mocketh] Which offers despite to* and vilifieth by word, deed, or
gesture, whether in the way of jest, or bitter disdain, [ the poore] not only
them that want wealth, but which are in any affliction, either externally, or
in their souls, [ reprocheth him that made him] does after a sort scorn and
scoff at God, who created the man, and allotted him that estate; as he that
laugheth at the work, does consequently deride the artificer, [ and he that
rejoices at his adversity* shall not be innocent] not only he that shows
apparent contempt of the man afflicted, but which is glad in his heart for his
misery and affliction, shall severely be punished.

Verse. 6. Childrens children are the crown of the elders, and the glory of the
children are their fathers.

CHildrens children] A long race, many nephews, such as we call
grandchildren, and those of many descents, [ are the crown of the elders] a
comfort and credit to their parents, grandfathers, great-grandfathers, etc [
and the glory of the children are their fathers] it is an honor for the
younger sort to have descended from worthy progenitors; provided yet in both
these cases, that as well the ancestors as the posterity be virtuous, and well
adorned with graces of their own. Many foolish vicious children can nothing
credit their wise and godly progenitors, as R^hoboam and his son added nothing
to the glory of David and Solomon: neither can sinful ancestors either yield
honor to, or receive honor from their seed that is holy and religious. That
blessed Hezekiah was in no sort dignified by his wicked father Ahaz: nor was
that wicked Ahaz any whit graced by his blessed son Hezekiah. And in case that
both the elders and youngers, the fathers and children be all naught, as was
cursed Cham and his seed, and cruel Cain and his, no multitude, nor might, nor
means, of what sort soever, can make either part honorable.

Verse. 7. Excellent speech becomes not a fool; much less lying talk an
ingenuous person.

EXcellent speech] Prayer, thanksgiving, discourse of God, of the Scriptures,
of religion, of any holy things: the commendation of that which is good, the
reproof and dispraising of that which is evil, [ becomes not a foole] is
not seemly in the mouth of a sinful sot, which neither practices, nor loves,
nor understands the points whereof he speaks: [ much less lying talke]
any manner of corrupt communication, whether it be false or filthy, worldly or
bitter, or scoffing, or idle; for one kind is put here for all the rest: [
beseems an ingenuous person] is comely for a godly, wise, and honest man,
such a one as is contrary to the fool formerly mentioned, in profession,
heart, and behavior, to utter.

Verse. 8. A reward is as a precious stone: pleasant in the eyes of him that
has it: it prospers whithersoeuer it turns.

A Reward] A gift or present bestowed upon a Magistrate, or officer, or any
that may help or hinder a man in his cause, [ is as a precious stone, pleasant
in the eyes of him that has it] much regarded of him on whom it is bestowed: [
it prospers whithersoeuer it turneth] it takes effect, and brings good
success, to what end soever it is applied; to escape punishment, to pacify
wrath, to obtain promotion, to get favor in courts, to cross ones
adversary, or to bring to pass any purpose.

Verse 9. He that covers a fault, seeks love: but he that repeateth a
matter, separateth a chief friend.

HE that covers a fault] That passes by an infirmity, that burieth an
offense, as much as may be, in silence, seeks love, by showing love to the
party, preserves concord where kindness was before, and takes the way to
make him his friend, who was before but a stranger to him: but he that
repeateth, which looks too narrowly into every slip, and is raking into
men's frailties, especially so as to blaze them abroad to others, separateth a
chief friend, does alienate the minds of those that be dearest unto him, and
makes them his enemies. Yet it is not against the rule of love to tell men
lovingly of their faults; for that helps them to repentance and reformation,
and cures their credits, the blemish thereof being wiped away both from the
eyes of God and men, as Saint James says: If any of you have erred from the
truth, and Iam. 5. 19. 20.
some man has converted him, let him know, that he that has converted the
sinner from going astray out of his way, shall save a soul from death, and
shall hide a multitude of sins. Neither is it unfit, but needful sometimes
to acquaint others with the transgressions of our neighbors, if it belong unto
us to be their Physicians; as Joseph did Jacob with the infamy his brethren
ran into: and they of the house of Cloe did the Apostle with the contentions
of the Corinthians. And in some cases some men's sins must needs be
discovered, for the safety of the whole state, both of Prince and people, of
Church and Commonweal: for it is a sure rul^, that no man's faults are then to
be concealed when any man may take hurt thereby. See Chap. 10. verse. 12.

Verse 10. A reproof enters more into him that has understanding, then an
hundred stripes into a fool.

A Reproofe] A rebuke and admonition only, though short also one word as it
were* enters more into him that has understanding, works more upon his
heart, and takes better effect for reformation of his faults then an hundred
stripes into a fool, then many grievous punishments inflicted upon a wicked
person, which wants the sound and saving knowledge of God.

The opposition is specially between desperate sinners, given over unto a
reprobate sense, and a godly man; notwithstanding that Gods own elect may also
be possessed with such obstinacy til the time of their conversion: and then
their miseries, with the work of Gods holy spirit, will help them to
humiliation and repentance.

Verse. 11. An evil man seeks only rebellion: and a cruel messenger shall
be sent against him.

AN evil man] He that is destitute of Gods holy spirit, and walks after the
flesh, seeks only rebellion, sets himself wholly to transgress the
commandments of God, and delights in nothing so much as in that which is
contrary to his will: and a cruel messenger shall be sent against him, even
as Kings and other Princes send out some forces (if need so require) to
suppress rebellions, and to apprehend and severely punish the Rebels: so the
Lord armeth sometimes men with wrath and power against his enemies, and
sometimes the Angels, and sometimes the unreasonable creatures, and sometimes
the insensible creatures, to be as it were his officers, appointed to plague
them without mercy, and sometimes his own hand immediately does destroy them.

Verse 12. Let a Bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, and not a fool in
his folly.

THe she Bear, whose young ones have been lately taken from her, exceeds all
other beasts in rage and fiercenes. From thence does Hushai take his similitude
concerning David: Thou know (says he to Absalom) thy father and his men, 2.
Sam. 17. 8.
that they be strong men, and are chafed in mind, as a Bear robbed of her
whelps in the field. And from thence does the Lord draw a comparison to
express the grieuousnes of the plagues wherewith he purposed to punish the
sinful Israelites: I will Hos. 13. 8.
meet them as a Bear that is robbed of her whelps, and will break the kall
of their hearts. And the immanitie of this beast may be discerned by that
which befell the wretched boys which scoffed at Elisha and were cursed by him.
It is said, that two Bears came out of the forest, and tare in pieces two and
forty 2. King. 2. 24.
of them. And yet it is not so dangerous to meet with such a Bear, as with a
fool in his folly, as to fall into the hands of a wicked man in the extremity
of his wickedness and fury.

Verse. 13. He that rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his
house.

HE that rewards evil for good] That deals injuriously and unkindly with
him that has declared his love in outward courtesies any way for his benefit
and profit, whether by word or deed; or has sought the salvation of his
soul, by helping him against his sins, [ euill] plagues and punishments from
God, and many times displeasure from men also, [ shall not depart from his
house] from himself especially, and from his wicked posterity.

Verse. 14. The beginning of strife is as he that opens the waters: wherefore
before the contention be meddled with, leave off.

THe beginning of strife] The person which is the beginner of strife, he that
gives the onset thereunto, is as he that opens the waters, that diggeth
down the heads of ponds, or banks of rivers, whereby the waters are held in;
which being by this means let loose, can neither be brought in again, nor
restrained from doing of hurt; but the breach increases, and cannot easily be
stopped: and the stream is violent, and cannot easily be stayed: Wherefore,
before the contention be meddled with, leave off.] If it be possible, let there
be no beginning of strife; but if there be, withstand the proceeding, and give
up before the matter grow to heat, and the suit to charges.

Verse. 15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even
they both are abomination to the Lord.

HE that justifies the wicked] Which either publicly or privately does either
warrant the unlawful actions of sinful men, or cleereth them of the practice
of that whereof they are guilty, or freeth them from the punishments which
their faults do justly require, and he that condemns the just, imputing
those things unto them for faults, which indeed are virtues, or not at all any
offenses, (as they did to the Disciples of Christ, for plucking, rubbing, and
eating the ears of corn on the Sabbath day, which in that case might be done
without sin) or laying those crimes to their charge, whereof they are
innocent and faultlesse: they both are abomination to the Lord, the one as well
as the other is loathed and disliked of him, and neither of them shall escape
the judgments which are to be executed by him.

Verse 16. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to buy wisdom,
seeing he has no heart?

WHerefore is there a price in the hand of a foole] Whitherto serves it that a
foolish wicked man has wealth, time, and other means, to buy wisdom,
procure the knowledge of God, seeing he has no heart, when he has neither
wit, nor will to use them to that holy end? The meaning is, that a sinful man
is nothing the better for all his riches, or whatsoever else he possesses, if
he have no affection or desire to seek and labor for sound understanding.

Verse. 17. A friend loves at all times, and a brother is borne for adversity.

A Friend] He that is true and trusty, [ loves at all times] is constant in
good will, and ready a^waies to perform every duty of kindness: [ and a
brother] a natural and dear friend, and not every natural brother or
kinsman, (for it is said in the next chapter, verse. 24. that a friend is nearer
then a brother: and in the 19. chapter, verse. 7. All the brethren of the poor
do hate him) is borne for aduersity] then begins to show himself as if he
were newborn, when a man being in affliction has most need of him.

Verse. 18. A man void of understanding clappeth the hand, taking upon him
suretiship before his friend.

A Man void of vnderstanding] An indiscreet and foolish person [ clappeth the
hand] gives his word for another man's debt, and confirms the same by giving
his hand or writing, or other means, such as whereby a promise is ratified: [
taking upon him suretiship before his friend] voluntarily, rashly, and
unadvisedly, being ready to offer himself to this burden before he be
entreated thereunto.

Verse. 19. He that loves strife, loves transgression: and he enlarges his
gate that seeks a breach.

HE that loves strife] Which is not upon necessity drawn into concentions,
nor through infirmity sometimes falls thereinto, but takes delight in
brawles and controversies, [ loves transgressions] is surely a wicked man, and
takes pleasure in sin, which is the cause of his unquietness; and likewise
procures many evils to ensue upon debate and variance, which are the effects
of his turbulent humor: [ and he inlargeth his gate that seeks a breach] he
that picketh quarrels, and is desirous to fall out with men with whom before he
was at agreement, sets open a wide door to let in many mischiefs.

Verse. 20. He that has a froward heart, shall not find good: and he that is
perverse in his tongue, shall fall into evil.

HE that has a froward heart] Which is not only missed by ignorance, or
subject to faults by frailty, or overtaken at some times by passions, but is
given to be wilful and stubborn, his soul is in the power of frowardness:
[ shall not find good] shall obtain no favor or blessing from God, but
judgments and curses rather, both for his everlasting state, and for his
present condition, howsoever he may seem to possess many earthly
commodities: [ and he that is perverse in his tongue] which abuses his tongue
to swearing, lying, flattering, railing, filthiness or any other leaud
speaking, [ shall fall into euill] shall feel and find in the end some heavy
stroke of God to light upon him.

Verse. 21. He that begets a fool, begets him to his own sorrow: and the
father of a fool shall have no joy.

HE that begets a foole] The parents of those children which are destitute
of wisdom and grace, [ begets him to his own sorrow] procure to themselves
matter of grief in the very generation of an ungracious seed: but feel the
bitterness of it when they find the frowardness and rebellion, and (it may
be) the misery and evil end of such sinful sons: [ and the father of a
fool shall have no ioy] His meaning is not, that they which have wicked
children are without all comfort: for then the best men, as Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, David, and other excellent persons, should have been altogether
comfortless, having godless sons as well as godly: but they can have no
rejoicing in such a wicked progeny, so long as they continue in their impiety
and folly.

Verse. 22. A joyful heart causes good health: but a sorrowful mind dries up
the bones.

A Joyful heart] Especially that which is refreshed and made merry with godly
joy, [ causes health] is many times as good as physic and wholesome
medicines for the restoring of health to weak bodies, and keeps the healthy
in very good temper, by a certain vital vigor which it conueieth into them: [
but a sorrowful mind] an heavy spirit, which is cast down without just
cause, or beyond just measure, [ dries up the bones] causes the body to be
out of tune, and greatly diseased, by consuming the rad^call moisture, and
fills the bones with aches, and wastes the marrow that is in them.

Verse. 23. A wicked man takes a gift out of the bosom to pervert the ways of
justice.

A Wicked man] Both the party that has the bad cause, and stands in it, and
the unjust Judge, or other corrupt Officers, that will be induced to do
wrong, [ takes a gift] which the one has prepared to give, and the other
knows to be brought, [ out of the bosome] closely and privily, that others
discern it not [ to pervert the ways of iustic^] to overthrow the right, and
stop the course of Law, wherein (as in broad and high ways) the Magistrate
should walk without all partiality.

Verse 24. Wisdom is in the face of him that has understanding: but the eyes
of a fool are in the ends of the earth.

Wisdom is in the face of him that has vnderstanding] The modest, lightsome,
and amiable countenance of a discreet and virtuous person, and especially the
stayednesse of his eyes, declares and publishes him to be wise^ [ but the
eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth] his looks and countenance bewray
and discover the lewdness, folly, and sottishness that is within him, and
namely the inconstancy or wandering of his eyes, rouing hither and thither, as
if he would look from one side of the land to the other.

Verse 25. A foolish son is a vexation to his father, and a bitterness to
her that bare him.

HIs contemptuous and disobedient behavior to his parents, and other leaud
conditions, and (as it often falls out) his unhappy estate does fill the
hearts both of his father and mother with anger, and with great grief and
sorrow.

Verse. 26. It is not good even to condemn the righteous, nor to strike
ingenuous men for equity.

IT is not good] but evil ann hurtful [ to condemn the righteous] to speak
against, or pass sentence upon harmless men with our lips; or so much as to
censure them in our hearts: [ nor to smite ingenuous men] to punish well
disposed and faithful persons, whom the Scripture, in regard of the free
spirit that is in them, whereby they are preserved from the power and bondage
of sin, and in regard of the dignity that grace has advanced them unto,
does call by the name of free men and Princes, as the word here used does
signify, [ for equity] either for shunning that which is unlawful and naught,
or doing that which is commendable and good.

Verse. 27. He that has knowledge, spares his words: and a man of
understanding is of a cool spirit.

28. Even a fool, when he holds his peace, is counted wise: and he that
shuts his lips, prudent.

HE that has knowledge] Which is endued with sound wisdom, [ spares his
words] holds in and keeps back unnecessary and fruitless speeches: he
delights not in speaking much, but in speaking well: [ and a man of
vnderstanding] being both judicious and godly, [ is of a cool spirit] is
moderate, and well stayed in his affections: not easily bursting forth into
anger, but diligently taking heed of the heat of his heart, and thereby is able
to bridle his tongue from multiplying of many and passionate words. [ Even a
fool when he holds his peace, is counted wise] So excellent a thing it is to
keep silence in time and place, that even a silly person and Idiot holding his
tongue, is deemed wise, and taken for a discreet man, because that by foolish
babbling he bewraieth not his ignorance and folly.

CHAPTER. XVIII.
Verse 1. For his desire a man will seek, separating himself, and deal in
every matter.

FOr his desire a man will seeke] Every man will apply his mind and endeavor
to get that which he affects, separating himself, avoiding all the lets and
impediments which are like to cross his desire, and will deal in every
matter, he will attempt all such courses as may serve for the accomplishment
of his purpose.

Verse 2. A fool is not delighted with knowledge, but in discovering his own
heart.

A Foole] A wicked person destitute of grace and wisdom, and yet highly
conceited thereof, has no delight in understanding, is not desirous to be
truly wise, and therefore regards as little the means whereby he may
attain to wisdom, but in discovering his own heart, in showing by word and
deed, that folly and naughtiness which proceeds out of his corrupt and
wretched heart, nothing does satisfy him, but that which is agreeable to his
humors.

Verse. 3. When the wicked comes, then comes contempt, and with the vile
man, reproach.

WHen the wicked commeth] When any man becomes wicked, and waxes sinful,
then comes contempt, dishonor and infamy follow fast after him, his credit
is growing into a consumption, how great and many means soever he has to
uphold it: and with the vile man reproach, he that is vicious, and by ^ll doing
deserves shame shall be sure to have shame and reproach of his companions: if
men dare not speak contemptuously to him, yet they will talk contemptibly of
him, or though they should be afraid to censure him in their word, yet they will
be bold to despise him in their minds.

Verse. 4. The words of an excellent man's mouth, are as deep waters, the
welspring of wisdom, is as a flowing river.

THe words] The wholesome and fruitful speeches, of an excellent man's mouth,
uttered by godly men, and such as fear the Lord: for to them does the holy
Ghost vouchsafe the title of excellency: as when David says in the Psalms,
My Psalm. 16. 3.
goodness extends to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent.
And when Solomon says in this book, The righteous is more excellent then his
neighbor, They are as deep waters, plentiful and copious, such as fail not,
nor can be drawn dry at any time. The welspring of wisdom is like a flowing
river Prou. 12. 26.
their hearts feed their mouths, and thereout, wise, holy, and fruitful words
flow abundantly, as a vehement stream boyleth out of a rich fountain.

Verse. 5. To accept of the person of the wicked is not good, to overthrow the
just man in judgment.

TO accept of the person of the wicked] To free him from punishment, or to show
him favor in a bad matter, for his power, parentage, kindred, friends, wit,
wealth, gifts, acquaintance, or to regard any thing in him, without the cause,
is not good, but dangerous and hurtful, it will draw down the judgments of
God upon those Magistrates* or persons whatsoever, which use such parciality:
and he speaks in this manner, because there is a show of wisdom, and policy,
for gain and safety, by gratifying of them, in respect of the bribes which
they will give to have their turns served, and the mischief which they will
work to those that proceed severely against them, to overthrow the just man in
judgment, this is the effect that commonly ensues upon the favor that is
showed to the wicked, and makes the sin double: in so much as unrighteous
malefactors are spared so much the harmless and innocent are oppressed: that
hand which lifts up him, whom it ought to beat down, will beat down him,
whom it ought to lift up. Either of these were great offenses alone, but very
grievous when they are both conjoined together. It was a foul fault to seek
the release of Barrabas, which had deserved to die; but to have him delivered,
that Christ might be crucified, was intolerable wickedness: and yet it would
have been more notorious and detestable, if Christ had been condemned to die,
by the practice and persuasion of Barrabas, which thing sometimes befalls the
members of Christ, by the instigation of the successors of Barrabas. The
Shechemites adventured to do that which is here condemned, and therefore they
felt the penalty which here is threatened: they would set up Abimelech to be
king, because he was of their blood, and slew the other sons of Gideon for his
sake, and at his request, but in the end they found it not good to accept of
the person of the wicked, and Judge. 9. 45.
to overthrow the just: for they and their city were destroyed, for taking part
with their wicked kinsman, and offering violence to the righteous children of
Gideon.

Verse. 6. A fools lips come with strife, and his mouth calls for stripes.

7. The mouth of a fool is his own destruction, and his lips are a snare for
his soul.

A Fools lips come with strife The wicked talk of a graceles fool, his
railing, slandering, lying, backbiting, challenges, comparings, nipping, and
girding, do as directly tend to quarrels, or brablings, as if they had legs
to go unto contention: which is especially to be understood of them that be
froward, proud, given to scoffing, and others of like nature and disposition:
and his mouth calls for stripes, the words of his mouth do provoke, and even
call for blows, and punishments, by his desire upon others, but by desert and
effect upon himself. The mouth of a fool is his own destruction, his
unadvised and intemperate speeches bring his own overthrow, and his lips are
for his soul, that matter which his lips do maliciously or rashly utter, is
an occasion and means to entrap him, to the hazard of his state, life, and
salvation.

Verse. 8. The words of the talebearer are as strokes, and they go down into
the inward parts of the belly.

THe words of the tale-bearer] The malicious accusations which whisperers do
secretly mutter against men behind their backs, ar^ as strokes, as wounds
that are given by weapons: they do them as much hurt by seeking their infamy,
or trouble, or by alienating the minds, and good opinions of their friends and
neighbors from them, as if they had smitten them with a sword, and they go
down into the inward parts of the belly: they are like unto darts, wherewith
men are dangerously wounded, piercing (as it were) into the very intrailes.

Verse 9. Even he that is negligent in his business, is brother to a waster.

HE that carries himself slothfully in the works of his calling, being
without all care and endeavor to set forwards his affairs, is brother to a
waster, is like to him that prodigally wastes his substance, as if he were his
own brother, and shall as certainly, though it may be not so speedily, come to
poverty as he. For God yoketh them together as fit mates, with the same
reproves, with the same threats, and with the same punishments. Both are
barren of all goodness: both are forward to any evil exercise, and both shall
be pinched with penury and want. And as in sundry respects the one is like to
the other, so it is obseruable that the one takes much contentment in the
company and courses of the other, with much familiarity and frequencie.

Verse 10. The name of the Lord is a strong tower: the righteous runs to it,
and is exalted.

THe name of the Lord] His favor joined with his mighty power, and faithfulness
toward his people, is a strong tower, as a Fort or Castle of defense is, for
the safety of them that are within it: so he preserves his from the violence
of their adversaries, that would destroy or hurt them: the righteous, such as
be just, and godly, and fear him, run unto it, depend upon him, and by
prayer, and confidence, commit themselves to his protection, against Satan,
sin, damnation, and all manner of dangers both of soul and body, and are
exalted, so kept from the rage of troubles, and the reach of their enemies, as
if they were taken up into an high Turret, or set in some place aloft, which no
enemy could either undermine, or assault, or shoot up unto.

Verse 11. The substance of the rich man, is as it were his strong city, and
as a high wall in his imagination.

IN the former sentence was declared wherein the godly seek for safety, and
find it, and that is in the name of the Lord: and in this, wherein the wicked,
especially being wealthy, presume of defense, but fail of it, and that is in
their goods and possessions. For they seem a strong city, which no dangers
can vanquish, and an high wall, that no misery can scale and climb over: but
all is in their own imagination, and nothing in truth: for they are weak and
low, and utterly void of power against any kind of calamities.

Verse 12. Before destruction the heart of a man is haughty, and before glory
goes lowliness.

BEfore destruction] Before some grievous calamity, whereby a man is as it
were broken in pieces (as the word imports) with misery, sorrow, or shame,
the heart is haughty, the mind is puf^ up with selfe-liking, and so grows
secure, and careless, and before glory goes lowliness, when a man is humble
in his own eyes, and thinks basely of himself, and reverently of others,
and submits himself to Gods hand, to bear willingly whatsoever he shall
impose upon him, he is in the way to true honor, if he be not advanced to
^referment, yet he shall be refreshed with comfort, and enriched with graces.

Verse. 13. He that answers a matter before he has heard it, it is a folly
and a shame to him.

TO make answer, or reply to a speech, or at all to speak of any matter,
before a man has thoroughly heard, and fully informed himself therein, is a
rash and indiscreete part, and the evil consequents thereof, cannot but
redound much to his discredit. For absurdities will necessarily ensue upon it,
and can by no means be avoided, whereby ^e declares himself to be failing
of that wisdom, and judgment, which bring praise and estimation. And is it
not most commonly an occasion and means that good causes have bad success, as
being perverted by the ignorance and temeritie of those which take upon them
the defense of that whereof they have not sufficient information, or else are
depraved unjustly by the haste and headiness of such as speak evil of the
things which they know not?

Verse. 14. The spirit of a man will bear out his infirmities, but a wounded
conscience who can bear?

THe spirit of a man] His heart being in a comfortable estate by the sight of
Gods favor, and the testimony of a good conscience, will bear out his
infirmities, makes him to sustain with patience, and some cheerfulnes,
manifold pains and diseases of the body, and all outward crosses whatsoever:
but a wounded spirit who can bear? but when the soul is cast down, and as it
were broken with the apprehension of Gods indignation, none can endure the
horror and anguish thereof, nor any thing raise it up, and give comfort to it,
but God alone.

Verse 15. The heart of the prudent possesses knowledge, and the ear of the
wise will seek after understanding.

THe heart of the prudent possesses knowledge,] He that is acquainted with the
state of his own soul, and discerns how precious and fruitful, and
needful understanding is, will not content himself to have wisdom in his
ears, or head, or lips, but lays it up in his heart, as his chief
treasure, and the ear of the wise seeks after understanding: he labors to
increase knowledge and grace, adding daily thereunto, by hearkening as much as
he may, to all sound and wholesome instructions.

Verse. 16. The gift of a man inlargeth him, and leads him before great men.

THe gift of a man] Not the good qualities that are in him, and the graces
which he has received, but the present that he brings, and the reward that
he bestows, inlargeth him, and leads him before great men, makes room for
him, and procures him access to the presence of them that are in high places,
and of great authority, from whom also he gets countenance and favor,
whether his suit be equal, or unlawful.

Verse 17. He that is first in his own cause is just: then comes his
neighbor and makes inquiry of him.

HE that is first in his own cause] He that is in a controversy, speaks
first, before the Magistrate, arbitrator, or any other to whom it belongs to
hear the matter, is just, so pleads for himself, and sets such colors
upon his cause, that he seems to be very righteous: if he be plaintiff,
that his informations be equal, and weighty; if defendant, that his apology
is good, and he innocent. Yet is not this to be understood of every one that
has the first place of speech: for righteous men do many times begin the
declaration of the the cause, or defense of themselves, and be found upright
and faithful both in the entrance and end of the strife: but it is meant of
false fellows, that respect not what they may warrantably auerre with truth,
but what they can audaciously affirm with impudency. Then comes his
neighbor, and makes inquiry of him* he that in the second place, or
afterward is to make answer unto him, or reply upon him, confuteth his
allegations, detecteth his falsehood, and conuinceth him, of indirect and
naughty dealing.

Verse. 18. The lot causes contentions to cease, and makes a partition amongst
the mighty.

HE declares the true and right use of a lot, by telling what is done, for
that which ought to be done: namely, in difficult and doubtful causes, which
cannot otherwise be well determined, and where in division men cannot agree
between themselves what part every one should have, that then they be satisfied
with that which the Lord by lot does after a sort, award unto them. And he
makes special mention of the mighty, that it serves to compound their
controversies, because that when they contend, by reason of their power, and
strength, and stout stomachs, they greatly damnify one another.

Verse. 19. A brother offended, is harder to win then a strong city: and
their contentions are like the bar of a palace.

A Brother] A natural brother, a near kinsma^, a kind friend, offended,
alienated by wrongs received, or imagined to ^e done unto him, from him whom
he so much affected before, is harder to win then a strong city, will with
more difficulty be brought to firm and unfeigned reconciliation, then a city
well defenced, can be vanquished and taken. And their contentions, their
strife, and suites, are like the bar of a Palace, strong, and vehement, and
must with no less ado be be pacified, whiles their power serves them to
pursue one another, then the mighty iron bars, whereby the gates of a Castle,
Fort, or great building, are shut in, and kept safe, may be broken, or cut in
sunder. But this is to be understood of unregenerate and fleshly men, or of
Gods servants so far as they be carnal, and not otherwise: for it is a
commendation that is given to the godly, by Saint James, that their wisdom
which Iam. 3. 17.
they receive from above, makes them peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated.

Verse. 20. With the fruit of a man's own mouth shall his belly be satisfied:
and with the increase of his lips shall he be filled.

WIth the fruit of a man's mouth] With those words which the mouth of a man
utters, be they good or bad, as the tree yee^deth her fruit, be it sweet or
sower, shall his bell^e be satisfied, he shall be as it were fed with joy, or
sorrow, and with the increase of his lips, according to those speeches which
the lips use most to deliver, wholesome, or hurtful* as the ground sends
forth her crop of corn or weeds, shall he be filled, he shall either have
great welfare, or great woe, many blessings, or many judgments.

Verse. 21. Death and life are in the power of the tongue, as every one
delights to use it, he shall eat the fruit thereof.

THis verse in part contains an explication of the former, showing what is
that satisfying, and filling, which is there mentioned, that it extends to
all misery, even to the very death of the wicked, which abuse their tongues to
evil, and to all happiness even to life it self, and that everlasting (as is
also meant of the contrary) of the godly, which use their tongues aright, both
which are said to be in the power thereof: that is, the perverting, or well
ordering of the same, is effectual, either for destruction or salvation: and
yet this force is not in the pronouncing of words, but in the affection from
which they constantly proceed, and as every one delights to use it* so he
shall eat thereof. Hypocrites sometimes do make fair shows, but their hearts
and lips accord not together, and therefore their smooth speeches tend not to
life: and godly men somtime^ forget themselves, but they take not pleasure in
evil speaking, and therefore they shall not be destroyed, though they may be
corrected.

Verse. 22. He that finds a good wife, finds a good thing, and obtains
favor of the Lord.

HE that finds a good wife] Which being himself a good man, has, and sees,
and enjoys the benefit of a good, wise, and faithful wife, finds a good
thing, which shall be for his help and comfort; and obtains favor of the
Lord, receives a testimony of his love in bestowing so great a blessing upon
him: and so does a godly woman, that finds a good and gracious husband.

Verse. 23. The poor speaks with supplications: but the rich answers
roughly.

THe poore] He that is in misery, in peril, in fear, or subjection, speaks
with supplications, submissely, and lowly, to the wealthy and mighty,
beseeching him in humble manner, and reverent terms, especially when he has
any suite unto them. But the rich answers roughly: he that has abundance of
goods, or is in authority, not only rejects the poor petitioner
contemptuously, with a churl^sh denial, but otherwise also is proud and
insolent in his speeches. Commonly thus it is, but yet not always: for some of
the lowest sort speak disdainfully, and some great personages behave
themselves courteously.

Verse. 24. A man that has friends, ought to show himself friendly, for a
friend is nearer then a brother.

A Man that has friends] Which is beloved of, and receives favors and
benefits from others, ought to show himself friendly, to entertain, hold, and
requite their friendship by all good duties. He is not only to take heed lest
by any strangeness, and offering of discourtesies, he lose their likings, but
to endeavor by all signs and pledges of good will, to knit their hearts faster
and faster unto him. For a friend, an unfeigned wel-willer, which bears
Christian affection unto him whom he loves, is nearer then a brother, is more
faithful and constant in ministering help and comfort, then an ordinary
kinsman, or mere natural brother.

CHAPTER. XIX.
Verse. 1. Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, then he that
peruerteth his ways, and is a fool.

BEtter is the poore] More happy and comfortable is the estate of him that is
of little wealth, and of small possessions, and greater respect is to be had of
him, that walks in his uprightness, endeavors constantly to be just and
godly, in words and works, then he that abuses his lips, then the rich that
is given to speak wickedly, and is a fool, void of grace, and godly
wisdom, and full of vice and lewdness. Thus stands the opposition: Better
is the poor that uses his tongue aright, and walks uprightly, and so is
wise, then the rich that abuses his tongue, and walks corruptly, and so is a
fool.

Verse. 2. Both the mind without knowledge is not good, and he that has^eneth
with his feet sins.

TWo vices are here matched together, and reproved together, as dangerous and
hurtful, whereof the one is cause of the other, which are ignorance, and
rashness. Concerning the former, it is said, that without knowledge, where the
sound knowledge of Gods holy will is contemned, or neglected, the mind is not
good, the man is not good. For a part is put for the whole: whatsoever shows
he makes of faithfulness within, all is but deceivable; his soul (as the
original Text has it) is destitute of goodness, and then, what is there in
hi^, or proceeds from him, that may be called good? and he that hasteneth
with his feet, sins.

The latter is described by a similitude, from him that should headily run on
blind-folded, and hood-wincked, in a perilous way, that he neither knows, nor
ever saw: as such a one is in danger to dash against stumbling blocks, or to
fall into quicksands, quagmires, mine-pits, brooks or ditches: so he that
unadvisedly, and without deliberation, attempteth and executes matters of
moment and importance, cannot avoid errors, and inconveniences, yea sins
and transgressions.

Verse. 3. The foolishness of a man overthrows his way, and his heart
fretteth against the Lord.

THe foolishness of a man] The sinfulness and ungodly behavior of the
wicked, overthrows his way, draws crosses and judgments upon him, and
causes him to have ill success, and his heart fretteth against the Lord:
though his tongue do not openly blaspheme, yet his heart does secretly murmr
against God, as if he were unjustly the cause of his calamities. Neither does
he this directly always, and imbittereth himself against the person of the
Lord, but scorneth at his hand, and accuses his proceedings, under the name of
chance, and il luck, and bad fortune, and many times religion is exclaimed
upon, and profession quarrelled at, especially if religious professors dislike
of his irreligious profaneness, do thrive and prosper, when he is plagued and
punished.

Verse. 4. Riches gather many friends, but the poor is separated from his
neighbor.

RIches gather many friends] Wealth increased, increases the number and heap
of such as pretend good will, and draws daily new friends. The persons of men
do not this, nor their graces, but their riches. They make many fetches, they
have many gestures, they use many words, and all this while their hearts are
fixed on the goods, as flies seek where honey is, and mice and rats will haunt
an house where food is to be gotten. So that their love is to the money, or
other substance, though they make semblance of good affection to the man. But
the poor is separated from his neighbor, he that is needy or afflicted, or
in disgrace, is forsaken of all his carnal friends and companions, they either
turn from him as a stranger, or against him as an enemy.

Verse. 5. A false witness shall not be unpunished, and a forger of lies shall
not escape.

A False witnesse] Either he that does wittingly misinforme the Magistrate, or
any other governor, or he that by his unjust testimony goes about to
confirm that which another has untruly suggested, shall not be unpunished,
but plagued either sooner or late, with some temporary penalty of shame and
misery in this world, or with eternal perdition of soul and body in the
world to come. And a forger of lies, which uses his tongue to falsehood, how
artificially, and with what shows and colors soever, though in private, shall
not escape, shall not be always free from punishment, though by flattering of
himself, he thinks the sin not dangerous: and though by means of his wit,
and present prosperity, he seems able to preserve himself in safety.

Verse. 6. Many sue to the face of the Prince, and every man is friend to him
that gives gifts.

MAny sue to the face of the Prince] They seek the favor and countenance of
them that be in authority, especially if they be also wealthy, and bountiful.
He speaks not here in the commendation of them, as being loyal in love, for
conscience, but for the reprehension of them, as being submisse in show, for
commodity. And every man is friend to him that gives gifts. He declares in
this latter clause, the cause of that which he had affirmed in the former, why
so many sue to the face of the Prince, because Princes have most to bestow, and
every man, every carnal man for the most part is friend, would be thought a
friend to him that gives gifts, that he might be used as a friend, and have
gifts bestowed upon him.

Verse. 7. All the brethren of the poor do hate him: how much more will his
friends depart far from him? Though he be instant in words, yet they will not.

ALL the brethren] The whole kindred, even they which are united with the
nearest bonds of nature; being yet carnal and unnatural, of the poor, of him
that is decayed in his estate, or in disgrace with superiors, though never so
unworthily, do hate him, they loathe and despise him. How much more will his
friends depart from him? Not they which were faithfully affected to him at any
time, and bare him good will in truth, ( for a friend loves at all times, and
a friend is nearer Prou. 17. 17. and 18. 24.
then a brother,) bu^ such his companions as dissembled with him, making
profession and show of love in his prosperity for their own advantage, these
in his adversity* go far from him, cast him off, and withdraw themselves from
him, as being ashamed of his company, and unwilling to take any notice of him,
much more to deal in his cause, or to supply his wants. Though he be instant
in words, albeit he heartily entreat, and earnestly importune them for
comfort, relief and favor, yet they will not, they will not hear any request
or complaint that he makes, they will not befriend them in any matter of
weight, wherein they may do him good.

Verse. 8. He that possesses his heart, loves his own soul: he keeps
understanding, to find that which is good.

HE that possesse^h his heart] Who has his mind rightly informed with
knowledge and judgment, and orderly moderateth his desires and affections,
loves his own soul, has a due care of himself, and uses direct means for
his salvation, safety, comfort, and welfare. For to love ones soul, in this
place, is otherwise taken then in the Gospel by S. John, chap. 12. 25. where
it is said, that he which loves his soul shall lose it, and he that hates his
soul in this world shall keep it unto eternal life. To love the soul, that
is, to be desirous of retaining this natural life, as rather to deny the
truth of God, and forsake the Gospel of Christ, then to make profession
thereof, and yield sincere obedience to it, with hazard and peril: and he
shall lose his soul, that is, forfeit his salvation and happiness, as he that
hates his soul, which chooses to forgo life, rather then the services of God,
and a good conscience, shall keep it unto eternal life, be saved and
glorified for ever. He keeps understanding, not only hears good
instructions, but seriously attends to them, pondereth of them in his
meditations, lays them up in his memory, observes them diligently in the
course of his life, and retains them constantly till the time of his death,
to find that which is good, that is, the end which he proposes to himself,
and this is the success which he obtains, that Gods favor shall be
confirmed unto him, both by the blessings of this present life, and by a
blessed estate, in that which is to come hereafter.

Verse. 9. A false witness shall not be unpunished: and he that speaks lies
shall perish.

THis is the same both in words and sense with the 5. verse. of this chapter,
saving that there was said, the liar shall not escape, and here he shall
perish: so that it is not only a repetition, but a brief exposition of that,
concluding, that as he shall be surely punished, so he shall be sorely plagued,
even with no lighter strokes, then destruction it self, which no gain or
advantage can be able to counteruaile.

Verse. 10. Pleasure is not comely for a fool: much less for a servant to have
rule over Princes.

PLeasure] The affections of joy and delight, the means whereby they are
wrought, and the objects whereon they are settled, as abundance of wealth,
delicious fare, gorgeous apparel, sumptuous houses, costly furniture, pleasant
pastimes, or whatsoever is of like nature, is not comely for a fool, is not
fit for him that is destitute of grace, and good understanding to have, as
neither making for his honor, nor profit indeed, though highly promoting both
in appearance. He will pervert them, and annoy other men by them, and they
will endanger him, and bring much harm and mischief to him. Much less for a
servant to rule over Princes. By servant, he means such manner of persons as
he called fools in the fo^^er clause; namely, men inthralled to their lusts,
and unlawful desires: and by Princes, are understood the godly, who are
dignified with a spiritual advancement: so that he proceeds in extenuating
the condition of sinful men, and shows their unworthiness by way of
gradation, that all sorts of desirable things are too good for them, and much
more authority and power over others, but most of all superiority, with
jurisdiction over the righteous.

Verse. 11. The understanding of a man, makes him slow to wrath, and it is his
glory to pass by an offense.

THe understanding of a man] The heavenly wisdom of God, which is in the
mind of a regenerate person, according to the measure thereof, withholdeth him
from rash and unadvised anger, but not from all anger: for then it should
deprive him of some virtue, and disable him from the performance of many
duties. As the distempered passions of wrath be works of the flesh, and
carefully to be avoided so are the well governed affections of anger fruits of
the spirit, and seasonably to be exercised. He that is ouercarried with rage
and choler, does want those lovely graces of meekenes, and patience: and he
that is never stirred to any displeasure, is possessed with stupidity, and
destitute of zeal, and Christian feeling. Now to shun these vicious
extremes on both sides, and observe the laudable mediocritie between them,
these rules may direct us. First that all our anger be only for sin, and so
we shall best put in practice the Apostles precept, to be angry and Ephesians. 4.
26.
sin not. Then shall we not be testie with them that be innocent, because
we are incensed by them that are faulty: then shall we never like fumish
Balaam fall out with beasts, and unreasonable creatures, much less be
imbittered against things that are senseless. Secondly, that our anger be
measurablie proportioned to the measure of the offense, greatest indignation
must be conceived against the greatest transgressions, though they bring not
to us so great annoyances: and smaller faults should less d^please us, though
in private respects they seem to be more for our damage: for every part ought
rather to be tenderly affected at Gods dishonor, then his own detriment.
Thirdly, that it be not ouerlong continued, and excessive in time, but bounded
within the limits of a day at the furthest: the Lord would not have wrath
protracted til night, nor the Sun to go down upon it. Fourthly, that the
crimes of our familiars, benefactors, kinsfolk, and dearest friends, do make
us more angry then theirs that are not so nearly united to us: that we take
to heart the sin of our child, more then of a brother: and of a yoke fellow,
more then of a child: and our own, more then a yoke fellow, child, brother,
or of any, or all others.

Fifthly, that the ire and wrath against the sins of our neighbors, draw not
our selves into any sinful behavior against God, as to be fierce and violent
in reuengement, to rail to re^ile, to vomit out blasphemies, or imprecations,
etc.

Lastly, that it hinder us not from, but further us to the performance of all
good services, especially in the behalf of the parties delinquent, as to
admonish them, pray for them, and give them direction for reformation of their
transgressions. And it is his glory, it wins him honor and praise, and
that worthily, to pass by an offense, to wink at smaller infirmities, and to
remit greater wrongs, yet not so, as to be silent at Gods dishonor, with the
peril of the soul of the sinner, or at the grieuances which are offered to
himself from them: only the forbearance of revenge, and not of just reproof,
or of due correction, is commended.

Thus thou see both the root, and the fruit, the cause and effect of
lenity and mildnes declared in this sentence.

Verse. 12. The wrath of the King, is like the roaring of a Lion: but his favor
is as the dew upon the grass.

THe wrath of the King] The indignation of a Prince, or mighty Potentate,
having authority and power, incensed (not against the innocent and righteous,
but such as were Michaiah, or Elijah, whom Achab stormed at, but killed not, or
though he had killed them, yet he could not have hurt the^, but himself
rather, as Ioab did, by slaying of Zachary, and sending him the sooner to
heaven) but against malefactors, rebels, traitors, contemptuous persons, and
transgressors of his wholesome laws, or any whom God shall put into the
Magistrates hand, as men of death, for violating his commandments, is like the
roaring of a Lion, which has more courage and strength, both to rore more
hideously, and to tear more cruelly: For it is not understood of them that be
taken, and shut up like captives in holes, whom we may hear, and look upon
through grates, and stand near too without peril, but of such as meet with a
prey, either of man or beasts, in the forests, or open fields, or any where in
their own walks. But his favor, his love, and countenance, especially
toward worthy men, is like the dew upon the grass, very comfortable or
profitable to them, rejoicing their hearts, advancing their states, preserving,
and protecting them from wrongs, as the dew, or mild shewres, do refresh the
fields, cause grass to grow, and preserve the same, that the scorching heat
of the Sun dry it not up, and cause it to wither. When God shall put into
the Magistrates hand, as men of death for violating his commandments in
presumptuous manner, is like the roaring of a Lion, fearful, terrible, and as
it were threatening present death: The Hebrew word signifies a young Lion which
Naham cacphir.
has greater courage, and strength, both to rore more hideously, and to tear
more cruelly, etc.

Verse. 13. A foolish son is the calamity of his father, and the contentions
of a wife, are like a continual dropping.

TWo of the greatest afflictions which befall the governors in their families,
are declared in this sentence. The former is a foolish son, a sinful,
unhappy child, after what sort soever his lewdness breaks out, whether by
contumacie, and stubbornnes, when he shall contemn his parents, and despise
their precepts; or by riot, and unthriftiness, when he shall be, as it were a
gulf to swallow up all his fathers labors, and those things which he has
been so careful to provide; or by any other means shall bring shame and
destruction upon himself, who is the calamity of his father, the worker of
his woe, and cause of sorrow for the loosenes of his life, and at the sight, or
foresight (by all probability and likelihood) of the misery of his death. The
other is a contentious wife* whose brawlings offend the ears, and vex the
heart, and sometimes demolish the state of her husband, and therefore are
compared to a continual dropp^ng: they are as irksome, and hurtful, as for
rain to pierce through every part of the roof, into all rooms of the house,
falling on the plancks, and walls, and stuff, and heads of them that are doing
their work, or sitting at their meat, or lying in their beds, which must
needs be both tedious, and noisome, to ruinate the building, and rot the
goods, and molest the inhabitants.

Verse. 14. House and substance are the inheritance of the fathers: but a
prudent wife is from the Lord.

IN the former sentence, by a lively similitude, he showed how noisome a bad
wife is, and in this by another argument, he makes it appear what a great
benefit a good wife is. He proves it from the efficient, that the Lord does
bestow her, and that in manner differing from his ordinary and common giftures.
Houses, and lands are his gifts also, and so are riches, and all sorts of
commodities, but they are ordinarily, commonly, and mediately received from
ancestors, as fathers, grandfathers, and great grandfathers, to whom the Lord
has given power to get, and keep goods, and a will to leave them from hand to
hand to their posterity. But a prudent wife, a godly, wise, and virtuous wife,
and in like manner, a religious, discreet, and gracious husband, is from the
Lord, made such a one by his grace, and joined to the yoak-fellow.

Verse. 15. Slothfulness causes heavy sleep to fall, and a deceitful person
shall be affamished.

THe dangerous effects of sluggishnesse are here set down, and described,
whereof some are sins, and heedfully to be shunned, and others are
punishments thereof, and greatly to be feared.

The first is, immoderate and excessive sleeping, whereby men's callings and
labors are neglected, their time lost, and their wits and senses dulled: and
this grows partly from the abundance of humors, by which the head is
oppressed, and partly from the want of cheerfulness, whereby the heart should
be refreshed: and therefore observe, that all sluggards are lumpish, and like
dead men, saving when they be about the practice or project of some thing
unlawful.

This drowsinesse of theirs, and disposition to sleep, they are charged with,
and challenged for, in chap. 6. How long will thou sleep, O sluggard, when will thou arise out of thy sleep? etc. Prou. 6. 9.


The second is deceitfulness, being inferred in the latter clause, as that
which ensues both upon slothfulness and sleepiness. For they that lose their
time, can neither get wealth well, nor keep that which others have formerly
gathered by their travel. Then must they needs fall into indigency and want,
and being not able to sustain the violence thereof, (for none are so impatient
of poverty, as those who retchlesly throw themselves into it) they will live by
their wits, and shift for themselves, by falsehood and indirect courses.

The third, which is the punishment of all the former, is famine, and miserable
necessity, which their fraud, and deceitfulness does double upon them, and not
prevent, or diminish. Or if it fall out that some by wrongful dealing are
helped in their state for a time, yet it turns to their greater hurt, and
deeper decay in time following: or if they thrive even to their lives end, by
their unjust and fraudulent practices, yet they shall rue it in the worlds end,
for the miseries and plagues that Iam. 5. 1.
will come upon them, as Saint James does testify.

The sense therefore of the sentence is this: Sothfulnesse causes men to be
sleepie and deceitful, and he that is deceitful, sleepie, or slothful,
shall be affamished.

Verse. 16. He that keeps the commandment, keeps his soul: but he that
despises his ways, shall die.

HE that keeps the commandement] Which in the integrity, and uprightness of
his heart observes the law of the Lord, to walk in the same, although he
cannot fulfill it, breaking it as little as he can, though he cannot obey it
so fully as he would, and is humbled for his faults, when he sees his sins
and transgressions, keeps his soul himself, a part being put for the whole,
he preserves the life both of his soul and body, from an untimely death, and
eternal destruction, not by the merit of his obedience, but by the mercy of
God, that rewards him for it: But he that despises his ways, makes no
account how, or after what sort he does live* ^or has care to be directed by
the prescript rule of the hol^ ^^ord of God, shall die, shall certainly perish,
and be destroyed for ever, at the last, though peradventure he be spared for a
season.

Thus stands the opposition: He that keeps the commandment, and regards
his ways shall live: but he that breaks the commandment, and despises his
ways, shall die.

Verse 17. He that gives freely to the poor, lends unto the Lord, and the
Lord will repay him his reward.

HE that gives freely] Which out of his compassion and mercy, without any
carnal, or corrupt respect of his own advantage, ministers food, apparel,
harbor, or any kind of help and comfort, by word, or deed, to the poor, to
them that are in affliction, of what sort so^^^r, especially if they be Gods
faithful servants, or seem to be such, lends to the Lord, not that he is
beholden to us, o^ receives any benefit at our hands: for what can we give
that he lent not to us, nor is his own, nor in his power, to take, and
dispose of, to whom he will without our leave? but he is pleased so to accept
of our beneficence to our brethren, as if himself were thereby gtatified, and
had a good turn done to him: for men are many times pleasured by that which is
lent them in their need, and are glad to buy the use thereof with loan, and
therefore Psalm. 112. 5.
it is noted as a work of mercy from a good man, not only that he bestows
gifts, but also that he lends freely. So then God vouchsafes to repute that
which is paid unto him, though imperfectly too, and scarce by the halues, to
be as it were a courtesy and kindness from us, as if something of ours were
delivered to him. And the Lord will repay him his reward, he will as faithfully
recompense the merciful man, as if he were bound thereto, and as an honest
borrower will be careful to pay that which he owes. For of his grace he
makes himself a debtor, to them which are more in his debt, then their body
and soul, and all that they have is worth.

Verse 18. Correct thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare,
which is to kill him.

COrrect thy son while there is hope,] chastise thy children of either sex,
both by tongue and hand, with rebukes and stripes, being yet young and tender,
and not grown stubstorne, stiffenecked, incorrigible, and past hope of
amendment, before they are accustomed to evil ways, or have learned to
despise the admonitions, menacings, rods, and scourges of parents. And let not
thy soul spare: beware that thy fond affection withhold thee not from doing
this necessary duty, which is, to kill him, lest thy too great indulgencie to
them, and cockering of them, turn to their destruction.

Verse 19. Being in great wrath, remit the punishment: but if thou let him
escape, yet apply chastisement again.

IN the former sentence was declared the necessity of correction, for the
prevention of destruction, or danger of children, and what is the fittest
season to begin it, even in their childhood. Now in this he admonishes every
man to take heed that he mar it not, or hinder the good effect thereof by his
own destemper. And therefore it is said, Being in great wrath, when thou art
in an angry mood, and burnest with fury, and hot displeasure, remit the
punishment, let pass for that time the punishment of the party offending. But
if thou let him escape, yet apply chastisement again. Nevertheless, though
for that time, and perhaps for that fault thou let him go free, yet leave him
not so to himself, nor suffer him to go on still unpunished, but when thou
art more calm, and as occasion shall be offered, take him in hand, and
chastise him.

Verse 20. Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou may be wise at
the latter end.

Having in the premises given precepts to parents and governors, he now
conuerteth his speech to children, and such as in the Scripture come under the
name of children, that is to say, all Gods people, to whom he does offer
himself as a father, being ready to teach and direct them. And the first
lesson that he gives unto them is, that they should hear counsel, lend an
ear, and hearken diligently with attention, to wise and wholesome doctrines
and admonitions: the second, that they receive instruction, or correction, for
the word signifies both: that is, to submit themselves to, and make use of,
and profit by, reproves, threatenings, or chastisements. And the reason of this
exhortation, is both from the motive that should persuade them thereunto, and
the end that they should propose ^o themselves therein, and the happy success
which they should find thereby, that they may be wise in their latter end,
that their wisdom may be manifested, and they reap the fruit thereof in
their old age, or whenever they are ready to depart out of the world, not
but that he would have men to be wise also before, but to note, that all that
time their heavenly wisdom will stand them in best steed.

Verse. 21. Many devices are in the heart of man: but the counsel of the Lord
that shall stand.

MAny devices are in the heart of man.] Sundry thoughts are in their minds, of
hopes, and doubts, and desires, and so they toss matters too and fro in their
imaginations, how they may avoid that which they fear, and accomplish that
which they desire, and yet feldome bring them to any effect, or when they do,
it is not by force of their plotting or forecast. But the counsel of the Lord
it shall stand; his will shall take place, whatsoever he has determined shall
succeed, whether men's likings be to it, or against it.

Verse. 22. The desire of a man is his goodness: and a poor man is better then a
lier.

THe desire of a man] That which every man ought most to wish and labor for in
himself, and to esteem and commend in others, is his goodness, his piety and
religion toward God, his me^^^e, truth, and upright dealing toward men, and
not a great (...)te, and earthly pomp, and he that in this manner do^^ g^od*
^n^ is fa^^hfull and true, though he be poor, not having store and abundance
of outward poss^ssions, is better, in happier case, and more regarded of God,
and good men, then a liar, then an impious, unprofitable, and false man, though
he be never so wealthy.

Verse 23. The fear of the Lord leads to life, and he that is endued there
with, shall remain satisfied, and shall not be visited with evil.

THe fear of the Lord] Sound piety and religion, a renerence of his Majesty,
joined with an vnfai^ed love thereof, leads to life, is by Gods free
goodness, according to his promise through Jesus Christ, rewarded with a
blessed and a comfortable life in this world, and a glorious and eternal life
in the world to come, and he that is endued therewith shall remain satisfied:
the man in whom this holy fear dwells* shall neither ^^ue (...)serable want,
nor in fear or danger thereof, but shall lodge satisfied, as the word
signifies, shall constantly Sabea^g (...) lin.
have competent provision, in the night he shall not care for the day
following, nor this day be doubtful how he shall do to morrow, but he by
whose providence he is s^stained at one time, will not fail to minister
whatsoever is needful at all times. And shall not be visited with evil, shall
not be plagued with hurtful calamities, and yet sometimes tried with sharp
adversities: and so are the two former promises touching life, and plenty, to
be understood, that they are secured only from a cursed death, or penury,
which are punishments of sin, and signs of Gods displeasure.

Verse. 24. The slothful hides his hand in his bosom, and will not put it to
his mouth again.

Solomon has often told us the nature and quality of the slothful, and the
misery and want, which of force they must endure, by means of their
sluggishnes, notwithstanding because the number of them does daily increase,
and this hurtful vice grows stronger, and more violent in them, he
contenteth not himself with so many aduertisements, which he has already
given us, but to the end that we may take more heed of it, or else be more
inexcusable, and judged worthy of greater penury: he repeateth here again
the mischief that it works in him over whom it gets dominion, describing
the same by an hyperbolicall, or excessive kind of speaking, saying, that he
hides his hand in his bosom, not setting it to work, but withholding it from
labor, and will not put it to his mouth again: to avoid the cold, and for
love of ease, he holds it in a warm place, and though the distance be but
small between the bosom and the mouth, yet he is unwilling to bring it from
the one to the other, so much as to feed himself: for though he do it,
(compelled thereunto by necessity) yet he does it with difficulty and grief,
as it is said in an Prou. 26. 15.
other chapter.

Not that he sets so little by his meat; for none are so hungry after
honey, as the idle Drones: but it is a torment unto them to take any pains for
it: their desire is, that others should travel for them, and put their meat
into their mouths also, if shame would permit it.

So then, the hands of lazy persons are as it were bound with the love of
ease, which they prefer before matters of profit and necessity; especially
concerning the soul, and the spiritual food thereof, even the word of God;
whereby only it is to be sustained.

Verse. 25. Smite a scorner, that the foolish may beware: and reprove the
prudent, and he will understand knowledge.

SMite] Either put to death, if thou be a Magistrate of that authority, and
the cause so require, or otherwise punish according to thy place, the scorner,
a refractarie person, him that contemns and derideth all admonitions and
instructions, one, of whom there is no hope of amendment: for a scorner is in
the highest degree of transgression, that the foolish, Psalm. 11.
such as through simplicity and ignorance are carried forwards to evil, may
beware, may be better brought to a sight of their faults, and the danger
thereof, and penitently reform their ways.

And reprove the prudent, give an easy rebuke to him that has wisdom, and
he will understand knowledge, he shall not need to be smitten, as the scorner,
nor be brought to see others punished, as the foolish, but an admonition or
reproof will sufficiently work upon him, both for information and reformation.

Verse 26. A leaud and shameful child spoileth his father, and chaseth away
his mother.

A Leaud and shameful child] One that is graceless, and given to riot, and
other sinful ways, whereby his parents and friends are made ashamed, spoileth
his father, does him as much harm, as if he brake into his house, and robbed
him, or came as an open enemy to make spoil of all that he has: and many
spare not their parents state indeed, but either filch away their goods, and
set them in debt and arreareages, by their wastfulnesse, and chaseth away his
mother, so alienateth her affection from him, by his rude and rebellious
behavior, that she flies as it were his presence, and is glad when she is
out of his sight: and sometime grows to that unnatural inhumanitie, and more
then barbarous and savage outrage, that he drives her out of his presence by
railing and bitter speeches, yea expels her out of the house, and turns
her out of doors, when once he comes to his inheritance.

Verse. 27. Leave off, my son, to hear any more the instruction that causes
thee to err from the words of knowledge.

Leave off, my sonne] Though in former times when thou wast the disciple of
deceivers, and the child of wrath, thy ear was open, and ready to hear such
lessons as poisoned thy heart, yet now that thou art become the scholar of me
Wisdom, and begotten to be my child, as being Gods child, now desist from
that hurtful and pernicious course, cease to hear any more the instruction,
that pestilent and infectious counsel and doctrine, which is delivered for
instruction, and carries a show of truth and wisdom, and yet will cause thee
to err from the words of knowledge, either perverting thy mind with erroneous
opinions, or corrupting thy heart with sinful affections, or deprauing thy
ways with leaud and wicked behavior, so that either thou shall not understand
the words of knowledge, the heavenly doctrines of Gods holy word, whereby sound
knowledge is obtained, or else will be enticed to transgress them.

Verse. 28. A wicked witness mocketh at judgment, and the mouth of the ungodly
swalloweth up iniquity.

A Wicked witnesse] A witness of Belial, as it is in the Hebrew text, one that
the devil himself, and his own wicked disposition subborneth to perjury and
deal corruptly, mocketh at judgment, not only gives in false evidence, but
does the same of set purpose, maliciously, and without any fear, making no more
account either of right causes, or of Magistrates that are placed to execute
justice, or of God himself that will punish false witnesses, then of a jest,
or things to be laughed at. And the mouth of the ungodly will swallow up
iniquity. This he alleges as a reason of that his untruth and falsehood in
witness bearing, because he is desperately sinful and bad in all his
behauiou^. His mouth, himself vile wretch, yet the mouth is mentioned because
of the allegory, swalloweth up iniquity, commits all villainies, with as
great delight and pleasure, as drunkards do strong drink, or gluttons
delicious meats.

Verse. 29. But judgments are prepared for these scorners, and stripes for the
back of fools.

THe behavior of these contemptuous persons was declared in the former
sentence, and their recompense follows in this: for all their cunning and
scorning speeches, judgments, punishments, many, and of diverse sorts: for the
plural number notes the multitude and variety of them: are prepared for
scorners, not only appointed, but ready to be executed upon them, either by
the Magistrate, or else by the Lord himself in this life, or in that which is
to come, or in both. And stripes for the back of fools, sharp and severe
plagues, resembled by the scourging of bondmen, are in a readiness both for
the souls and bodies of these malicious and incorrigible fools, which shall
not lightly be chastened, but grievously, and extremely tormented, to their
destruction. For the preparation does argue some exquisite torture, as fire
prepared Mat. 25. 41. Esai. 30. 33.
for the devil and his angels: and Tophet prepared of old for that cursed King
of Assure, etc.

CHAPTER. XX.
Verse. 1. Wine is a mocker, and strong drink is raging, and whosoever is
deceived thereby, shall not be wise.

WIne] Needlessly, or immoderately taken, is a mocker, makes him a mocker which
intemperately abuses it: and strong drink is raging, causes them that are
ouer-gone therewith, to brawle, contend, break forth into outrage, and go
together by the ears. And whosoever is deceived by it, enticed by the color,
or taste of it, to exceed in it, by drinking too often, or too much, shall not
be wise, either with divine wisdom, or humane, but show himself a fool,
and reap the fruit of his folly.

Verse. 2. The fear of the King is like the roaring of a Lion: he that
provoke him to anger, sins against his own soul.

THe fear of the King] His wrath, which strikes a terror into their hearts,
with whom he shows himself offended, is like the roaring of a Lion, very
fearful and dangerous: he that provoke him to anger, which incurreth his
indignation by disobedience, or any ill demeanor, sins against his own
soul, not only defiles his soul with the transgression of Gods holy Law,
but puts his life in great peril, and exposes the same to the sentence of
death.

Verse. 3. It is an honor for a man to cease from strife: but every fool will
be meddling.

IT is an honor for a man] It makes for his praise, and procures the tongues
and hearts of men to give him a good testimony, to cease from strife, either
not to enter into it at all, if upon good conditions, without wrong to Justice,
or righteous cases meet to be maintained, he may be freed from it, or else to
break off, and put an end thereto, with as much celerity as may be convenient:
but every fool will be meddling, such as are unwise on the other side, do love
contentions, and delight to be stirring and striving upon every slight
occasion. Thus stands the opposition: It is a man's honor to cease from
strife, and every wise man will endeavor to keep himself quiet: but is a
man's reproach to be contentious, yet every fool will be meddling.

Verse. 4. The slothful will not plow because of winter, wherefore he shall beg
in summer and have nothing.

THe slothful will not plow because of winter] Here is a description of a
tender and fearful sluggard. Indeed winter is cold, and the weather then
sometimes biting, but yet it is a season meet for plowing, which because the
air is nipping* and sharp, he lets alone; by which manner of speech is
meant, that a small matter will easily stay an idle person from following his
calling, wherefore he shall beg, shall be driven to seek relief at other men's
hands, in summer, in harvest when his neighbors that took pains in due time,
are reaping of their commodities, and enjoy plenty, which will be the greater
eyesore and heart-griefe unto him, because it is in the nature of sluggards to
be envious, and have nothing, he shows the cause of his begging, namely,
pennurie and need, when all his substance is consumed: and sometimes it falls
out also by Gods righteous providence, to be the success of his begging, that
no man shall be moved with compassion toward him, to minister any, or at least
sufficient food or apparel unto him.

Verse. 5. The counsel in the heart of a man is like deep waters, but a man of
understanding will draw it out.

THe counsel in the heart of a man] The secret intent of his mind and purpose
of his heart, which is like deep waters, is by some diverse times so cunningly
hidden, and closely concealed in the secret corners and bottom of the soul,
that it is a hard matter to sound or perceive the same. But a man of
understanding will draw it out* he that is endued with wisdom and discretion,
will discover and apprehend what practices are in hand, and what matters are
like to be attempted. So it comes to pass often, but not always, nor
necessarily, because good men are not seldom circumuented by the wiles and
crafty devises of the wicked.

Verse. 6. Many men will boast every one of his goodness, but who shall find a
faithful man?

MAny men Proud and vainglorious persons which are many, will boast every one
of his goodness, will publish and set abroad the commendable qualities which
they take to be in themselves, and the kindness and benefits which they perform
to others: but who can find a faithful man? The interrogation does import an
impossibility, that faithful men are not only rare, but none at all; yet his
meaning is not absolutely that there are none faithful (for that would
contradict other Scriptures, which have testified of the vprightnes of sundry
good me^ by name, and described the integrity of others which are not
particularly mentioned) but that among these braggers, which are so forward to
magnify themselves, and celebrate their own praises, there is not one
faithful man to be found, which does good with a good conscience, in
singleness of heart toward God, and love and compassion to his brethren.

Verse. 7. He which walks in his uprightness is just: and blessed shall his
children be after him.

HE which walks in his vprightnes] That without dissimulation, constantly
endeavors to obey the will of God, laboring to know all that the Lord
requires at his hand, and as much as he can perform, all that he knows, and
that with desire to glorify him, and likewise with hope to be rewarded
himself, is just, perfectly righteous by the merits of Christ without him, and
righteous by the work of Gods holy spirit within him: and blessed shall his
children be after him, it shall both go well with himself while he lives (for
so much is intended in this sentence, though not expressly mentioned) and with
his posterity also who shall succeed him. So does he usually bless his
servants, but not at all times, some being otherwise recompensed, and not in
this manner: for many godly men have no children at all, and others leave such
behind them, as prove unhappy and graceless.

Verse. 8. A King that sits on the Throne of judgment chaseth away every one
that is evil.

A King] The supreme Magistrate principally, and others also of great
authority, sitting upon the Throne of justice, executing his office faithfully,
chaseth away every evil one, affrighteth leaud malefactors, and either cutteth
them off, or otherwise punishes them, or they amend their ways, or fly out
of his jurisdiction, or at the least from his presence: with his eyes, by
looking into causes, and taking knowledge of offenses, whether it be by sight
or hearing, and therewith also he daunteth the wicked that appear before him,
his looks and countenance being terrible unto them.

Verse. 9. Who can say, I have cleansed my heart, ^ am pure from sin?

WHo can say] Who can truly and with good warrant affirm, I have cleansed my
heart, I have utterly, and for ever freed my self from all unlawful desires,
delights, purposes, cogitations and motions. He begins at the heart, because
it is the fountain, or at least the cesterne from whence corruption flows;
which yet must be understood of his own natural power, and not of grace: and of
perfection, and not of sincerity: for the Prophet does truly profess that he
had cleansed Psalm. 73. 13.
his heart, though in his tentation it seemed to be in vain, which he did by
the spirit of God, and in part, and by degrees, I am clean from sin* my
nature, soul and ways are all pure, nothing can be laid to my charge, for
unlawful thoughts, unrighteous actions, unfruitful speeches, good duties at
any time omitted, or sinful works ever committed; meaning by that
interrogation, that no man has power so to walk, nor any reason so to boast.
Notwithstanding, this is nothing against that saying of S. Paul: Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods Romans 8. 33.
chosen? It is God that justifies. For he there speaks of that innocence
that the godly attain unto by remission of their sins in Gods presence, who
having received satisfaction for them from Christ, imputed them to him, and
fully acquitteth them: and Solomon here speaks of another matter, that no man
is thoroughly purged from original corruption, and the impure humors that
issue out of it. Neither let any man object that of S. John, Whosoever is borne
of God sins not: for 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
he speaks not in that place of the practice, but the dominion of sin, th^^ a
regenerate man yields not obedience unto it, as a slave to his master, but is
taken captive, or receives a wound, as a soldier from his enemy.

Verse. 10. Diverse weights, and diverse measures, even both these are abomination
to the Lord.

Diverse weights] One heavier, another lighter, and diverse measures, one
greater, another less, to buy with the greater weight, and greater measure,
and to sell by the less or lighter, or with a just weight and measure to sell
to the wiser sort, and with the unjust to the simpler, whom they may easily
deceive, both these, and all such kind of crafty and covetous dealing, are
abomination to the Lord, such abominable iniquity as the Lord will surely and
sharply revenge, and punish.

Verse 11. Even a child will make known by his conversation, whether he be
pure, and whether his work be right.

NEither young nor old can so lie hid, but that they will by one means or
other, at one time or other, bewray what manner of persons they are, and what
manner of deeds they do. If any may be unknown, and not made manifest in
both those respects, surely those of younger years are most likely to be they,
who are not tried in such dealings, nor in so many matters as men of riper age,
and yet here it is taught, that even a child, a youngling, being yet tender,
and not grown to man's estate, will make himself known by his conversation,
by his behauior, by his gestures, by his speech, by the course of his
practices, whether he be pure, whether there be vprightnes* and plain meaning
in him, without dissimulation, or gross and professed leaudnes, and whether
his work be right, whether that which he presently does, be with an honest mind
performed, and whether he be like to take a good course in the rest of hife to
come. For even young plants declare by their growing and budding, what trees
they will prove to be, and what fruit they will bear hereafter; so little ones
often show betimes, what expectation is to be had of them: they minister matter
of hope, or fear to them that converse with them, and desire to see grace and
piety in them. This is a duty laid upon every child, so soon as he is of
any discretion, and capable of instruction, that he should enter foorth-with
into the good way, and walk constantly therein, howbeit we confess that many
fail therein, either through want of good education, and bringing up, or
yielding afterward to the lusts of youth, decline and fall away from this
towardliness, which at the first appeared in them.

Verse. 12. The Lord has made both these, even the ear which hears, and the
eye which sees.

HIs meaning is, that the Lord has formed the whole man, all the parts of his
body, though he names only these two, as the seats and instruments of those
noble senses of bearing, and seeing, which are mentioned with them, and these,
together with all the rest, he enableth and quickneth to do their office.

Many have eyes, and yet are deprived of the use and benefit thereof: many have
ears, and yet are oppressed with such deaffenes, as that they understand
little of that which is spoken unto them: many have legs, and feet, and are
possessed with such lamenesse, as that they can neither run nor go: many
have arms and hands, and yet are so full of imbecillitie, and weakness, with
palsies, and other diseases, as that they are able to do no manner of work.
But as the natural use of man's senses, and members, are of Gods creation, and
by his blessing, so after a special manner is the spiritual, being promised
as a peculiar favor to his own elect, who only enjoy the efficacy, from
virtue, and fruit of his Gospel. Then (says the Prophet) Isai. 35. 5. 6.
shall the eyes of the blind be lightened, and the ears of the deaffe be
opened. Then shall the lame man leap, as an Heart, and the dumme man's tongue
shall sing.

Verse 13. Love not sleep, lest thou come unto poverty: open thine eyes, and
thou shall be satisfied with bread.

Love not sleep,] Though God grant thee liberty to take thy rest, and to
refresh thy weary body with sleep, yet love it not, delight not too much in
it, give not thy self unto it, not use it excessiuely, nor otherwise give over
thy self to slothfulnes: for under immoderate sleep which is one exercise
thereof, he comprehends all the rest, lest thou come to poverty, this he
alleges as a reason, why he would not have men to be too sleepy and
slothful, because such idleness begets and brings forth beggerie. Open
thine eyes, be watchful, and diligently apply thy business in thy calling: for
many are too wakeful for plays, and cards, and dice, and dancing, and
drinking, and other disorders: and thou shall be satisfied with bread, it shall
go well with thee, and by thine honest labors and industry, thou shall
possess, if not abundance of all things needful for thine estate, yet enough,
and so much as thou shall be content with, and by Gods blessing find very
sufficient.

Verse. 14. It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer: but when he is gone
apart, he boasts.

IT is naught, it is naught,] Albeit the ware cheapened be good, and well worth
the price demanded by the seller, yet the covetous buyer, to the end he may
get it better cheap, whiles he is bidding money for it, dispraiseth it to the
uttermost: but when he is gone apart, he boasts, after he has bought the
thing, and behind the sellers back, he praises his bargain, both for the
goodness of the commodity, and for the good peny-worth which he had therein.
And hereby in like manner the disposition and behavior of the seller is to be
understood, which is as forwards to extol, and set out that which is bad, as
the other to find fault with that which is good. For if they be both false and
wicked, as this testimony concerns none other, they will depart with their
own, with no more truth, and equity, then they seek to come by another man's,
and the Lord does as much look into, and loathe the injustice of the one, as
of the other.

Verse. 15. There is gold, and a multitude of precious stones: but the lips of
knowledge are a precious Iowell.

THe ability, and conscience, and use of fruitful speaking is here commended
by Comparison, being preferred before those things which are of greatest
estimation in the world, there is gold, great store of it, in Mines, in Coin,
in Plate, in Chains, and Ornaments, and diversely used, and much desired, and
set by, and a multitude of precious stones, great variety of rich Iemmes, as
Diamonds, Carbuncles, Rubies, Iaspers, Saphires, Emerauds, etc. and many of the
several sorts of these, but the lips of knowledge, the mouth, and lips of a
godly wise man, uttering that sound and holy knowledge which dwells in his
heart, are a precious Jewel, surmount, and are more worth then all the
treasures before mentioned, and therefore more to be accounted of.

Verse. 16. Take his garment that is surety for a strange man, and make him
give a pledge that undertakes for a strange woman.

TAke his garment] Receive a sufficient pawn of him, and provide for thine
own indemnitie, that thou be not defrauded of that which thou lendest, and if
no better security can be given thee, receive and keep his Cloak, or Gown,
or Coat, that is surety for a stranger, which gives his word for such as he
ought not: for some unacquainted with us, may be undertaken for in their
distresses, when their need does justly require that help, which we cannot
of our selves minister unto them, and yet may procure by our word, at another
man's hand: and some well known unto us, and of our nearest kindred, may be
strangers in this case, yea the better known, the more unfit that we should
promise for them, having experience of their insufficiency, or unfaithfulness.
And make him leave a gage that undertakes for a strange woman. A strange woman
in the Scriptures, is usually and every where, for ought we remember to the
contrary, taken for an harlot, or whorish woman; the sense seems to be, that
if any man would offer to give his word for an harlots debts, or take up ought
in his own name to bestow on a whore, he should not be taken, nor have any
thing lent unto him, without a morgage, or competent pledge, or such sound
specialty, as will certainly counteruaile the sum which he is bound for. The
liberty and limitation of suretiship has been somewhat more spoken of in the
eleventh Chapter, verse. 15.

Verse. 17. The bread of deceit is sweet to a man: but afterward his mouth
shall be filled with gravel.

THis whole sentence is allegorical, wherein unlawful gain is resembled to
food, the delight that it first brings to the pleasant taste of delitious
meats, the mind to a man's mouth, and the mischiefs that follow to grit, or
little stones, which are very offensive to the teeth. The bread of ded^it, all
manner of maintenance, or commodities, craftily, cruelly, or by any unjust
means compassed, and gotten, is sweet to a man, makes a worlding and an
unrighteous person joyful and glad: but afterward, either in his life time,
or at his death, or in the world to come, his mouth shall be filled with
gravel, some great and grievous miseries shall befall him. For either his
conscience will sting and bite him, and so he shall be vexed with fears and
horrors, or else the hand of God will inflict punishment and plagues upon him,
and so he shall be over whelmed with anguish and torments.

Verse. 18. Establish thy thoughts by counsel, and by prudent advise make war.

HE gives in these words a caveat, that no man should lean too much on his
own judgment, nor too suddenly resolve on enterprises, without mature
deliberation, and sound direction. Establish thy thoughts by counsel, that thy
purposes be not variable and unconstant, and that thy proceedings be not
without prosperous success, and so uncomfortable: make as sure work as thou
can, both to confirm thy mind, and to manage thine affairs in the best
manner, and therefore communicate thy matters with such thy friends as are both
wise and faithful. And look well to this that Gods holy word be one, and the
chief, even best regarded, and most obeyed of all thy counselors, so that
nothing be practiced, or hearkened to, against it. And by prudent advice make
war, especially in all matters of weight, of which sort war is, (wherein the
estates of Countries, and the lives of many persons are hazarded) let nothing
be rashly attempted, but all things well considered of, and consultation had
with men of piety, understanding, skill, and experience.

Verse 19. With him that goes about as a slanderer, disclosing a secret, and
with him that flattereth with his lips, join not thy self.

ALbeit it is a good thing to take counsel, yet it is not safe for a man to
communicate his affairs to all sorts of persons: for if a secret be not kept,
counsel is made frustrate. Wherefore he gives a caveat to beware, among
others, of two kinds of people especially, whereof the first are slanderers, and
tale-tellers, whom (as he did in the eleventh Chapter, verse. 13.) he
resembles to Pedlers, who mingle sundry sorts of wares together, and go from
place to place to utter those things which they have received from others, for
that they tell that to this man, which they heard of that, and wander hither
and thither to gather up tales to tell wheresoever they come, and commonly
report them otherwise, and far worse then they heard them; neither is there
any thing that they can conceal, what dangers or mischiefs soever the
disclosing of it will procure.

Of the second kind are flatterers, such as will speak fair, and gloze with
their tongues, pretending love, and professing good liking, when they do only
sound thee to be made acquainted with thy purposes.

Verse. 20. He that curses his father or his mother, shall have his light put
in extreme darkness.

HE that curses his father or mother] Which utters imprecations, railing and
reuiling speeches, scoffs and jests, or any manner of despitefull words
against both his parents, or either of them, to their face, or behind their
backs, or after what sort soever he declares by his words the bitterness of
his heart, to bring them to contempt, and to profess how lightly and basely
he esteems of them, shall have his light put out in extreme darkness, all
his prosperity, which in the Scripture is often compared to light, shall be
turned into woe and misery, which is usually termed by the name of darkness.
And this he shows shall not be ordinary, and such an affliction as common
faults are corrected withal, but exceeding grievous and fearful, as
appears by the Epithere extreme, or as it is in the Hebrew text, the
blackness of darkness.

Verse. 21. An heritage is hastily gotten at the beginning, but the end thereof
shall not be blessed.

AN heritage] Lands, goods, money, offices, or promotions, and the like, is
hastily gotten at the beginning, is of many wicked men quickly atchiued by
evil means, but the end thereof shall not be blessed, the issue of it shall
be unhappy and cursed, partly in this respect that it is a snare to their
souls, and stops their way from eternal life, and partly in this, that it
is like to be as badly spent as it was ill gotten, and he that rose up to
wealth so suddenly, may as suddenly, or by leisure fall into want; as it is
said, that a man with a wicked eye Prou. 28. 22.
hastes to riches, and knows not that poverty shall come upon him. And the
thoughts of the diligent do surely bring abundance: Prou. 21. 5.
but whosoever is hasty, comes surely to poverty, and partly in this that it
brings them many perturbations and troubles whiles they retain it.

Verse. 22. Say not, I will recompense evil, wait on the Lord, and he will
save thee.

SAy not, I will recompense euill] Be so far from revenging thy self indeed,
for injuries done unto thee, as not in words to threaten, or in mind to
purpose any vengeance. But wait on the Lord commend thy cause unto him, and
stay his leisure till he deliver thee, and he will save thee, he says not, he
will revenge thee, and plague them, though he will do so, unless our
adversaries repent, yet he would not have us so much to think of, or desire
that, as to put our trust in him, referring our selves wholly to that which
seems him good to do, without desiring hurt to them which do us hurt:
defense and salvation to our selves is that which we must seek for, and Mat.
5. 44.
pray (as our Savior both did and taught) that our enemies may rather be
pardoned then punished. Now these words are^ added to the former, both as a
reason thereof, and an answer to an ob^ection that might be urged, or at
least conceived against the Precept in the first clause: If I revenge not
wrongs, I shall be undone with wrongs, every man will boldly tread upon me.
Nay, says he, there is no such peril, the Lord will take the cause into his
hand, and help thee, and though it be not so apparent at first, yet thou
shall perceive it at last that he is thy protector, it being his office to
defend the innocent, and oppressed. And whereas it is said that he will save
such as wait upon him, it is not so to be understood, that he will always
deliver them that are wronged from their present molestations and troubles,
that the adversary shall be compelled to surcease his practices: for many are
vexed and pursued as long as they sieve, and yet depend upon God with faith and
patience: but though they continue in afflictions til their death, yet herein
they find him true of his promise, that he makes them overcome their
enemies, and adversities, and are victorious by faith and patience, and thereby
obtain eternal salvation, to the which the children of God ought principally
to aspire.

Verse. 23. Diverse weights are abomination to the Lord, and deceitful balances
are not good.

Diverse weights are abomination to the Lord] The Lord does hate the sin which
is committed by making of greater and smaller weights and measures, whereby men
are defrauded of their right; and as he detesteth the sin, so will he plague
the sinner, and make him taste of his displeasure, and deceitful balances are
not good. Balances by which men use to deceive, as being too little, or too
great, or any way fraudulent, are not good, neither be they allowed as lawful
and warrantable, but condemned as unjust and sinful, neither bring they any
profit to those that use them, though for a time they seem gainful unto them,
but turn to their hurt and detriment, as at last they shall find in their
estates, or consciences.

Verse. 24. The steps of man are of the Lord: and what does a man understand of
his way?

THe steps of man are of the Lord] The Lord by his providence has the
appointment of the cogitations, purposes, actions, and speeches of all men,
together with the successes, and events of all that they deal in, their goings
out, their commings in, their mouings and stirrings are not by their own
strength, but by the power and will of the Almighty: a child that cannot go
alone, but is borne in arms, has not so much assistance from the Nurce or
keeper to uphold him, or to teach him how to go, or set his foot forwards, as
the wisest, or strongest receives from God, And after a special manner by his
grace and spirit, he directs and guides the hearts and ways of his people
for his own services, and their salvation. And what does a man understand of
his way? Who has wisdom and knowledge of himself rightly to order his
affairs, and to discern the effects and issues of that which he takes in
hand, and to foresee the things which shall befall him.

Verse. 25. It is a snare for a man to devour that which is sanctified, and
after the vows to call back.

IT is a snare for a man] This sacrilege described in the words following, is
passing dangerous, tending to the destruction of the party committing it, as
the food under the net, or within the compass of the grinne, does to the
slaughter of the birds, and the bait upon the hook to the death of the fish,
to devour that which is sanctified, to pervert those things which are by Gods
ordinance appointed for his services, from the right use of them, to his own
private gain and commodity. When this Scripture was written, diverse things
were unlawful for any to eat, but for the Priests and Levites only, unless
it were in case of necessity, as the shewbread, and sundry oblations in the
Temple, and tithes, and first fruits of trees, etc Now he alludeth thereunto,
and comprehends under these all other things of like use, and destinated to
the same maine end, to serve for his worship. And it is not only sinful and
perilous to rob God of those things which himself does challenge, or his
servants have dedicated to him, but to detain, or seek to recover again that
which our selves have voluntarily couenanted with our lips, or hearts to give
unto him, or to any good uses. And therefore he says, after the vows to call
back, either to wish the vow unmade, or to withhold the thing which in heart
has been vowed, or in speech promised to him.

This God forbids in his law, where^ he says: If thou have Deuteronomy. 23. 21.
vowed a vow unto the Lord, defer not to pay it: for the Lord thy God will
require it of thee, and it will be a sin in thee: but if thou abstainest
from vowing, it shall not be a sin.

Verse 26. A wise King scatters the wicked, and turns the wheel over them.

A Prudent governor is in this sentence compared to a skillful Husbandman: for
as the Husbandman winnoweth or fanneth the corn, to the end the chafe may be
severed from the pure grain: so a wise King, or godly Magistrate scatters
the wicked, breaks the knot of drunkards, gamesters, thieves, robbers,
seditious persons, and other malefactors, and turns the wheel over them,
inflicteth sharp punishments upon them, as they used in those countries to
beat out the hard corn with a cart wheel, as may appear by the testimony of
the Prophet Isaiah, who resembling the Lords moderate and wise proceedings to
that course which the th^esher takes in dealing with his corn, says: Fitches
are not threshed with an iron instrument, neither shall a cart wheel Isai. 28.
27. 28.
be turned about upon the Cummin, but the Fitches are beaten out with a staff,
and Cummin with a rod. ^read corn when it is threshed, he does not always
thresh, neither does the wheel of his cart shall make a noise, neither will
he break it with the teeth thereof.

Verse. 27. The light of the Lord is the breath of man, and searches all the
bowels of the belly.

THe light of the Lord] That grace which out of his love, he works by his
word, and infuseth by his spirit, is the breath of man, the very life and
felicity of a godly man, and searches all the bowels of the belly; finds
out most deep and secret things: it causes him to know the hidden counsels of
God, and the state of his own soul: for as the word is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart, so it informs Heb. 4. 24.
the man in whom it dwells with the nature and quality of the same, that he
may judge himself with righteous judgment, discovering his corruptions to be
corruptions, and his graces to be graces, that he shall neither approve of the
one sort as if they were virtues, nor condemn the other for illusions: or at
least (though sometimes Gods children in tentations do fail on both sides)
yet they be easily reduced from their error by the ministry of the word, or
by wholosome conference with godly Christians: whereas the hearts of the wicked
wanting this light, are like dark chambers locked up from themselves, that
they could never look into them (for the word which we translate bowels, does
signify chambers) and they do with no more sound understanding apprehend,
either the mysteries of salvation, or the constitution of their own souls,
then with their bodily eye they can see what is in their intrels and belly.

Verse. 28. Mercy and truth preserve the King: for his throne shall be
established with mercy.

MErcy] Pity and compassion toward such as are oppressed, and mildness and
lenity toward penitent offenders, and benignity and kindness, so far as
opportunity serves to show the same toward all loyal subjects: and truth,
administration of Justice, whereby every one has his due: good men
encouragement; evil men correction: and all men the enioyment of those things
which are their own, and by right appertain unto them: preserve the King,
procure the safety of person, state, and honor, both of Kings, and all other
great personages in authority: for his throne, his kingly dignity and power,
whereof the throne is a sign and representation, shall be established* made the
more sure; and continued the longer to himself or his posterity, by mercy,
associated with truth and righteousness: for as here he expresses that, and
intends the other, so elsewhere he expresses the other, and that is
intended, as chap. 16. verse. 12. It is an abomination for Kings to commit
wickedness: for the throne is established by justice.

Verse. 29. The glory of young men is their strength, and the honor of the aged
is the gray head.

THe glory of the young is their strength,] It is an ornament unto them, and
praise for them to be strong, valiant, and full of agility and courage, if they
use these gifts well, and exercise them profitably in their callings, and for
the good of the Commonwealth wherein they live: for otherwise if they be
boisterous, violent, and given to fighting and quarrelling, especially if they
imbolden themselves therewith, to robberies, or such like villainies, they are
no more commendable in them, the^ is the strength of great Bears, or other
wild beasts which are noisome and hurtful: Goliath, and Og, and the Anakims,
and other Giants were tall men, yea huge and strong, and yet are neither praise
worthy, nor praised: and the honor of the aged is the gray head, the white
hairs which publish their anciencie, and the multitude of years which they
have lived, do bring credit and reverence unto them, so that they be garnished
with gravity, wisdom, and other virtues, as it is said, Old age is a crown of
glory, when it is found in the way of righteousness. chap. 16. verse. 31.

Verse. 30. The blewnesse of the wound serves to purge the evil, and the
stripes within the bowels of the belly.

THe blewnesse of the wound,] Sharp corrections, and severe punishments which
are argued by the effects, or signs thereof, serves to purge the evil, is
the ordinance of God, together with rebukes and instructions, to draw diverse
persons that will not otherwise be reclaimed out of their sins, and the stripes
within the bowels of the belly, such strokes as pierce inwardly, and make the
heart to ache: not that in chastising it is lawful to strike so hard, or so
much, or to use such rods, or scourges as will pierce into the intrailes; for
that were to endanger life, and to put to death, but he shows the manner how
the evil is cured, where the correction takes good effect, that it enters
into the inward parts, affects the soul with sorrow and fear, and not only
the body with pain and smart: that the mind is no less touched with it then
the flesh. In this sense was the same word used in the seven and twentieth
verse. The light of the Lord searches into the bowels, or chambers of the belly.

CHAPTER. XXI.
Verse 1. The heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord: as the rivers of
water, he turns it whithersoeuer he will.

THe heart] The affections, will, and purposes of the King, of all great
personages and rulers, is in the hand of the Lord, in his power, and at his
disposing. It is a borrowed speech from men, who show their strength, and
perform their actions, principally by their hands. Now this is true also of
subjects, and inferior persons: For all men's hearts are in his hands, but he
names Kings, because they of all others are most absolute, and not subject to
the commandment of any creature; and therefore his power does the more appear
in the ruling and ouerruling of them, and it follows by consequent that none
other can resist him: and this he illustrateth by a comparison from the like,
the rivers of waters, the streams, floods, and tides, those headie, violent,
and boisterous creatures, which no man, or all men can tame or govern, and yet
by him are commanded, restrained, and easily ordered; as were the red sea, and
Jordan, and the great inundation in Noah's time, when God called up the huge
depthes out of the earth, and opened the windows of heaven to let down floods
from above, that all these waters should meet together to cover the earth, and
yet in a short time (by his appointment) they all returned to their places,
without any stay or lingering. He turns it whithersoeuer he will, his grace
guides the godly, his power drives the wicked, and his providence prevails
with both, that they, and all their determinations are wholly at his disposing:
yet does he not give any of them commandment, encouragement, or toleration to
do evil, neither infuseth corruption into their hearts, whereby he should
become the author of their evil doings. That then which he affirms and
teaches, is, that the Lord has a provident hand in the governing of all
governors. The dignity and pre-eminence over their subjects, is very large and
lawful, but far inferior to his own over them. For he rules in the
heart, which they cannot deal with; and effectually directs every action of
all commanders, which no commander has power to do, in the several affairs
of his underlings: he makes them flexible to his purposes, and boweth their
minds which way it pleases him: whether it be to show favor, as one Pharaoh
did to Jacob, in Joseph's time; or to deal unjustly and cruelly as another
Pharaoh did to Jacobs seed after Joseph's death: and this comes to pass,
because he made the men, and fashioneth their hearts: he gives them the power
Psalm. 33. 15.
of sense, of cogitation and purpose; all the motions of life are his gift,
because he has not only made them creatures, and men, but Potentates also,
and mighty men: their greatness is as well from him, as their substance and
being, and therefore both the one and the other must needs be for him.

Verse. 2. Every way of a man is right in his own eyes: but the Lord pondereth
the heart.

PRoud and ignorant persons, the most sottish and foolish of all others, are so
inamoured with the liking of their own doings, and given to flatter themselves
in the estimation of their own courses* as that they deem all to be well
performed which they manage, and nothing worthy of reprehension which they say
or enterprise, be it never so unlawful and absurd. Whilst Paul lived without
the knowledge of the law, and in the continual transgression thereof, he most
gloried in the happiness of his estate: he thought himself then to be alive,
notwithstanding that sin lived and reigned in him, Romans 7. 9.
to the death of his soul, and so to his damnation, had not Christ by grace
delivered him from the same. And our Savior fore-signified to his servants
what entreaty they should look for at the hands of such as had no knowledge of
him, Ioh. 16. 2.
that they would think that they did an acceptable service to God, when
violently they should kill them. But the Lord pondereth the heart, he strictly
and narrowly examineth, as it were with weights in a balance, whether their
purposes and affections be sincere, or otherwise, and finding them failing
therein, he conuinceth them to be culpable and faulty, how glorious soever
their actions appear to themselves and others. And thus much Christ himself
gave the bragging and conceited Pharisees to understand, when he said: ye are
they which justify your selves before men, but God knows your hearts: for
Luke 16. 15.
that which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God.

Verse. 3. To do justice and judgment, is more acceptable to the Lord than
sacrifice.

TO do justice and iudgement*] To perform the works of equity, love, and
mercy to men, with other duties of righteousness commanded in the second
table, from an upright heart, is more acceptable, better pleasing to the Lord,
and brings more recompense, than sacrifice, than without them, all sorts of
gifts, oblations, and other leuiticall rites, prescribed in the ceremonial
law, or that mere external act of Gods worship, prescribed in the moral law,
as making of Prayers, singing of Psalms, reading of the Scriptures, hearing of
Sermons, receiving of the Sacraments, observing of the Sabbath, etc. This
exposition we have out of the Prophet Isaiah: Bring no more oblations, incence
is an abomination unto me: the new moons and Sabbaths, Isaiah. 1. 13. 14 15.
16. 17.
the calling of your assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniquity even the
solemn meeting. Your new moons, and your solemn feasts my soul hates: they
are a trouble to me, I am a weary to bear them. And when you spread forth your
hands I will hide mine eyes from you: when you make many prayers, I will not
hear you: your hands are full of blood: wash you, make you clean put away the
evil of your doings from before mine eyes: learn to do well, seek
judgment, relieve the fatherless, plead for the widow, etc. Hos. 6 6. 1 Samuel
15. 22. Mich. 6. 6. 7.


So then that which he teaches, is, that the more substantial any duty is, so
a greater care is to be had for the performance of it. For I desired mercy,
and not sacrifice (says the Lord) and the knowledge of God more then burnt
offerings.

For first, we shall more faithfully imitate the Lord Jesus Christ, and most
clearly show forth his image, in the exercise of true piety and godliness,
with the practice of sound righteousness, and mercy, in comparison whereof
ceremonial rites are of small respect: for he best knowing his fathers will,
does thus acknowledge it unto him, sacrifice and offering thou did not
desire, mine heart have thou prepared* etc. And next, the most guilefull people
and dissemblers, have ever been as forward with sacrifices and outward
observations, as the best Christians, but always as remiss in upright
dealing, as the worst infidels. And therefore by faithful execution of justice
and judgment, they that are unfeignedly righteous may chiefly be discerned from
dissemblers, and hypocrites.

And lastly, better service is performed to the Lord for the honor of
religion, greater good is done to our brethren for the benefit of mankind, and
larger reward will be given to our selves, for our eternal happiness, by
discharging the substantial and more necessary duties of righteousness, then by
resting in the circumstantiall, or less weightier exercises of religion.

Verse. 4. He that has haughty eyes, is also of a proud heart, the plowing of
the wicked is sin.

HE that has haughty eyes,] Which look bigly, whereby likewise all staturely
gestures are taxed, is of a proud heart: the word in the Hebrew text,
signifies one of a large heart, meaning that he swells with a great opinion
of himself, and carries in like manner an aspiring mind to grow greater and
greater, which is even odious, for that in effect it is commonly joined with
disdainfulnesse, and scornful contempt of others, contrary to that modesty,
humanity, and christian courtesy which humility begets, and is also an
impudent boasting of a man's own worth, though it be not directly uttered in
express terms.

For by his facing and bearing his head on high, he would have all men to take
notice of his great estate or comely personage, or singular qualities, or so me
admirable excellency that is in him. And the lamentable event of it, bew^ayeth
the loathsomeness thereof: sithence the Lord is thereby provoked to so great and
grievous displeasure: For it is one, and the first of those six and seven
things which he hates, yea which his Pro. 6. 16. 17.
soul abhors: and therefore will also with such severity punish, as he
threateneth by the Prophet saying: The high look of man shall be humbled, and
the l^ftinesse of men shall be abased, and the Lord only shall be exalted in
that day: For the day of the Lord is upon all the proud and hau^ie, and upon
all Esai. 2. 11. 12*
that is exalted, and it shall be made low.

The plowing of the wicked, etc.] The proiects, plots, and practices of sinful
proud persons, which by a borrowed speech are called plowing, in regard of the
industry whereby they seek to accomplish their purposes, is sin, they are
such attempts as tend to the breach of Gods holy law: either for impiety, or
unrighteousness, and turn consequently by due desert to their own ruin, as
a recompense of sin, unless they break them off by repentance. The drift
therefore of this sentence, is, to declare the pernicious effects of pride, and
the hurts which it works to them in whom it reigns: as puffing up their
minds with evil conceits, filling their hearts with ambitious lusts,
disfiguring their faces with arrogant looks, and perverting all their
endeauours to that which is evil.

For their heart delights in it, they greedily long after it, nothing is more
precious unto them, no not their corn, cattle, coin, nor any other
commodities. And they are wholly made of flesh, and savor of nothing else but
flesh; and therefore to what can they be intent, and diligently, but to that
which is sinful and fleshly? moreover, they are the plough-men, hinds, and
drudges of Satan, who will not allow them to do any work but his, nor permit
them at any time to be remiss in his work, much less to be occupied about
the work of his enemy.

Verse. 5. The thoughts of the diligent do surely bring plenty, but every one
that is hasty comes to want.

THe thoughts, etc.] The providence, the wise and judicious forecast directing
the actions, and affairs of the diligent, of him that is faithful in his
vocation, laboring therein for conscience sake, and not for covetousness, do
by little and little, from time to time increase his substance, and add to his
stock, so that he walks in the ready way to great wealth, which either in
time he shall attain unto in copious and plentiful measure, or have his heart
well satisfied with a smaller portion, yet made sufficient for him with as
large a blessing from the hand of the Lord that gave it. Unto which diligent
man is opposed the hasty person, one that boyleth with an immoderate desire of
riches, and to be wealthy all at once without delay; whom though he be not
utterly idle, yet God reputeth no better then a sluggard, because he is not
well occupied, nor willing to continue his diligence, if ever he showed any, as
his greedy longing after goods does declare, to the end he may be freed from
much travel, and would get a great deal of substance with a little labor.
Then contrary to premeditation, and the working thoughts of the diligent, is
the precipitant rashness of him that is hasty, taking matters in hand
unadvisedly, without deliberation: and therefore the unhappy event of him that
is unadvised, proves also contrary to the prosperous success of him that is
unadvised and circumspect, the one growing to abundance, the other fading to
nothing. And therefore it comes to pass that the more forward and greedy men
are after the world, the worse they are like to prosper, as Saint James says:
From whence are wars and contentions among you? are they not hence, even of
your lusts that fight in your members? ye lust and have not: ye have e^^i^ Iam.
1. 2. 3.
and indignation and cannot obtain: ye fight and war and get nothing,
because ye ask not. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye
might consume it on your lusts. For the fountains whereout this ardent desire
of riches, and have to be wealthy does issue, are the filthy sinkes of
pride, vain confidence, and infidelity: For why do men so highly esteem and
adore their silver as a God? What causes them to have earthly possessions in
so great admiration, and to prefer them incomparably before heavenly grace
and glory, but that they deem honor to be necessarily annexed unto them, and
dream that safety is never separated from them, and doubt on the other side,
that their life must needs be unhappy without them? Moreover, the ways and
practices of those that would flee up so fast to abundance, be such as are fit
to draw them down to penury, both by the sting of Gods judgment, and the
scourge of their own imprudence: for neither piety, equity, nor good
aduisement is ever to be found in a greedy earth-worme. He that makes too
much have to be great, will take more leisure then he ought to be godly:
neither will he stick at any injustice, or cruelty, that may serve for his
advantage; and therefore it is a true saying as well touching that which a
covetous ^erson does, as what he must suffer: he that hastes to be rich shall
not be innocent, or unpunished: for the Hebrew word signifies both. And how
many snares he lays for himself, to the intangling, and overthrowing of his
own estate, every wise and diligent eye by serious observation may easily
apprehend. Sometimes he is ouercharged with multiplicity of affairs, that he
is not able to manage any of them, and therefore speedeth unhappily in all of
them. Sometimes he is caught with unprofitable bargains, and contracts: for
though the match be very hard, and let the rate be never so unreasonable, yet
bait it with time, and give him days of payment, then be sure that bite he
will, and down it shall how dearly soever it costeth him afterward. And
sometimes the brittle chapman that is ready to break, prays upon him, when
he has ought to sell: he offers frankely, and gives largely, for above the
value of the commodity he would buy, to the intent his word may the more
readily be taken, or his bond alone, with which without more ado he
purposes to make satisfaction. And how long does he keep himself out of the
usurers clutches? whose net does take him, and he does pluck him, until he
leave him not a feather to fly with.

Verse 6. The gathering of treasures by a deceitful tongue, is vanity tossed
to, and fro, of them that seek death.

THe gathering of treasures by a deceitful tongue] Wealth, and substance how
much soever, gotten by lying, or deceit, or other abuse of the tongue, and
consequently, by any unlawful means whatsoever, is vanity, nothing worth, and
will do him no good that so comes by it, tossed to and fro* is as chafe or
such like matter blown up and down by the wind, of them that seek death,
that is, they that do in such sort gather riches, do seek death, either of
their souls, or bodies, or both, though they intend it not, nor be willing of
it: and it is a certain effect which such injustice does necessarily produce.
Therefore as the wise man in the sentence going before, has commended
painful diligence, as a direct and lawful means for the attaining unto
wealth, so in this he condemns falsehood, and shifting, and that by three
arguments. First, because that which they get thereby, is vanity, Psalm. ^2. 10.
it does their bodies no good: it does their souls no good; it does their
names no good; it does their posterity no good: God does not bless it to their
relief, they have no protection, or good safety from it, their hearts thereby
are not refreshed with any sound comfort: they are nothing furthered toward
everlasting life by the possession of it: no true honor and estimation does
accompany it: and their children* most commonly are hurt, and not benefited by
that which is no better (...) 23. ^.
gotten. Secondly, because it is unstable, and vanishable, as uncertain as
dust, whereof one blast of wind will blow away great heaps: it is subject to
fire, to thieves, to losses, to deceitful bargainers, to suites of law, to
Gods curse, which has innumerable means in a readiness to waste, and consume
them. Thirdly, because it is dangerous and hurtful, tending to the ruin of
the getters, and owners, as will appear evidently in the next verse.

Verse 7. The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them, because they refuse to
do judgment.

THe robbery of the wicked] That theeuery which they commit against others,
and the goods gotten thereby, shall destroy them, the Hebrew word signifies,
may come of a root which signifies to terrify, and fear, and likewise to
dwell, and stay with, and so it imports that their punishment shall be both
terrible, and continual, it will both affright, and dismay them, and not be
gone in haste but abide with them, and stick fast unto them: or else of a word
that signifies to saw, cut in two, or cut down, intending the finiall
destruction and overthrow of them; because they refuse to do judgment, his
purpose is then to confirm the last clause of the last sentence, and to prove
that falsehood, and injustice is most pernicious, and hurtful, which he shows
first by the effects of it, and then by the cause: the effect is utter undoing,
and that as any man is greedy to enrich himself by injurious, and wrongful
dealing, so fast he hastneth, to his own ruin, and overthrow: For they that
will be rich fall into temptation, and snares, and into many foolish, and
noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition, and destruction. For the desire
of money is the root of all evil, which while some have lusted after, they
erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. 1. Tim.
6. 9. 10.
Often it comes to pass that life is taken away for it, or their bodies hurt
or wounded: but always the soul is plagued, and subject to peril of damnation:
malefactors that are taken robbing by the high* way side with the purse in his
hands: or breaking up the house with their hands in the chests, are not so sure
to be condemned of the Judge, and strangled by the executioner, as these are to
receive sentence of the Lord, and perish by his justice; unless they convert
with holy humiliation, and so he pardon them in mercy. There is no poison
being swallowed will more certainly destroy nature, then oppression and
wrongfulnes, will damn the soul; Zaphor, in the book of Job spoke most
truly to this point saying, his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall
of Aspes within him. He has swallowed down substance, but he shall vomit it
up again: God shall cast them out of his belly. He shall Job. 20. 15. 16.
suck the poison of Aspes, the Vipers tongue shall slay him.

The cause is the manner of their sinning, they refuse to execute judgment,
they fail not through frailty and infirmity, but choose to offend wittingly, and
willingly, with stubbornnes, and obstinacy which make their faults the more
intolerable, their offenses more impardonable, and their punishment more
grievous, and insufferable.

Verse 8. The way of a man is perverse and strange; but of the pure his work
is right.

THe way] The manners, the life, and conversation of a man, of a wicked man,
and such a one as is impure is perverse, sinful, and crooked, sweruing from
all equity, and right, and ^range, nothing agreeable to the order that God
himself has prescribed in his word; and his children do allow, and observe,
but of the pure, who is purged, and washed from the guilt of his sins by the
blood of Christ, God pardoning them all through the merit of his son: and who
is sanctified, and cleansed from the filthiness of his own nature, and
corruptions by the spirit of grace: and who also upon the hope of salvation, is
careful as much as he can to purge himself, his work, his actions, speeches
and course of all his behavior; is right, sincere, and faithful, conformable
to Gods will, and referred to his glory, not deceitful, not variable, not
crooked, nor in any word unreformed. Herein therefore the holy Ghost declares
the contrariety that is between the godly and the wicked, the one doing
nothing but that which is evil, either notoriously, or otherwise through hidden
fraud, and guile; the other nothing but that which is good, either in practice,
or desire, whereof when he fails, it is through infirmity, and weakness: for
they use the fashion of two contary countries, the one heavenly, the other
earthly: and perform their services in two contrary Princes: the one to Satan,
the other to the Lord, and are governed and ruled by two contrary laws, the
one of God, the other of the flesh.

Verse 9. It is better for a man to dwell in the corner of an house top: then
with a contentious woman in an wide house.

IT is better] More ease, and quiet for a man, to dwell even alone without
company, in a corner of the house top, in a most inconvenient place, yea though
it do not only want necessary room, but also subject to the heat of the
summer, the cold of the winter, the force of the wind, the beating of the
rain: (for he alludeth to the manner of their buildings, which were with slate
roofes, as most, Churches, Castles, and Towers are with us; being therefore
delectable places to walk upon, but not commodious rooms for lodging and
continual abode especially, when one shall be penned up in an angle or narrow
corner thereof) then with a contentious woman, then with a woman given to
brawling and chiding, in a wide house, in a very large, profitable, and
pleasant room to dwell in. And by this is signified, that albeit wedlock, and
a married estate be desirable and full of comfort to fit, and well matched
yoke-fellowes, yet nothing is more unpleasant and tedious, then that is to him
who longs for peace, and is suited with contentions, who sought a wife for the
joy, and refreshing of his heart, and has met with a tormentor continually to
vex him; this is the greatest outward cross, because it is the nearest, and
like to a diseased member, which will continually put a man to pain: which
more remote commodities and benefits cannot easily counteruaile; a great house
sounding with brawles, and chidings, will bring little contentment to a
peaceable mind so tediously disquieted.

Verse 10. The soul of the wicked desires evil, his neighbor finds no
favor in his eyes.

THe soul,] The very heart, and affections of the wicked wishes evil,
mischief, and hurt to all but himself, he is so kindled with envy, and his
neighbor, he that dwells by him, meaning also thereby any other: for he that
does not good to those that be about him, is hardly drawn to profit others,
has no favor in his eyes, finds no friendship at his hands, neither the
sight of his presence can move him to love, not the sight of his calamity can
move him to commiseration: there is no pity nor compassion in his eyes,
whereby he should be incited to do good, no not so much as kindness, to give
a good countenance, unless it be with dissimulation, or to such as are like to
himself. So that we may know that it is the property of wicked men to be
unmerciful, and hard hearted, especially to such as fear God: such as his
soul is, such likewise is his eye: and such as his eye is, such likewise is
hand, his tongue, his ear, and every part of his body. As other sins
increase: whether it be lying, lust, swearing, or any impiety, or any
unrighteousness, so does cruelty with them, because self love is strong in all
sinful persons, that fills the place of all Christian, and brotherly love,
and leaves no room for the same in their hearts: moreover pride abounds
always with it, which begets envy, and makes men uncharitable: neither are
they free from the sting of a guilty conscience, which makes them fierce and
inhumane: and as they are privy to themselves, that they deserve not to be
beloved of any, so will they requite it by loving of none: and who knows not,
but that the devil is their father, and master, who will have them all to
bear his image, and be like to himself, and always compel them to serve his
turn. Yet it is true, that sometimes the worst are made profitable, and
helpefull to the best: but that proceeds not from their disposition so much
as from Gods power, and providence who has the commandment of their hearts,
and hands, their lips, and substance. It is not the nature of the hard rock to
send forth water; and yet when the Lord caused it so to do to the people in
the wilderness, they inioyed the benefit of it. It is not the nature of the
Raven to provide food for men, but to devour all her self, yet when the Lord
appointed one to minister food unto Elias, she failed not a meal. It was not
the custom of the Egyptians to be loving and kind to the Israelites: yet
when the Lord moved their hearts, and sent a qualme of kindness upon them,
they were ready to impouerish themselves, and to depart with the best Jewels
they had, to bestow upon them.

Verse. 11. When the scorner is punished, the simple is made wiset and when the
wise is instructed, he receives knowledge. See chap. 19. 23.

Verse. 12. He instructs the wise by the house of the wicked, which
overthrows the wicked in their evil.

HE instructeth] The Lord gives examples as clear as precepts to them, that
have true wisdom, and his fear in their hearts; and brings them thereby to
a judicious meditation of his justice, and their own deseruings, and causes
them to profit to their own repentance, and reformation of their lives, by
consideration of his righteousness, who might have plagued them as well as
others: and of his mercy, goodness, and patience, who has laid his strokes
upon others, and spared them, by the house of the wicked by the fearful
strokes that light upon the wicked themselves, their states, habitations,
families, and posterity (for so far does house extend sometimes in the
Scripture) which overthrows the wicked in their evil, which ruinateth, and
brings to naught evil and sinful men, for their rebellious and ungodly
behavior against him: so that the seuerit^e of God, and his greatest plagues
against godless men, are very useful, and many ways profitable to them that
have sound wisdom and understanding. The Prophet acknowledged this to the
Lord for his praise, and testimony, of his peoples vprightnes, saying, With my
soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within Esai. 26. 11.
1. Cor. 10. 11.
me, I will seek thee early: for seeing thy judgments are in the earth, the
inhabitants of the world shall learn righteousness. For God does strike a few
for the instruction of many, and would have all his attributes to be thought
of, though but one, or a few do most eminently work, notwithstanding his
justice is most seen: yet his truth forethreatning such plagues as are
inflicted, are not to be passed by without reverence, his power is manifested,
whereby he is able to bring down his proud adversaries: and so his love, his
mercy, and faithfulness to his own, is much magnified by preserving of them,
when their adversaries, and his, do fall into such misery and mischief.

Verse 13. He that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, he shall cry
himself and not be heard.

HE that stops his ear at the crying of the poor,] That he may not hear,
but turns away himself, and his compassion, from them, when they cry to him
for relief, he shall also cry, shall fall into such misery as shall make him
cry, earnestly call upon, and entreat God, and man, and therein be helpless
without favor of God, or man: and not be heard, be neu^r a whit the better for
it: which punishment also is due unto, and shall be executed upon such as turn
their ear from hearing those, that do relate the state of the poor unto the^;
or though they do hear it, yet little regard it: or which turn their eyes
from beholding the afflictions and miseries of their brethren; or if they look
upon them, will do nothing for them: as our Savior complains of them that
saw him hungry Matthew. 25.
in his members, but fed him not. All comes to this, that merciless men
shall receive no mercy. For it is just with God Iam. 3. 13.
so to punish them, which neither regard his commandment, nor his people, nor
the members of his Son, nor their own Job. 31. 19. Esai. 58. 7.
flesh, as poor distressed men are called by the Prophet.

Verse. 14. A gift in secret pacifieth anger, and a reward in bosom strong
wrath.

A Gift] Given, and received also of any, either high or low, offended with
thee, in secret, closely and secretly given, pacifieth anger, conceived against
a man, and a reward in the bosom, carried in the bosom, and so given to
another man, pacifieth, and stilleth mighty and raging wrath. His drift is
therefore to show, that gifts prevail much with those that receive them, and
work a great impression in their affections. Prou. 17. 8. and 18. 16.
Because men naturally are possessed with a desire of having, and therefore
that is acceptable to them which may increase their substance. And because the
bringing of presents, especially to one offended, and moved with indignation,
is a testimony of submission, whereby the party conceiving displeasure is
after a sort honored, which will work as much upon a great mind, as the value
of the thing bestowed will upon a greedy mind, and therefore either for one
cause or other it is accepted.

Verse. 15. It is joy to the just to do judgment: but destruction shall be to
the workers of iniquity.

IT is joy to the iust] The godly and righteous man takes great delight and
pleasure, to do judgment, to deal righteously with God, and justly with men,
and to be upright in all his actions: a good man has his greatest comfort in
well doing. The example of our Savior, the best, is both a pattern and worker
of this: and he testifyeth thus of himself: My Ioh. 4. 3. 4. Gal. 5.
meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. For as
goodness is the fruit of the spirit, so is joy also, and a companion of
goodness. Moreover the services of Christians are not enforced by compulsion,
but performed with love, and whatsoever love does, it does it cheerfully and
gladly: and add hereunto that hope has a great hand in the works of the
righteous, and that does with all gladness and comfort wait for a reward,
accounting all good works which are done in earth, to be certain treasures
laid up in heaven, so that well doers in the kingdom of grace, have joy mixed
with their righteousness, and in the kingdom of glory are assured they shall
have joy given them for their righteousness. Howbeit Romans 14. 17.
this joy is either more or less, according to the degree of their grace; the
best feel most, those which have less faith do that which is good with less
delight: all do obey God with some gladness, but none with perfection of
gladness, because there is not a perfection of mortification.

So much natural corruption as remains, so far a man is hindered from this
alacrity and cheerfulness, which even that worthy Apostle found in himself,
which he also confesses, saying: I deligh^ in the Law of God after the inward
man? but Romans 7. 22.
I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, bringing
me into captivity unto the law of s^nne, which is in my members. But
destruction, eternal perdition both of soul and body, with manifold perils
and calamities, foregoing the same, shall be for the workers of iniquity,
because it is their constant and common practice, their trade and profession:
for there is great difference between the working of iniquity, and to be a
worker of iniquity, the one may sometimes befall a Saint; the other is always
proper to a sinner: So that this then he means, that wickedness in time will
utterly undo the wicked: as the Psalmist confesses, saying: When the Psalm.
92. 7.
wicked spring like grass, and all the workers of iniquity flourish, they
shall be destroyed for ever. For all the threatenings of God are against them,
and all the attributes of God are against them, his truth, his anger, his
justice, and his power. etc. Here is somewhat more to be understood then is
expressed in both the strains, the reward of the godly for their goodness is
concealed in the former; and the propension of the wicked to evil in the
latter: the opposition therefore stands thus: It is joy for the just to do
judgment, and he shall obtain salvation: but it is joy for the workers of
iniquity to do mischief, and therefore they shall be destroyed.

Verse. 16. The man that wandreth out of the way of understanding, shall remain
in the congregation of the dead.

THe man that wandreth] Which follows his own carnal reason, or sensual
lusts, which lives according to the course of the world, walking after the
flesh, and not after the spirit, and so goes out of the way of understanding,
out of the Romans 8.
course that Gods wisdom has prescribed, shall remain, shall have an
everlasting abode without all hope, or possibility of recovery, in the
congregation of the dead, amongst that great number of people that are dead
already, both in soul, and body, or else through their wickedness make have
to the same. This sentence by a comparison taken from travelers, contains a
description of the condition of the wicked: first, their behavior is resembled
to a voyage, which is altogether in aberration and bypath: and secondly, the
success of the same to the end of a journey, very uncomfortable, like unto a
Iayle, or house of correction full of malefactors, being upon the rack, or
otherwise tormented: yea rather banging upon the gallows, as he also must do
with them for company. And his intent is to show that there is no passage to
salvation or happiness but by the word of God. The whole first Psalm is spent
in this argument, declaring two kinds of men, two opposite ways, two contrary
estates: for the way of the word is pleasing to God, and wilful wandering out
of it is abominable unto him; the one has the promises, and is blessed; the
other has the threatenings, and is cursed.

That has the spirit of God to guide them that walk in it; the other the
world the flesh, and the devil to deceive the passengers: that has Christ for
the gate to let men in; the other has Christ to be the Porter to bar them
out. And because company is delightful, and men do most willingly travel
where are most companions; and society in evil does seem to promise safety
unto it, or at least to mittigate the penalty, if they may have others to
suffer with them; ^e does purposely aggrauate this punishment. By relating the
multitude of them that are so punished, the Prophet Esa^ does the like: And
they shall be afraid, anguish and sorrow shall take them, and they shall have
pain as a woman that trauelleth: every one shall be amazed at his neighbor,
and their faces shall be like stames Isai. 13. 8.
of fire. And for the like purpose our Savior uses a parable in the Gospel,
bringing in this for one misery to come upon the hypocrites at the end of the
world; that like tares, they shall be bound together in bundles, and cast into
the fire to be Mat. 13. 30.
burnt.

Verse. 17. He that loves pleasure shall be a poor man, and he that loves
wine and oil shall not be rich.

HE that loves pleasure] Who cannot moderate himself in the use of
recreations, but too much affects them, and immoderately follows them, to
the satisfying of his fleshly delight, shall be a poor man, though he were
never so rich before: and he that loves wine and oil, or fat things, (for
the word signifies as well fatness, as oil) shall not be Shemen.
rich, either shall not attain unto wealth, or if he do, he is not like
long to continue wealthy.

The scope is to show, that voluptuous persons take the way to bring themselves
to penury: even lawful delights, when they be excessive, turn to be sins,
and causes of misery. Saint James teaches, that the earth is not a place, and
consequently Iam. 5. 5.
that this life is not a time, to live in pleasure: but that is to be referred
till rest be given from labors, for a reward in heaven after this life. The
Lord in wisdom does pursue this sin with the penalty of poverty for diverse
causes: as one, because it is due, and proportionable to their courses; they
fruitlesly spend their time, and is not equal that they should be restrained
from wealth and substance, which is the fruit of time well spent. They offer
violence to the good gifts and creatures of God, by riotous and wastfull
devouring of them; and therefore it is equal the good gifts and creatures of
God should be delivered out of their hands, to serve for the use of others
which will use them better. Be they reprobates that live in this sin? need and
want is the fittest rod to make them smart, whose happiness consists in
luxury, and belly cheer; are they elect, and such are reclaimable? a better
means cannot be found to help them to repentance, then to put them to drink
a potion of sorrow and pain; of hunger and thirst; of co^d, and raggedness;
who surfeited before with delights, ease, and abundance.

Verse. 18. The wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous, and the
transgressor for the upright.

THe wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous] viz. Many times it falls
out that when the godly are in trouble, or in peril, they escape out of the
same and be preserved, and the whole burden thereof fall upon the back of
their enemies, or some evil doers, upon whom God does inflict that which man
had prepared for the hurt of the righteous* as is plain by the example of the
Egyptians who were drowned, that the Israelites might be delivered; and of
Haman hanged, that M^rdecaie might be freed. It is a word borrowed from the
Copher.
Leuiticall Law, wherein gifts were given, or sacrifices offered, or oblations
consecrated. Sometimes for men's souls, for remission of sins, not for the
merits of the work, but for the merits of Christ, who was figured in those
sacrifices: sometimes for the exchange, and buying out of those things which
were destinated to sacred uses. This proceeds from the love Isai. 3. 4.
which God bears to his people, whom he incomparably prefers before the
ungodly, more then men are esteemed above beasts: who would not kill a dog, to
save the life of the child? Abraham was glad to sacrifice a Ram in stead of
Isaac his son. And if Jacob might have recovered Joseph for a swine, or a
Goat, would he not most willingly have given them for him? This verse agrees
wholly in sense with the 8. verse of the eleventh chapter.

Verse. 19. It is better to dwell in a wilderness, then with a contentious, and
angry woman.

THe desert is a very incommodious and uncomfortable place to dwell in: for
therein good things are wanting, and evils abounding. The Israelites found this
true by their experience, who in the desert not only wanted food, and drink,
but were stung with Serpents. Nevertheless it is more tolerable to abide in
the wilderness among venomous creatures, and wild beasts, then to dwell in
never so fair or plentiful an house, with a brawling and unquiet woman: for
she by her words and dealings will both provoke a man to grief, then any
bear, or serpent. As in the ninth verse of this Chapter.

Verse. 20. There is a treasure to be desired, and oil in the dwelling of the
wise, but a foolish man spends it up.

THere is a treasure to be desired, and oil in the house of the wise* In the
habitation of the prudent householder, there is laid up store of all things
which are necessary and delectable, and hereby he does commend the liberality
and bounty of God toward those or his servants, who apply their
understanding, and other gifts to godliness, and frugality. He does allow
sufficient both for necessity and delight to them that be thri^cie and godly:
as that holy servant of God acknowledges upon comfortable experience, saying:
Thou do prepare a table before me in the sight of mine adversaries, Psalm.
23. 5.
thou do anoint my head with oil, and my cup runs over. Because he is
rich enough and has plenty of all creatures* for beasts, and birds, and
fishes, and all manner of unreasonable creatures; yea for wicked men also,
which are baser then any of these; and it pleases him so to recompense that
piety and godliness which is in his servants, and likewise their diligence,
Psalm. 112.
painfulnesse and prudence: and he makes them his granarie and storehouse,
for the relief of many other his distressed people: compassion is in their
eyes, when they see their brethren in need, they distribute and communicate to
the poor, if they have it, he knows they will faithfully dispense that which
is put into their hands, and therefore puts them in trust to be his
cofer^rs. True it is that all have not great abundance, but many are kept
within a shorter tedde^, and the Lord dieteth them, that they should not
surfeit with excess: for too much would make them too high minded, and too
worldly minded: but no good man has too little, and want of comperence,
according to the prayer of the holy man, in the 30. chapter, and eighth verse.
For a small substance is blessed by God for great use: as was the widows case
with her cruse of oil, and barrel of meal: and as is promised in the Psalm*
a small thing to Psalm. 37. 6.
the righteous, is better then great riches to the wicked. But a foolish man
spends it up: The unthrifty person either spends as fast as he gets,
and so can never keep store together, or else by his prodigality, lauishing
out his great patrimony, and great substance left him of his parents,
becomes bankeroupt. See verse. 17. of this chapter.

Verse. 21. He that follows after righteousness and mercy, finds life,
righteousness and honor.

THis is the property of a godly man that he follows after righteousness
and mercy, or kindness; that is to say, he does not slackly seek after, but
ensue with earnestness those two virtues which are most excellent, and under
which all other are contained: the former of these is righteousness, which is
that virtue whereby that which is due is performed: the latter is mercy,
whereby good is done of a merciful and kind affection. He that thus seeks
after these two virtues, shall find these three jewels, and singular rewards:
the first of these is life, that is, length of days in this world, with all
manner of comfortable blessings: the second is righteousness, as good as, or
better measure from the Lord, and men, then he observed in his dealings. The
last is honor, that is to say, glory, both in heaven and earth, before the
Almighty, and before the faithful: yea and sometimes with the tongues, but
commonly with the hearts and consciences of the wicked.

Verse. 22. A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, and casts down the
strength of the confidence thereof.

A Wise man] Who is qualified with sound judgment and dicretion, scaleth, as a
conqueror assaulteth, and wins the city of the mighty, the fort and hold
which mighty men possess, and keep the walls and bulwarks of it, wherein
they much trusted, thinking themselves thereby to be in safety. He means
that wisdom is more excellent then strength, and that in controversies and
strifes: it helps more to the victory to be prudent then puissant, according
to the testimony of the Wise man solemnly professed: I say better is wisdom
then strength: though the wisdom of the poor be Eccles. 9. 16.
despised, and his words not heard. For a man endued with wisdom shall best
find out equity, and be most ready to find out a good cause: and he will best
discern of his advantages, and find out fit means for the managing of his
matters. A weak man that has the benefit of sight, will be too hard for a
Giant that is blind: and how comes it to pass that a little man can master a
great beast? but that the reason of the one prevails more then the power of
the other.

Verse. 23. Who so keeps his mouth and his tongue, keeps his soul from
troubles.

WHo so keeps his mouth] Takes heed to his words, and is considerate in all
his speeches, not to be mute, when he ought to speak, nor then to speak when
it becomes him to be silent, nor rashly utters any thing that may be unfit
or unseasonable, or any way for his disadvantage, keeps his soul, him self
and his life from troubles, from that grief, and those afflictions, which
unadvised men do cast themselves into by the misgouernment of their tongues.
See chap. 13. 3. and our note upon that place.

Verse. 24. Proud, and stubborn scorner is his name, whom in his fury works
pride.

THat is to say, he publicly is branded with many titles of reproach, as with
the name of a proud man, one that is high minded, and vainglorious; and of a
stubborn person, that is, stomackfull, and very wilful: and of a scorner, one
that is a contemner and derider of all others beside himself, and indeed a
very evil and pestilent man, (for the word commonly is taken (as in the first
Psalm, and other places) for him that Lets.
is desperately wicked,) who in his fury works pride, either by doing at
that time some presumptuous action, or else by uttering some insolent speeches;
for many being angry because their commandments are not obeyed, their desires
fulfilled; that they may make their power known, persecute such as resist
them, or attempt high matters in the pride of their heart. So did Lamech when
he boasted, that he would slay a man in his wound: Dathan, and Abiram when they
rose against Moses: Nabuchadnezzar when he blasphemed God, saying to Shadrach,
Meshech, and Abednego, Who is that God that shall deliver you out of mine hand?
and afterward cast them into the fiery furnace: and Herod, when in his rage,
for being defeated of Christ did maffacre the little infants.

Verse. 25. The desire of the slothful slays him: for his hands refuse to
labor.

THe desire of the slothfull] The things which he desires, and cannot
obtain, slays him, grieueth him at the heart, and almost kills him: for
they that will spare themselves from needful and Christian pains, shall bring
upon themselves hurtful and shameful pains, misery shall pursue, and want
will bring them to deaths door: for his hands refuse to labor, he does
nothing but wish, but uses not the means to provide for himself, and
therefore must needs perish. The fault is not laid upon his debility, but upon
his wretchlesnes. They are not to be charged for idle persons which cannot
work, but which will not, for against such dealt the Apostle, 2. These. 3. 16.
that if any would not work, they should not eat.

Verse 26. He coueteth greedily all the day long, but the righteous gives and
spares not.

HEe] The sluggard mentioned in the former verse: (for he does insist in the
fame matter) coueteth greedily all the day long, he vehemently lusts after
other men's goods; from time to time, and incessantly, living both uncomfortably
to himself, and unprofitably to others: for he does no good that others might
be benefited: nor gets any good that himself might be relieved. So that he
notes the slothful persons of all others, to be most insatiably covetous.
Their thoughts are ranging abroad, and surueying of every man's estate, with a
longing desire to have, as much as, or more then the best: and the practices of
many do convince them of this, and for instance that of gamesters, who would
win all the money in the world, if their skill and good hap would serve: they
would not spare their dearest friends, but rob them of all that they are worth,
if the dice, and cards would give them the advantage thereto. How many inuiting
guests unto their table under pretense of kindness, do make them buy their
meat dearly, and pay an unreasonable shot for it, before they depart?
sometimes threefold: sometimes seven fold: sometimes ten fold: sometime twenty
fold, and more then their dinner was worth. And do not guests invited very
often requite the same unto those, who in good will have entertained them, and
with great charges made them good cheer: they do not only devour their host
his meat, but as cruelly as thieves, bereave him of all his money, that the
family fare the worse for their coming seven years after? See Chapter 13.
verse. 4. But the righteous gives: unto the sluggard is opposed one that is
truly diligent, and faithful in his calling, whom he sees as contrary to the
other in diverse respects: as first that he is righteous and just, whereas that
lasie sluggard is wicked and unjust: he is liberal, (for he gives to them that
are in distress) whereas the other is hard hearted, and ravenous not ready to
bestow any thing, but violent, in his desire to get that, which his neighbors
have: he is of good estate, and able to continue his liberality, he spares
not, either through niggardlines, or through necessity to minister relief to
them that want: the other is beggarly, and so far from sufficiency to yield
help to his brethren, that he is burdensome to them, and lies as a charge
upon them. This good estate of the godly man is described by the Prophet in the
Psalms, saying, He has dispersed Psalm. 112. 9.
and given to the poor, his righteousness endures for ever, and a reason
thereof is assigned, because he measures his affairs by judgment. And the
Apostle, according to this text, does persuade men to be laborious, that they
may the better exercise liberality, saying, Let him that stole, steal no
more, but Ephesians 4. 2^.
labor with his hands the thing that is good, that he may give to him that
needs.

Verse. 27. The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord: how much
more when he brings it with a wicked mind.

THe sacrifice of the wicked] That service whatsoever which they pretend to
perform to God: whether prayer, thanksgiving, or ought else, is abomination,
very offensive and displeasing to the Lord; and therefore also rejected of him,
as a heinous sin. See chap. 15. 8. how much more when he brings it with a
wicked mind? when he intended to effect some mischief, under pretext and
color of devotion, and for the easier effecting of his wicked purpose: as
Balaam, and Balaac did, when they intended to curse the people of God: and as
Absalom who with the show of performing a vow at Hebron, conspired against
David, and raised up rebellion against his own father: and as the Pharisees
did, who under the pretense of long prayers, devoured widows houses: such was
the fast appointed by lezabel, and solemnized by the Iezralites, to murder
Esai. 58. 4.
Naboth: and the people also in Esaies time, who fasted for strife and debate,
and to smite with the fist of wickedn^sse: such were the sermons of them also,
whom Paul charged to have preached Christ of envy, and to add to his bands.
Phil. 15. 16.


Verse. 28. A false witness shall per^sh: but he that hears, speaks
constantly.

A False witnes] A vain person, who testifies things which he never heard, or
saw, witnesses lies: (for lies are untruths, and devised by the brain of some
deceitful person or other) shall perish: for being intrapped in his speech or
punished by the Magistrate, or the Lord himself, he shall be put to silence,
with shame, or cut off from the earth, shall not live, or at least have no
hearing for his lies any longer time: for his instability and doubling will
bring him out of credit at least, if not destruction. See Chap. 19. verse. 5. 9.
But he that hears the truth of matters knowing also the same, and being as it
were, an eye witness; (for he puts one sense for sundry) speaks constantly,
tells the same tale always and in all places, when he is called thereto,
wheresoever, whenever, and before whom soever. Paul was the same man, when he
made a speech to the chief captain, and to Felix, and unto Festus, and unto
Agrippa. See Chap. 12. 19. The opposition stands thus; A false witness
utters matters which he never heard himself, and therefore shall perish, or
have his mouth stopped: but a faithful witness speaks nothing but that he
hears himself, or has certain knowledge of, and therefore shall escape
destruction, and speak constantly.

Verse 29. A wicked man hardneth his face; but as for the upright, he directs
his way.

A Wicked man hardens his face] The ungodly person goes on in his sinning
without shame, or returning back: the seat of bashfulnes is in the face, so
that whereas he says, he hardens his face, it must be understood that he
either defends his sin, or excuses it, or proceeds therein without
blushing. He is likened to a traveler, that fetteth his face against the wind
and weather, and goes on forward in his journey, whether he be in the way or
out of the way, all is one with him. But as for the just he directs his way;
for the just man walks warily and soberly in this world, and takes care,
that neither he err in any of his opinions, nor swerue from the law of God in
any of his actions: wherefore also if he be reproved, or admonished for any
thing that is noted to be amiss in him, he resists not, but amendeth his
fault, and as much as in him lies, frames himself in the whole course of his
life, unto the obedience of the Lords commandments.

Thus stands the opposition: The wicked man is impudent, and therefore
careless also how he walks: but the righteous is modest and shamefast, and
therefore directs his steps.

Verse 30. There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the
Lord.

BY the particulars he means that there is nothing in man, whether wit,
policy, or craft, or confederacy, that can infringe the decree of God, or
hinder the effect of his purposes. For he denies not that carnal wit, that
the streine of wicked men's art, that the depth of subtilty, that combinations
and coniurations are opposed against the Lord, with all their power, and
plotting, and hellish practices, but they take no place, they nothing prevail,
as the Psalmist says, The Lord breaks the counsel of the heathen, and
brings to naught the Psalm. 39. 10.
devices of the people. The counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever, and the
thoughts of his heart throughout all ages. And, Why do the heathen rage, and
the people murmur in vain? The Kings of the earth band themselves, and the
Princes are assembled together Psalm. 2. 1. 2. 3.
against the Lord, and against his Christ: let us break their bands and cast
their cords from us. But he that dwells in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord
shall have them in derision. And although sometimes things seem to be effected
by the cunning practices of crafty heads against God, and godliness, against
good men, and just causes, yet nothing is done by the force of their wit, but
only by the virtue of Gods will, sometimes for the correction of his people,
and sometimes for their trial, but all for their good, and our glory, as the
Apostles together apprehended, and acknowledged in that which seemed the most
direful success which ever sinful man found, for the crucifying of the most
righteous innocent Savior of the world. Doubtless (say they) against thine
holy son Jesus, whom thou had anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate,
Act. 4. 27.
with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel gathered themselves together, to
do whatsoever thine hand, and thy counsel had determined before to be done.
For how can any thing be of force against him, who gives to all creatures
their being, and from whom men receive all the faculties of their mind, and
strength of their bodies; who foreseeth all future purposes, and designements:
who assigns to every man, all the actions that he shall effect: who is
present in every place with wisdom and might, to cross all adversary craft
and power.

Verse 31. The horse is prepared for the day of battle: but saf^tie is of the
Lord.

THe horse is prepared] So are weapons also, and armor, and soldiers that
should use them; they are mustred, and they are trained: yet the victory is
doubtful how great soever the army be, how good soever the armor is, and how
skillful and valiant soever the warriers be: For the King is not saved by the
multitude of an host, neither is the mighty man delivered by his great
strength. A horse is a vain help, and shall not deliver Psalm. 33. 16. 17.
any by his great strength* for safety is of the Lord, he gives power to that
side which shall win the field, without need or help of their forces: for
sometimes the smaller multitude prevail, and sometimes the weak soldiers
prevail, as the wise man by experience observed, saying, I returned and saw
under the sun that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the
Eccles. 9. 11.
strong. Now it is not Salomons intention to limit the point, and restrain it
to this particular, but his meaning is that the success of every thing is in
Gods hands, and stands not in the force of the means, though never so
lawful and likely, as it is said, Except the Lord build the house, they labor
in vain that build it: Except the Lord keep the city, the keeper watches
Psalm. 127. 1. 2.
in vain: It is in vain for you to rise up early, and lie down late, etc.
For though great pains be taken for riches, yet wealth is from the Lord:
though great riches be gotten for the raising up, and supportance of a family,
yet honor and establishment is from the Lord: though counsel be taken, and
diligence be used, for the following of causes, and managing of suits, yet the
sentence is from the Lord: though physic be ministered, and medicines applied,
yet the recovery of health is from the Lord, etc.

CHAPTER. XXII.
Verse 1. A good name is to be chosen rather then great riches, and loving
favor then silver and gold.

A Good name,] viz. Reputation, or a good report gotten by good men, for
weldoing: (for it is not that commendation which is given by the wicked, for
doing of that which pleases their humor) is to be chosen, by such as love
and fear the Lord, and the fellowship of his Saints, rather then great riches,
more then any commodities of this life. In the book of Ecclesiastes, it is
preferred before Eccles. 7. 2 Matthew. 26.
the best ointments, which in those parts were of great value, and were
reckoned for treasures, and esteemed with the Isai. 39. 2. Prou. 10 7.
most precious things. For a man's credit, and honor is of outward things his
best possession. Because it is peculiar to good men; whereas other things in a
more plentiful measure, are among the wicked. Hypocrites and sinners may be
applauded: as Herod, and the Pharisees were; but it will turn to their
perpetual shame at the last, as Herod felt, and the Pharisees Act. 12. Luke 6.
26.
were foretold. The deepest hypocrite cannot possiby long retain his
estimation, or at all attain unto true praise: for that is never separated
from a good conscience, forasmuch as it is not of men only, but of God
himself, and is always the Romans 2. 29.
perfume of faith, and obedience: and herein it is more excellent then any
earthly substance, in that it is so durable and perpetual: death bereaueth a
man of all his goods; they are owned by a new master so soon as soul and body
be separate; but just praise remains still a man's own: it taryeth behind
him in earth, and goes with him also to heaven, and will most grace him at the
last day, at the Judgment seat of Jesus Christ. It may seem sometimes to be
abolished, by the malicious slanders, and accusations of wicked men; as Naboths
was when he was defamed as a blasphemer, and a traitor: but it is obscured but
for a time, as it were clouds coming between men's eyes, and the rays of the
sun: but it cannot be taken away for ever, no more then clouds can ever keep
the Sun from shining: for they that cannot take away grace, can never take
away true glory. Wait on the Lord Psalm. 3. 3.
(says David) and he shall bring forth thy righteousness as light: and thy
judgment as noone day. And loving favor, that good liking whereby any person
is acceptable and gracious in the sight of God and man: then silver and gold,
then those things that are most desired and coueted after in the world: for it
is a great blessing from God upon due cause to be beloved Psalm. 106. 46.
and favored of men. This is obserueable in Daniel, in Joseph, in David: and
in many others whom the Scripture mentions, and especially our Savior
himself, who is said to increase in wisdom, and stature, and favor both
with God and Luke 2. 52.
men. By this means many benefits are obtained, which otherwise could not be
gotten: and much good is done which without this could not be performed: as the
preservation of the Church by Hester and Mordecay: the building of the Temple
by Zerubbabel: and the repairing of Jerusalem by Nehemiah. The Scriptures
abound with examples of this nature.

Verse. 2. The rich and the poor meet together, and the Lord is the maker of
them all.

THe rich] Who for a time has abounded with wealth, and great plenty either by
his own getting, or by other men's gifture, or by any such means, (whether
just, or unrighteous,) as it has pleased Gods most righteous providence to
direct for that purpose, and the poor, he that has tasted of adversity, and
drunk of the bitter cup of penury, do meet together, not all, but some, whom
the Lord sometimes singleth out from the rest, of both estates, to make them
acquainted with both estates, do find an alteration of their former
conditions, the one falling or rising to that which the other formerly had
been; as passengers iourneying from contrary coasts, do meet in the mid way,
and this man trauelleth thitherwards, from whence that man is lately gone and
departed. For no outward estate is certainly perpetual, and unchangeable, but
that falls out to be true which both Hannah, the gracious mother of Samuel,
and Mary, the blessed mother of Christ did sing: They that were full are hired
forth 1. Sam. 2. 5.
for bread, and the hungry are no more hired. And, he has put down the
mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree. He has filled the
hungry with good things, and sent away Luke 2. 52. 53.
the rich empty. Riches would be vntollerably admired, if there were a
perpetuity of them, sithence that now being so fugitive they are so greedily
coueted, and so confidently trusted in. And the stability of their state which
had once gotten the possession, substance would turn to the hurt of their
neighbors, who should thereby continually be deprived of the benefits thereof:
for if all waters should be dammed up in a few men's ponds, what would become of
the grounds, and cattle of others? On the other side, poverty certain and
continual, would impair that cheerfulness which is in labor and diligence,
and that thankfulness for the good success of the same: Gods promises for
earthly blessings would not be so forcible, nor his power and providence so
clear and conspicuous. And the Lord is the maker of them all, the maker of the
men, the maker of their estates, and the maker of that change and alteration
which often happens, that the one might become grateful, and the other
humble. This parity did rich Job acknowledge to be between himself, and his
poor underlings, his servants, his bondmen. Did not he that made me in the
womb, make him? and did not one fashion us in the womb? It is he then that
gives life, and breath, and reason, and being to all: and it is he that
allotteth to every man his portion, some to be full, some to be empty, some to
have much, some to be worth little: some to be able to give, some to have need
to receive. If all were rich, the blessing would not be so acceptable,
according as many excellent gifts, being yet common, are not, as fire, light,
warmth, water, air, etc. Neither would there seem to be so much need of
prayer for substance, or the preservation thereof. If no man were in want, few
men would take pains to travel for others, if necessity did not compel them;
Deuteronomy. 15. 11.
and then there would be none to exercise mercy upon. If all were poor, who
should be the helpers of them? who should supply their wants, and minister
relief unto them? And who could carry the countenance, the port, and
consequently the reverence of magistracy, and of public authority?

Verse. 3. A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself: but the
simple pass on, and are punished.

A Prudent man.] He that has learned holy and heavenly wisdom, sees the
plague, foreseeth some judgment and punishment ready to fall upon himself, or
the public estate, which he discerns by the knowledge of sins committed,
and the due meditation of the threatenings of God against the same; all which he
verily believes will be executed, and hides himself, deals like discreet
persons, who apprehending by sight or signs some tempest arising, betake
themselves to covert, either in a house, or under a bush, or in some other
commodious and safe place of refuge. Spiritual foresight Job 31. 1.
and prevention of evils, is by avoiding the sins that may bring hurt; or by
humbling our selves after sins committed, as Josiah did for himself and the
people; and by depending on God alone, without trusting to, or using of any
evil means. Racha^, the Gibeonites, and Nineuites, are pregnant examples for
this purpose: but the simple, those silly and wicked fools, worse then
witless idiots; which will neither take notice of their iniquities, nor
fearing the threatenings of God denounced against the same, pass on, in their
wicked ways and transgressions, not seeking any shelter so much as of God
himself, and are punished, overtaken with some evils, either by curses in this
world, or with condemnation in the world to come: for all obstinate and
impenitent persons must ^eeds bring destruction upon themselves at the last, as
the Scriptures threaten. The transgressors shall be destroyed together, Psalm.
37. 38.
and the end of the wicked shall be cut off. And, did not my words, and my
statutes, which I commanded by my servants the Zach. 1. 6.
Prophets, take hold on your fathers, and they returned and said, As the Lord
of hosts has determined to do unto us, according to our own ways, and
according to our works, so has he dealt with us. And this both in regard of
Gods justice, truth, curse, and oath: in regard of Gods people, who should not
be so happy by shunning of sin, if wicked men might live therein, and not
be miserable. Though a sinner do evil an hundred Eccles. 8. 12.
times, and his days be prolonged: yet surely I know it shall be well with
them that fear the Lord, which fear before him.

Verse. 4. The reward of humility, and the fear of the Lord, is riches, honor,
and life.

THe reward,] Those blessings wherewith God does recompense humility, that
amiable grace of lowliness, when a man esteems basely of himself, and
thinks well of others, and accordingly giving honor, and not taking of it;
and of the fear of the Lord, sound piety and godliness: is riches, the
plenty of good things, so far as they are safe for their souls; honor,
that good name that has been commended in the first verse; and life, a
comfortable continuance in this life, until they be ripe for another, and then
the enioyment of that, with all happiness for ever. See chap. 3. 15. and 16.
17.

Verse. 5. Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward: But he that does
keep his soul shall be far from them.

Thorns and snares] Most grievous plagues and punishments, such as are
contrary to the reward promised to the humble and godly in the former verse:
the thorns of penury, want, and beggary: the thorns of contempt, and the
snares of death, are in these ways and courses which he takes, and that
impious and wretched life which he lives: for it is the portion of godless
men, to go with misery to their destruction. As the end of Pharaoh, Achab,
Haman, and the whole rabble of that hellish crew does make the world to see. He
that does keep his soul, that has confideration of his own salvation and
good estate: (for it is a part put for the whole) shall be far from them,
from such miseries as hang over these men's heads, and therefore also from those
misdemeanors as pull down such judgments upon them. Lo (says Job) their
good is not in their hand, let the counsel of Job. 21. 15.
the wicked he far from me. How often shall the candle of the wicked be put
out? and how often comes their destruction upon them: God distributeth his
anger upon them.

Verse. 6. Train up a child in the way wherein he should walk, and he will not
depart from it when he is old.

Train up a child] Give instruction unto him, the manner whereof may be
gathered, not only by the mention of child, but by the signification of the
Hebrew word, which is Chanoc. Nagnar.
as much as if it were said, catechize him, initiate him, enter him (as it
were) properly dedicate him, as they did their houses new built unto the Lord,
inform him therefore according to his capacity in the grounds and principles
of religion, admonish him also of his faults, teach him how to reform them;
rectify and strengthen him, whiles he is yet a flexible plant, pluck up the
weeds which yet begin to grow in his heart, while they be young and tender,
before they have taken too much rooting. Saint Paul requires the performance
of the same duty, saying; Bring up, or nurse up your children in the fear of
the Lord. He would have them to suck in religion, if not with their mothers
milk, yet shortly after as soon as they are capable of it. Here are two
reasons which may move men to obey this precept: The first is the cause
thereof, in that understanding piety, and Christian behavior, is the way even
of younglings: according to the Prophets testimony, Wherewith shall a young
man, (the word is the same Psalm. 119. 9.
which here we translate child) Cleanse his way, in taking heed thereto
according to thy word. Now then sithence it is so, it is good to set them on
forward in so happy a journey betime in the morning, that they may take the
whole day before them. The second is the effect, he shall not depart therefrom
when he is old, the seasoning of youth does much confirm piety and goodness
in riper years, whereof our Solomon himself Prou. 2. etc. 2. Tim. 3. 14. 15
found the benefit. And so did Timothy, in whom S. Paul apprehended so much
grace and virtue. This causes memory long to keep the print of the first
stamp: and the delights and customs of youth will not easily be extinguished.
The unreasonable creatures which are tamed when they are young, and from the
teates of the damme, continue less wild and fierce then others of the same
kind, so long as they live. Although this timely teaching does not in all take
this good effect, yet it does in very many, and is Gods ordinance for the same,
and the parents exercising of it may take this comfort, that they have obeyed
the Lord, and neglected no duty to their children.

Verse. 7. The rich rules over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the
lender.

THe rich rules over the poore] Because the poor man stands in need of the
rich, he that is wealthy becomes his Lord, usurping authority, and bearing
away the sway for all matters: for every thing must be as he will have it, and
the borrower is servant to the lender: for he that goes a borrowing (as we
say goes a sorrowing:) for he loses his liberty, and is many times at his
inferiors commandment. They are often feared, and crouched unto with cap and
co^rtesie, and magnified like young masters, which have neither wisdom,
parentage, nor good nature, nor good qualities, nor any thing else to adorn
them; but only because men are in their debts and danger who are unworthy to
be servants, (so base they are and contemptible, (having nothing to set them
forth, but mon^y and wealth) do take upon them to be Lords, frowning upon,
rating, and th^eatning, and contemptuously vilifying those that are far their
betters. And by these two circumstances the wise man teaches, that great
wealth is a usual occasion of cruelty and insolency, which also the Apostle
Saint ames observed, saying: Do not the Iam. 2. 6.
rich oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats? And Daniel
describing the condition of one of the Monarchs or Monarchies, says, that in
his greatness he was like to a Lion with Eagles wings, strong and fierce, and
borne up high; but Dan. 7. 4.
when his state fell, his stomach also came somewhat tamed: for when he was
set on the ground upon his feet, that a man's heart (which is more mild and
moderate) was given unto him. For it puffs up the heart, and makes men proud
and haughty, thinking themselves the worthiest men, and condemning all others:
and so it comes to pass also by the inequality of power: for they see
themselves so strengthened by their substance, that they be abl^ to prevail in
what they will, and all the poor unable to resist them. Security also is
commonly joined with a great estate: for they that are up aloft, do not so
much as dream that they are suctiect to falling, but their prosperity will be
perpetual; as the Prophet brings in proud Babel boasting: I shall be a Lady
for ever, so that thou did not lay these things to thy heart, neither
remembredst thy Isa. 47. 7.
latter end. And in all this their folly and madness, they are very much
forwarded by the enchantment of flatterers.

Verse. 8. He that sows iniquity, shall reap vanity, and the rod of his anger
shall fail.

HE that sows iniqu^ty,] He that gives himself over with greediness to
commit sin, shall reap vanity, condign punishment and calamity, especially
from God in due time. It is an allegorical speech from husbandmen, which
conclude of an harvest after their feeding, and look what grain they sow,
that they make reckoning to have a crop of; and so wicked men do necessarily
prepare misery for themselves, as Eliphaz by observation and proof informed
Job, saying, As I have seen they that plough iniquity, and sow wickedness,
reap the same. The truth whereof also the Apostle Job 4. 8.
Paul confirms as most certain and infallible, admonishing the Galathians
not to be deceived in the matter, as though God might be mocked: For
whatsoever a man sows, that shall Gal. 6. ^.
be also reap. Upon men's ground sometimes thistles grow in stead of wheat, and
cockle in stead of barley: but this sinful seedman, is sure to have his own
again, and that in full proportion there will be neither alteration of
grain, nor defect of growth; the truth and justice of God will never permit
that. This is perpetually true in all manner sins whereunto they addict
themselves, without repentance, especially of tyranny and oppression, the rod
of his anger shall fail, that is, as in his arrogancy and indignation he that
scourged the poor, so he shall be scourged therewith, and it shall be spent
upon himself, so that he shall have no power to hurt others: for the more
violent and cruel wick^d men are, the nearer their power draws to an end:
for the harder and more often men strike with the rod, the more they waste it.

Verse. 9. He that has a bountiful eye shall be blessed: for he gives of his
bread to the poor.

HE that has a bountiful eye] He that is merciful and liberal toward
others (for a good man will have his eye, and other senses to further his heart
to compassion: as Moses went to see the burdens of his brethren: and those
blessed ones whom our Savior will praise at the last day, visited the hungry,
the thirsty the sick, the prisoners) (as contrariwise an evil eye is put for
an envious and evil person, because with the same he corrupts his heart)
shall be blessed: for not only men will wish him well, but the Lord himself
will power upon him store of earthly and heavenly blessings: so that the
fruits of good grace shall increase with him: for he gives of his bread to
the poor, and all other necessaries, according to their need, and his estate.
And therefore the Lord according to his own goodness, will yield him the
recompense of his goodness.

Verse. 10. Cast out the scorner, and contention shall go out: yea strife and
reproach shall cease.

CAst out,] Thou whom it concerns, as having a calling thereunto, as far as
thou may with equity, and conueniencie expel and banish out of thy
company, thy family, and jurisdiction, the scorner, he that contemns good
men* good instructions, good matter. For beside the reason perticularly
specified, there is great reason why he should be abandoned: because he is
infectious, and able to corrupt all that Romans 16.
converse with him. He delights to trouble the company of godly men, and
disturb all good conferences, if there be any possibility of cure to be done
of him; this disgraceful expulsion is the most likely means to work upon his
heart, and reclaim him: or if he receive no benefit by it, it will be an
exemplarie warning and admonition to others, and contention between him and
others well affected shall have an end. For there is no way to avoid contention
with scorners, but by excluding them out of our company. For while they give
themselves to contradicting and scorning, and take a certain pride and
pleasure therein, they do nothing but provoke brawling and quarrels. Yet by
that means of thrusting out scorners, strife not only with him, but part
taking many sins with others, and reproach, shame for, and in following such
discord, shall cease, be composed, and proceed no further. He means that
dissolute men are either the authors, or maintainers of contention, and strife,
which without them would either never have been begun, or being kindled would
soon be quenched: for they are destitute of the peace of God in their hearts,
for they are enemies to peace, and to every godly man that desires to live
peaceably, as David complains, saying: I am for peace, when I speak thereof
they are for Psalm. 120. 6.
war.

Verse 11. He that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips, the King
shall be his friend.

HE that loves pureness of heart] Which is sincere, and vprigh^ in the inward
man, des^^ing that grace which according to his wish his soul cannot so fully
attain unto, detesting that corruption which he cannot perfectly be purged
from: for the grace of his lips; because he utters also gracious, and
grateful things, not such as tickle the ears, but such as effect a faithful
heart: for it is the note of sincerity to join heart and tongue together in
good causes, even by our Saviors testimony who declares, that a good man, out
of the good Mat. 12. 35.
treasure of his heart, brings forth good things. To this agrees that of the
Psalmist, Mine heart will utter forth a good matter, I will entreat in my
works of the King, my tongue is as Psalm. 45. 1. and 17. 3.
the pen of a sw^ft writer. The King shall be h^ friend, he shall be well, and
friendly used of great personages: for the King either will, or should delight
in such persons, as David did in Hushai. His purpose is, to declare that
faithfulness is the best way to preferment: as we see it verified in Joseph, in
Daniel, in Mordecai, and sundry others recorded in the Bible. For honesty, and
plain dealing is a thing desirable: and therefore men for their own sakes,
often make choice of, and employ such as they may trust and rely upon. And God
has the Kings heart in his hand, to derive his love unto his servants, and to
bring those into his favor, which are beloved, and favored of him, and that
many times for the use, and comfort of diverse of his children: for by the love
of Pharao to Joseph, all the family of Jacob was relieved; and by the ki^dnes
of Ashuerosh to Ester, the whole Church and nation of the Jews was preserved.
It seems that the acceptance of the sound hearted man in this verse, is
opposed to the reiection of the scorner in the verse before.

Verse 12. The eyes of the Lord preserve knowledge: but he overthrows the
matters of the transgressor.

THe eyes of the Lord] His gracious mercy, and great providence (for he
speaks of God after the manner and capacity of men) preserve, keep in
safety from all hurt and danger, knowledge, men endued with true knowledge and
wisdom, the qualities of the mind being put by a Metonymie, for the persons
endued therewith and their state, and affairs also, as may be collected by the
Antithesis, but he overthrows the matters of the transgressor: sometimes he
resists at the beginning of their attempts: sometimes they proceed on in
their business in great hope, and likelihood of happy success: but when they
are about to set on the roof, their foundation fails, and down comes all
their building, their words, their thoughts, their actions, their state, all
that they said, purposed, did or had gotten, is quite ouerturned, and comes
to naught: For God does set himself against them in every one of these. The
opposition stands thus: The eyes of the Lord preserve such as have knowledge,
and therefore establishes their matters, but they are directed against those
which are sinfully ignorant, and therefore overthrows their affairs.

Verse. 13. The slothful man says there is a Lion without: I shall be slain
in the streets.

THe slothful man] He that gives himself to idleness, and loytering, says a
Lion is without: although he utter not the same words which are set down in
this place, yet he so behaueth himself, as if he spoke them, by faining of
lets, and fearing of dangers, as loss of life, or of favor, or of liberty,
or of money, has always one excuse or other, either in his heart, or in his
mouth: For this complaint of the Lion is but casting of an imagined peril;
imagined, I say, because he thinks a Lamb to be a Lion, and is terrified
with his own conceit: For Lions haunt not in streets, but in woods and
wildernesses: and if a Lion were in the street of a city, or town, there
would be help enough to save the man, and kill the beast, so that there need
to be no such dread to be slai^e therein. It is the purpose of the holy Ghost
to declare (...) osition of men that are unwilling to do good, they ^ill
^eutie shifts, and feign excuses, needless, and (...)less, and very absurd,
rather then they will be induced to p^rforme that which they affect not. King
Zedekiah was pers^aded to yield himself to the King of Babel, and so he, his
people, and the city should be spared from the sword: but he durst not
forsooth, because he was afra^d of the Jews that were fallen unto the king
Ierem. 18. 19.
of Babel, lest they should be delivered to him, and they would mock him.
Certain searchers were sent with Joshua and Caleb into the land of Canaan, to
view the country, to the intent they might bring good news to the people, and
animate them to go and take possession thereof: but they wanted courage, and
had no mind to encounter with the Canaanites, and therefore could pick
quarrels against the place, and find out reason^ in respect of the persons, to
afray themselves, and all their brethren from that expedition. The cities are
walled (say they) and exceeding great, the people be strong that dwell in the
land: Numb. 13. 33.
it is a land that eats up the inhabitants of it: and the men that are in it
are of great stature: for we saw giants the sons of Anak, which came of the
giants, so that we seemed in our sight like grasshoppers, and so we were in
their sight. Was there ever any thing more gracious, comfortable, and
lightsome, then the kingdom of Christ? and has ever any government been more
mild and righteous, then that of David, his substitute and figure? and yet the
contemptuous rebels which refused to submit themselves thereunto, could pick
quarrels against the same, as if they had been cruel and tyrannous, accounting
them rather prisons and Iayles, then tolerable governments. Let us (say they)
break their bands, and cast their cords Psalm. 23.
from us.

Verse 14. The mouth of a strange woman is a deep ditch, he that is abhorred
of the Lord shall fall therein.

THe mouth* The fair speeches, and flattering words uttered by the mouth of a
strange woman, of an ha^lot, or whore, is a deep ditch, full of great danger.
It is very fitly compared to a pit, because he that falls thereinto cannot
rise up again, but is plunged into eternal and most fearful destruction,
and bottomless misery. See chap. 7. 26. 27.

And he that is abhorred of the Lord* Such a one against wh^^ God is provoked
by former wickedness: being delivered up by him into a reprobate sense, through
a peculiar kind of revenge, shall be seduced by her, as this our Solomon
elsewhere also testifiet^; I find more bitter then death the woman E^cles. 7. 26.
whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands as bands: whose pleases God
shall escape from her: but the sinner shall be taken by her.

Verse 15. Foolishnes is bound to the heart of a child: but the rod of
correction shall drive it out.

FOolishnes] Wantonness, frowardnes, and simplicity spreads it self through
the whole flesh of youth, but especially has abode in their souls, where it
is deeply rooted: For their reason is weak, their will waiward* and their
whole heart addicted and inclined to evil. And this corruption is bound up in
such sort in a childs heart, as that it is fast tied thereunto, as a pack or
a fardell is to an horses back. So then all children, as well as elder folk,
are addicted and inclined to evil, sin, and folly. And David yields a
reason hereof: (for that which he testifies of himself pertains to all
others) when he says, that he was borne in iniquity, and that in sin Psalm.
51. 5.
his mother had conceived him. But the rod of correct on will drive it out:
Correction given with the rod will be a very good means to remove it. For the
medicines against sin, which God uses to every age, be effectual to his
own of that age: as to the elder sort, the Word, the Sacraments, and censures
of the Church: to the younger sort, especially to such as are yet but te^^er,
instructions, with the rod of parents and governors.

Verse. 16. He that oppresses the poor to increase his riches, and he that
gives to the rich, shall surely come to poverty.

HE that oppresses the poore] Either by fraud, or force, or any indirect
means, to increase his riches, to make himself more rich and mighty thereby:
for they that take away from the needle, usually besto^ where no need is, and
the greatest oppressors are commonly great bribers of those that are above
them, and often make feasts to their superiors, to get them to be their
friends, and to serve the^ turns* that their faults may be winked at* and
dis^ens^d with: and to save their credit, which is impeached by their violent
and unmerciful dealing (...)ly come to want. For cruelty, and unjust dealing,
(...) way to overthrow a man's estate, as Zo^har witness(...) That which he
labored for shall he restore* and shall not swallow it down: according to his
substance shall his rest^^ution be, and he shall not rejoice therein. Because
he has oppressed the Job. 20. 18. 19.
poor, because he has violently taken away an house which he builded not.
The Lord by law of requital does oftentimes expose them to oppression, or else
otherwise powers a curse upon them: this sometimes they hasten by their own
greedy desires, in st^iuing to ^omp^sse great matters, and to that and give to
the rich, and namely to the Usurers, that they may furnish them with money,
when there will not be sufficient for the purpose: who having gotten them into
their clutches, do pray upon them, until they have drawn them dry, never
ceasing to suck, so long as there is any moisture in their estate.

Verse. 17. Bow down thine ears, and hear the words of the wise* and apply
thine heart to my understanding.

FRom the beginning of the tenth chapter, to this place, diverse brief
sentences have been set down, rather by way of doctrine, then exhortation. Now
that style being altered Solomon returns to take unto him the person of a
father, and for the most part does speak after that manner which he used in
the nine first chapters, and this course he holds in the remnant of this
chapter, and the two next following. Again, exhortation is here propounded,
which is set forth by the subject of it: the duties whereunto he does
persuade us in this verse, and is enforced by reasons for confirmation of it,
in the four next following. The duty is first set down more generally, to
embrace the words of wise men: and more particularly to be attentive to his
knowledge: Bow down thine ears, and hearken unto the words of the wise, bend
the sense of hearing* which is the entry of understanding, unto the speeches,
and writings of the godly learned. For regard is to be had to the documents and
instructions of men endued with piety and understanding, and that does David
require of all in that ample and serious exhortation: Hear this all ye
people, Psalm. 49. 1.
give ear all ye inhabitants of the world. Our need requires it, who ever
we are, though as David, or Peter: and Gods blessing is bestowed upon those
that are attentive to such, Chap. 13. 14. and his judgments pursue such as
reject them: as we may see in Rehoboam, in Amaziah, and in Elies sons, 1.
King. 12.
and apply thine heart to my knowledge. See chap. 2. 2.

Verse 18. For it is a pleasant thing, if thou keep them within thee, they
shall withal be sitted in thy lips.

THe reason whereby he does confirm his doctrine, is first from the
delectation, and delightfulnes of it, in the beginning of this verse: the
second from the commodity and vsefulnes of it, in the latter part of this
verse, and in all the next: thirdly, from the excellency and dignity of it,
in the twentieth verse: fourthly, from the certainty and truth, in the one and
twentieth.

For it is a p^easant thing, the hearing, and understanding of them, and all
other Scriptures, is sweet, and comfortable, as joyful to the heart, as any
aspect or beautiful sight can possibly be to the eye, or the most delicious
food can be to the taste: For they are found and felt to be sweeter then the
honey, or the honey comb. For by these a man is estated in Psalm 19. 10.
Christ, in Gods favor, in heaven, and in all the promises: if thou keep them
within thee, in thy heart, in thy mind, and in thy memory: the Hebrew word is
in thy belly, which sometimes in the Scriptures is taken for the inward parts,
or faculties of the soul, they shall be withal fitted on thy lips. From the
pleasure of them, he comes to the use, and profit of them: which in the first
place is external, they shall furnish a man with wholesome and seasonable
speeches. It is said they shall be fitted on thy lips, the instrument, or
cause, being put for the effect thereof: For the word of God in the heart and
mind, does yield matter to the tongue and lips, of fruitful conference: and
he that applies his ear to hear attentively, shall Isai. 50. 4. 5.
thereby enable his mouth to speak fruitfully, and for the good of many. And
agreeable hereunto is that in the Psalm, The mouth of the righteous speaks
wisdom, and his tongue talks Psalm. 37. 30. 31.
of judgment: For the law of God is in his heart, therefore none of his steps
shall slide.

Verse. 19. That thy trust may be in the Lord, I have made known unto this day
even unto thee.

HE shows another use and fruit of his doctrine, and all Gods words, which is
internal, and that which concerns the inward man, which is hope, confidence,
and dependence upon God: as if he should have said: To the intent thou may
neither despair, nor yet securely lean unto thine own wisdom, I have both
by my words and writings given thee such instruction, as show both Jehovah to
be the true, eternal, and all-sufficient God, as also declare the duties of
obedience, wherein men are to walk before him. For the whole scope of the
Scripture is, to bring men to believe in, and confidently to rest on God, as
Saint Paul teaches, affirming, that whatsoever things have been written in
fore time, Romans 15. 4.
were written for our learning, that we thorough patience, and comfort in the
Scriptures might have hope. For in this consists all true blessedness: as
from vain confidence, and worldly trust all misery proceeds.

Verse. 20. Have I not written unto thee excellent things in counsels and
knowledge?

THis verse contains the third reason, commending the excellency of Salomons
lessons, and all the rest of Gods doctrines, which he expresses, partly by a
simile, or comparison, and partly by the matter and subject which they handle
and entreat of: the comparison is taken from the dignities and degrees of great
men; and therefore he says, that they are excellent, or princely, nor base or
common, but rare and royal sentences: before in this book Christ said, I will
utter the words of rulers: there is used a word in the Hebrew, that notes
Negudim.
out those governors which guide and lead the people: and here another which
signifies those nobles which are in Shalishim.
the third place from the King. The subjects hereof is counsels, and knowledge,
which reveal and make manifest the revelation, and manifestation of Gods
counsels and purposes which advise a man, and give him perfect direction in all
his ways, which so clearly inform a man in whatsoever is fit for him to
understand, as that there is nothing meet for his soul, or state, or credit,
or any thing appertaining unto him for his good, but he may know, and have
sound intelligence thereof.

Verse. 21. That I may make thee to know the certainty of the words of truth;
that thou may answer the words of truth to them that send unto thee.

HEre we have the last reason whereby this doctrine is praised, the verity of
that which he in this place, and the spirit of God every where does teach:
which first he expressly professes and teaches, and after enlarges by the
end and effect of the same; That I might make thee to know the certainty of the
words of truth: as if he should have said, I do not broach or give out
fantasies or fables, which vanish or ever they come to pass, or fictions of
things which never were: but I publish truths, whereof thou may have a
perfect evidence, and which shall be performed without fail in their season:
and are not only to be credited as humane words, or writings, but to be
believed with faith as the sayings of God. The end of this follows, that thou
might answer the words of truth to them that send unto thee; which tends
to this purpose: I, and the Lord which speaks by me, would not only have
thee to apprehend and be persuaded of the truth thy self, but to confirm it
also to others, and be able to render a reason of thy judgment and doings to
those that shall call thee to an account, Deuteronomy. 6. 6. 1. Pet. 3. 15.
and to give sound advice to those that shall require thy counsel.

Verse. 22. Rob not the poor, because he is poor, nor the afflicted in the
gate.

23. For the Lord will plead the cause, and will spoil those that spoiled them.

THese two verses contain a caveat against oppression; wherein we may note
the parties specially to be freed from molestation, and the manner of
molesting in the former verse; and the reason of it in the latter. The parties
not to be wronged are t^^ poor, Rob not the poor, take nothing from him
unjustly, not upon that title which he has, nor any part of his substance,
because he is poor, embolden not thy self by the sight of his debility, and
thine own power to fly at him, deuou^e, or plume him, but therefore be the
more wary, and if nothing else detain thee from that attempt, yet let this,
because he is poor, and has more need to be relieved then further moles^ed.
The manner of wrong doing forbidden is, oppress not the afflicted in the gate.
It is agrieuous fault to add affliction to the afflicted, but to do it in the
gate, to abuse Psalm. 69. 26.
ones might in the place and seat of justice, which is meant by the gate,
there to overthrow the right of him that is wrongfully pursued, or grievously
oppressed, is an intolerable crime, and heinous offense: for God has
appointed it as a refuge for them that are wronged, and for relief of them
which sustain injuries. The reason why this sin is to be avoided, and men
should so carefully abstain from it, is, because the Lord will take the matter
into his hand, though all the counsel be against them now, and no man take
upon him the defense of their cause, or to open his mouth in their behalf, yet
God ^n time, without a fee will prove that the law and right was on their side,
and though the bench be made against them, and sentence passed on their
adversaries side, yet the suite will not so be ended, but have a new day of
hearing hereafter, when God shall be Judge, who will make a decree that all the
proceedings against him, shall be reuersed, or left so recompensed as shall be
to their honor, and their enemies shame: For he will spoil their soul that
spoileth them, execute vengeance, and judgments upon the souls and bodies of
their oppressors, to their utter overthrow in earth, or hell, amongst men, or
before the throne of Christ in the world to come. This was of great moment with
Job to deter him from violence, and injustice toward his feeblest
inferiors, whom he could have had means most easily to crush: If I, says
he, have lift up my hand Job 31. 22.
against the fatherless, when I saw my help in the gate; then let mine arm
fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone. For
destruction from God was a terror unto me, and I could not be delivered from
his highness.

Verse. 24. Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou
shall not go. 25. Lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul.

MAke no friendship] Choose not him to be thy familiar friend* who is of a
wrathful disposition, neither go with him, be not sociable with, nor often in
the company of the furious man, him that is wholly given to heat and fury,
and cannot subdue his angry and outrageous affections: Some by nature somewhat
hasty are not utterly to be rejected, or excluded from our company, if
through Gods grace they bridle themselves in any good measure: but such as
neither have power nor will to stay their passions, either by Gods grace, or
the use of reason, are fit to live alone, as Dragons, or wild beasts. The
reasons of this precept are from the evil effect that will proceed from such a
companion. One is, lest thou learn his ways, lest by his ex(...)le and
company thou be infected with his vices. For society with any kind of wicked
person is dangerous to cause infection, and in particular in this case, there
can be no safety in breach or kindness with him: If we accord, and there be
agreement between us, we shall hear untrue reports from him, and so be
partakers with him: if breaches, we shall be driven also to brawle and
contend, and so at the last get an habit of frowardness. Another is, lest thou
get a snare to thy soul, lest thou be driven into some quarrels, to do
mischief, to the endangering of thy soul, or life, or be assaulted with his
violence, and meet with a deadly blow at his hands: for the furious person
spares not to shead blood, neither are his most familiar and kindest friends
always free from his rage or assaults.

Verse. 25. Be not thou one of them that strike hands, nor of them that are
sureties for debts.

26. If thou have nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed from under
thee?

BE not of the number of them that strike hands. See chap. 5. 1. 2. 3.

If thou have nothing to pay] If thou have undertaken for more then he for whom
thou gave thy word, is able to satisfy, or thou thy self can conveniently
discharge, Why should he take away thy bed from under thee? why do thou
through thine own folly commit, that thou should be deprived of the bed
whereon thou lie? and have a thing so necessary as that is to be taken away
from thee, and so besides the shame and disgrace thou shall have nothing to lie
on. See chap. 20. 16.

Verse 27. Remove not the ancient land-markes which thy fathers have set.

Remove not] By force, or fraud, openly, or secretly, in the day, or in the
night, the ancient land-markes, to enlarge thine own ground, and detract from
others, which thy fathers have set, which thine ancestors have made for bounds
and limits. In Judea the changing of the marks of lands did breed great
confusion, in the year of Iubile, wherein their grounds were to be restored to
the first possessor, or at least to their posterity. Amongst us incroaching on
other men's possessions, and the deceitful displacing of the signs of our
inheritances, causes suites of law, fraies, and slaughter. If men's grounds
should not be severed by creekes, or ditches, or hedges, or meare-stones, or
some other marks, much wrong would be done, and none should know his own:
and therefore says Moses in Deuteronomie, Remove not the ancient bounds which
Deuteronomy. 19. 14.
the elders have set down. And by the infringing of this precept men incur
that solemn curse, which was publikly denounced upon mount Eball, with the
Amen of all the ^ultitude, Cursed be he that remoueth his neighbors mark, and
all Deuteronomy. 27. 17.
the people shall say Amen.

Verse. 28. See thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before
Kings, and not before mean men.

See thou a man diligent, or swift (for so the word signifies) in his
business, do thou observe one who dispatcheth any work of the body or
mind with nimblenes, or that does as it were fly about his masters errands?
he shall stand before Kings, he shall be received into the service of Nobles,
and Princes, who are wont* greatly to delight in those that are quick
spirited, and painful, and not before mean men, remains not in the number
of them, but is more highly preferred. Whereby he signifies, that faithfulness
in a calling, is the best way to true advancement. If they have not
entertainment with great men, because their families be not always safest for
their souls and manners, yet they shall be sure of favor, and countenance,
from the great God, which of all others yields the greatest honor. See chap.
12. 24.

CHAPTER. XXIII.
Verse. 1. When thou sit with a ruler, consider diligently what is before
thee.

2 For thou put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to thine
appetite.

3 Be not desirous of his dainty meat, for it is a deceitful meat.

THe holy Ghost declared in the last verse of the former chapter, that
diligence aduanceth to the presence, and speech of great personages: and now in
the beginning of this chapter, he shows how they should behave themselves
when they come before them: specially when they sit to eat with them. These
verses contain two exhortations, enforced with their several reasons. The
first is to be wise, and considerate at the present whiles we are at the table
with them: that then we show not our selves ravenous, and uncivil, in the two
first verses. The other, that we do not greedily affect dainties, to press
our selves to the feasts and tables of our betters, especially noble
personages, and courtiers, in the third verse. Consider diligently what is
before thee, ponder, and observe, with wisdom, and discretion, the nature and
number of those dishes that are placed on the table, that thou begin not where
thou should not, and so bewray want of good manners, or ouercharge thy
stomach by feeding on every one, and so disgrace thy self with intemperance:
For it is an ordinary thing at the tables of Princes and great Lords, to have
diversity of meats, with diverse sorts of wines and plenty, to show their
magnificence, whereof a man cannot fall to every one without luxury, and
excess, which is odious at all times, and in all places, but much more thee,
and in such a presence. And therefore men ought to be as circumspect at their
meat, as in any other of their affairs: because m^ns eyes look upon them,
which ought to be regarded, especially if they be men of quality and place:
and Gods eyes behold them, which of al others ought most to be respected. S.
Jude marketh them with the brand of wicked persons which feed themselves
without all Jude 12.
fear. Otherwise thou put a knife to thy throat: If thou be immoderate in
thy diet, and have not power to bridle thine appetite, and restrain thy self
from excessive eating and drinking, thou do after a sort endanger thy life,
as if thou did put a knife to thy throat, and so be made the author of
thine own death: For surfeiting and drunkenness does destroy health, and so
thereby men offer violence to their bodies: and the punishment of them is
everlasting death, and so thereby they destroy their own souls. Be not
desirous of ^is dainty dishes, lust not after, nor covet with an unbridled
affection his delicates: the Hebrew word imports such things as savor well
to the taste, and are sweet and delicious. The Matgnammoth.
meaning is, that good fare, fine apparel, and other delights, which are to be
found in the courts of Princes, and families of great men, should not allure us
without just cause, and due calling, to intrude our selves as it were into
those places, to become courtiers, companions with, or attendants upon those of
high calling: for it is a deceitful meat, like a bait, under which lurketh
an hook, and such food it is as will easily overtake a man, if he be not very
watchful and wary: it does not yield such contentment as men expected: many
vexations are mingled with it: there is no stabilitie therein, to day in
favor, to morrow in disgrace; now aloft, with countenance and hopes, anon
down to the ground with contumelies and despair: many seeking by this means
to set up themselves, and theirs for ever, have ruinated their former estate,
which was competent, and utterly overthrown their posterities.

Verse 4. Labor not to be rich, cease from thine own wisdom.

Verse 5. Will thou cause thine eyes to fly upon that which is nothing? For
riches makes her self wings, and flies as an eagle toward heaven.

AS in the former sentences he forbad the immoderate appetite after dainty
food: so in these he prohibiteth too great a desire of wealth, and riches. He
proceeds in the same method which he had begun in the former chapter, by
giving an admonition, and confirming it with a reason, Labor not to be rich,
drudge and moyle not by toylefull travel to get, and hoard up substance, and
store thine house, thy chests, thy barnes, thy fields, thy grounds, thy
warehouse, or thy shop with plenty and abundance: cease from thine own
wisdom, because thou have, and all carnal men do account it a point of
prudence and wisdom, to be worldly, and having, to provide, and heap up much,
therefore alter thy mind and reform thy judgment, know that to be folly,
which thou esteemest for great wisdom: For seeing it was not the wisdom of
God, but the wisdom of the world, which seems plausible to the flesh, but
absurd to the spirit, thou shall provide best for thy self to cast it off and
have no more to do with it. For notwithstanding it is discretion to be
industrious, and diligent in work, to serve the Lord, in hope of his blessing:
yet it is but a foolish part to oppress the body or mind with too heavy
burdens of karking, caring, and anxietie, to make a god of ones own labor or
policy, with trust or confidence in that which is done, or gotten. So that
worldliness is no part of sound wisdom, but of condemnable folly, and that
Luke 12. 20.
by Gods own testimony, calling him fool, which wanted not wit to heap up
great wealth. For ^^ is painful to the body, Eccles. 2. 26.
and draws it unto needless and fruitless labors and travels: it is
burthenous to the mind, and oppresses it with sorrow Eccles. 5. 17.
and vexations: and it is perilous for the heart and conscience, and makes men
unfit for their latter end, unmindful of death, and unprepared for the
judgment to come. Luke 21. 34.


Will thou cause thine eyes to fl^^ upon that which is nothing? Will thou too
earnestly and egerly like a foolish Faulk^^r, haulke with the flight of thine
eyes, after that which when thou have caught it is nothing worth? Two arguments
he uses to condemn the sin of covetousness: one from the vanity of goods so
gotten: the other from the instabil^^e, and uncertainty of them. He calls
them nothing but that t^ere is a substance in the creatures, and good use also
of them to such as love them not too much, nor abuse them, but none in
possession of them to the cou^tous person: the having them is nothing, and to
no purpose to him. It is as good, and better to be without them, then not to be
nothing the better for them. They fly as an eagle toward heaven: the
instabilitie, and uncertainty of riches, he declares by an ellegant
similitude showing them to be as sugitiue, and once lost as irrecou^^ble, as
wild foul that is flien away, as those ^owles which be ^^iftest of wing, and
so are highest, even like unto an Eagle, which cannot easily be taken, or
overtaken. Now then as a man cannot assure himself to fare the better, because
foul do light on his pasture, or sit in his meddowes, because they be in his
ground, but not in his hand, as Job says: For when he comes Job. 21. 16.
toward them for contentment, comfort, or use, they take their flight, and
mount up into the air, and fly away, and so defeat him of all his hopes:
Earthly things may be plentifully in an earthly minded man's house, but no more
his, for inioyment, then the birds that sit upon the top of his house, or upon
an high tree, or fly in the open fields. Jeremy uses a similie somewhat like
unto this, and altogether for the same purpose: As the Partrich sits on
eggs, and batcheth them not: or otherwise translated, As he Partrich gathers
young which she has not brought forth: so he that gathers riches, Iere. 17.
11.
and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end
shall be a fool.

Verse 6. Eat thou not the bread of him that has an evil eye, nor desire his
dainty meats.

Verse. 7. For as he thinks so is he: eat and drink says he to thee, but
his heart is not with thee.

Verse. 8. The morsel which thou have eaten thou shall vomit up, and lose thy
sweet words.

AS a little before he advised us not to be too desi^ous of the delicates of
great men: so here he counsels us to beware, that we be not too much
beholding for food, or any other benefits, to misers and churles. Eat not,
nor partake of, without consideration, or just warrant, the bread, drink, or
any kind of soode, or other benevolence, of him that has an evil eye, of a
too much restrained or niggardly person, such a one is contrary to him that is
liberal, and has a good eye, chap. 22. 19. neither be desirous of his dainty
meats (because a sweet tooth, and hungry appetite, lead men many times to
unfit places) For as he thinks in his heart so is he, he is not as he
pretends with his tongue, and as he makes semblance of with his countenance,
tranke, and free, and glad to give entertainment: but miserable, and churlish,
because he thinks all lost, that any man has from him, may that goes out of
his dish, or out of his cup, or out of his purse, although it be for his own
people, or his own lips: he begrudgeth himself sufficient of food and
necessaries, and how can he then willingly spare any thing to strangers? he
cannot afford his own belly a good morsel of meat, and would it not grieve
him that thou should eat up his victuals: and therefore though he say unto
thee, eat drink, go to I pray you, spare not, you are welcome, etc. yet h^^
heart is not with thee, he thinks not as he speaks, nor speaks in love
so much as in complement, and with dissimulation. The morsel which thou have
eaten thou shall vomit up, thou shall find such bitter sauce to thy sweet
meat by some snare wherewith he will entrap thee, to make thee pay dearly
for all that thou have eaten at his board, or by some distasteful speeches to
make up the meal with, or by his discovery, and thy apprehension of his
niggardly disposition, as that thy mind shall be as much afflicted with
grief, as if thy stomach were disquieted with a furfeit, or the receipt of a
vomit, and lose thy sweet words, either such as thou have received from him, as
welcome, and much good do you, and others of like nature, or such as thou
shall render to him in way of thankfulness, and acknowledgement of his
kindness.

Verse. 9. Speak not in the ears of a fool: for he will despise the wisdom
of thy words.

Speak not] Utter not wholesome counsel to an obstinate fool^, or scorner:
for he that will do good, and receive comfort by his words, must consider not
only what he fa^^ but with whom he talks: good seed is not to be sown
upon rocks, and craggie places: good licour is not to be put in unclean or
broken vessels: holy things are not to be given to dogs: nor pearls to be
cast before twine. For he will despise the wisdom of thy words, he will be so
far from profiting by that which thou shall teach him, as that he will
pervert them, and either pick quarrels, and rail upon thee, or otherwise take
advantage against thee, or at least hate and despise thee, and the wisdom of
thy words. See chap. 9. 7. 8. 9.

But herein it concerns us to be cautious and discreet, as that we condemn
not every one that is in a fit of passion, to be a wicked fool, nor every
unregenerate man to be a wilful fool in this kind and nature, but trial
must be had, (so far as is fit for our place) before we pass such a censure
upon any. And in this case patience and long fuffering is requireable, that
though we find no success at one time, yet we take occasion 2. Tim. 2. 24.
to try what will be done at another: and though we be the men that can do
no good with him, yet let us hope that another may prevail more: but yet after
all this, if he persist in his railing and jesting, and contemptuous behavior,
make an end with him, cease to admonish him any further: but though he be
incorrigible, and will not be instruted, yet he is rebukeable, and must be
disgraced, both for terror to himself, and example to others.

Verse. 10. Remove not the ancient land marks, and enter no^ into the field of
the fatherless.

Remove not the ancient land-markes. See for this, chap. 22. 28. and enter not,
either by craft or violence, by fraud, or force, in any sort, into the fields,
houses, or possessions, either to make claim unto them: if thy conscience tell
thee they be not thine own, or to take any commodity thence which is not due
unto thee, of the fatherless, of orphants, who by reason of their young age,
can make no resistance: as wanting experience in themselves, or help and aid
from others. And the same is to be understood of any that are weak and
friendlesse: and according to this the Lord says in Exodus, Thou shall not
Exodus 22. 22.
molest any widow, or orphant.

Verse. 11. For their redeemer is mighty, and he will plead their cause with
thee.

HE alleges a cause why injury should not be offered to the fatherless, or
widow, etc. For that the Lord who is the helper of the helpless, is full of
might and power; though they be poor and weak, he is their redeemer, or
revenger, he is (as it were) their nearest kinsman, who is to pursue not only
the blood that is shead, but all other wrongs that are done. Albeit they find
no patrones in the world, yet he will defend their right, and punish the wrong
doers: for he does most help them that be helpless in the world: and the
same the Scriptures publish as matter of great honor and glory due unto him,
Sing ye unto God (says one text) sing praises to his Psalm. 68. 4. 5.
name, extol him that rides upon the heavens, by his name lah, and rejoice
before him, A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in
his holy habitation. Praise ye the Lord; praise the Lord O my soul (says
another) The Lord preserves the strangers, he relieueth the fatherless and
widow: but the Psalm. 146. 1. 9.
way of the wicked he turns vpside down.

And therefore it is safer to encounter with men of great might, then to
trample upon them, who in themselves have the least power, forasmuch as God is
in this case more interested in the cause, as being in a special manner the
guardian of his powerless orphans, or pupils, and the great master of the
wards. If thou see (says Ecclesiastes) the oppression of the poor, and
violent perverting of judgment and justice in a province, marvel not at the
matter, in way of discouragement: for he that is Eccles 5. 8.
higher then the highest, regards, and there be higher then they.

Verse. 12. Apply thine heart to instruction, and thine ears to the words of
knowledge.

Apply thine heart to instruction,] Bend all the powers and faculties of thy
mind to receive it, and thine ears, apply all thy senses and parts of thy body
also, to the words of knowledge, as are uttered out of knowledge, wisdom, and
judgment, and able to minister knowledge and understanding: he uses a part
of the inward man, and a part of the outward man for the whole man, both
inward, and outward: for if thou would have an attentive ear at the word of
God, thou must bring a good heart to it: and if thou would store thy heart
with the wisdom and grace of the word, thou must bring an attentive ear;
otherwise thou shall not understand, or not affect, or not retain, or not obey
that which is taught thee.

Verse. 13. Withhold not correction from thy child: for if thou beatest him he
shall not die.

14. Thou shall beat him with the rod, and deliver his soul from hell.

WIthhold not correction,] Be not remiss to inflict moderate and due
punishment, when need requires, from thy child, which deserves the same, as
few do not, at one time or other: for if thou beatest him with the rod, when
thou shall in measure, and good discretion chasten with the twig, or wand, thou
shall cause him to smart, and not cause him to die, or receive hurt thereby.
The old saying remains true, that the rod will break no bones: thou shall be
so far from killing of him, as that it will be good physic for him, and a
medicine to preserve him alive.

Beat him with the rod, and thou deliver his soul from hell,] From death,
danger, and misery, both of soul and body. Those governors then that most
faithfully exercise Gods discipline toward their people, are their best, and
most faithful friends, and of all others do them most good, and that in time
the reformed servant will acknowledge with thankfulness unto his master, and
the child to his parents, which is promised (as the fruit and good effect of
holy severity, for the reclaiming of hurtful persons) by the Prophet: One
shall say unto such a one, and so dealt with, What are these wounds in thine
hands? Zach. 13. 6.
Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my
friends.

Verse 15. My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine.

16. Yea my reins shall rejoice when thy lips speak right things.

MY son if thine heart be wise,] If thine affections do desire wisdom, and
thy mind be enriched with it mine heart shall rejoice, even mine, even I shall
wonderful delight therein for thy sake, what comfort then shall thou thy self
find by it.

Yea my reins shall rejoice,] Mine inward parts shall be moved to exceeding
great cheerfulness: and I shall be glad from the bottom of my heart. For
Scripture attributes the seat of the will and affections to the reins: as
when it is said, God is the searcher of the heart and reins: When thy lips
speak Ier. 17. 10.
right things, when thou vtterest such speeches as are true, wise, just, holy,
and gracious: I or every good man will be glad to 3. Ioh. 3. 1. These. 3. 16.
see goodness in the people of his charge: both in love to the parties in whom
the image of Christ so shines, which if it be a matter of comfort to behold
in any, much more to see it in them which are so near unto him: and herein a
man shall see Gods blessing to himself, in the prosperous success of his
planting, sowing, building, and spiritual labors. Saint John had no greater
joy, then to hear that his children walked in the 3. Ioh. 4.
truth. And Saint Paul thought that he could never be thankful enough for such
a blessing, upon the Thessalonians. For what thanks (says he) can we render
to God again for you, for 1. These. 3. 9.
all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God.

Verse 17. Let no thine heart enu^e sinners, but be thou in the fear of the
Lord all the day long.

18. For surely there is an end, and thine expectation shall not be cut off.

LEt not thine heart envy sinners,] Let not the prosperity and flourishing
state of the wicked trouble thy mind, neither grudge or re(...)e thereat: for
from whence grows this envy, but from an over great estimation of earthly
things, as though some part of happiness consisted in the having of them? but
be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long. He prescribes a remedy
against the evil which he had forbidden, be thou in the fear of the Lord, do
thou reverently tremble at, and worship the Lord, and be soundly religious: for
so thou shall get power over this burdensome sin of envy: For true piety,
and the grace of Gods holy spirit will illuminate the mind, and make a man see
why such men are to be pitied, rather then envied: for their prosperity is but
vain at the best, but worse then that, it is hurtful and pernicious unto
them. This will kill pride, and discover to a man his own unworthiness of
that which he has, and therefore he shall have little list to trouble himself
about that which others have. This seasoneth the soul with faith and
confidence in God, and sweeteneth it with the delight of his holy word, which
will expel the bitterness of envy. All the day long, continually, in
prosperity, and adversity, whatsoever thy state be, or howsoever the world
goes with other men, our religion ought to be Psalm 106. 3. Luke 1. 74.
stable, constant, and continual: for God is continually good, and gracious
unto us, and therefore why should not we be constantly serviceable to him? there
is no time when we are out of his presence; and therefore it can never be safe
for us to be careless of his worship; neither does any moment pass without a
blessed effect, that is bestowed about his work.

For surely there is an end, and thine expectation shall not be cut off,]
Their wealth, their pomp, their pleasures, whatsoever their hearts be most
affected with, must cease, and perish together with themselves and their hopes
of perpetuity, the transgressors shall be destroyed together, and the hope of
the wicked Psalm. 37. 38.
shall be cut off: and notwithstanding godly men be full of afflictions,
sorrows, sicknesses, necessities, molestations, and disgraces; yet all these,
or whatsoever other calamities shall vanish away in time, and the hope of Gods
favor, and blessed reward from him, shall outliue all these, and take place
when these be abolished. Mark well the upright man, and behold the Psalm. 37.
37.
just, for the end of that man is peace. That which he desired and expected he
shall be sure to enjoy, a faithful man shall not be frustrated of his
expectation, nor defeated of that which he hops for: according as the
Psalmist says: The poor man shall Psalm. 31. 29.
not always be forgotten, the expectation of the poor shall not ^^rish for
ever. For that is ever grounded upon faith, and faith is surely grounded upon
Gods promises.

Verse. 19. Hear my son and be wise, and guide thine heart in my way.

THis sentence is inserted (as it seems) as a conclusion to the premises, and
a preface to the exhortation following. Seeing knowledge comes by hearing,
the spiritual father does first will his son to hear. Secondly, for as much
as man may hear wise counsels, and be never a whit the better, if he
perceive, or receive it not: he bids him laying aside all ignorance, and
childish sollie, to be wise. Lastly, for that it is not enough to receive the
truth, unless it be loved, delighted in, and embraced in the affection: he
exhorts him to guide his heart in the way, that is, to cause his soul to
affect and follow after the fear of the Lord, and not the way of the wicked.
And this he does the rather, because that voluptuous persons, and epicures,
commonly have hearing, and prevail with those that refuse to hearken to Gods
wisdom, and their hearts are often beguiled, and corrupted with
voluptuousness, and epicurisine, which are not guided in the way of virtue and
goodness.

Verse. 20. Be not among wine-bibbers, and riotous eaters of flesh.

21. For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsinesse
shall cloathe a man with rags.

BE not among wine-bibbers,] Follow not the custom, nor company of such as
haunt tauernes, and quaffe in one cup of strong drink after another, and
riotous eaters of flesh, be not of their crew or society, who love good
cheer, and dainty meat, who immoderately devour it. It is not unlawful to
drink wine, or strong drink, but it is sinful to drink it too often, and too
much: whether a man be drunken therewith, or be strong to power it down
without drunkenness. Neither Isa. 5. 22.
does God forbid the use of flesh, or delightful food: for he does allow his
people to eat of the fat, and drink of the sweet: Nehem. 8. ^^.
but to be cormorants, and bellie-gods, to fare deliciously every day, as the
rich man did in the Gospel, to live in pleasure on Luke 16.
the earth, and to nourish ones heart as in the day of slaughter, or feasting*
is condemned as unlawful and sinful: for besides the mischief that these
vices bring, both to the brain, stomach and whole body: beside the ruin and
wast that they make in a man's estate; beside the infamy and reproach which they
bring to his name, they corrupt the heart: they are impediments to Christian
wisdom: they hinder a man from the fruit of Gods holy word: for all epicures
are unteachable, intractable, and profit nothing by the best counsels that can
be given unto them: therefore says the Prophet; They have erred because of
wine, and are out of the way by strong drink: the Priest, and the Prophet have
erred by strong drink, they are swallowed up with wine: they have gone astray
through strong drink: they fail in vision, they stumble in judgment: For all
their tables are full of vomiting, no place is clean. Whom shall he teach
knowledge? or whom shall he make to understand the Isa. 28. 7. 8.
things that he hears?

The reason why surfeiting and drunkenness is to be avoided, is, because the
drunkard and glutton shall come to poverty, partly through their great
expenses, and partly through loss of time: and for that much eating causes
much sleeping, and much sleeping brings extreme poverty. To make the vices
of surfeiting and drunkenness more odious, it is said that drowsinesse shall
cloathe a man with rags to go in torn and patent apparel; the pampering of
his belly draws misery upon his back, and causes it to be pinched with
pain and cold, which is one plague threatened for all other, and is a smarting
lash upon him: for that gluttons, drunkards, and sluggards are very proud, as
well as voluptuous, and would go gaie, as well as fare delicately. And
therefore a ragged coat does much burden their backs, and gall their hearts,
and is a great corrasiue unto them, and is as unpleasant as a vomit after their
surfeit: but God will so serve them in their kind, by restraining them of that
which they most affect, and imposing that upon them which they most abhor:
and this vile apparel is an eye sore to themselves, so it makes them a gazing
stock unto others, being many times the liuerie of a wastfull unthrift.

Verse. 22. Hearken to thy father which begat thee, and despise not thy mother
when she is old.

HEarken unto thy father, see chap. 1. 8. that begat thee,] He yields a
reason of the precept why parents are to be regarded, because under God they
have been instruments of much good unto us, we have had our substance, our
life and being from them, and consequently in that respect we are by them made
capable of all the happiness which we shall possess, both in heaven or
earth: and the Apostle to the Hebrews assigns this to be the cause why they
are to be regarded, even then when they deal sharply with us, saying, We had
the fathers of our flesh which corrected, and we gave them Heb. 12. 9.
reverence, etc. And despise not thy mother when she is old, think not basely
of her in thy mind, let her not be vile in thy eyes: show no contempt unto her
in thy behavior: neglect no duty to her when she is old, or weak, or poor,
or little regarded by others: for no infirmities or wants can give thee
dispensation to set naught by her, or to detract any duty from her; she is
still the same that conceived and bare thee: she is still the same, whom by
express name, in special manner God does command thee to honor: the trial of
thy love and loyalty to her in that estate will principally be made. Fear of
the rod compels children to stand in awe of their mother, in her fresh
years, and vigor of her time, and whiles they be under her government: and
hope induces many to be submisse and obeysant whiles she has ability to
minister somewhat unto them, or leave them portions: but it is the fear of
God, and a good conscience, which works reverence toward her, when they
stand in no bodily fear of her, or have no need of her, nor expect no
benificence from her: but contrariwise she is by Gods providence put upon them
for her relief and succor.

Verse. 23. Buy the truth and sell it not, also wisdom, instruction, and
understanding.

BVy the truth,] What the truth is our Savior declares in the Gospel,
sanctify them with the truth, thy word is truth. Ioh. 17. 17.
Therefore when he says, buy the truth, he means the knowledge and comfort
of Gods holy word, and the profession of the same with faith, and obedience,
which he admonishes us to buy, that is, obtain, and retain with labors,
with charges, with peril (if need be) with suffering, if we be called unto the
same; not that there is any merit in any of these means: for Christ gives
grace freely, as he professes by the Prophet: Ho, Isa. 55. 1. Mat. 13. 45.
every one that thirsts let him come hither, buy wine and milk without price
and money: but that thereby we are made more capable of them, and fitter for
them. The wise Merchant bought the truth, when he bestowed all that he had to
purchase the rich Pearl. And the Hebrews bought the truth, when they suffered
the spoil of all their goods for the Gospel. And so did Moses when he
departed with all the pleasures of Egypt, to suffer Heb. 18. 33. 34.
affliction with the children of God. This then he informs us, that all good
means are to be used, and no travels or troubles to be refused for the getting
of grace, and keeping of a good conscience. For this is that, one thing which
is most needful. And this is that which will abundantly counteruaile all
labors, costs, disgraces, losses, imprisonments, banishments, and killings.

But why has not God appointed it to be more easilier gotten

First, that it might be the better esteemed: for things which and sell it not,
estrange it not from thee, for earthly delights or commodities; nor make vile
account of it, as commonly they do of their possessions that sell them. No
earthly respect must corrupt our hearts to alienate them from grace and fear
of God. This is the note of a profane person. It is contrary to the nature of
Heb. 12. 16.
Christian love: he shall be a miserable loser that makes such an exchange,
whatsoever pleasures, profits, or preferments he gets thereby: for what
shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his own soul?
Likewise wisdom, instruction, and understanding. Now seeing wisdom,
instruction, and understanding, (of which three virtues much has been spoken
of in this book. As chap. 1. 2. 3. are precious Jewels with the truth, they
are in like manner to be bou(...), and not sold, because the truth cannot be
well enjoyed without them: and no man can put them away from him, without
shipwreck of faith, and a good conscience.

Verse. 24. The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice, and he that
begets a wise child shall have joy of him. See chap. 20. 1

25. Thy father and mother shall rejoice, and she that bare thee shall be glad.

CAuse both thy parents, and other friends, for thy wisdom and virtue, to be
glad, and joyful, refresh their hearts with the effect of Gods grace and
spirit in thee, and let her that bare thee rejoice. This verse is an
application of the former, that for as much as joy comes to the parent by the
virtue of the child: he therefore admonishes the child for his own happiness
to gratify his parents And this clause contains an argument from the cause;
since his mother has bin at great pains in breeding him in the womb, and
with great sorrow brought him forth into the world: and it is intended that her
nursing, education, and bringing up, could not be without some trouble and
molestation unto her. Therefore it becomes him now to make requital, and to
yield her consolation and refreshing, by his prudent and virtuous behavior.

Verse. 26. My son give me thine heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways.

HE is about to give another precept and admonition against whoredom; and
therefore after his usual manner makes a preamble to it, prescribing a
remedy for the prevention of this sin: and therefore in the person of
heavenly wisdom, calls for the heart to be yielded unto him, saying, my
son give me thine heart, let thy mind be wholly intent, and applied to me,
renounce thy self, and set thy love only and wholly upon the Lord, and his
holy word, and let thine eyes observe my ways, even as men do use to fix
their eyes upon those things with thy mind, and greatly regard, and especially
in their travels look to their way, where there is peril of missing it, and
to fall into some hurtful bypath; so (says he) let thine eyes diligently
observe my ways, use thy understanding; bend thy thoughts and whole care;
attend upon my commandments, and counsels, which is the only right way
wherein thou shall walk safely, and thereby be preserved from that enchanting
harlot.

Verse 27. For an whore is a deep ditch, and a strange woman a narrow pit.

FOr an whore is a deep ditch. See chap. 22. 14. and a strange woman a narrow
pit,] Wherein a man cannot stir himself, or deliver himself out of danger,
he is so shut in on every side. A man may easily fall into whoredom; but when
he is once gotten into that bottomless pit, and narrow hole, he can hardly,
or not at all come out again. See chap. 2. 19.

Verse. 28. She also lies in wait for a prey, and increases the transgressors
among men.

SHe is here described by her effects, which are acted with great craft and
subtilty, which appears by the similitude which he uses: even as a thief
lurketh in a den or bush to get a prey: so this cursed woman lies in wait,
and with her art and enticements does as it were assault the hearts of those
which come within her reach, and spoileth them of their affections and
honesty, and increases the transgressors amongst men, whereas there were too
many notorious offenders in the world before, now by her practices there are
many more added unto them, being drawn in, and corrupted with this loathsome
vice of adultery.

Verse. 29. Who has woe? who has alas? who has contentions? who has babbling?
who has wounds without a cause? who has rednes of eyes?

Verse. 30. They that tarry long at wien, they that seek after mixed wine.

Having in the former verse related the mischievous properties, and events of
the harlot, he does in these discover also the danger and hurt of that sin
which brings intemperate pe^^ons into her bait, and delivers them into her
hands, namely drunkenness: the which to make the more odious, he describes the
lamentable estate of drunkards. And first he makes an ennumeration of the
several calamities which befall them, by the way of an interrogatorie, or
question: and then accuses their intemperancy as the cause thereof, by way of
subjection, or answer.

Touching the former, he begins with the most general, and that is woe,
extreme grief and misery, temporal, or everlasting: For the Scripture is
wont to call every heavy judgment of the Lord in this life, and eternal
condemnation by the name of woe: and then descends to perticulars, as that it
inforceth him to cry out for misery, with groaning, and sighing, and to
bewail his poor and miserable estate: for so much the word imports. And
next that it causes contentious brablings, and weepings: For drunkards at
their cups are wont to cauell one with another, to brawle, scold, and rage like
people out of their wits. See chap. 20. 1. Thirdly, it makes them to babble:
For when the wine is in the wit is out: For neither can they be silent, nor
trustely keep any secret: then they fall to scoff and jest one upon another,
upon every light occasion, or talk vainly, or friuolously, without any use or
wisdom: or else inueigh bitterly against Magistrates, Preachers, and godly
people. Fourthly, it procures wounds without cause, not but that the drunkard
deserves to be wounded with punishment, but that they have no cause to
adventure themselves to such peril: they must take the blame upon themselves,
as having no calling to draw them into such dangers: they were not hurt in the
field, nor in warfare: it was in no service for the Prince, or Country: either
they fell down, and hurt themselves: or else for their rash speeches, or other
disordered behavior, they received stripes, and so were wounded. Last of all,
it hurts the countenance, and disfigureth the face, through heat and
inflammation, which shows it self in the rednes of the eyes, much drinking
causes humors to abound in the body, especially in the face, and namely in
the eyes, which are thereby oftentimes blemished, and almost blinded. The cause
of all this consists first in the quantity of that they drink, and then in
the quality of the same. The quantity is, that they drink excessiuely: For
as they tarry long at it, so all the time, or the most part of it, they are
busy about it: for a little serves not their turn, but they m^st have
enough, to soke themselves, and their brains in: and therefore call for cup
upon cup, and power in one bowl full after another. Such are they whom the
Prophet threatens, saying, W^e to them that rise up early in the morning, that
Isai. 2. 11.
they may follow strong drink: and continue till night until the wine inflame
them.

For the latter it is said, they seek after mixed wine, either allaied, and
made cool after the custom of those Eastern countries: or mingled with
spices to make it taste the better: howsoever it was, yet it was the more
pleasant and delicious: and likewise they thirst after variety, one sort will
not content them, and therefore not one house, where there is not great choice:
for it is said, they seek mixed wine, searching in many places where they
meet with the best.

Verse. 31. Look not upon the wine when it is red, when it gives it color in
the cup, when it moves it self aright.

Upon the occasion of the premised description, he infers an admonition to
beware of that sin: and therefore prescribes a remedy whereby we may be
preserved from it, and that is, that we in amor not our selves with the
delight of it, by the specious color, or pleasant taste: For though he names
but one adiunct, yet he understands all the rest. Look not upon the wine
when it is red, illude not thy self with gazing too much upon it. It was not
made to please the eye, but with the moderate use of it to confirm the
stomach: when it gives it color: or as in the Hebrew, the eye of it in the
cup: For when it shall have a lively and lovely look, it shall be graced also
with the cleerenes and comelines of the glass, or vessel wherein it is: for
then it has the greater force to allure: when it moves it self aright, when
it shall stir very kindly, leap or spirt in the goblet; in which words (as
it seems) good wine is painted out, or resembled to a fair and beautiful
damzell: whose cheeks are ruddie: whose eyes are lively and piercing: and
whose feet are nimble, and dancing: by those means she does draw the eyes of
men toward her, and entangle their affections with her. All comes to this,
that prouocations to drunkenness are to be shunned with due care and
diligence.

Verse. 32. In the end it will bite as a serpent, and sting as an adder.

LEst the pleasantnes of wine deceive and illude our senses, the bitterness and
grievous effects of it are here declared by way of comparison. In the end it
will bite as a serpent, and sting as an adder. Some serpents hurt by the
venomous bi^ing of the teeth: and others by the striking with the sting, which
they have in their tongues: both sort bring great torment, and endanger the
life of the creature which is bitten, or stung by them, and as deadly will be
the effect of wine immoderatly taken: at the least it will trouble the brain,
it will inflame the liver, it will ouerwhelme the stomach, and cause dropsies,
and deadly diseases in the whole body: besides all this, it defiles the
conscience, it transformeth a man into the shape of a beast, it works most
bitter and intolerable effects, both present and future: as we have showed in
the 20. and 21. verses.

And this is the event of all delightful sins: they which are led by
censualitie shall certainly sooner, or later fall into misery: they feel
pleasure at the first, and shall find sorrow and pain at the last, as Zopher
truly affirms touching graceless persons: Though wickedness be sweet in his
mouth, though Job 20. 12. 13. 14.
he hid it under his tongue: though he spare it and forsook it not, but kept
it still in his mouth: his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of
Aspes within him.

Verse 33. Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter
perverse things.

THat which he had more generally uttered by similitude in the former verse,
he does confirm in this by certain special evils which do accompany this
swinish vice of drunkenness.

The first is unchastity, a wanton eye, and disposition to fornication and
adultery. The second is licentiousnes of tongue through want of good
government of the heart, and both these are in this verse. The third is
extreme security, and senselesnes, imminent peril in the next verse. The
fourth is stupiditie and dulnes, when a man is so far from reformation by the
smart inflicted upon him for his sin, as that he is made the worse thereby,
and more greedy to evil, in the last verse. Thine eyes shall behold, thou
shall become shameless, to look, lust after, and hunt after strange women,
sometimes thine neighbors wives, specially such as are comely and beautiful:
and sometimes strumpets, and harlots, whose work is to be filths, and naughty
packs: and thine heart shall utter perverse things: thine heart, that is, out
of the abundance of thine heart, (for otherwise the heart speaks not) shall
utter, vomit out, sometimes blasphemies, sometimes railings, sometimes filthy
communication, always that which God hates, and godly men abhor: For one
sin usually leads on to another, not only in this case of intemperancie,
but in all other crimes and vices. Simeon and Leui began with murder, and then
fell to theft and robbery. David first abused his eyes to wanton looks, and
then his body to adultery, and then his hands by a command (though not by
drawing a weapon) to the shedding of blood.

Verse. 34. Yea thou shall be as he that lies in the midst of the sea, or as
he that lies on the top of the mast.

Verse. 35. They have str^ken me (shall thou say) and I was not sick, they have
beaten me, and I have not feit it: when I shall awake, I will seek it again.

TO show the carelesnes of drunkards, he resembles them to those, which for
their unnatural regardlesnes of themselves, are seldom, or never to be
found: namely, such as in the very heart of the sea, or very far from the
shore, and likewise in the highest part of a ship in the top of the mast,
exposed to the vehemency and violence of the winds, and that in a boisterous
storm, should nevertheless through the little care of their lives sleep
there, and so the tempest arising hurleth them down without all remedy: For
when men be possessed with this, or any other sin, they will hardly be drawn
from the practice of it. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, I^^^. 13. 23.
or the Leopard his spots? then may they also do good that are accustomed to
evil. And the more danger such be in, the more bold they are, and less
fearful of hurt: for they neither believe, nor fear the threatenings of God,
and therefore will not Lu^e 17. 26.
be moved with them, until they feel the execution of them: therefore
Jeremiah complains of them, saying, They have belied the Lord, and said it is
not he, neither shall evil come upon us, neither shall we see the sword, or
famine, and the Prophets I^^e. 5. 12. 13.
shall become wind: the word is not in them: thus shall it be done unto them.

And thou shall say] Here he charge the drunkard with blockishnes and
privation of sense: for he speaks of himself as if he were a very stock,
or stone: they have stri^en m^ grievously and very hard: shall thou O drunkard
say, after thou art awake out of thy dead sleep of drunkenness, but I was not
sick, I cared not for it, I was not much hurt, they have beaten me, but I felt
not their blows: for drunkenness takes away almost all senses; and therefore
though one thump them, or punch them, or lay load upon them with great blows,
yet they think all to be well with them: what are they the worse? when I awake
therefore I will seek it again: these, and those before in this verse, are
rather the speeches of his practice, then of his lips, showing the success of
his troubles and hurts, and that is continuance and proceeding in his brutish
behavior, notwithstanding all the inco^^eniences that follow upon it: for no
miseries that sin brings can bring a man out of it, without grace. Such a
proverb we shall find in another chapter, though thou should bray a fool
in a mortar, among Prou. 27. 29.
wheat, without a pestill, yet will not his foolishness depart from him: for
they work only upon the body and outward state, they cannot pierce unto the
soul, and inward faculties of it: neither will they make the mind judicial,
or the heart penitent, as the Prophets complain against the wicked Israelites:
Strangers (says Hosea) have devoured his strength, and he Hos. 7. 9.
knows it not, yea gray hairs are here and there upon him, and be knows it
not: and the pride of Israel testifies to his face, and they do not return
to the Lord their God, nor seek him for all this.

CHAPTER. XXIIII.
Verse. 1. Be not envious against evil men, neither desire to be with them.

WHen the ungodly either rage in cruelty, or flourish in prosperity, the godly
are often moved to sore passions, and exercised with wonderful tentations.
Sometimes they are stirred up to anger and impatience, disdaining, and being
offended that they which deserve the greatest judgment of God, should receive
and enjoy his greatest blessings in this life: Sometimes they are tickled with
a desire of being acquainted, and to be in league with them, to the end they
might not be hurt by them, but live together in prosperity with them. This
envying the wicked, and desiring to be with them, is forbidden in the former of
these sentences as a thing unlawful, and greatly hurtful: as there is no
society nor fellowship between light and darkness, so likewise there ought
to be in the godly no desire of the company or condition of the ungodly. See
chap. 23. 17.

Verse. 2. For their heart studieth destruction, and their lips talk of
mischief.

THe reason of the prohibition is first, because their heart studieth
destruction, they themselves in their hearts imagine and devise hurt and harm
against their godly neighbors: as godly men ponder and confider how they may
best please the Lord, and merciful men muse in what manner they may do the
best good, and be most profitable and beneficial to their brethren: so these
do beat their brains, and set their wits to work, how they may accomplish
their villainous designements. And secondly, their lips talk of mischief, that
which in their malicious hearts they have plotted and framed, now they pollish
and perfect with their lips: for they are the principal agents for the
effecting of all wicked purposes: either they command with them, or persuade
with them, or encourage with them, or direct with them; or flatter, lie, brag,
or threaten with them; in one fashion or other they spit out venom with them.
A leaud tongue is evermore a necessary officer to a naughty heart.

Verse. 3. Through wisdom is an house builded, and by understanding it is
established.

Verse. 4. And by knowledge shall the chambers be filled with all precious and
pleasant riches.

HE shows in these verses, that it is not needful, or a point of true
discretion, to seek the society of the wicked whose hearts and tongues are so
hurtful and noisome: for God has ordained better means, and such as are far
more comfortable to raise up the state of his servants. An house can never be
built to stand long, by a covetous heart, a deceitful tongue, and an
unrighteous hand: but through wisdom an house is builded, through godliness
and religion, estate and family shall most happily be erected, together with
the attainment of all things necessary for the same: and by understanding, of
Gods will revealed in his word, with conscience and uprightness to serve and
obey the same, it is established, made firm and sure, that no curse or envy
shall be able to cast it down; though the Lord in mercy and goodness by his
providence sometimes take it down; and by knowledge, a right skill to govern
that wherewith God has blessed a man, shall the chambers, all the parts, and
rooms of the house be filled with all precious and pleasant riches, stored
with such furniture as is fit for the owners place and degree, with this
limitation always that it be useful and needful for him, and not snares to
puff him up with pride, or any way corrupt him. So that all sound prosperity
for a comfortable estate, does grow from grace and piety: as the Psalmist
teaches. For thereunto are Psalm. 112. 3.
the large promises of God made not only for the life to come, but for this
present life: and this heavenly wisdom is every Deuteronomy. 28. 1. etc.
where joined with prudence, and Christian policy: and contains many
excellent precepts of all good husbandry for thrift; that most needful things
be done first, that suretiship be avoided, and many such like.

Verse. 5. A wise man is strong, yea a man of knowledge en^reaseth strength.

A Wise man is strong,] Manageth his affairs, and effects his matters more
succesfully, by the power of Gods gracious providence, and his own commendable
circumspection, then he could have done, or others do, by mere force of
bodily strength, of friends, or of purse, or of any other fleshly or worldly
power: yea a man of understanding, that is endued with right knowledge, and
wisdom increases his strength, does grow more prosperous in his attempts and
matters which he undertakes, as he grows more godly and judicious. See chap.
21. 22.

Verse. 6. By wise counsel thou shall make war, and in the multitude of
counselors there is safety.

BY wise counsel thou shall make war,] In these words is proved the
puissance of wisdom, because without it, power is nothing powerful, armies
of men and weapons will prevail nothing without this: for the field is won
not so much by men's strength, as by prudent ordering of the battle: and
dangers are turned away not by the might and valor of the soldiers, but by
the wise guidance of them, with the good government of the Chiefetaines and
leaders. See chap. 20. 18. and in the multitude of counselors there is fafety.
See chap. 11. 14.

Verse. 7. Wisdom is too high for a fool, he opens not his mouth in the
gate.

Wisdom,] Wisdoms (says the holy Ghost in the Original text) for the
excellency of it, holy understanding, the sound and saving knowledge of God,
whereby a man is directed uprightly in his fear, is too high for a fool, for
a wicked graceless person it is above his sight, that he cannot discern the
pretiousnesse of it, and above his reach, that he cannot attain to the
possession of it: it is a fruit that grows upon the top of the tree of life,
that such dwarfes without better help can never come at. No man then can be
made godly and wise by his own natural capacity; grace cannot be gotten
without grace; which our Savior meant when he said, Except a man be borne of
water and the holy Ghost, he cannot Ioh. 3. 5.
enter into the kingdom of God. And which the Apostle meant, when he said, The
natural man understands not the things which are of God: for all that he
apprehends, is either 1. Cor. 2. 44.
by sense, or by carnal reason, or at the most, and best, by natural reason,
which all come too short of true wisdom, the the treasures whereof are hid in
Christ with whom he has no communion, and participated by the spirit, whereof
he is utterly destitute, he opens not his mouth in the gate, he cannot
speak graciously, profitably, and laudibly in a public meeting: for by gate,
the places of assembly are noted, which in old time was in the gates of towns
or cities. There he may speak eloquently, and plausibly as Herod did: but
neither there, nor any where else, faithfully, or in such manner as he can
have any acceptance from God, for that which he utters: for he regards no
other but the holy words of godly Christians.

Verse. 8. He that deuiseth to do evil, shall be called a mischievous person.

HE that deuiseth to do evil.] He that abuses his mind and cogitations to
the study of wickedness, how he may bring to pass his ungodly and
vnrighteo^s purposes, and effect that which is contrary to piety, equity, or
honesty, and does accordingly attempt the same to put it in practice, they
shall call him a mischievous person, a notorious wicked man' and a captain of
mischief: for as any sin is more perpensedly, or advisedly committed, so it
is more grievous and shameful: to transgress by frailty is a fault, and
deserves blame, but yet more tolerable, and that which may easily find
pardon, but wittingly and willingly, and studiously to do, and effect that
which is evil, is abominable, and worthy of severe punishment, and ignominy.
Woe unto them (says the Prophet) Mic^. 1. 2.
that imagine iniquity upon their beds: for this proceeds from the love of
naughtiness, and the liking of mischief: hereby they become skillful, and are
their crafts-masters in lewdness: hereby they are made more impenitent
afterward, and can scarcely be reclaimed for ever.

Verse. 9. The thought of foolishness is sin, and the scorner is abomination
to men.

THe thought of foolishness,] The least degree of evil, even that which is in
the mind, though it break not out openly, nor be so conspicuons, is sin, the
transgression of Gods holy law, who requires not only the actions, but the
mind of men to be conformable to his will: but the scorner is an abomination,
it is an aggrauation of the contemptuous behavior of wicked men, by an
argument from the less to the greater. God takes notice of evil thoughts
which are smaller offenses, and yet unlawful, and to him displeasing: but the
scorner his execrable deeds, or crimes which show themselves to the world,
which proceed from pride or presumption, and are so continued in, are more then
a sin, an abominable filthin^sse, which God and men detest and abhor. And
as concerning the scorner himself who sins with an high hand, and scorneth
all good instructions, he makes himself odious to all that are ingenuous, and
of any good disposition; for they that give themselves professedly to be
impious and wicked, shall not only have God, but also men to hate them: and
equal it is; because they hate and rebel against the most gracious and
righteous God, who gave unto the^, and has preserved their life and being, and
all that they have: and who has the disposing of all men's hearts, and tongues,
and therefore can easily direct them against those which oppose themselves
against him, and violate his commandments, as he says by Malachie: Therefore
have I made you to be despised, and vile before Mal. 29.
all the people, because ye kept not my ways, etc. And commonly these
scornful persons are proud, insolent, and contemptuous and hurtful to others,
and wholly given to seek themselves, which will greatly withdraw the love of
the people from them; as it was said of Israel, that his hand should be
against every man, and every man's hand against him.

Verse. 11. Deliver them that are drawn to death: for should thou withdraw
thy self from them that go down unto destruction?

Deliver them,] This is an exhortation raised from the former sentence, that if
it be so dangerous a thing to neglect our brethren in their distresses and
afflictions, therefore we should shake off that remissness, and animate our
selves to so necessary a service: wherefore (says he) deliver, rescue by thy
power, (if thou art a Magistrate, as Job did, who brake the jaws of the
wicked, and plucked the prey out of his teeth) or by all lawful means
whosoever thou art, such as being innocent are brought into danger of death, or
undoing: for if any be justly troubled, or condemned to die, it belongs not
to us to meddle with him, otherwise then by praying for him, and inciting him
to repentance. But if might oppress right, or violence be offered to the poor
afflicted, every one is bound to defend his neighbor from wrong, as much as in
him lies: For (says he) will thou withdraw thy self from them that go down
to the slaughter? That is to say, Art thou to withdraw thy help from
preserving the poor and innocent, who are laid down on the block to be
slain, or drawn to the stake to be burnt, from the stroke of the sword, or
flame of fire? So that every one according to his place ought to minister help
to the oppressed. Governors by virtue of their authority, as we shall see in
the 31. chapter, verse. 8. Inferiors by giving counsel, or testifying the
truth of the cause; or in petitioning to the Prince, or such as have power of
delivering: as Ebedmelech for Jeremiah; and Ester for her people: or by prayer
to God in their behalf: as the Church in the time of the Apostles for Peter:
and in the Act. 12.
time of the Prophets, for other godly men which were destinated to the
slaughter, whose petition we find in the Psalm: Let the sighing of the
prisoners come before thee; according to Psalm. ^9. 71.
thy mighty arm preserne the children of death.

Verse 12. If thou say, Behold we knew not of it shall not he who pondereth
the heart understand it? does not he know, that preserves thy soul? does not
he also recompense every man according to his work?

HE confirms his strict charge for assistance, and helpfulnes to our brethren
wrongfully molested, and endangered, by forcible arguments: whereunto he
makes a way by an anticipation, wherein he first propounds the excuse that
pitilesse men are wont to make, and afterward confuteth it. The objection is,
we knew not of it: For so they plead ignorance, by which they hope to clear
themselves, as that it was unknown to them that they were in trouble: neither
were they acquainted with the equity of the cause: nor understood by what
means they might help them: all which pretenses he plainly refuteth: for no
shifts will serve to cloak sin before Iere. 23. 23. Eccles. 5. 5.
Gods eyes. And these he refelleth by such reasons, as whereby he proves the
necessity of mercifulnes. And the first is from the knowledge of God, who is
the searcher of the hearts and affections: puts men's minds, or meanings
into the scales, or ballanceth them, to try how just and upright they are: and
therefore does not he understand whether thou dissemblest, or dealest in good
earnest? whether thou had intelligence of the matter, or whether it were
altogether hidden from thee? The second is from the power and authority which
God has over all men: their lives and souls are in his hands: and therefore
it concerns them for their lives, and salvation too, not to halt with him, or
be incompassionate toward his. The third is from the justice of God, he will
recompense every man according to his work: he that deals uprightly, and
without dissimulation, shall find comfortable approbation at his hands: he
that deals fraudulently, and with guile, shall be dismasked, and punished: he
that shows mercy and compassion to them that be in misery, shall
plentifully be rewarded with mercy from him: he that is hard hearted, and
without all bowels of commiseration, shall find pure justice, without any
compassion.

Verse 13. My son eat thou honey because it is good, and the honey comb,
because it is sweet to thy pala^ or taste.

Verse 14. So shall the knowledge of wisdom be to thy soul when thou have
found it, there shall be a reward, and thine expectation shall not be cut off.

THese two sentences contain the praise of gracious and holy knowledge, and
that by a full similitude, on both parts, as well the resemblance, as the
application from honey, saying, My son eat honey, that is, thou have liberty
for it, it is free for thee so to do, if thou will, because it is good,
wholesome, and profitable for thy body: it being a food much in use in those
parts: as the Prophet Isaiah speaks; Butter and Isai. 7. 15.
honey shall he eat. And Jonathan was much refreshed, and his eyes received
sight by eating of honey, whereas before they were dim for weariness, and
hunger. And the honey comb, 1. Sam. 14. 27.
for it is sweet unto the palate or taste, that is, pleasant, and delectable in
relish, the palate the instrument of tasting being put for the sense it self:
two benefits therefore proceed from it, pleasure, and profit: So both
profitable and pleasant, and more also shall the knowledge of wisdom be to
thy soul, thy heart, thy conscience, thy inward man, though in thy body, and
estate, there be many bitter crosses and calamities: if thou find it, if thou
be truly endued therewith, and have a sure apprehension thereof, and be not
illuded with flattering conceits, and vain imaginations. And this comfort and
joy is the effect of an infallible hope, which is wrought by faith in, and
knowledge of the holy Scriptures, and this hope is steadfast, firm and
effectual: as chap. 23. 18. He would have us therefore to understand that
nothing is more delightful then spiritual understanding Isai. 25. 6.
of Gods holy will. Honey, and other food, though most delicious, is earthly,
and the delight that it yields is but censuall: but this is heavenly, and so
is the consolation that it works: a beast, or a wicked man may feed on the
best corporal food, and feel as much sweetness as the worthiest Christian:
but Gods own people and servants have a peculier right and property in the
holy Ghost: there may be in honey and other bodily delights, an hurtful
excess, to the annoyance of those which surfeit of them: as chap. 25. 16. but
there can never be too much heavenly wisdom, and gladness proceeding from it:
but always, and continually the more, the better: the pleasure that is taken in
meats, or drinks, or any earthly refreshings, is but momentaine, and for
present use: For when death comes, or sickness, the delightfulnes thereof will
be forgotten, and so will the strength that comes by it, and all other like
benefits: but the joyful assurance of Gods favor, the heavenly fruits of his
holy spirit, with the possession of his graces, is perpetual and everlasting
according to the testimony and promise of our Savior, saying, Whosoever shall
drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never be more Ioh. 4. 14.
a thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water
springing to everlasting life.

Verse 15. Lay not wait O wicked man against the dwelling of the righteous:
spoil not his dwelling place.

Verse. 16. For the righteous falls seven times, and rises again: but the
wicked shall fall into mischief.

IN the former verse was declared the great comfort that godly men find in the
knowledge of Gods holy word: and in these the great safety which they enjoy by
his providence for them, and protection of them: for that is the scope of the
words, though they be directed to the wicked in way of admonition, or
prohibition. The parts thereof are two: the one is a charge given to sinful
men, that they proceed not on in their craft, or in their cruelty against the
servants of God, in the former verse: and the other, a reason which could cause
them to stand back, and not offer such injuries to them, in the latter. Lay
not wait, deal not subtly, practice not any secret mischief, like to such
as lurk in corners suddenly to surprise a man, or get some advantage against
him, against the house of the righteous, against a man himself, or any thing
that appertains unto him: spoil not his resting place, offer no violence
unto, nor prey upon his goods, and especially go not about to overthrow his
dwelling place, nor chase him from it: For it is as if he should have said,
This is thy practice, and which is to be looked for at thine hand, until thou
cease to be wicked. For all thy attempts be in vain, and shall take no place:
and therefore if thou were wise and prudent for thy self, thou would be
better advised, before thou tookest such courses. The reason is from the
contrary condition of the wicked, and godly: the one endures many troubles,
and escapes out of them all: the other, often times more crosses come upon them
for a time: but some one deadly stroke comes at last for all, to their utter
undoing: The just falls seven times, comes into troubles very often, a
certain number of times being put for an uncertain, but rises again, but by
the gracious hand of God is delivered out of them all. It is a similitude from
children led of their parents, who though through weakness do sometimes
stumble, and fall to the ground, yet they be neither hurt with the fall, nor
helpless, that they should not be taken up again. So that the goodness of
God does more appear in sustaining his people in their troubles, then in
preserving Psalm. 34. 19. Job. 5. 18.
them from troubles, as diverse Scriptures do witness. But the wicked falls
into mischief, the ungodly perish in adversity, being so overthrown therein,
that they never be able to recover themselves: they are altogether like those,
who falling from an high and steep place, or tumbling down a pair of
staiers, break their backs, or necks, with that fearful downfall, that they
are not able to stir hand or foot. So that albeit crosses come but seldom
upon ungodly men, and misery tarry long before it visit them; yet when God
sets in with them, he paieth them home, even to their ruin and destruction:
For so are they threatened: The Lord shall shoot an Psalm 64. 7.
arrow at them, their strokes shall be at once: their plagues have stings with
them, a guilty conscience, the burden of sin, with Gods displeasure and curse
are joined with it.

Verse. 17. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, let not thine heart be glad
when he stumbleth.

Verse. 18. Lest the Lord see it and it displease, him, and he turn away his
wrath from him.

Rejoice not,] Be not glad, nor show forth any outward sign of joy, when
thine enemy falls, when he that is thine adversary comes to calamity,
or adversity, let not thine heart be glad, do not so much as conceive joy
within thy self, though thou should not express it to others, when he
stumbleth, when any cross does befall him: he takes the similitude from
travelers, whom it concerns not their fellow travelers to insult over when
they be down or slipping, but rather be sorry, and therefore succor and help
them up again. So that it is not lawful for any man to take delight in his
neighbors woe, howeuer he be affected toward him.

Job cleereth himself of this fault, saying, I have not rejoiced Job 31. 24.
at the destruction of him that hated me, or lift up my self when evil found
him. And the world knows how David lamented and wept, when news was brought
him of Saul's death, which most injuriously and cruelly hunted after his life.
If we be bound to pray for those that persecute and hate us; if we be required
to help our enemies with food, and gratify him with other courtesies, it
cannot stand with equity that we should rejoice at, or take pleasure in their
misery: but this precept may seem to be contrary to the practice of the
godly, as Moses, Ester, and diverse others of Gods servants, when their enemies
the Egyptians, Haman, and other such like have been destroyed: but indeed
neither Moses nor the rest, did rejoice so much in the destruction of their
adversaries, as in their own deliverance, and the preservation of the Church:
neither was the ruin of their enemies so comfortable unto them as the glory of
God, which did appear in the punishment of the ungodly. A man may in holy
zeal rejoice at the overthrow of the enemies of God, and the foes of his
people, as chap. 11. 12. but he may not simply be glad at the fall of his
adversaries, nor uncharitably triumph over them with joy of heart, arising from
private grudge, and secret hatred, lest the Lord see it, lest he take notice of
it, and observe the same with displeasure, for having and nourishing such
vncharitabl and pitilesse affections in thine heart, and turn his wrath from
him, which is not so to be understood, as that therefore a man were not to
rejoice at his enemies fall, lest that by so doing his good name be procured,
namely the mitigation of Gods displeasure, and removing away the scourge that
is upon him: but by this every one is warned to take heed of this reuengefull
rejoicing at the miseries of them that hate him, lest by this means he draw
Gods wrath and plague upon himself, and make his own case worse then his
enemies.

Verse. 19. Fret not thy self because of the evil man, neither be envious at
the evil doers.

20. For there shall be no reward to the evil man, and the candle of the
wicked shall be put out.

FRet not thy self.] Be not moved to anger and indignation, because of the
evil man, for that either they flourish and prosper or else in the malice of
their hearts attempt evil against thee. neither be envious at the evil doers.
See chap. 23. 17. and the first verse of this chapter.

For there shall be no reward to the evil man.] His plagues and miseries shall
be perpetual, and the light of the wicked shall be put out, his felicity, and
flourishing estate, yea and his life it self shall be extinguished, and
abolished, desperate misery shall succeed in the place thereof. See chap. 13.
9. And therefore Psalm. 73. 18. Job 21. 16.
the greatest prosperity that ungodly men presently enjoy, is not able to
counteruaile the lamentable calamity that shall come upon them afterward: for
the one is but counterfeit and mixed with many sorrows and fears; the other
is as bad or worse then it seems, and void of all comfort: the one is short,
and of no continuance: the other is everlasting, and has none end: and add
this thereunto, that measure and great abundance of the former, does much
increase the quantity and grieuousnesse of the latter. As is the case of that
whorish Babel, In as much as she gloried her self, and lived in pleasure, so
much give to her torment and sorrow: for she says in her heart, I fit being a
Queen, and a^ no widow, and shall see nomourning. R^u. 18. 7. 8.
Therefore her plagues shall come at one day, death and sorrow, and famine, and
she shall be burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord which will condemn her.
And as Saint James threatens to all Iam. 5. 1. 2.
worldlings and Epicures. Go to now ye rich men, mourn and howl, for the
miseries that shall come upon you: your riches are corrupt, and your garments
motheaten.

Verse. 21. My son fear the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that
change.

MY son fear the Lord,] Let thine heart always stand in awe of his
presence, worship him with reverence, and holy devotion: faithfully observe and
obey as much as possibly thou can, his will and commandments, and the King,
thy sovereign, whom the Lord has set over thee: for conscience sake be
subject to him: show all loyalty to his person, and obedience to his laws,
and ministers of justice; neglect not the commandment of the Lord by the
Apostle, saying, submit 1. Pet 2. 13. 14.
your selves to all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake: whether it be
to the King as the superior, or unto governors, ^ unto them that are sent of
him, for the punishment of evil doers, and praise of them that do well. For
true religion toward God, and due subjection to lawful authority, are always
individual companions. Fear God (says Saint Peter) and honor the 1. Pet. 1.
2. 17.
King. No rebellious person, or any that is disobedient toward the Magistrate,
deserves the name of a Christian. He that denies unto Caesar that which
belongs unto him, does in no uprightness perform to God that which is his
due. Saint Jude Iud. ^.
makes it a note of a sinful hypocrite to despise government, and to speak
evil of them that are in authority. For there is no power but of God, and the
powers that are, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves greater damnation. Wherefore we must subject, not because of wrath
only, but for conscience sake. So on the other side, never any impious person
can be a faithful subject: whosoever contemns the Lord, and his word, which
is the foundation of all magistracy, will (if occasion serve) manifest his
perfidiousnesse to his Prince; and though fear restrain him that he never
break forth into arms, or open contempt, yet he carries not a loyal heart,
because he wants a godly heart. There are many which crouch, and bow, which
flatter, and fawn, and highly extol obedience, and inueigh against
refractorie people, who notwithstanding bear as little love as the worst, and
yield no more reverence in their hearts to their Prince, then those which are
most contemptuous. Saint Jude describes the despisers Iud. 16.
of government to be murmurers, and complainers, and yet to have men's persons
in admiration for advantage. And the Prophet Hosea testifies, that they which
made the King glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with their lies, did
yet de^oure their Judges, and cause their Kings to fall. And meddle not with
them that change; he gives a caveat to beware of the means whereby thou
may be seduced, and be brought thereby to contempt of God, and thy Prince,
and that is the society of Malcontents who affect alteration, and novelties,
such as are weary of the holy Laws of God, which teach religion, and
Christian obedience, and wholesome laws of Prince touching policy, and civil
peace, and seek for innovation, by abrogation, and abolishment of both: for
such manner of men are very contagious, and able to pervert the hearts of all
that converse with them. How many did Corah, Dathan, and Abiram inchant to
oppose against the government of Moses, and Aaron? What (...) multitudes did
that cursed Absalom infect, and make (...) turn rebels most seditiously
against the kingdom of David? and did not Sheba that obscure and base fellow
prevail far to get associates, and thereby to raise a new commotion, when it
seemed that all sparks of rebellion had been extinguished? and how many
millions of millions have been stirred up against the kingdom of Christ, by
the pestilent tongues of those which cannot bear the burden of government,
most lamentable experience of all ages does clearly witness. This comes to
pass by the violence of their desires that way, which are wholly set upon
mischief: and by the sharpness of their wits for this hellish work, which
are sharpened, and have an edge set on by the devil himself, and by that
procliuity which is in all f^^^ly men's nature, to be corrupted by pernicious
speeches: Satan works in the tongues of these sinful seducers, and together
also in the hearts and cares of their carnal hearers.

Verse. 22. For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin
of them both?

HE confirms both his precept, and caveat, by the mischief that is like to
ensue, if they obey not the one, nor be admonished by the other, and that is
the ruin and overthrow of ungodly and disloyal persons: and this is
exaggerated by the grieuousnes and suddennes of it, it comes sooner then it
is looked for, and is more intolerable then is either known, or thought of.
For their calamity, the plagues which they shall suffer, shall rise suddenly.
It lies still for a time like a fierce beast, or serpent in a bush, or
thicket, either sleeping, or waiting for advantage, and neither is seen, nor
heard, there is neither roaring, hissing, nor rusling, and in a moment being
either wakened, or spying the opportunity, is upon a man before he is ware.
Who knows the destruction of them both? to wit, that which the Lord and the
king shall work: For as Gods wrath is like a consuming fire, so is the Kings
compared to the roaring of a Lion, both of them very fearful and terrible. For
misery is evermore contrary to the expectation of the wicked, both for time
and measure: it comes upon them before they be provided and lies upon them
more heau^ly then they are able to sustain it. And this is because they would
not believe the predictions of the word, which foretold what Psalm. 73. 18.
would become of their wicked ways: but despised all Gods threatenings: and
because they are proud, and secure, and flatter Iere. 5. 13. 1. These. 5. 3.
Apoc. 18. 7.
themselves in perpetuity of their peace and safety: and because they fuffe^
themselves willingly to be misled and deceived by the flattery of others: as
Herod did. Act. 12.


Verse 23. These also are the sayings of the wise: It is not good to have
respect of persons in judgment.

AS David made not all those spiritual songs which are contained in the book
of Psalms: so neither did Solomon (as it seems) utter all those parables
which are set down in this book of Proverbs. Thus much may be gathered out of
the words, wherein it is said, also th^se are the sayings of the wise. The
sentences from this place to the end of the chapter, were spoken by the
mouths, or written by the tongues of wise men: but who they were is not
expressed: but sure woe are they were led by the spirit of God, seeing
otherwise neither could they have been wise, neither would they who gathered
these sayings together, have put them into the book of canonical Scripture,
to have respect of persons, to regard any thing which is beside the cause* or
out of the matter in question, as thereby to be led aside, and drawn to
pervert justice, or decline from the law, as because they be rich, or because
they be poor; because they be good, or because they be bad: because they be
friends, or because they be enemies. To pass sentence for the wealth; or
power, or misery, or favor, or hatred of the parties accusing, or accused, is
not good, neither lawful, nor safe: the thing to be regarded is the matter,
and not the man. And therefore in all controversies, look not who Leuit. 19.
15. Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
be the parties, but what is the cause: because the judgment is Gods, and not
man's.

Verse. 24. He that says to the wicked, Thou art righteous, him shall the
people curse, and nations shall abhor him.

HE that says to the wicked, thou art righteous,] He that applandeth, or
approves of sinful men, whom God condemns: o^ justifies any man in doing
that which God does not allow; him shall the people curse, and the nations
shall abborre him, he shall be odious, and infamous, every where, and amongst
all men for the greatest part, especially such as hate iniquity, and know
after what manner he does countenance it. Indeed well disposed persons will not
easily break out into rash cursing: neither will they proudly reproach the
Magistrates, or superiors, though they see them fail in their duties: yet
nevertheless in zeal toward justice they cannot but blame them, whom they see
so grossly and notoriously to offend. So that they who go about to grace
others in their sins, take the way to bring themselves into contempt: For
Mal. 2. 3.
they are an abomination to the Lord, as chap. 17. 15. and then how can they
choose but be vile also amongst men? They do mischief to many in animating
such wicked creatures: and even to those sinful wretches themselves, by
hardening them in their evil: they becomes accessarie to the offenders facts,
and makes them their own: and it is a fault, that is seldom to be found in
any, who are not in some evil or other themselves: according to that saying,
they that transgress the law, praise the wicked.

Verse 25. But to them that rebuke shall be delight, and the blessing of each
good man shall come upon them.

Verse 26. Every one shall kiss his lips that gives a right answer.

HE amplifieth the point propounded in the former verse, by the contrary both
behavior, and event: there was the justifying of the wicked taxed, here the
reproving of him is commended: there was the curse, or reproach threatened to
such as shall give approbation to malefactors: here blessing is promised to
such as shall disgrace them: obloquie, reproach, and hatred are there denounced
as a punishment to them that shall flatter unrighteous men: here honor and
love is assured to them that shall deal soundly, and sharply with them: but to
them that rebuke him, to them that convince evil men of their faults, shall be
delight, comfort, and joy, in apprehension of Gods favor, men's good affections
shall be toward them, and the blessing of each good man, their testimony which
they will give of them, and the prayers and praises which they will offer to
God for them: this blessing fell upon Jobs head full often, as himself
witnesses, saying, When the ear heard me it blessed me, and when the eye saw
me it gave witness unto me, that I delivered the poor that cried, and the
fatherless that had no help: the blessing of him that was ready to perish
came upon me, and I caused the widows heart to rejoice. And it is added in the
next verse, the people will kiss the lips of him that gives a right
answer; the kissing of the lips is a sign of love amongst us, and in old time
it was also a token of reverence. Whereas therefore it is said here, the people
shall kiss the lips of him that gives a right answer; the meaning is that
they will exceedingly affect, and singularly honor such a person: it may be
the wicked will despise, and contemn such a one, but the godly will reverence
and embrace him. Now he is said to answer right things, who utters true,
wise, and profitable speeches, or such sayings as are agreeable to equity and
righteousness. He therefore which most faithfully opposes himself against the
corruptions of others, shall gain most comfort, and credit to himself, both
from God, and honest men, and many times from the parties reproved, or
resisted: for that it may prove a good medicine for the curing of the maladies
of the soul.

Verse. 27. Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thy self in the
field, and afterward build thine house.

PRepare thy work without.] Have an eye to those things that are abroad, as
for corn, cattle, vines, fruit trees, etc. make it fit for thy self in the
field, make ready for thy self that which thou have in the field, that thou
not only have ground, but that it be so husbanded, as y^ it may best yield
commodity to thee, that thou not only have a croppe upon thy ground, or graffe
growing in thy meddowes, but that it be so carefully, and seasonably cut
down, and inned, as thou may enjoy the fruit thereof: that thy land be not
unfruitful through want of good manuring, or that which grow upon it be not
the less, or worse by thine ill husbandry, and after, when thou have
performed these things, build thine house, make it large, or fair, according
to thy state, and store it with such good furniture, as before was not
requisite for thee. An house, and habitation to dwell in is first of all to be
provided: but the ornaments, and beautifying of it, are to be deferred until
thy maintenance will allow thee the liberty thereof. His purpose is to teach
us to proceed orderly in all our affairs, preferring of things of greatest
importance to the first place, and going about matters of less weight by
leisure afterward: as in a building, stone and timber is to be prepared, before
wainscot and hanging.

And men use to buy land or take it, and have a crop toward before they hire,
or build a barn. It were a foolish part in feasting to spread the table, set
dishes upon the board, and to make the guests sit down, before any meat be
provided: or for a man to provide bridle, or saddle, with trappings and all
other furniture, and yet is able neither to buy, nor borrow, nor hire a horse
for his journey.

Verse. 28. Be not a witness against thy neighbor without a cause, nor deceive
with thy lips.

BE not a witnesse] In any matter, or for any man's cause, against thy
neighbor, against any man, without a cause, when he deserves it not, or thou
have no calling thereunto, and therefore take heed that thy testimony be not
false: For all untruth is false witnessing, and without cause: neither affirm
thou any thing certainly which is uncertain, and stands only on likelihood
and probability: so Eli testified against Hanah, when he charged her with
drunkenness, because he saw the motion of her lips, but heard not the voice of
her speech: so they testified against the Apostles and Disciples without cause,
when they said they were full of new wine, because on a sudden they spoke
strange languages: neither take half a tale for a whole speech, nor add any
thing of thine own to that which thou speak, nor pervert the meaning of a
ma^s words which he utters: for so they witnessed against Christ, when they
informed that he said, I can destroy this temple, that material building of
stone and timber, and I will build it in three days, because he said, destroy
you this temple, meaning of his body, and I will build it again in three
days. Lastly, commense not a complaint against any for well doing, and impute
not that to him for a crime which is duty, and a good service: for so Doeg
testified against Abimelech without cause, when he accused him to Saul, for
ministering relief and weapon to David in his distress. And so the enemies of
Daniel witnessed against him without cause, when they laid to his charge his
prayer and supplication made to the Lord: and deceive not, abuse not the ears
of any man to make him to believe that to be true which is false; or that to be
good which is bad; or that to be bad which is good: him to be faulty which is
innocent; or him be just which is vn-righteous: at no hand misinforme the
minds of thy brethren with thy lips, with the words which thy lips do utter.

Verse. 29. Say not, I will do to him as he has done to me, I will reward
every man according to his work.

SAy not,] By threats in speech, or purpose of heart, neither let thy
reuengefull passions or actions declare thy meaning: I will do to him as he
has done to me, the injuries that I have received from him, I will requite
unto him, I will reward the man according to his work, he shall receive as
good measure as he brought: though I pay him home, and punish him soundly, may
I not do it? he began with me; I am provoked to that which I do; the fault is
in himself; he was the first cause of his own hurt. See chap. 20. 22.

Verse 30. I w^nt by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man
destitute of understanding.

31. And lo it was all grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered the
face thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken down.

32. Then I saw and considered well, I looked upon it and received instruction.

33. Yet a little slumber, a little sleep, a little folding of the hands to
sleep.

34. So shall thy poverty come a^ one that trauelleth, and thy necessity as an
armed man.

THe Wise man, whosoever he were, does in these verses, by his own experience,
lively paint out, and describe the shameful wretchlesnesse of sluggards, with
the misery and calamity which they do incur them by the same. First, he
relates the occasion whereby he was brought to see so far into the matter: I
passed, (says he) by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the
man destitute of understanding: as if he should have said, I went not as busy
body to spy out the faults of other men which belonged not unto me. I made
not a journey of purpose to find out what was amiss, in the man's behavior,
estate, or possessions: but my business lay that way, I had just calling to
travel thereby, and in regard thereof, I passed by the field of the slothful,
etc. whose idleness, negligence, and want of forecast, conuinceth him to be
void of understanding, or destitute of an heart, as the word signifies: for it
is as good to have no heart, as to use none, as he does who is so remiss in
affairs of such importance. Secondly, he relates the matter subject of his
report, the object which his eyes apprehended, and lo, this field, or vineyard
was all grown over with thorns, it was full of brambles, and briers, nettles,
thistles, burs, and such like hurtful weeds, had covered all the ground, that
nothing could be seen but they, and these suck out the moisture of the earth,
and feed upon the fatness of the same, whereby the ground was much
impouerished, and made very barren: these annoyed the come, or grass, the
vines, or any other plants, and made them fruitless, so that nothing could be
expected but sterility, and barrenness: and beside, the stone wall was broken
down, there was delapida^ion of wounds, so that swine might easily get in, and
rout up the ground, and every beast had liberty to bark the trees, or browse
upon the branches thereof, or make spoil of such commodities as are green
therein: for idleness is a very hurtful sin, and every thing is the worse
that slothful persons have to deal in: and so Solomon testifies, saying, By
slothfulness the roof of the house goes Eccles. 10. 18.
to decay; and by the hands of the idle, the house droppeth through. Thirdly, he
recounteth the uses that he made of the sight which he saw, whereof one was for
himself, and his own benefit: he considered it well, and received
instruction, he gathered wisdom out of the folly of the sluggard, and
learned thereby that slothfulness and folly are the mothers of poverty, and
misery, and in this he showed himself to be truly wise: for as much as
heavenly wisdom directs men's minds to make that useful to themselves,
which is pernicious unto others, and make the very sins of their neighbors
to be motives Mal. 3. 15. Psalm. 4. 6.
to goodness to them. The other use concerned that lazy person, in whom he
observed the cause of that ruin and desolation, and that was love of sleep,
and lingering in sleep and drowsinesse had so possessed him, as that he was
held as a bondsman, or prisoner in it; whose very words he recites to declare
his captivity in, and thraldom to that vice, a little sleep, a little
slumber, etc. proceeding by little and little to a great deal, and can hardly
find a time to make an end thereof: and therefore for conclusion passes the
sentence of beggerie upon him, which he threatens should come upon him both
speedily, it would be sudden, and certain, as the comparison used does import;
which see more fully expounded. Chap. 6. 11.

CHAPTER. XXV.
Verse. 1. These are also the parables of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah
King of Judah copied out.

THese,] The sentences which are contained in this chapter, and the four next
as well as those in the former chapters, unto the 23. verse of the twenty
four, are the parables of Solomon, such as he, inspired by the spirit of of
God, did deliver, whether by pen, or tongue, or both, it is uncertain: it is
probable that they were among the three thousand mentioned in the book of
Kings, which the men of Hezekiah King of Judah, which some by Hezekiahs
appointment; (whether they were Priests or Levites, or Prophets, or private
persons, God has not revealed) collected together, and set in order, being
formerly here and there dispersed, and being comp^led (as it were) into a
little treatise, they are by the authority of the holy Ghost incorporated into
the book, which he himself had composed and become a part thereof.

Verse. 2. The glory of God is to conceal a thing, but the Kings honor is to
search out a matter.

THe Lord does much glorify himself by revealing things, in that thereby he
does manifest his wisdom, his goodness, his justice, his omnipotency, and
all the rest of his divine attributes unto the world: and therefore the Prophet
Habakkuk says, the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of God, as the
waters cover the sea: but herein he is wonderful glorious, that working, and
showing so much, he does yet reserve to himself of his counsels, and of his
purposes, and of his works also more then the world sees. Some things he
covers for a time, that no man may discern, and yet brings them afterward
to light that all men may behold: and this falls out often in his ordinary
administration: some things, namely the mysteries of salvation, he manifests
to a few, to his elect, that none else, though never so witty or lear^ed are
capable of; which our Savior acknowledges, saying; I thank thee O father,
Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have h^d these things from the wise and
prudent, and revealed them to babes; even so oh father because it so pleased
thee. And this he does by his gracious dispensation: some things he retains
for ever from all men, that they cannot possibly attain unto the knowledge of;
as the causes why this man is elected, and that man rejected; why one is
appointed to salvation, and another destinated to destruction. And by this he
does maintain his absolute sovereignty, that he will not subject himself to
give an account of his ways to his creatures, and to declare the plenitude,
persection, and insinitenes of his holy nature; and this is that which the
Apostle does stop all mouths with, and himself so much wondreth at, saying:
Oh the depth of the riches of the wisdom Romans 11. 33.
of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, his ways past finding out! But
the Kings honor, it makes much for the renoune of great Princes and
Governors, to search out matters, and bring them to light, that the craft of
cunning and dissembling persons go not beyond their understanding; and others
have not more skill in cloaking their facts and designements, then they have in
discovering and finding them out. This is the fruit of their wisdom, this is
the exercise of their justice, and for this they shall be greatly loved,
feared, and admired: as Solomon was in sounding out the truth, though very
difficult to 1. King. 3.
to be found in the case of the two harlots.

Verse. 3. The heavens for height, and the earth for depth, and the Kings heart
is unsearchable.

THe heavens for height. Do exceed men's knowledge and skill, and the earth for
depth, goes beyond all the reach of his understanding, and the Kings heart,
his thoughts, proiects, wisdom and understanding is insearchable, more
politic and prudent, then their subjects can understand: for those governors
whom the Lord in goodness lifts up, the royal thrones are by him endued
with an excellent spirit, and adorned with such gifts as for the most part are
not to be found in private persons: if any Princes by reason they give
themselves rather to vanity then the study of wisdom, be not such, yet
such they ought to be: for seeing they have to deal in great and weighty
matters, it is required of them that their wits, counsels, purposes, and
determination of matters, be rare, profound and past the common reach. All
Princes attain not to this, nor many: diverse are as ignorant, simple, and
shallow witted, as those that are far their inferiors: but it is through
their own default, because they want the love of understanding and diligence;
or neglect those means whereby it is to be gotten. As Rehoboams heart was so
far from mounting up to the top of heaven, or piercing down to the centure
of the earth, as that it was not a yard high, or a foot deep; but it was
because he labored not to be judicious, nor entertained good counsel when it
was offered unto him; but as for Solomon his father, who knew the words of
wisdom, and prayed for it at the hand of God, God gave him wisdom, exceeding
much, and a large heart as the sand on the sea shore, his wisdom excelled the
wisdom of all the children of the East, and the wisdom of Egypt: for he was
wiser then any man. No bad cause was too hard for him to detect, no practices
which he did not smell out: no complotters which he did not speedily entrap in
their wiles. Adoniah did easily illude Bathsheba his mother, but so he could
not him: for he espied out his treason, with Abiathers, and Ioabs, at the very
motioning of the match, which he desired might be between him and Abishag the
Shunamite.

Verse 4. Take the dross from the silver, and there shall proceed a pot for
the fin^r.

5. Take the wicked from the King, and his throne shall be established in
judgment.

TAke the dross from the silver,] For the understanding of these words, we
must observe the sense of the similitude, which is this: even as when the
dross is removed from the silver, there remains nothing but good and pure
matter, for the finer to frame a good vessel of: so when the wicked is taken
away from the King, there will be equity and justice, and so his throne
thereby shall be established: and herein first the wicked are compared to
dross, as they are also in Ezechiel Ezech. 22. 19.
for dross has no good metal in it, but is a kind of unprofitable earth: so
in them is no good to be found, but pride, worldliness, etc. And hypocrisy
at the best is like to dross which is mixed with silver: dross will never be
melted, what pains soever be taken with it; nor they humbled, or brought to
repentance, what means soever be used with them: dross will not serve for
plate, nor be converted into coin or ornaments: neither will they be fitted
for the worship of God, or any holy services. Secondly, the King is compared to
a finer; for that it belongs to him to purge away wicked persons, and
redress things that are amiss. And thirdly, the kingdom or State to fined
silver, or a vessel made thereof. Now we must speak more perticularly touching
the application in the second verse, take away, etc. He intends not to give
liberty to subjects at their pleasure, to banish licentious and dissolute men:
for that were an intolerable presumption; but it is a direction given to
Princes to inform them of their duty, that they ought not permit wicked men
to converse with them, or to have countenance from them. David after a sort
vowed before he came to the crown, that he would surely abandon all impious
persons, when the sword should be put into his hand, saying, A froward heart
shall depart from me, I will not know a Psalm. 101* 4.
wicked person: for they are every way exceeding harmefull, and pernicious to
Princes, and Magistrates, by corrupting and poisoning their hearts with sinful
counsel, as did the counselors of Darius, by applauding and praising them in
their faults; as did Herod's flatterers, by false and malicious complaints D^n.
6. H^st. 12.
against innocent men: as did Doeg, and Haman, by opposing and overthrowing all
good instructions given unto them: as did Pharaohs sorcerers, and Rehoboams
young companions; and blemishing their honor and estimation, as Shebna did
Hezekiahs; and endangering their estate by committing evil themselves, and
drawing them also into it: as in this ^ext appears by the reason from the
contrary, his throne shall be established in judgment: as if he should have
said, He would be righteous, if they were expulsed from him, and his equity
and justice would establish his throne, would bring safety, and government, and
kingdom, which cannot be expected, while such pestiferous wicked persons are
so intimate with him.

Verse. 6. Put not forth thy self before the King, nor stand in the place of
great men.

7. For better it is that it be said unto thee, Come up hither, then that thou
should be put lower, in the sight of the Prince whom thine eyes have seen.

THe holy Ghost in these sentences calls every one from vain boasting,
especially before Princes, who by reason of their high places cannot abide
arrogancy; and by reason of the power wherewith they are armed, will not
suffer it go unpunished: put not forth thy self before the King, make no show
of any bravery, or excellency before a Prince* and stand not in place of
great men, intrude not thy self into those rooms whereunto thou art called,
but belong unto men of greater account. The reason from the comparison of
contra^y effects follows: for it is better, etc. it is a more comfortable and
commendable thing, that when thou seatest thy self in a low place, thou be
called up to an higher, then that when thou have placed thy self in an high
room, a man of better degree or account coming in, thou be caused to sit
down lower, and give place unto him: as thou by experience have seen for to
come to pass to the shame of many.

Verse. 8. Go not forth hastily to strife, lest thou know not what to do in the
end thereof, when thine enemy has put thee to shame.

AS before the spirit of God has taught us modesty, and dissuaded us from
insolency and pride; so now he wills us to take heed of contention, which
vice brings shame as well as the other, go not forth hastily to strife, if
thou be unjustly pursued, maintain thy cause as well as thou can, so that
it be in equity, and after a due manner; but be thou not forward in molesting
of others, go not forth as assailants, and challengers, as champions use to
do. For from them is the similitude taken as it seems: if thou must needs be
a party in suite, be the defendant, rather then hastily to contend: for it is
great wisdom (if it be possible) to be at peace with all men, and to follow
after peace by all means; which if we cannot obtain, let us observe these
rules in all our controversies: first, that the justice and equity of our
cause appear unto us. Secondly, that the matter for which we contend be of
moment, and such as with good warrant from God we may safely deal in. Thirdly,
that we first offer condition of peace and agreement to the party whom we are
compelled to contend with, as by moving him to compremit the matter, and refer
it indifferent arbitrators. Fourthly, that we ouermatch not our selves with
adversaries too strong for us, or willingly bring the matter before corrupt and
unequal Judges, (See chap. 17. 14. in the doctrine) lest thou thereby be
brought to such extremity, that thou know not what to do, against thine
adversary, or in thine own defense: and this he speaks, not only because
rashness causes men to rush into things unlawful, but depriueth them (as it
were) for a time of all their senses, in the end thereof, when the matter has
been heard, and the cause sentenced, when thine neighbor has put thee to
shame, when thine adversary, or the party whom thou have injuriously
molested, has given thee the foil and overthrow, and has obtained of the
Judge that it be done to thee as thou thoughtest to have done to him, and so
either put thee to pay the same charges which he should have borne, or suffer
the same punishment which he should have sustained.

Verse. 9. Debate thy cause with thy neighbor, and reveal not thy secret to
another.

Verse. 10. Lest he that hears it put thee to shame, and thine infamy turn
not away.

DEbate thy cause with thine neighbor,] Dispute thy cause lovingly with thy
brother: If thy brother has offended thee, go tell him betw^ene him and thee
alone: and reveal not the secret of another, as for the private and privy
offense committed by him, which is only known unto thy self, declare it not
unto any, if thine own admonition may pre^aile with him.

Lest he that hear thee put thee to shame,] Lest in stead of credit which thou
seek after, thou procure unto thy self discredit from him unto whom thou
tellest the tale, who perceiving thee to blaze abroad the infirmity of thy
friend, will repute thee a back-biter, or talebearer: and thine infamy turn
not away, lest the leaud opinion that is had of thee, and that report that is
given ou^ of thy uncharitable dealing continue longer then thou did
imagine, and the blot and shame thereof be perpetual. So that they which lay
open the secrets of their friends, commonly bring most and longest disgrace
upon themselves. For thereby they discover their own malice and
unfaithfulness, which is a more enormous vice, then their neighbors frailty:
they break the rule of our Savior, which would have us by love and merciful
dealing to cure and hide our brethrens faults; they break the noble and
ancient rule of equity, Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, the
same do you to them: and likewise that of the Apostle grounded upon the same
foundation, put them in mind to to speak evil of no man, for we our selves
were sometimes foolish, Tit. 3. 2. 3
disobedient, etc.

Verse 11. A word sitly spoken, is like apples of gold in pictures of silver.

EVen as silver pictures set out, or beautified with golden, or gilded apples,
grapes, pomegranets, or other fruits, or flowers, are pleasing and delightful
to the eye, both for variety of rich matter, and diversity of artificial
forms: So a word, sentence, or speech containing true, weighty, and wholesome
matter, and uttered in comely and decent manner, is very wise and acceptable to
a judicious ear. Such an ornament it is, and honor for a man to order his
tongue aright, when the truth in a matter of importance is garnished with wise
and discreet handling, all due circumstances (of persons, time, and place,
vehemence or softnes, pro^xitie or briefnes, and every other of like nature)
concurring.

Verse. 12. As an eare-ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold: so is a wise
reprouer to an obedient ear.

THe sense is, that the wise reprouer, or instructor, who lovingly, and
seasonably tells a man of his fault, or duty, is more beneficial to the
ear, and consequently to the heart and whole man of him, which is attentive to
hearken, and obedient to perform, then if he should grace his ear with an
eare-ring, or bestow a rich Jewel upon them: For the grace of Gods spirit
which he is used as an instrument to confer, is far more precious then all
gold or Iemmes: and the inward garnishing is incomparably more glorious then
outward decking. So that good men's counsel is of no small value and worth to
good men. If our Savior had clothed the woman of Samaria with cloth of gold,
and hanged upon her as many Jewels and precious stones, he had not so richly
adorned her, nor brought her to that honor, as he did by that gracious and
well tempered conferen^^: For what can more commend a man, or make him shine so
bright, as that which helps to remove away the rags of his corruption, and
further him to repentance, that he may be clad with righteousness? by this he
is made acceptable to God, and godly Christians: and free from the danger of
reproach, which can come from the tongue of any wicked deprauer.

Verse. 13. As the cold of snow in the time of summer: so is a faithful
messenger to him that sends him.

THe inhabitants of those hot countries, used to cool their drink in summer
with cold snow water, which they gathered in winter, and reserved till that
season. Let it not seem strange though here mention made of snow in harvest,
which if it would fail on the ground, would be unseasonable, and hurtful
thereunto, as we shall see in the beginning of the next chapter: but the water
thereof which is most cold, put into drink, to cool the same, does much
refresh them that labor hotly in harvest work: or otherwise are oppressed,
and made faint with extremity of heat: as may appear in the 25. verse of
this chapter. Now unto snow water reserved, and thus applied, is a speedy and
trusty messenger here fitly resembled: for by his good news he greatly
reuiueth the longing and languishing minds of those who sent him about their
business, who during the time of his absence, through fear and doubt were
almost half dead. For they which use good men in their messages, or other
affairs, do commonly ^inde good success therein: as did Abraham, and
Corn^lius* and when David heard that Ahimaas was coming toward him, he
concluded because he was a good man, he would surely bring good tidings: such
will not fail to be trusty, and diligent: they will manage their affairs
with wisdom, and discretion, and Gods Angels and blessings do accompany
them, and their actions, to make them fortunate and prosperous. See chap. 13.
verse. 17.

Verse. 14. Who so boasts himself of a false gift is as clouds, and rain
without water.

Clouds and wind in drought, when ground chops and chawnes for want of
moisture, and grass, and corn, and the fruits of the earth begin to wither,
do put the husbandman in great hope that the weather will alter, and store of
rain will fall shortly; which if it come not to pass, but their expectation
be deceived, does add unto their grief through the defeatment of their hope:
and so dissemblers, and such as make show of great liberality, are much
depended upon for a time, and great confidence is reposed on them: but when
they feed men with bare words and pretenses, and neither perform any good, nor
mean it, they double the sorrows of those needy people who waited for their
help, and had rather been without their promises, then to be nothing the
better for them: for misery is made the more miserable, when a man is gulled
and illuded by deceivers.

Verse 15. By long forbearance is a Prince persuaded, and a soft tongue
breaks the bones.

GReat personages are for the most part more vehemently incensed when they are
angry, then meaner men: because their minds are greater, and take it for an
indignity not to be satisfied in their wills: yet by modesty, and meekenes* by
patience, silence, and forbearance is a Prince pacified: great Rulers are
appeased when they see they are not incountred: when not indutifull reply is
made unto them: when there is no dogged countenance, nor muttering language
against them, and a loft tongue, mild and lowly words uttered with the tongue,
breaks the bones, overcomes stout and hard minds, which otherwise would
not yield, and asswageth the greatest rage and anger, which otherwise cannot be
extinguished, that is attributed to the mind which properly belongs to the
body, the strength of the creatures much consisting in the greatness of the
bones. It was said of Isa^ar, that he Genesis 29. ^^.
should be a strong ass, or an ass of bone. It is like unto an oil which
will not only supple the flesh, and outward parts of the man, but soke even
unto the very bones, and have an operation therein. See the doctrine of the
first verse of the 15. Chapter.

Verse. 16. Have thou found honey, eat so much as is sufficient for thee, lest
thou be filled therewith, and vomit it.

Have thou obtained any thing that is pleasant and delightful, moderate thy
self in the use of it, eat so much as is sufficient for thee, but no more,
lest thou be filled therewith, sated with eating overmuch, and vomit it,
annoying thy stomach, and shaming thy self with the rauenousnes of thine
unbridled appetite. A measure therefore is to be kept in all things, even in
those things which are most pleasant: for excess will make the best things
bitter and unsavory: For what is sweeter then honey if it be moderatly taken?
yet if any eat too much thereof it causes loathing, and casting; and so will
all delights of the world which are abused above measure, they will bring pain
and sorrow after them: too much of every earthly thing is hurtful, as of meat
and drink, of Isai. 28. 7. Hab. 2. 5. Iam. 5. 3.
gold, silver, and money; of garments and apparel, of pleasures and delights:
Chap. 21. 17.

Verse 17. Withdraw thy foot from thine neighbors house, lest he be weary of
thee, and so hate thee.

THis seems to be a particular application of the former precept, that as he
would not have men to glut themselves in other delights which our natures do
affect: so he would not have us to exceed in pressing too hard upon, or
ouerlaying a kind friend: For though his table or house be in sweetness like
home, yet if a man will haunt it without all measure, or modesty, he will make
his dearest friend to whom he was wont to be most welcome, to grow weary in
time of such a daily guest: therefore says he, withdraw thy foot, or as the
word is, make it precious at thine neighbors house. Christians must learn not
to be burthenous one to another. It 1. These. 29. 2. These. 3. 8.
stands not with the ingenuous heart of a good man so to do: it is not
agreeable to love and charity: it proceeds not from prudence and wisdom:
it depriueth us of much of our liberty and honor: it is a thing to be more
glorious to be serviceable to our brethren, as Christ was, then to be
chargeable to them.

Verse 18. A man that bears false witness against his neighbor, is a maule,
and a sword, and a sharp arrow.

A Man that bears false witnesse] Which ^ither does lay things to his charge
as an accuser, or undertakes to justify other men's false complaints by ^^s
testimony, or raises up, and disperseth slanderous reports, against his
neighbor, against any man whereby his life, or limbs, or his state, or
family, or credit might be endangered, deals as if he should strike his
neighbor with a maule, and so knock him on the head: or run at him with a
sword, and let out his bowels, or shoot a sharp arrow at him which will
pierce deeply, and strike him at the heart: to all these three instruments of
death is a malicious tongue fitly compared: For that many times it does as much
mischief as any of them all, because the name of a good man is as dear unto
him, as the best member of his body: and life it self is often destroyed by
the virulent tongues of malicious accusers. If Naboths enemies had knocked out
his brains with a club; or run him through with a sword; or shot a quiver
full of arrows at him, could they possibly have equallized that cruelty of
traducing him to be a traitor against the King, and a blasphemer of God, to the
destruction of his life, ruin of his house, and perpetual reproach of his
name, if the Lord by a marvelous favor to him, and justice against his
adversaries, had not miraculously cleared him. See 1. King. 2.
chap. 12. 18.

Verse 19. Confidence in an unfaithful man is as a broken tooth, and a hand
out of joint.

COnfidence] Trust, and affiance reposed in an unfaithful man, in a
dissembler, who means nothing less, then the kindness which he makes show
of, is as a broken tooth, that fails and paineth him, that goes about to
chew his meat therewith, and a foot out of joint, which tormenteth, and
dissappointeth him that sets it on the ground to go: neither can the broken
tooth, or foot out of joint do their office: but are unprofitable, and
painful. A deceitful friend then turns to the hurt of him that depends
upon him: by disappointing him of his expectation, as Job complains of his
friends, that they deceived him like a brook, which is full of water in
winter, when enough is to be had every where else: but as a dry pit in summer
utterly failing the passengers that come in Job. 6. 15.
hope to quench their thirst thereat.

And David complains of his acquaintance that they stood far off from him.
And it was no small grief to Paul when he had most need of help to be
forsaken of all, and assisted 1. Tim. 4. 16.
of none: and this is commonly done with some calumniation, or under color or
pretext of some desert of his, as that he was worthy to be left to himself:
and at last such a friend turns to be a most malicious and bitter adversary:
as David found Achitophel to be.

Verse. 20. As he that puts on a garment in cold weather, and powers
vinegar upon nitre: so is he that sings songs to an heavy heart.

THe purpose of this is, to demonstrate the sweet consolation and refreshing,
which a wise and faithful comforter does minister to a pensive and afflicted
mind, and that by three comparisons: the first is warm clothes in cold
weather, whereof every man by his own experience, sense, and feeling, does
know the delight and commodity: the second is the pouring of vinegar upon
nitre, which (as writers say) is a matter or substance much like unto salt, but
is not salt, with holes like a sponge: it is to be found in Judea, Egypt, and
those parts, made hard by the Sun, which is quickly dissolved and wasted by
vinegar, though by heat compacted together it has the hardness of a very
stone: and as much do the consolatorie comforts of a loving and godly friend
mitigate and consume the settled grief of the heart. The third is music, or
melody, it is called the singing of songs, chearing the heart in sorrow and
heaviness, as a pleasant harmony, or well tuned dittie, sung with a sweet
voice, affects the care.

Verse. 21. If thine enemy hunger, give him bread to eat: if he thirst, give
him water to drink.

Verse. 22. For thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord
shall reward thee.

THe holy Ghost in this place (as he does expound himself in the new
Testament, does give a precept for Christian charity to our adversaries which
hate us, that we should overcome Romans 12. 10.
their malice with beneficence and well doing: and to this purpose prescribes
a duty in the former verse, teaching us how to deal with him; and soliciteth
us thereunto by forcible arguments in the latter. The duty is, that in case
our enemy hunger, we should feed him, etc. if he be in any want, according
to our ability and opportunity we must minister unto him, denying him no
help or coutesie at his need: therefore the law requires the same,
instancing in other offices of love and humanity: as, If thou meet thine
enemies ox, or his ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him
again: Exodus 24. 4. 5.
if thou see the ass of him that hated thee lying under his burden, and
would thou forbear to help him? thou shall surely help him.

The arguments are two: the first from the end: the second from the effect. The
end is that we may reconcile him to us, if it be possible; and win his love,
by pouring coals of fire on his head, by heaping up many benefits upon him:
For it seems to be a comparison taken from founders, or casters of metal,
who by adding too much fuel, and making a great fire, will make the hardest
iron and steel at the last to melt, and become liquid: and if there be any
metal of ingenuiety and good nature in such foes: if they be not wholly made
of dross, they will be pacified, and will not after so many and great good
turns continue implacable. Even that waiward Saul, whose heart was very much
obdurate with hatred, envy, and malice against David, was for the time
mollified, when he saw that he spared his life.

Having such an advantage to slay him, and only cut off a piece of his coat,
when he might with as much ease have cut off his head: this kindness of David's
did so affect Saul, and wrought upon him, that he called him his son now,
whom before he proclaimed a traitor, and prayed to the Lord to recompense unto
him the goodness which he had shown unto him, whereas formerly he desired
nothing but his ruin and destruction. All good means therefore are to be
used, to make our enemies to be better minded toward us, whatsoever the
success be: let our fire of goodness be as great as we can make it: for that
we know not what they may prove, whether lead, or tin, or brass, or silver,
or gold, etc. unto this we are persuaded by the Prophet, saying, Seek peace,
and follow after it, pursue it with patience, long sufferance, forbearance,
with pai^es, charges, and all testimonies of our desire of their good will, and
care of their welfare. For now notwithstanding variance continue between us,
yet we shall be freed from the burden and blame thereof, before God, men, and
Angels, and in our own consciences, and theirs also: and this is an excellent
armor of defense, and w^ may be assured of protection and safety against
their malicious and mischievous practices. The effect of this loving behavior
toward our enemy, is the reward to be expected from God, the Lord shall reward
thee, we shall be no losers, although our enemies remain obstinate, and not
able to requite us: if froward men will not respect the mercy or courtesy
that has been showed to them, the faithful God will reward the obedience that
has been yielded to him: for the more remiss, or insufficient men be to
requite any good services, the more pressed and ready the Almighty will be to
recompense them for it: we have good security for this, the Lord Jesus has
given his word for it: Love (says he) your enemies; do good, hoping for
nothing again, and your Luke 6 35.
reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the highest: for he is
kind to the unthankful and evil.

Verse. 23. As the north wind drives away rain, so does an angry countenance a
backbiting tongue.

AS the north wind,] Often, and for the most part drives away Techolel, formed
of Chol.
rain: the Hebrew word says, grieueth, vexes, or molesteth rain: for we so
find it in the 26. chapter, verse. 10. the great man molesteth all: it is a
catachresticall and improper speech: for grief befalls not insensible
creatures, yet there may be a Metaphor in it: for that men will shun the
place and company wherein they are grieved and vexed. The truth of this
Protesis, or former part of the similitude we see verified by experience. For
it is commonly fair weather, though cold, when the wind sits in the north:
notwithstanstanding that there was a north-west wind, which by reason of the
situatio^ of the Mediterranean sea engendered rain, and gathered the clouds
together, so does an angry countenance, the slanderous tongue, in like manner a
frowning look, which argues dislike, and coffeehouse, and is a sign of
anger, silenceth, and expels him that with his tongue is given to slander,
and backbite others. For the best way to be rid of tale-bearers, and all other
sinful men, is, to discountenance them: for this will Ephesians. 5. 11.
discourage them from coming to us at all, when they shall see themselves no
better welcome: or if they should come, they would not be in have to open their
packes of news, when they perceive their reports to be no better regarded: and
let them speak what they will, and what they can, yet we shall not be annoyed
with the infection thereof, so long as we give so little countenance to their
backbiting.

Verse. 24. It is better to dwell in the corner of an house top, then with a
contentious woman in a wide house. See chap. 21. 9. etc. 19. 13.

25. As cold waters to a weary soul, so is good news from a far country.

AS cold waters,] When they are drunk, especially in the heat of summer in
those hot countries, do greatly refresh and comfort a weary soul, the person
wearied with labor and travel, and by that means also waxen dry and
thirsty, so is good news, touching his own estate, or friends, or the Church
of God, or the public state wherein he lives, from a far country, and from
near also: but principally when a good message comes from places remote and
furthest distant, it is the more acceptable and welcome, because men cannot
hear from them every day, or often, which causes more doubt and fear,
touching the estate of matters there: and therefore good news from thence is
also the more grateful, because it has been long and earnestly looked for,
and desired: for whatsoever the heart does much desire, the ear will at any
time most gladly hear of: if Jacobs sons had brought him home as many pieces
of gold, as they did grains of corn, they could not have rejoiced his spirit
so much as they did by assuring him that Joseph was alive in Egypt.

Verse. 26. A righteous man falling down before the wicked, is as a troubled
fountain, and corrupted spring.

A Righteous man falling down before the wicked,] Either consenting with him
in any sin, or through cowardice and fear desisting from any good and
necessary duty, or doing any thing in his presence, or which may come to his
knowledge, that is scandalous or offensive: (for all this is meant by falling)
is as a troubled fountain, is disgraced, and defaced, as the cleernes and
sweetness of the well is by grauel and other such things when they are stirred
up: for every man's natural corruptions be as mire in the bottom of a good
well; and wicked men's seducements to evil, or insultations over them for their
faults, are as beasts feet trampling in good wels, or a corrupted spring,
whereinto filth, carrion, or poison is cast to infect the same: for a godly man
swaruing and erring from the right way is very obnoxious, and apt to do hurt
by his erroneous speeches, when he undertakes to maintain an error: his
examples, and actions in that which is not warrantable by the word of God, and
a good conscience, sway very much with others to be of his judgment and
practice. When the subtle Jews had drawn Peter into dissimulation, Barnabas
quickly followed, and then many others one after another: Gal. 2. 11. 12. 13.
and if Paul had not speedily addressed himself to help to cleanse the
fountain, there would have been much muddie water drunken in Antioch.
Wherefore it is a great disadvantage for godly men to discover their
infirmities in the eyes of Gods enemies. What a blemish was it for Abraham to
be found equiuocating and dissembling in a matter of such consequence, of that
Heathenish Pharaoh? what an uncomfortable case was it for Samson to be taken of
the Philistims in an whore-house? if it be wished that the afflictions of Gods
people should not be heard of in Gath, it is to be lamented that their sins
should be seen there.

Verse 27. As it is not good to eat much honey; so for men to search their
own glory is no glory.

AS it is not good to eat much honey,] Though honey moderately taken be
wholesome food eo be eaten, yet to eat too much is not good, lest thou
surfeit through the excess thereof, and be driven to vomit thereby. See the
16. verse of this chapter.

So for men to search their own glory,] To seek praise, glory, commendation,
and preferment to themselves, is not glory, is not profitable nor honorable,
but rather base and contemptible; yea a dishonest and wicked thing: to enjoy
any of these upon due cause, is a testimony of Gods favor, and a blessing
upon well doing; but studiously to affect them, and ambitiously to hunt after
them, is a note of pride, and apparent testimony of vainglory; and the more
men labor for them, the more unworthy they are of them. None of the trees so
greedily longed after sovereignty, and to be Prince among the rest, as did
the Bramble: humble men desire rather to do that which may deserve praise,
then to be magnified and praised: and therefore as selfe-liking, and desire of
estimation abounds, so that virtue of true humility is wanting, yea and faith
also is wanting: as our Savior says; How can ye believe that seek honor one
of another, and seek not the honor that comes Ioh. 5. 44.
of God.

Verse. 28. He that has no rule over his own spirit is as a city broken down,
and without walls.

HE that is not able to govern his mind, and to keep under his affections,
but lets the bridle loose thereunto, is as a city broken down, and without
walls, being not able to resist any assault, but lies open to the spoil, the
enemy may come in at his pleasure, sack it, and burn it, and put all the
inhabitants to the sword: in such an estate are they which are ruled by their
lusts and passions, being not fenced with the wall of the fear of God: they
are exposed to the tentations of Satan, and to the fraud and illusions of
wicked men: they are not able to withstand any wicked motion of their own
sinful hearts, or the rage of their unruly tongues; they are taken captives
and become bondslaues to every noisome and damnable vice, whereunto the
procliuitie of their fleshly nature carries them: whether it be to railing, or
quarrelling, or incontinencie, or covetousness, or fraudulent dealing, or
lying: every vile affection and lust, will carry him headlong with violence
into all mischief and misery: as wild and fierce horses wanting guidance,
oftentimes run away winh a coach, to the danger of all their lives that sit
in it.

CHAPTER. XXVI.
Verse. 1. As the snow in summer, and rain in harvest are not meet so honors
is not comely for a fool.

AS snow in summer, and rain in harvest, As snow and rain do not agree to
those seasons, neither did either of them use to fall at those times in those
countries: for it was a miracle to have 1. Sam. 12. 17.
rain in wheat hauest* so honor is unseemly for a fool, so are titles,
praises, and promotions unfit for wicked persons, because they should be the
rewards of wisdom, and virtue. Snow is not agreeable to summer, seeing
through the extreme coldness thereof it hinders the ripening of the corn;
likewise rain is not welcome in harvest, for as much as through the moystnesse
thereof, it hinders the inning of the fruits of the earth: in like manner,
honor is not meet for a fool, in this respect, that he is unworthy of it,
reproach and punishment is more proper and due unto him: and in this respect,
because he is incapable of it: all the preferments in the world cannot make a
sinful person truly honorable* no more then a gold ring in a swines snout can
make her gorgious and beautiful: they do no more adorn him in wise men's
eyes, then a call man's apparel ^oth become a little boy: and in this respect,
because they are hurtful unto him, making him proud and high minded, and
breeding a dangerous timpanie in his heart, and publishing to the world his
folly and vileness, as being thereby set on an high stage that all his
misbehauiour may be gazed at, and looked upon by every man: and lastly in this
respect, that his honor conferred upon him, and he thus lifted up with
honor, or rather the picture of it, is made pernicious and noisome unto
others, by his insolency and fierceness, and manifold abuses of his
authority.

Verse. 2. As the bird by flying, and the swallow by flying do escape: so the
curse that is causeless shall not come.

AS the bird by flying,] As the setting of lime-twigs or sn^res, the throwing
of stones, the shooting of arrows or other shot, seldom hurt the swallows,
or other birds that are on wing, or in their flight: but all such attempts are
frustrate, and take none effect: so the imprecations and maledictions, the
accusations and complaints, the slanderous reports and bruites which are
directed against harmless men, and without desert, shall not come, shall take
no place to hurt them. Men set nets, and prepare grins, and use other devices
against the poor fow^^s who have not wronged the^; but very often they lose
their time and labor: for the birds have no harm, but save themselves, and
escape away by flying, and fly away so fast, as the bird-catchers cunning
cannot overtake them: in like manner it comes to pass, that mouths that are
full of curses, obloquies, striving to hurt their betters without cause, are
defeated of their expectation and desires: for the goodness of God which is very
succourable, serves for feet and wings to his servants that are wrongfully
traduced, which will never permit an evil tongue to hurt an innocent and
righteous man: For God is as provident for the name of his people, as as he is
for their life and estate; and does as well ward off the pernicious words of
foul mouths, as he does the cruel strokes of violent hands. Eliphaz
promised to Job, and all other godly men, safety from this danger, saying; Thou
shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue; neither shall thou be afraid Job
5. 21.
of destruction when it comes. Our Savior pronounced his Disciples blessed,
and willed them to rejoice, when men speak Mat. 5. 11.
all manner of evil against him for his name sake falsely. Jeremiah said,
Though he neither lent on usury, nor borrowed on usury, Ier. 15. 10.
yet every man cursed him: yet what was he the worse? Simeo^ tells Marie that
our Lord Jesus Christ should be a sign to be spoken against, but what was he
the worse? Iezabel inueighed bitterly against Eliah, threatening him, and that
with an oath, that he should not live three days to an end: but what ^as he
the worse? yet deserved curses and threatenings upon due cause are perilous and
powerful, and work many ^mes the bane and ruin of them that are smitten with
them* when God in his displeasure says Amen unto them: the two Captains Deuteronomy.
15. 9.
with their fifties that were sent to take Elijah, had this verified upon them,
to their woe: and so had the boys which mocked Elisha; and many others in the
scriptures. 2. King 2. 10.


Verse. 3. A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and a rod for the fools
back.

A Whip for the horse,] To incite him, and make him run swiftly forward in
the battle: for the special, and almost only use of horses in those parts,
and at those times (for ought we read) was for war: and in stead of spurs
which are amongst us, they carried a whip in their hands: according as horses
employed in our countries for plough, and cart, and such like services, will
not draw laboriously enough, unless they be remembered now and then with
smarting lashes: a bridle for the ass, to rule and direct him in his way: for
those they used in iourneyes to travel with: this simple creature when he
carries a man on his back, would go out of the right way very often, unless
he were by him guided and ordered by a bit: and a rod for the fools back,
that is, chastisements and corrections appertain to wicked and witless
fools, and that for two causes; the one to stir him up, if it be possible,
and provoke him to goodness; the other to restrain him as much as may be, and
detain him from sin: for the bruit beasts are not harder to be governed, then
wilful, and unteachable men are. Vain man (says Zophar) would be Job 11. 12.
wise, though man be borne like a wild ass colt. Masters and Parents find
this true in their families; and so do Magistrates in the Commonwealth, and
Ministers feel it in the Church, and God takes special notice of it.

Verse 4. Answer not a fool according to his foolishnes, lest thou be like
him.

Answer not a fool in his foolishness,] In talk, and speech between thee
and him, deal not with him according to his sinful vain and manner: if he
scoff, fa^l not thou to scurrility: if he rail, fall not thou to reuiling: if
he rage break not thou into passion: after whatsoever manner he diso^dereth
his tongue, imitate him not, conform not thy self to his vain ^angling, lest
thou be like to him, lest by following his example, or incurring the opinion of
folly, thou corrupt thy heart, abuse thy tongue, or blemish thy estimation, as
he does his: for great circumspection is to be used in dealing with rude men,
for observation of time, and place, matter, manner, 2. King. 18. 3. 6.
and measure of speaking. Hezekiah commanded that no answer should be made to
railing Rabsekah. Saint Peter would have us in this case to follow Christ his
example, Who when he 1. Pet. 2. 23. and 3. 9.
was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed it to him that judges righteously. And therefore admonishes us not
to render evil for evil, or railing for railing, but contrariwise to bless.

Verse. 5. Answer a fool according to his foolishness, lest he be wise in his
own conceit.

IT seems to the first view that this sentence is contrary, and merely
contradictorie to the former, that being here commanded, which is there
forbidden: but upon further inquiry, we shall find that they very well
accord, without all manner of opposition, if it be observed that there are two
kinds of answering; the one in folly, to fashion ones self according to the
fools course; the other unto folly, to let the fool know his absurdity:
Answer a fool according to his folly, either by reproving, or confuting him,
or showing him the danger of his sin; or affrighting his heart with the
judgments of God, lest he be wise in his own conceit, lest by conceiving error
to be truth, he remain ignorant: or fantasying his speech to be excellent, he
wax proud: or imagining his neighbor not to be able to reply, he grow the
more insolent. Micaiah would not answer the Prophets according to their 1.
King. 20.
folly: but he did not let them pass without an answer, and such as was for
their perpetual reproach. Paul would not answer Festus according to his folly,
when he said he was mad: Act 26. 25.
but he soundly refuted him with his sober and modest speeches. Abigail did not
answer Nabal according to his foolishnes in his drunken mood, whilst he was
rauing against David but she made him understand on the morrow, what mischief
his sollie had like to have brought upon himself, and his family; which
killed his heart, and stroke him as dead as a 1. Sam. 25. 37.
stone.

Verse. 6. He that sends a message by the hand of a fool, cutteth off the
feet, and drinks violence.

HE that sends a message by the hand of a fool,] Which commits an errand,
or any other business to a fool, to one that wants wisdom, and honesty:
For by the hand of any, is an Hebrew phrase commonly for parties employed in
matters, is as unwise in that behalf, as he that cutteth off the feet of the
messenger whom he sends: meaning that he does deprive himself of the means
whereby his purposes should be performed. Wisdom, to manage a man's affairs,
is as needful as legs and feet to carry one unto them: and therefore it is
all one, in respect of the success, to send a messenger that has no legs,
or having some, to saw them off, and to employ him that is void of judgment,
discretion, and faithfulness.

And drinks violence] Procures as much sorrow, and coffeehouse to
himself, as if he were violently abused, and should be compelled to drink
nothing but that which is both unpleasant, and unwholesome, offending his
stomach, and oppressing of nature. See chap. 10. 26. in the Doctrine.

Verse. 7. As the legs of the lame are not equal: so is aparable in a fools
mouth.

A Fool is fitly in this verse resembled to a lame man: for every fool
halteth down right in his understanding, or behavior, and the words also
uttered by a fools mouth are aptly compared to his legs, which are withered,
and feeble, unequal, and uncomely. For indeed all good speeches do limpe in
wicked men's mouths: as appears chap. 17. 7. they are not suitable to
themselves: they affirm that now, which they will deny anon, and so
contrary. There is no constancy in their mouths (says the Prophet) for
within they are very corruption: sometimes they bless: sometimes they curse:
sometimes prayers are in their lips, sometimes oaths and imprecations, which
S. James condemns: sometimes commending Iam. 3. 10.
religion, and good men: sometimes railing at, and inueighing against both:
sometimes they have the words and texts of the Scripture in their mouths:
sometimes they belch thereout wanton, filthy, and ribaldrie speeches. And as
there is no harmony, or good agreement in their speeches: so their most
plausible words, and those whereby they make some semblance of religion, are
grossly thwarted* and crossed by their actions: They profess (says S. Paul)
that they know God, but by works they deny him, and are abominable and
disobedient, Tit. 1. 16.
and to every good work reprobate. And the Prophet Isaiah teaches that their
hearts never keep pace with their tongues, whilst their tongues are talking
of any thing which is good: always when the one comes one way, the other Isai.
29. 13.
goes another.

Verse. 8. As he that hides a stone in a sling: so is he that gives honor to
a fool.

AS he that hides a stone in a sling, or engines whereout they were wont to
shoot great stones, for the battering of walls or cities: as if he should
say, In like manner as he which does bring shot for ordinance, which by the
discharge thereof, will do much mischief; or does furnish a brainsick, or
madheaded fellow with weapons, does endanger many, and is the cause of all the
hurt that shall be done by that stone, bullet, or other mortal weapons, which
he has so unadvisedly delivered out of his own hand, into the hand of such a
mad or malicious fellow: so does he which gives honor to a fool, that
promoteth to office such as are worthless, and altogether unfit for the same,
is after a sort accessarie to all the harms which they do: For as their wills
and purposes are corrupt, and naught, so has he been a means to help them to
power to accomplish the same: this his act has drawn his hand to the defense
of evil causes, to the receiving of bribes, to the perverting of justice: to
the discountenancing of good, to the encouraging of the wicked, and to all the
villainies which they shall commit. Saul put a stone into the sling, when he
put that currish Doeg into office, and accordingly gave countenance unto him:
and so did Ashuerosh when he advanced Haman that cursed Amalekite.

Verse. 9. As a thorn going up into the hand of a drunkard: so is a parable in
a fools mouth.

THe wicked fool may very fitly be compared to a drunkard: for as a drunkard
for a time wants the use of reason; so is he commonly void of grace, and good
discretion: a parable, or wise saying, in such a fools mouth, may also be very
well likened to a thorn going up into the hand of a drunkard, he both hurts
himself therewith, or pricketh those that are about him: so does this vain
and impious fool, the best sentences which he utters: For when wicked men
use good words, they commonly tend to some mischief: as did Caiphas by his
prophesying persuade to put Christ to death: Ioh. 11. 49. 2. Pet. 3. 16.
so S. Peter accuses the profane hypocrites of his time, for wresting Paul's
Epistles to their own destruction.

Verse. 10. The great man molesteth all, and hireth the fool, and the
transgressor.

THe great man] Which has power, and dignity, and no goodness^, molesteth
all, oppresses, and vexes all his underlings, caus^^g them to groan under
the burdens which he lays upon them: and to the same end, and the better to
bring his purposes to pass, he hireth the fool, and the transgressor, gives
entertainment, wages, countenance, and offices to the worst sort of men, t^
have them his agents for information, for counsel, for pr^ie^^ so ^x^^ution of
all their detestable designem^nts: so did A(...)each for the bloody massacring
of Judge 9. 4. 1. King. 20. ^0.
h^^ innocent ^^^thren: ^^ did ^ez^bel for the taking away of ^e life of
Naboth: so did the corrupt governors in Judea before Neh^m. 8. 15.
^er^miah: so did those ravenous oppressors in the time of Zephanie. And how
could Saul, after he became a persecutor Zeph. ^^. 9.
of David and good men, have missed his Balliefe Doeg?

Verse. 11 As a dog returns to his vomit: So a fool returns to his
folly.

SOme sinners are like to dogs in barking: some in biting: some in properties:
but a backslider is like unto them in their most beastly quality, even in
taking up their vomit: For the dog feeling his stomach surcharged goes to
the grass, and casts up that which troubles him: but afterward delighted
with filthy things, returns, and takes up that as good, which before he
had cast out as evil, and so like a filthy beast as he is feeds himself
with his own filthiness. After the same manner the reuolter feeling his
conscience burdened with sin, by the knowledge of the good word of God,
though not with the conscience of it, and being moved therewith, lays aside
his iniquity for a time: but being set upon afresh by his own concupiscence,
and taking pleasure in that which is vile and loathsome, returns back to his
old evil course, and is again entangled with his first uncleanness, which to
do is a most grievous, dangerous, and deadly transgression: for all the first
sins of such a man remain still upon the score, because howsoever there were
shows of repentance in him, yet there was nothing indeed but guile and
hypocrisy* and ^t is to be found by all experience, that he grows worse and
worse, and that his latter end is much more wretched then his beginning.
Apostaters are of all other men the most dangerous and hurtful persons to Gods
people. Achitophel, Ioa^^ and ^udas are noted to be treacherous and most
notorious malefactors. The devil has more power over them, their own
guiltiness does gnaw their conscience, Mat. 12. 45.
and much i^bitter them: they are less careful of repentance, when they
trample on the medicine that should heal them, and at last the judgments of
God will fall most heavily upon them.

Verse. 12. See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there* is more hope of a
fool then of him.

See thou, Do thou know by familiar acquaintance, or conversation, or by
any testimonies a man wise in his own conceit? that is opinionate of his own
wisdom, and his carnal mind is lifted up with conceit of his own
understanding, as one looking in a glass, should dote upon his own personage
or beauty, there is more hope of a fool, there is greater likelihood that an
idiot, or natural, may be brought to learn, practice, or receive good, then
this glorious selfe-liker: for the insufficiency of the one grows from want
of natural capacity; of the other from pride, sinfulness, and abuse of wit:
God corrects the one indeed with a sharp rod, and yet there is hope of his
pity and compassion toward him: for his commiseration is most in greatest
misery: but he plagueth the other most grievously in wrath, being provoked
thereto by his due deserts. Wherefore of all fools conceited fools are the
most lamentable; as Christ said to the Pharisees, If ye were Ioh. 9. 41.
blind* ye should have no sin, but now ye say, we see, therefore your sin
remains. For what are their guides, but blindness of mind, hardness of
heart, pride, lust, and Satan? and what sin almost are they freed from him?
are they not impudent? are they not despisers of all good instructions? are
they not contemners of God and his ordinances? As were also the Pharisees and
Lawyers, who rejected the counsel of God against themselves, Luke 7. 30.
and would not be baptized of John? And what judgments may they not look
for? when woe is denounced against them by name; when God is their enemy, when
damnation Isa. 5. 21.
is their portion.

Verse. 13. A slothful man says, there is a Lion in the way, a Lion in the
streets. See chap. 22. 13.

14. As the door turns on the hinges: so does the sluggard on his bed.

AS the door,] Or gate of an house, turns on his hinges, and hooks
whereupon it is set, and yet is not carried out of it place, but there hangs
still; though sometimes it be moved to one side, and sometimes to another: even
so the sluggard fastened to his bed, sometimes rolleth to this side, and
sometimes to that, often purposing to rise, but still lying still and taking
his ease, he would never fall off those hooks, unless he were lifted off, or
by compulsion knocked off: if the authority of superiors, or hunger, or mere
necessity did not rouse him up, he would gall his side with beating upon the
sheets, and weary himself with tossing up and down, before he would rise.
Such an iron strength has the sin of sluggishnesse, to hold men fast when
they are set upon it.

Some other kind of sluggards are as fast tied to other vices: some are in
thraldom to their bellies for tippling, and good cheer: some to their games
and sports: some to this pleasure, and some to that; though they rise sooner
then the other, yet they are no better occupied then if they were in their
beds: but worse a great deal many of them; and yet are so in the power of
their sin, that nothing can draw them out of the same, but only the virtue
of Gods spirit, if ever it be bestowed upon them.

Verse. 15. The slothful man hides his hand in his bosom, and it grieueth him
to bring it to his mouth. See chap. 19. 24.

16. The sluggard is wiser in his own eyes, then seven men that can render a
reason.

THe sluggard is wiser in his own eyes,] As he himself thinks of himself,
he has that imagination in his own mind, and is not so indeed, then seven
men, then many others, that can render a reason, of the things they do or
speak: and it may as well be translated tending to the same purpose, that
returns sage counsel, that give prudent answers to those Meshibei tagnam.
that ask their advice, and can sufficiently confirm and justify all that
they say: for idleness makes men very proud, notwithstanding that their
brains thereby be much dulled: their vnteachablenesse conuinceth them of
this; for they will learn of no man, their contempt does also manif^stly argue
it: for they will censure every man. It was said concerning Sodom, that this
was her iniquity, Pride, fullness of bread, and Ezech. 16. 49.
abundance of idleness was in her, and in her daughters. On the contrary
side, faithful diligence in a good calling, by Gods blessing, is a means of
great humility.

Verse 17. He that passing by medleth with strife that belongs not to him;
is as he that takes a dog by the ears.

HE that passing by,] Occasionally where men contend, and has no calling to
the place, especially to the business, and medleth with the strife that
belongs not unto him, is angry, and begins to chide and brawle for another
man's cause, or interposeth himself into matters wherein he is not interested,
is as he that ta^eth a dog by the ears, and thereby provoke the dog to take
him by the hand, or by the throat: for he puts himself in danger of his
teeth; and so busy body agents in other men's quarrels, do many ways
endanger themselves, thrusting themselves into troubles, and into suites, and
incensing many to be their enemies, with whom otherwise they might have lived
peaceably: for they that enter strife without calling, do commonly hazard
themselves into trouble without comfort: as Iehoshaphat, having taken part with
Achab, had felt to his woe, but that the Lord was very merciful to him; but
we must understand that Solomon does not tax such as do labor to accord
those that are at debate: but which makes himself a party, and maintains
one side against another, which comes not with water to extinguish the flame
of discord, but with fuel and b^llowes to feed the fire, blow the coals, and
increase the heat of variance between them.

Verse. 18. As a mad man that casts firebrands, arrows, and death.

19. So is he that deceives his neighbor, and says, Am I not in sport?

AS a mad man,] Which is deprived of the use of his understanding, and is
carried with rage and fury, casts abroad, and at other men, firebrands,
arrows, and death, all manner of things which come to his hand, that may do
hurt to others, even to the loss of their lives: for furious persons have a
great longing to shead blood, and to kill: so is he that deceives his
neighbor, the cogging iester, or sporting companion, does those deeds, or
utters those words that pierce his neighbor or friends unto the heart: but
he covers himself so under the pretense of mirth and pastime, that if he be
called into question for it, his answer is, I did it, or spoke it but in jest.
And thus the mirth of wicked men is usually mixed with mischief. It was a
matter of sport to Abner, to see men draw their weapons to sheadding of one
another blood: Let the young men (says he to Ioab) arise and play before us,
and 2. Sam. 2. 14. 15
they ^^ught every one his fellow by the beard, and thrust his sword into his
side: the good fellowship of many of them is little better then horse play:
they strike at one another credit as much as they can, and study to make them
be derided as much as they may: and so they do for their bodies, though
quaffing, and answering of healths would destroy health, and extinguish life,
yet they hold them unto it, they must do them their right: and so they do to
their estates: though the loss of their money were the overthrow of their
fam^lies, yet it is no discourtesie to draw them into company, where they may
hazard all, and who will be more willing to win it then themselves?

Verse. 20. Without wood the fire is quenched, and without a talebearer strife
cease.

EVen as fire is maintained by wood, coals, or such like matter: so is
commonly contention and strife nourished by an evil tongue: wherefore as
without wood the fire goes out, so (says this text) where there is no
whisper, will strife cease: For contention is a fire, backbiters are fuellers,
which take it for their office, and work to expel and keep away brotherly
love from among men: such in^eudiaries they are, that if it were in their
power, would set the whole world on fire, and do prevail. For the tongue
(says S. James) is a fire, and a Iam. 3. 6.
wo^ld of iniquity, it setteh on fire the whole course of nature. See chap.
16. verse. 28. both in the text, and doctrine.

Verse 21. As coals to burning coals, and wood to fire: so is a contentious
man to kindle strife.

AS the former sentence declared the means whereby strife may be appeased, and
that is the remouall of whisperers, make-bates, back-biters, and tell-tales: So
this shows the spring from whence contention flows, whereby also it is
increased, and grows greater and greater, and that is the contentious person.
For as coals being put to coals on the fire, and new wood added to that which
was there before, augmenteth the heat, and makes the flame greater: so the
wrathful quarrelsome person, makes him to be furious which was before but a
little moved with anger, and a little quarrel to grow to a great broyle: for
one sinful man is apt to corrupt many. Corah, Dathan and Abiram being but a
few, (and one of them also at the first set on the other) did draw more then a
few into the conspiracy against Moses and Aaron. We read nothing worth noting
in Sheba, but only that he was factious, longing for turbulencie and
combustion; and yet that base wretch could work upon a multitude, to cause
them to cast off their Sovereign. It appears that traitorous Judas did only
mutter himself against the honor that was done to Christ, by the oil powered
on his head: but that he had also kindled the rest of the Disciples to join
with him therein.

Verse 22. The words of a talebearer are as strokes, and go down into the
inner most parts of the belly. See chap. 18. 8.

Verse. 23. As a potsheard covered over with silver dross: so are burning lips,
and a wicked heart.

AS a potsheard covered over with silver, is but a base and contemptible piece
of earth: For of what value is a potsheard? or what excellency is in dross,
though perhaps the unwise man be deceived with the show thereof: for all is not
gold yt glistereth: so are burning lips, fauning lips, hot, and great words of
love and friendship, and a wicked heart, a heart that minds nothing less,
the^ that which the speeches make show of: an heart that nourishes enmity,
while the tongue pretends great good will and liking. So that hypocritical
dissemblers be naught on both sides: for that which is best in them, their very
guilding, is but imaginary: that which seems such precious metal in many
men's eyes, will prove plain dross, if it be brought to the touchstone: as
that which they think is putrified and corrupt, so is that which they do, and
so is all that they say. The sepulchers of dead men, though they contain
rottennes and filthiness within; yet may have costly matter without, as
Marble, Iet, or richer stones: but these dissembling mates have but painted
painting upon them, their very colors are counterfeit.

Verse. 24. He that hates dissembleth with his lips, and lays up deceit
within him.

Verse. 25. When he speaks fair believe him not: for seven abominations are
in his heart.

IN these two verses, and the two next following, he lively describes a
malicious caitife, who is his crafts master in practicing of mischief. First
he does declare his fraudulencie and guile, in these two verses: and secondly
does foretell the cross, and vnsuccesfull event thereof, in the two next.
Touching his guile, he shows what he does pretend, and likewise discovers
what he does intend: His pretense is kindness and amity, he dissembleth with
his lips, and faineth himself to be another manner of man then that he is:
and of such the Prophet speaks, saying, They speak vanity one to another,
Psalm. 12. 3.
flattering with their lips, and speak with a double heart. He does not only
imagine evil, but waits his time and opportunity to perform it. See
examples hereof in Kain, Ioab, and Judas When he speaks fair, when he most
courteously saluteth thee: when he protests what great account he makes of
thee: when he promises favors, and the best offices he can perform unto
thee, believe him not, be not confident of him, trust him not too far, come
not into his danger, expose not thy self into his hands: For it is not the
want o^ charity, but the use of wisdom, to be wary of an adversary,
especially which maligneth thee for thy goodness: For if he persist Iere. 12.
6. Micah. 7. 5.
in his evil and be not converted unto God, he cannot ^oundly be reconciled to
thee, and his glozing speeches be no testimonies of his good meaning: but
gi^^es and traps whereby he may catch thee more easily at (...)ge, and effect
his own purpose. If Abel had known Kaines mind when he spoke to him to
walk in the fields, he would have been better advised before he would have
gone out: For there are seven abominations, a great number of villainous
thoughts and purposes in his heart, in his mind, and that also with the
consent of his will and affections: he is plotting some mischievous attempts,
and greatly desires the effecting of them.

Verse. 26. Hatred may be covered by deceit: but the wickedness thereof shall be
shown to the whole congregation.

HEre he begins to show the evil speed of the dissembler in his malicious
and guilefull behavior, and that is the detection of his venomous heart, and of
that poison which he has so artificially covered, but the wickedness of his
hatred shall be shown to the whole congregation, the world shall see to his
ignominy and reproach, what ^ malignant mind he has borne, and what a crafty
hypocrite he has been: For they that nourish any sin in their souls, may
look to have it break out at last to their shame. One occasion or other will
wind them into lewd practices, as traitorous Achitophel had a bait laid for
him, by Gods providence, in Absaloms conspiracy: And so had treacherous Ziba
also: and Gods judgment will bring sin to light, either while the sinner
lives, or after he is dead: either amongst men in this world, or before Christ
at the judgment seat of God.

Verse. 27. Who so diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he that rolleth a
stone, it shall return upon him.

ANother, and more grievous plague that shall light upon the politic and
crafty enemies of Gods people, is the woe that they work to themselves, all
that they have been devising against others, returns upon their own heads:
He that diggeth a pit, to take his innocent and godly brother in, is as if he
were a wild and hurtful beast: (for the similitude is taken from hunters)
shall fall therein, through Gods just judgment shall be taken in the same
snare: He that rolleth a stone* or casts it up to the end it might fall upon
his neighbors head, it shall return upon him, it shall descend with violence
upon his own pate: For they that go about injuriously to hurt others that
fear God, do most harm to themselves: they bring molestation to their
brethren at the first; they trouble others with the smoke, and burn up
themselves with the flame. Who is ignorant of examples which make this
manifest? David's enemies; Daniels enemies; Haman, and many Psalm. 7. 15. Eccles.
10. 8.
such others, have their names still hanging on the gibbet: one cannot travel
in Scriptures, but he shall see how, and for what cause such a fearful
execution was done upon them.

Verse. 28. The deceitful tongue hates him whom it goes about to afflict, and
works ruin by a flattering mouth.

THe deceitful tongue,] The man that uses his tongue to falsehood and deceit,
hates him whom it goes about to afflict, and so intends to afflict or
plague him whom he hates: for when men are determined to do any mischief,
their tongues must act and manage their business: for so much the Prophet
testifies of them, and every one of them, saying, The words of his mouth are
iniquity and deceit, he has left off to be Psalm. 63.
wise, and to do good: He deuiseth mischief upon his bed: he sets himself
on a way that is not good, he abhors not evil. All consultations, and
parlies for the concluding of matters, are dealt in by the tongue. The tongue
accuses and traduceth innocents to superiors, and Magistrates, to the end
they being incensed, they may punish as they have a quarrel against: great
complaints were made of Jeremiah to the Princes and rulers: and of Christ to
Pontius Pilate, and of Paul to Felix and Festus. The tongue must remove away
the blame of spleen, hard dealings, cruelty, that there may seem to be some
color of justice on their part, and desert on the others, and works ruin,
oppresses many righteous and harmless men, by a flattering mouth, partly by
fair speeches, to him whom he leuelleth at, and purposes to strike to the
heart, that he may the less mistrust him, and partly by sawning on others that
may assist him, or serve his turn, whom thereby he gets to be on his side,
and exasperateth against his adversary, or to whom he is an adversary.

CHAPTER. XXVII.
Verse. 1. Boast not thy self of to morrow: for thou know not what a day may
bring forth.

BOast not thy self,] Presume not too far of any thing that thou will do,
have, or enjoy, of to morrow, of the time to come, how far off, or near
soever: for it is the phrase of the Scripture to call that which is future, and
to come, by the name of to morrow; When thy son shall ask thee to morrow,
Exodus 13. 14.
saying, What is this? Therefore no man ought to be confident of that which
shall be hereafter. David acknowledges himself to be too bold, and that
therefore he was worthily corrected for it, when he bragged in this manner, I
said in my prosperity I shall never be moved: the reason why thou should not
thus boast, is from the uncertainty of all future events: because thou know
not what a day may bring forth, what things may fall out this day to prevent
all thine expectation to morrow, or what may come to pass to morrow, clean
contrary to that which thou did expect this day. The day is said to bring
forth by a comparison taken from women with child, or creatures great with
young: because time trauelleth with the Lords decrees, and in their season
brings forth the same, even as a woman does her babe, or little infant, and
what shall be borne at any time, none in the world does know: every day, and
every night, and every hour, and every moment is bringing forth such a birth,
as all the world is ignorant of: because Gods purposes are known to himself,
and concealed from his creatures: the accidents, and occurrents of this life,
are so hidden from men, that they cannot conclude upon warrant and certainty
what shall be anon, who knows whether his life will last till anon: little
dreamed Haman that purposed to be so merry at the Queens feast, that he
should be hanged before his dinner time was past. Therefore S. James taxes
those who are so large in promises, for their own good speed and commodity in
their traffic, and merchandise: saying, Go to now ye that say, to day, or
to morrow, we will go into such a city or country, and continue there a
year, and buy, and sell, and get gain Whereas ye know not what shall be on
the morrow: For what is your life, it is a shadow, etc.

Verse. 2. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger,
and not thine own lips.

LEt another man praise thee,] So behave thy self, and order thine affairs,
as that thou may give cause to another to praise thee, though that be not
the end which thou aimest at, nor the purpose of thy well doing, and not thine
own mouth, thou thy self with thine own mouth, a stranger, any other besides
thy self, and not thine own lips, namely, the words which thy lips do utter:
for it is a very unseemly thing for a man to applaud his own doing, if the
seeking of praise from other be condemnable, and worthily condemned of our
Savior in the Pharisees: much more absurd it is to give commendations of
himself vauntingly, to sound out his own praises because his testimony may
worthily be suspected of falsehood, because the worst men be most forward in
praising their own deserts; and this corrupts and staineth the goodness of
the work, that no praise is due for it either from God, or from men, for he
that praises himself is not allowed, but 2. Cor. 10. 8.
whom the Lord praises: or if any thing be wrought that is praise worthy, to
whom does the glory of it belong but to God, who is the proper author of it,
and man but the instrument of it, by his direction and power? Finally, it is
needless for men to magnify themselves, if they be faithful: for God will
bring their righteousness to light, and men will yield unto them the honor of
their virtues, though they hold their peace: nevertheless it is necessary for
a man in some cases to testify his graces and actions: as in defense of his
innocence, when he is unjustly traduced, as Paul was: or when the hiding or
concealing of ones goodness, may turn to the hinderance of the truth, or to
the hurt of the Church, or impairing of Gods glory.

Verse. 3. A stone is heavy, and sand weighty: but a fools wrath is heavier
then they both.

A Stone is heavy,] For that it is a lump of congealed earth, and sand
weighty, especially by reason of the moisture that is in it: but a fools
wrath, the rage and displeasure of a fool, of a wicked man, whose heart and
passions are not governed by the use of reason, or the spirit of God, is
heavier then they both, is more burthenous and importable, then either an
heavy stone, or weighty sand to them on whom it lights, or lies: it
presses them under, and crusheth them sorer, either with present violence, or
future revenge; either the hand strikes, or the tongue strikes or the heart
deuiseth what d^^efull hurt he may do; especially if he have power whereby
he may wreake his malice and anger. Such an heavy burden do they bear that
lie under, and are subject to the yoke of malicious, wrathful, and violent
persons: they have three cruel taskmasters dwelling together in one house, and
conspiring together with one consent: and they are a fierce nature, proud mind,
and the cruel devil: all these joined together, do kindle anger, do
increase it to excess, and make it difficult, and hardly extinguished. The
brick upon the poor Hebrews shoulders was very weighty, and burthenous; but
the hard hearts, and tyrannous dealing of their masters the Egyptians, were far
more then they.

Verse. 4. Wrath is cruel, and anger outrageous: but who can stand before envy?

AS in the former sentence he aggrauated the violent force of anger and wrath,
by making it more burthenous then stones, or ^a^d. In this he aggrauateth the
damnable venom of envy, by making it more perni^ious then anger and wrath:
Wrath is cruel, it seldom leaves off, or is satisfied, till it commits
cruelty: witness the inhumane act of Simeon and Leui: and anger is outrageous,
like the waters of a river passing over the banks: or like to a spring tide
which ouerfloweth all the low grounds and marshes round about: (for the Hebrew
Sheteph.
word signifies inundating, or ouerflowing:) such a blood proceeded from the
wrath of Herod, who (for that he saw himself to be mocked of the Wise men)
commanded all the infants in Beth-leem, and the bordering quarters round about
to be slain: but who can stand before envy? what good man can preserve
himself from being envied? or were not God a marvelous protector of his, how
could any possibly avoid the hurtful strokes of envious persons, but that he
shall be cast down, and overthrown by them? So that this detestable vice of
cankred envy, is far more dangerous and condemnable, then the sin of
crabbed anger, and wrathfulnesse, because it is of longer continuance, and
still growing; whereas the other is shorter, and more and more abating: and it
is more cunning, secret, and close, and therefore also must needs be more
perilous: for that men cannot so easily defend themselves from the enemies, or
weapons which will not be seen, before they be felt. Many times anger is for
faults* and things done amiss, or at the least they seem such to him, that is
moved at them: but envy is usually for goodness, and against good men; and
therefore always the best have been most enui^d; as Abel, Joseph, David
Daniel, and Christ Jesus: anger may be pacified by entreatie, by apology of
ones own innocence and submission; by mediation of friends; by commendation,
or testimony given of the party fallen into displeasure: but all these means
are oil to feed the flame, and not water to quench the heat of envy: for
when God himself pleaded for Abel, Cain was the more imbittered against him.

Verse. 5. Open rebuke is better then secret love.

OPen rebuk^,] A check, or admonition given unto them for a fault committed, is
better then secret ^^e, does more good, and is more to be esteemed of then the
hidden affection of love in the heart, which is not manifested by word or deed,
nor shows it self when need requires: for they are our best friends that
deal most against our sins and corruptions; Le^it. 19. 17.
for hereby they shall show themselves to be no flatterers, but faithfully
minded toward us; they do us the best favor, and perform the greatest
kindness that may be in reconciling us to our best friend; namely, to the
Lord, whom by our offenses we had incensed against us: they succor us against
our most dangerous adversaries, ^amely, our transgressions, and Satan, into
whose hands we had cast our selves: they help us where our own power
fails: they give direction to us when we had lost our way: they give us
medicines to cure our deadly diseases.

Verse. 6. The wounds of a friend are faithful: but the kisses of an enemy are
to be prayed against.

THe opposition stands thus: The wounds of a friend are faithful, and
therefore to be prayed for, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful, and
therefore to be prayed against.

The wounds of a friend,] The sharp and piercing chastisements; whether by
words, or stripes inflicted by a friend, which sees our need, and in love or
compassion applies himself to say, or do that which is good for us; though
it be tedious for him to perform, and uneasy for us to suffer, are faithful,
proceed from the fidelity and uprightness of his heart toward us, and from a
true desire of our good and welfare: but the kisses of an enemy, the fair and
flattering countenances of one that hates a man: (for in the word kisses, he
alludeth to the manner used in those countries, where they did salute one
another, as well men as women with kisses, and whereby they did profess their
kind affection each to other, although they conuersed together, and did not
meet after long absence:) for Judas supt with our Savior in the night that he
was betrayed, and had been in his company before, and yet kissed him not very
many hours after: are to be prayed against, to be taken heed of for our
better defense; because we are not acquainted with men's guilefull purposes, we
are to entreat the Lord to shield us therefrom: For they deal dangerously when
they deal most smoothly: the still waters are commonly the deepest. David
entreats the Lord that he may not be caught with the dainties of the wicked
but that he may be smit^en by the mouth of the righteous. Ioabs, Iudases and
Achitophels examples are notorious for the confirmation of this point: and the
devil kills a thou(...) (...) by the ca^l, glass, and bait of delightful
allure(...) (...) ^ee pretends to gratify men, and to satis(...) (...) ^hen
by his shot of terrors and fears, and (...).

Verse. 7. A person tha^ (...) comb: but to him that is hungry every bitter
thing is sweet.

THis sentence is true both for corporal food, and spiritual, for the things
which concern the soul and body: he that is full of meat or drink, does
loathe all dainties whatsoever: there is nothing so delicious, but if a man be
sated, or have his stomach cloyed therewith, it will be nausye, and offensive
unto him: the honey comb does much affect men's taste, and is pleasant almost to
all men's palates: and yet such as have over charged their stomachs, or have
lost their appetite, would rather trample it under their feet, (as the word
which we translate ( loathe) does signify) then to eat it: and the same
falls out in all other delights and refreshings; those which are very
acceptable to some, are as distasteful, and ill liked of others. This saying is
also verified in many, yea in the greater number of people, whose stomachs
stand against the sweetest honey of Gods holy word: as the Israelites in the
wilderness loathed that sacramental bread of Manna, which the Scriptures
calls Angels food, and was after a miraculous manner bestowed upon them: but
to him that is hungry, which is pinched with penury and want, or which has a
greedy appetite to his meat, every bitter thing is sweet, he feeds upon,
and ^auourly rellisheth those things which others could not brook; nor at
other times peradventure himself could not so well away with: but the proverb
is true, that hunger is the best sauce. The purpose of the words is to declare,
that men do esteem of things according as their desires and delights be
disposed. Gods servants have professed that his law and ordinances were sweeter
to him then honey, and more precious then gold: and complain^ is made of the
wicked that his word was a reproach to them, they could not endure it. The
austere Iere. 6. 10.
and more strict ministry of John the Baptist was very grateful and
acceptable to some, both of the people, soldiers, and publicanes; when as the
most amiable and joyful message of the Gospel, published by the son of God
himself, was harsh, and unwelcome to others, especially the Scribes and
Pharisees, which had an high opinion of their own good estate and sufficiency.

Verse. 8. As a bird that wandreth from her nest: so is he that wandreth from
his place.

AS a bird that wandreth from her nest,] That leaves her nest wherein her
eggs, and young ones are, to fly up and down, should deal both unnaturally,
and contrary to her kind, if she should use it: For her eggs would be addle,
and her young ones would be starued, either with cold, or famine, and so also
bring much peril upon her self, and her own life, as to be killed with stone,
or piece, or to be made a prey to the Haulke, or other ravenous foul: so evil
provides he for himself, that wandreth from his own place, which stragleth
abroad upon no due or just occasion.

True it is that the bird may fly from her nest, sometimes for to seek food,
and meat; but neither too often, nor be too long absent: and so it is lawful
for a man to go to work to places remote from his own house, for maintenance
to himself and his family: for he that does his office and duty, whither
soever he goes, cannot be said to wander from his place, but keeps residence
there as he ought. So that remisnes ^n men's vocations, and carelesnes of their
charge, and of such as depend upon them, is seldom found in the unreasonable
creatures, or when it happens, even in them it is blameworthie: as we see in
this text: and have it also in other places confirmed unto us, by the
testimony of Gods own mouth personally talking with Job, who says, Gave
thou the goodly wings to the Peacocke, or wings and feathers to the O^^rich:
which leaves her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in the dust, and
forgets that the foot may crush them, and the wild beast break them: she
is hardened against her young ones, as if they were not hers: her labor is in
vain without fear, because God has deprived her of wisdom, neither has he
imparted to her understanding.

Verse. 9. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so does the sweetness of a
friend more then the counsel of his heart.

THe ancient people of the Eastern countries, used to anoint their heads with
their precious ointments, and to perfume their houses and garments with
pleasant and sweet odours, to the end their spirits might be quickened, and
their hearts revived: For those things which delight the senses, delight, and
rejoice the heart, the foundation of all the senses: and both here, and
elsewhere in the Scripture, is the loving fellowship of Christian friends
resembled unto such ointme^ts and perfumes. Behold (says the Psalmist) how
p(...)nt a thing Psalm. 133.
it is, brethren to dwell together in unity: it ^^ like the precious ointment
upon the head, etc. So comfortable was Jonathan to David: and Ruth to Naomi:
and O^esipherus unto Paul: and 1. Tim. 1. 6.
as uncomfortable an estate it is to be destitute of such comforters: For among
many calamities whereof David complained, this was not the least, that he was
like an owl, or pelicane of Psalm. 102.
the desert: and in the same sense Job bemoneth himself, saying, I am a
brother to Dragons, and a companion to owls. More then the counsel of his
own heart; the advice of such a good friend, is more joyous, and useful unto
him, especially in his distress, then the counsels of his own heart, then the
comfort or direction which he can minister unto himself: For a man's own
counsel is blind in his own matters, and the thoughts of his mind in
adversity do rather trouble him be he never so wise, then refresh his
spirits, or free him from perplexity.

Verse 10. Thine own friend, and thy fathers friend forsake not, neither go
into thy brothers house in the day of thy calamity; for better is an neighbor
that is near, then a brother far off.

IN the former sentence he commended the comfort and benefit that proceeded
from Christian friendship, and here he teaches to retain, and make much of
such Christian friends, and that by two arguments: the first, from the former
experience of them, the stability, and ancientnesse of their kindness, that
they have remained firm and faithful to our selves, and our parents, ^r other
progenitors: the other is from the need that we may have of them hereafter, and
the fidelity, readiness, and constancy to do us good, that we may expect to
find in them. And this he proves by comparison, preferring them before
natural kinsmen, which are not so nearly united unto us by the bands of grace,
and unfeigned love, thine own friend, one whom thou have had trial of to be
faithful to thee, and thy fathers friend, which did heartily love him, and in
like manner was heartily beloved of him, forsake not, cast not off, but
maintain friendship with him, and testify thy love unto him, in his
necessity: for when friends are faithful unto us, we must be kind and
constant to them. David performed this to Ionathans seed, although Ionathans
death would not permit him to show it to his own person, otherwise then by way
of lamentation: and so he did to Ahimelechs son Abiather, whom he undertook
the protection of: whom also for the same cause Solomon spared, though he had
dealt both unkindly, and disloyally with him. And contrariwise Pharaoh was
taxed for his vnmindfulnesse of Joseph, and his posterity: and so is Ioash for
his ingratitude to Iehoiada, whose worthy son Zechariah the Prophet of the Lord
he slew: go not into thy brothers house, seek not for compassion and succor
at the hands of a fleshly kinsman, if he be wicked, and thou godly, in the day
of thy c^lamity, at what time thou shall be in poverty, contempt, trouble, and
distress: for carnal kinsmen will fail those of their own flesh in their
greatest adversity, as David tried, and complained, saying; My lovers, and my
friends stand a far off from my sore, and mine acquaintance stand far off.
See chap 19. 7. For better, more comfortable, and profitable, is a neighbor,
friend, and acquaintance, that is near, not only in respect of the place, but
of affliction, and good will, then a brother that is far off, that is further
distant in goodness and love, then in habitation. See chap. 18. 24.

Verse. 11. My son be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him
that reprocheth me.

MY son be wise,] The Wise man in the person of every father, exhorts every
son to the study of wisdom, and moves him thereunto by two fruits that
will arise from thence. The one is, that if he be so wise, as to know and obey
the will of God, he shall rejoice the heart of his father. See chap. 10. 1.
and 23. 15. The other is, that he by this means shall drive away reproach and
shame from his father: for a foolish son makes his parents ashamed. When a
child is graceless and evil manered, the people usually blame his fathers
government, and say that he was ill brought up: but by the virtuous behavior
of a child, the parents are freed from sorrow, and contumely, and have
wherewith to stop their mouths that go about to blame them. The holy Ghost
compares good children to good weapons, by whom a godly man may defend his
credit; as he that has a good weapon, with strength and skill to use it well,
shall thereby preserve his person from the violence of an enemy. As arrows
Psalm. 127. 4. 5.
(says he) are in the hand of a mighty man; so are the children of the youth:
happy is the man that has his ^^iuer full of them, they shall not be ashamed,
but they shall speak with the adversaries in the gate.

Verse. 12. A prudent man sees the evil, and hides himself: but the simple
pass on and are punished. See chap. 22. 3.

13. Take his garment that is surety for a strange man, and make him give a
pledge that undertakes for a strange woman, See chap. 20. 16.

14. To him that blesses his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the
morning shall be counted a curse.

TO him that blesses his friend,] In way of praising and extolling him to his
face, and in way of saluting him with a flattering mind, or fawning words,
wishing well unto him with his lips, and desiring little good unto him in his
heart, with a loud voice, so that he may be heard of others, and by that leaud
means purchase favor from the party, aising early, in the morning to do it,
showing himself first and before all others, to the end he may seem the
chiefest well willer, shall be counted for a curse, shall turn to his own
shame and ignominy: for flattery makes a man odious, and reproachful. What
is more disgraceful then to be called a parasite, or clawbacke? and this
oblique and infamy is just upon them, and belongs unto them for due desert:
for they only serve themselves, which intend to make a prey of those whom they
so much applaud, it is neither love, nor good liking that does induce them unto
it; but hope of acceptance and reward: and noisome they are in many respects,
and that to the party whose ears they claw in this manner: for if his
neighbor be a good man, he takes the way to corrupt his heart, and actions,
and to make him proud: if he be sinful and evil, he does as much as in him
lies to harden his heart, and retain him from repentance. Yet it is not
unlawful either to salute our friends, or to commend them justly, so that it
be done in a fit manner, or measure; not with a flattering mind, not too often;
not too much; not too openly; but with a single heart, modestly, sparingly,
when there is cause to incite them forwards to goodness, and to animate them
against discouragements, otherwise the safest way is to tell them of their
faults unto their face, and to speak of their virtues behind their backs.

Verse. 15. A continual dropping in a rainy day, and a contentious woman are
alike.

16. Whosoever hides her, bideth the wind, and the ointment of his right hand
which bewrays it self.

IN these two verses he declares the mischievous effects of an unquiet and
brawling wife: and first he shows what evil she does to her husband, and
family, comparing her unto rain, soaking through the roof of the house into
the inward parts in wet season: and secondly he declares what hurt she does
to her self, laying open her shame, and making the world acquainted with her
unpeaceable behavior, which he amplifieth by two similitudes: the one from the
wind, which cannot but be felt and heard: and another from an ointment in a
man's hand the sent whereof cannot be suppressed: a continual dropping, into a
man's house, upon the peoples head, or the stuff therein, in a rainie day, when
the showers are great, and it beats in sore, and a contentious woman, a woman
given to much scolding, and chiding, are alike, both of them troublesome, and
both of them discommodious: for as the rain offends those whom it falls
upon, and rotteth the things which are wetted thereby, and consumes the same
in time: So does a contentious woman grieve all that dwell with her, and is a
great hinderance to the estate of her husband. See cap. 19. 24. He that hides
her, he that attempteth to hush her brawlings and iarres, that they shall not
be heard, hides the wind, labors as much in vain, as if he would go about
to cover, keep close, or shut up the wind that it should not blow, she is as
an ointment on his right hand, wherewith his right hand is maintained, that
bewrays it self, that will make all the house and company to smell the
savor thereof; the word which we translate bewray, signifies to cry, which is
improperly ijkra.
spoken of ointment, because it belongs to living creatures: but makes it
self (...)ble, as if it had a voice to utter or cry out withal: so that it
is as possible to restrain the sent of an oi(...) (...)wred out, as to stop
the infamy that she brings upon her self.

Verse. 17. ^ ^s ^ man sharpeneth iron by iron, so does the face of his friend
(...) a man.

AS a man sharpeneth iron by yron] As men use to whet one knife that is blunt,
or other edge tool, with another, and so make it keener to ^he end it may cut
the better: so does the face, the presence of a friend with his communication,
as exhortations, directions, encouragements, and the like, sharpen a man to
comfort, to humiliation, to knowledge, to love, to diligence, and to all good
works. A man by himself is often very dull, and like unto a tool whose edge
is blunted, or broken: but if his fellow come, and quicken him, by his company,
by his speech, or example, he has such an edge set upon him, as that he is
much more skillful, comfortable, and every way better then he was being alone.
Hence it is that the Scripture says elsewhere, that two are better then one,
and that a threefold Eccls. 4. 5.
cord is not easy to be broken. Hence it is also that the Apostle exhorts
the Hebrews, not to leave their mutual fellowship Heb. 10. 24.
in assembling: but to provoke one another to love, ^^d good works. For this
cause the Lord adjoined Aaron as an assistant to Moses. And Christ sent forth
his Disciples by twoes, and twoes, that one might confirm and animate another
in his message, and services. So on the other side, the society and fellowship
of wicked persons together, does mutually whet one another to mischief, and
entice him to evil, as we saw by another similitude of coals kindling coals,
in the former Chapter, verse. 1.

Verse 18. Who so keeps the fig^ree shall eat the fruit thereof ^ so he that
waits on his master shall be honored.

WHo so keeps the figtree] As an husbandman watching his trees with a
vigilent eye, and pruning them with a diligent hand, tastes of the fruit
thereof, according to their kinds, whatsoever they are: whether figs, or
grapes, or apples, or pears, etc. So the servant who is serviceable to his
master, and attendant about him, if it be his office, or otherwise trusty in
the affairs committed unto him, shall be honored, either preferred to a
better place, or so well provided for in that wherein he continues, as that he
shall enjoy the credit and commodity of his painfulnes and faithfulness. They
that have not houses, or charges of their own, in stead thereof have the
business and matters of their governors to look unto, and the well mannaging
thereof in time may bring them to be masters over others: or if it fall not out
so, their condition will be as comfortable in that place of service, and
inferioritie, as if they were greater commanders. See chap. 22. 29.

Verse. 19. As in water face answers face: so the heart of a man to a man.

Whosoever looks into water, or into a glass, shall see the figure, or shape
of a face, in all points like unto his own, of what fashion, color, or
complexion soever he be: So the heart of a man answers to a man, what mind,
affection, or disposition is in one man, the same may be found in some other,
which will rightly, or fitly accord with him in the same: there is scarce a man
under heaven, which has not one or other which does not lively represent him.

As for natural inclination and desires: one man is given to cheerefulnes, so
is another: one man given to sadness, so is an other: one man sets his
delight upon literature, and all his study is how to be learned, so does
another: one man takes pleasure to be a Merchant, and to adventure his estate
in traffic, so does another: one man much affects traveling, and to see
foreign countries, so does another: one man addresseth himself to husbandry,
and to maintain his estate by the commodities of the earth, so does another:
one man loves a country life, and he has neighbors like minded: another
would be a citizen, or courtier, and he has others that are willing to join
with him therein. And so for spiritual graces: this man is much delighted in
the word of God, his thoughts and meditations be constantly in it, that man is
also so affected, and his heart is carried the same way: this man is delighted
with the fellowship and society of Christians, and never so joyous, as when he
is in godly company, and at holy conferences, that man's comfort and felicity
is in the same: this man's heart is much broken and wounded with the sight of
his sins, and the sight of Gods displeasure, that m^n is no less humbled in
the same manner. And this holds also in carnal corruptions: what sinner is
there that may not find companions and associates in all the vices whereunto
^ee is subject? It were strange that a drunkard should want a mate to give him
the meeting at the tavern, or ^^thouse: or a robber could get none to take his
part at the taking of a purse: or that a gamester should be grown singular
that no man should delight to play at tables, cards or di^e, but himself. A
^ew instances may suffice for great multitudes of all sorts. And for natural
corruption in the general, derived from our first parents, and wherein every
one is conceived, all therein look with one countenance, and have one vizage:
there was never any son, or daughter of Adam (Christ only excepted) but has
been disfigured by birth since: Moses as well as Pharao, David as well as Saul,
Paul as well as ^lymas* Peter as well as Judas, that in this respect holds
true touching any one, and every one, that the whole imagination of the
thoughts of man's Genesis 6. 5.
heart, is only evil continually.

Verse 20. As the grave and destruction are never full: so the eyes of a man
are never satisfied.

AS the grave and destruction are never full,] As there is none end of burials,
and death: but after one corpse is buried, another will come shortly to the same
state, and the grave will consume them, and all that are put into it, and be
still ready (as it were) with a wide mouth to receive more: and though death,
called here destruction (because it does extinguish the unreasonable creatures,
and brings the wicked into perdition, and seems unto sense to be the final
ruin of the godly) does take away many millions; yet it is as hungry after
more, as if it had never fed upon any: So the eyes of a man are never
satisfied, the concupiscence of them is insatiable: though he see much, and
have much, yet it is nothing in comparison of that which he desires to see,
and possess: whether it be riches, or honor, or whatsoever his heart most
lusts after: For there is no contentednes in sense, or worldly desires:
according as is said in another place: The eye is not satisfied with Eccles. 1.
^^
seeing, nor the ear with hearing. And therefore the complaint of the Prophet
against the proud Babylonian, and all others of his condition, is pertinent
unto this purpose: He has enlarged his desire as the grave, and is as death,
and cannot be satisfied: Hab. 2. 5.
but gathers unto him all nations, and heapeth unto him all people

Verse 21. As the sining pot for the silver, and the furnace for gold: so is a
man to his praise.

AS the silver is tried by the fining pot, and gold by the furnace, whether it
be pure, or no: See chap. 17. 3. even so a man is best judged by that praise
which is given of him, whether it be true, or no: For we are not to depend on
other men's lips: but to examine the matter by our own knowledge, whether the
commendation that is given of us be due unto us, and deserved of us: For a^ a
man may flatter himself by comparison to justify his own ways, because they
are not so bad as some other men's: so he may also be illuded by testimony
given of him, to have himself in h^gh admiration because he is so well thought
of, and spoken of. And therefore a rule like unto this of Salomons is given by
the Apostle Paul; but with more p^^innes, Let every m^^ prove his own work,
and then he Gal. 4. 6.
shall have rejoicing in himself only and not in another: For many flatterers
speak not as they think, but as they see it m^st aduantageous for their own
turns, and therefore most highly extol the unworthiest persons, as Tertullus
did Felix that corrupt governor. Again, many testify out of their love, and
hope that to be true which they say, but not out of their knowledge, they are
not sure that which they say is true; and therefore a man next unto God is of
all others the fittest to pass sentence upon himself. Men be not so foolish
^^ they be poor, and in great penury, to believe them which shall magnify
their wealth, and praise their great plenty: nor a s^cke man feeling his
torments, and weaknesses, will assent unto him that shall commend his
healthfulnesse, and sound constitution of body; and why then should we suffer
our selves to be misinformed touching our actions and ways, and the state of
our souls?

Verse. 22. Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a
pestell, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.

THough thou should bray,] One kind of grinding which people used in old
time, was to put their parched corn into a mortar, and to beat it unto
powder: unto this custom Solomon alludeth in this place, insin^ating that no
severity will amend an obstinate wicked man: for it is as much as if he should
have said; Although thou should take never so great pains in reproving, or
correcting a desperate fool, and the judgments and plagues of the Lord be
never so heavy upon him, yet his foolishness will not depart from him, he is
so incurable, that he will not forsake his sins, nor amend his faults, the
hardness of his heart is such, that no strokes or calamities will do him good.
The grains of corn, though much hardened by parching, or drying, yet at the
last will be broken with a pestell, and turned into soft meal; but his
obstinacy and wilfulness will never be overcome; because he is incapable of
graces, and no miseries of themselves without grace will cure sin. And
therefore Jeremiah complaining of such perverse and obstinate rebels, says; O
Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou have stricken them, but they have
not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused correction; Ier. 5.
3.
they have made their faces harder then a rock, they have refused to return.
For smart, and grief, and all kind of woeful calamities fall only upon the
senses, but enter not into the ^^arts of such impenitent persons; and the
devil which has them in his power, neither feels the strokes which they
suffer, nor has any commiseration of their misery; and therefore unless the
pestell could knock him on the head, and expel his forces, it can do no good
unto their soul.

Verse 23. Be thou diligent to look well to thy flocks, and know the state
of thy herds.

IN this verse he begins to persuade men to be provident for their estate,
and not slack to superuise and ouersee their own affairs, and to look that
there be no detriment through their negligence in their commodities, wherein
their principal maintenance does consist; and perticularizeth in the duty of
the grasier, or such as live by cattle, as a pattern for all other trades, or
vocations. Be thou diligent to look well to thy flocks,] Consider daily, or
as often as is fit, the condition of thy sheep, oxen, and other cattle: look
to the number of them, lest any be stolen, dead, or lost: see how they be
provided for with grass, fodder, or water, that they perish not through want:
look well to it, and that with thine own eye, that their pasture be safe and
wholesome, not such as will breed a murren, or rot: take good notice how they
are handled, or dressed, that they be not anoyed with maladies, or hurtful
diseases: for men are not so to pass over their estate to the care of others,
as not so often as is needful to take a view of it themselves. Boaz, though
he were a great man, Ruth. 3. 7.
yet was not ashamed to be among his reapers, and harvest men, and at the
threshing time to be in the floor all night. For by this providence they
shall preserve their state from ruin and decay: and deter^e their servants and
agents from carelessness, and assist them with direction and encouragement.

Verse. 24. For riches remain not always, nor the crown from generation to
generation.

HE enforces his precedent exhortation by two arguments; the former from the
peril that may grow from improuidence and remissness, and that is penury and
want. This is not mentioned at all in express terms, but is necessarily
understood, and intended; as it appears by the words of this verse: for they
are a prevention of an objection that might be made against the former precept.
Our means are so good, and our fortunes so great, that we need not trouble our
selves with oversight of our cattle, or business: though we should sustain
loss by their unfaithfulness, whom we trust in our affairs, we can well
bear it, we have enough. Now this he takes away, by showing the instability,
or casualtie of wealth, saying, Riches remain not always: and that he does
amplify by a comparison taken from the greater: Princes estates (which he
means by the name of crown) are not perpetual, much less is the wealth of
inferiors: as if he should say, Do thou think that thy goods are so entailed
upon thee, that they are not alienable, or cannot go from thee? thou art much
deceived so to deem; for they are brittle, and flitting, though they be never
so great and glorious. What treasure in the world, be it never so royal, or
princely, which shall endure for ever? and not be exhausted in the end, unless
it be maintained by care and diligence? and therefore look well unto thy
things thy self, and rest not slothfully in man's labor.

Verse. 25. The hay discovers it self, and the grass appears, and the
herbs of the mountains are gathered.

26. The Lambs are for thy clothing, and the goats are a price of the field.

27. And let the milk of thy goats be fufficient for the food of thy family,
and sustenence of thy maids.

THe second argument is from the commodity which he shall reap by observing
his counsel, applying himself well to husband his matters, and to provide
that his estate be well ordered; and that is food for his beasts and cattle,
in the first of these three verses: and secondly, for the maintenance of
himself, and his family, in the two last: the hay discovers it self, when
it is meet and ready for carriage, and inning, and the grass appears,
springs plentifully out of the earth, and the hearb^s of the mountains, the
grass, or other fodder that the mountains yield, are gathered, cut down,
brought in, and laid up, that they may be food and nourishment for the
cattle: he speaks thus of the situation of that land, wherein there were a
mu^titude of mountains, which had things growing upon them very useful, and
all this comes by the blessing of God, for the benefit of men, and cattle,
according to the saying of the Prophet: He causes the earth to bring Psalm.
104. 14.
forth grass for the beasts, and herb for the use of man, that he may bring
forth bread out of the earth. The lambs are for thy clothing, the good which
himself and his family shall receive by his heedfull regard of his flock, and
herds, is first for apparel, the lambs, that is, the wool and fleece of the
lambs and sheep, shall be for thy clothing, wherewith both thou and thine
shall be warmely, and comely clad. Secondly, for money, the he goats, the
male goats, and such like cattle as may well be spared, being sold, will
bring thee money, not only to the price of thy field, that is, the rent of the
ground wherein they go, if thou rent or hire the same of other men; or to
yield thee so much as another would give for it, if it be thine own: and
thereby thou shall be enabled to enlarge thy possessions, or make thee a
purchaser of lands. Thirdly, for food and sustenance, the goats mil^e shall be
sufficient for the food of thy household, and maintenance of thy maids, that is
to say, the she goats, the ewes, and the kine will give thee such abundance of
milk, as will sustain thee, thy wise, and thy children, and thy servants,
both men and maids. So that beside other provision which thou may make with
thy money, thy self, and thy household may have butter and cheese enough, and
other good use of milk, of thine own flock. This in those dai^s was
accounted good cheer for men of worth in that goodly country, which God in
kindness promised, and out of his bounty performed; for which every godly man
has cause to be thankful, and of which every wicked man is altogether
unworthy; and therefore he does vpbraid his rebellious and wicked enemies,
though opulent and wealthy, with that favor which in this kind, among other
benefits, he had shown unto them, saying; Butter of kine, and milk of sheep,
with fat of lambs and rams fed in Basha^, and goats with the fat of Deuteronomy.
32. 14.
wheat, and red licour of the grape have thou drunk. And as this is spoken
against the wicked in way of exprobration: so a blessing is pronounced by
Jacob, to the posterity of Judah, whom God would be bountiful unto, in this
manner; His eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk. Genesis
49. 12.


CHAPTER. XXVIII.
Verse. 1. The wicked flee when none pursue: but the righteous are bold as a
Lion.

THe wicked flee,] Are chased and hunted with fear: for though their feet
stand still, yet their hearts are continually in flight, when noue pursues,
when no man follows matter against them. It is a similitude taken from
cowardly soldiers, who betake themselves to their heels at the sound of the
trumpet, or drum, and at the sight of the enemies weapon, before they be
assailed: for the guilty person after he has committed some abominable fact;
as theft, murder, or some other crime, imagines that some lie in wait for
him, and that he shall surely be taken: for the bolder any man is to commit
sin, the less courage he has when his conscience is awakened, and there be
any likelihood of danger: The wicked (says Eliphaz) is continually as one that
trauelleth with child, and the number of years is hidden from the tyrant, a
sound of fear is in his cares, and in his prosperity shall the destroyer come
Job 15. 20.
upon him. For though no man pursue him, yet the guilt of his conscience does;
as did that bloody Kain: and the righteous curse of Gods law makes after them
with all speed, even that which is thus threatened in Leuiticus: I will send a
cowardlines Leuit. 26. 36.
upon them in the land of their enemy, and the sound of a shaken leaf shall
chase them: they shall flee as fleeing from the sword, and shall fall when none
pursues. Now if they be brought to this plight with imaginatie perils, and
only as yet assaulted with their own thoughts; what will they do when
troubles and plagues, such as carry stings in their mouths, shall invade and
set upon them? When their hearts shall hear their sins complaining against
them, and Gods justice decreeing punishment for them: men in this case Isaiah
speaks of, and brings in horribly terrified, saying; The sinners in Sion
are afraid, a fear is come upon the hypocr^tes: who among us shall dwell with
the devouring sire? who among us shall dwell with the everlasting burning? But
the righteous, who is at peace with God, and has a good cause with a good
conscience, is not so timorous, and full of cowardnesse as the wicked, but
courageous and dreadlesse, notwithstanding all the malice, might, and craft of
wicked men, which set themselves against them, neither can any other accidents
or occurrents dismaie or daunt them. He will not be afraid of evil tidings,
his heart is fixed and believes Psalm. 112. 7. 8.
in the Lord: his heart is established: he will not fear until he see his
desire upon his enemies. And this confidence and boldness is set forth by the
comparison of the equal, he is like unto a Lion, who is thus described by the
Lord himself: As the Lion, or Lions whelpe roareth on the prey, against whom
if a multitude Isai. 31. 2.
of shepherds be called, he will not be afraid at their voice, neither humble
himself at their noise: so shall the Lord of Job 11. 18. Psalm. 91.
hosts, etc. Grace therefore is the foundation of a good courage; for he that
is endued therewith, is persuaded of the verity of Gods promises, with the
sufficiency of his power, and has a sure apprehension both of his presence
and goodness.

Verse. 2. For the transgression of a land, there are many princes thereof: but
by a man of understanding and knowledge it shall be prolonged.

FOr the transgression of a land] For the sins which the people inhabiting the
land do commit, not the wickedness of some few private persons, but the
general iniquity of a nation, or state, there are many Princes, often changes
of the rulers and governors thereof, many Kings, or other head Magistrates, in
a short time succeeding one another, by means of the death of the
predecessors: For the sins of the people tend to the hurt of the Ruler: If
you do wickedly (says Samuel) ye 1. Sam. 12. 25.
shall perish, both ye and your King. And for this cause the great rebellions
of Judah, both of the Priests, and Prophets, and people, shortened the life of
Josiah: Pharao Neco could not have touched him, if the iniquity of his
subjects had not exposed him into his hands. The Magistrate is the head, and
the people are the stomach; and what causes the head to ache so much as the
distemper and sickness of the stomach? He is a shepherd, and they are the
sheep, and men do usually put away their shepherds, or set them to some
other work, when all their sheep are rotten. But by a man of understanding,
and knowledge, it shall be prolonged. In this latter part of the verse he does
intimate, that as the corruptions and iniquity of the people do cause the
remoueall of their Princes: so the change of Princes is hurtful, and dangerous
to the state of the kingdom, not only for that by this means there are new
officers placed, rue tributes imposed, and many alterations in the state: but
peril of seditions, stirs, and tumults, whereby both kingdoms and
commonwealths are subverted and brought to an end: and the cause thereof he
opposes to the contrary: For he sets the wisdom and knowledge of a good
man (meaning of good men, putting the singular number for the plural by a
Synecdoche, with the fruits thereof, which is obedience unto God) to the
rebellion of a land: and the continuance of Kings and kingdom, unto the
frequent mutations of Kings, and destruction of a realm. So that the
opposition stands thus: For the transgression of a land, and foolishnes of
men, the Princes dye fast, and the whole kingdom is not like to continue: but
by the obedience of a land, and men of wisdom, Princes live long, and the
kingdom is like to be surely established.

Verse. 3. A poor man if he oppress the poor, is like a raging rain that
leaves no food.

A Poor man if he oppress the poor,] Either by fraud, or force, by
bargaining or sycophancie, and false calumniations, by extreme pursuit of
actions, or advantages, or by any other means, is like a sweeping rain, like
to storms that leave no food, for men, or cattle to live on: For even as a
great tempest does make land-floods, and inundations of waters, sweeping away,
and choking the corn, and bears the fruit off from the trees, and causes
a dearth: so a merciless poor man wresting and extorting from others in
necessity that little which they have, does bring them to extreme want and
penury. Vncon^c^onable poor men therefore are as violent (if their power
serve them) as the rich and wealthy. A Sparrow haulke is as greedy of his
prey as an Eagle, and a Wolf as rauenou^ as a Lion: the servant that had but
an hundred pence owing unto him, was more rigor^us and merciless, then his
master that had a thousand tallents due unto him. If all Magistrates should be
as boisterous to their inferiors, as many base masters are to their
apprentices, their yoke would be too heavy for the people to bear: neither
are better things to be expected at ungodly poor men's hands, then from those
that are richer: for there is the same nature in all: and Jeremiah says, that
the least are given to covetousness as well as the greatest. And great men are
less pricked forward to injustice by penury and want, then these needy
creatures and contemptible persons: small things will do rich men no good: all
is fish that comes to the net with the hunger-starued, and miserable beggars,
they meet with nothing which will not serve their turns. There is hope, or at
least a possibility, that that which is taken away by men of wealth, and
substance, may be restored again by mediation of friends, or by saluing of
credit, or by some other means, or for some other causes: but that which these
hungry abiects get into their clutches, is as soon swallowed as fingered,
neither care of credit will move them, nor their ability will afford them to
make restitution.

Verse 4. They that forsake the law praise the wicked: but they that keep the
law contend with them.

THey that forsake the law,] They that sinfully live in the breach of Gods holy
law, and transgression of his Commandments, and make their own fleshly
reason, and sensual lusts, the rule and square of their life, praise the
wicked, give encouragement unto them, study to find out matter to commend in
them, and for the same to give good testimony of them, that they have evermore
somewhat in a readiness to speak in their behalf, either to grace their
person, or justify their faults: for every man will most readily stand for
them which be most like unto them. As S. Paul reckoning up many foul offenses,
says, They do not only the same, but favor them Romans 1. 31.
that do them. And the rebellious Israelites in the wilderness, after they
heard Moses and Aaron to convince Corah, Dathan and Abiram of notable
presumption and arrogancy: after that they saw the Lord to execute a
remarkable punishment upon them, yet quarrelled against Moses and Aaron, in the
defense of those execrable men and their accomplices, saying, Ye have killed the
people of the Lord. This is a sure note of evil, Numb. 16. 41.
when men have evermore a good word ready for an evil doer, and by crediting
sin in others, that they should have no blemish for it, they seek to abolish
the disgrace from their own former wickedness, and hope with less reproach and
controlement to make a way for new: but they that keep the law, which addict
themselves with all their might to keep Gods commandments, and with due care
and conscience observe, and obey them, contend with them, do not only
discountenance, and dispraise, but as much as they can oppose themselves
against them, and resist them, notwithstanding it be with some conflict and
trouble unto themselves: For it is the property and sure mark of a good man,
not only to forbear evil themselves, but to stop and cross others that do
practice it: and this they do in zeal to God, and in hatred to sin
committed against him: as the Prophet professes, saying, I hate them that hate
thee, and earnestly contend with them that rise up against thee. And by this
they keep themselves from being guilty of other men's faults, and in as much
as in them is, further the offenders to repentance.

Verse. 5. Evil men understand not judgment: but they that fear the Lord
understand all things.

Evil men] Men given over to impiety and wickedness, understand not judgment,
albeit there be some light in them, which is after a sort enforced upon them,
by the brightness of Gods word, and ordinances, by the speeches and
communications of good men, which live among them, and by the manifestation of
Gods glory in his works; yet it serves only to make them inexcusable, but
not to procure their salvation, nor to direct them in their behavior: they are
always so blinded with natural ignorance, and malice, that both Christ and his
word are a mystery, wherewith their hearts are unacquainted, though they be
familiar to their ears to hear the^, and to their tongues to talk of them:
they neither see what is to be beloved, nor rightly apprehend what is to be
done, either generally in all sorts of actions, or particularly in the course
of their callings, and offices: For neither are they meet vessels to receive
the licour of divine wisdom, neither have they any desire, or are industrious
for to obtain it: but they that seek the Lord, they that seek the Lord in
his word, and by prayer, to the intent to do him service, shall understand all
things, which are needful for their salvation, and discharge of the duties of
their callings. For all godly men are acquainted with God holy will* so far
as is necessary for them: for as much as the secret of the Lord is reueiled to
them that seek him, Psalm. 25. 14.
and his covenant to give them understanding: For neither will the holy Spirit
fail to inform them, neither will they neglect to inquire of him, nor to use
their understanding fruitfully when they have it.

Verse. 6. Better is the poor that walks in his vprightnes, then he that
peruerteth his ways, though he be rich. See chapter 19. 1.

Verse. 7. He that keeps the law is a wise son: but he that is a companion
to gluttons shameth his father.

HE that keeps the law] That young man which applies himself to such godly
and virtuous behavior, as the word of God does teach, and prescribe him, is a
wise son, shows his wisdom, virtue, and understanding, not only in
ordering his ways as a Christian; but in yielding loyalty to his parents, as
a dutiful child. But he that is companion to gluttons, both in company
keeping, and luxury, and riot, shameth his father, is a blemish unto him, and
gives advantage and occasion, whereby of some he is taxed and censured;
besides that seeing him come to extreme poverty, or punishment, he cannot
but blush, and hang down his head with shame and sorrow. The sense and
opposition goes thus: He that keeps the law, and refraineth the company of
dissolute persons, is a wise son, and a credit unto his parents: but he that
breaks the law, and is a companion to gluttons, is a foolish son, and
dishonors his parents.

Verse. 8. He that by usury and unjust gain increases his substance,
gathers them for him that will be merciful to the poor.

HE that by usury and unjust dealing, etc.] Which either gets, or
augmenteth his stock, or estate by unlawful means: for under these so often by
name condemned in the word, he comprehends all others of whatsoever sort
they be, gathers them, though much contrary to his purpose, thought, or will,
for him that will be merciful to the poor, which both compassionately
affects, and liberally is handed toward them which are in necessity: It is
as if he should have said, the Lord does appoint that the goods which diverse
usurers have wickedly compassed, shall be taken from him, or his, and come into
a good man's hand, who will give the poor that which was before unjustly taken,
either from them or their brethren: for that which wicked men ill come by is
many Eccles. 2. 21. Job 27. 16.
times left for the godly to use well. See chap. 13. 22. doct. 2.

Verse. 9. He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer
shall be abominable.

HE that turns away his ear.] Not he who through frailty, infirmity, or
tentation has sometimes his heart interrupted at the hearing of the word, and
has attention, and so his a^^ection blunted; or by the rebellion of natural
corruption resisting the spirit of God, does now and then fail to obey the
counsels or precepts of the word; but which wittingly, willingly, with
obstinacy and contempt rejects the commandments of God, and knowledge of
his will, which despises the ordinances of God, and refuses to be instructed
by his ministry, even his prayer, and thanksgiving, and all other his services
especially in his calamites that would come upon him, when for misery he shall
he compelled to cry, shall be abominable, odious to the Lord, and such as he
will repel, and rather plague him for, then hearken unto him, and accept: so
that the best refuge which ungodly men have for their souls, even their good
prayers which they trust so much unto, will fail the^ at their need: and it
stands with equity, and he does but return them their own measure:
according to his complaint of them, and threatening against them: Yea they
refused to hearken, and plucked away the shoulder, and stopped their ears that
they should not hear: yea they made their hearts as an adamant stone that they
should not hear the law, and the words which the Lord of hosts spoke by his
former Prophets: therefore came great wrath from the Lord of hosts: therefore
it came to pass that as he cried, and they would not hear; so they shall cry
Isa. 7. 11. 12. 13.
and I will not hear, says the Lord. They themselves are execrable and
loathsome, and then how can the prayers, the berries of such manner of brambles
be esteemed any better? they are not presented to God by Christ, nor offered by
them in faith; and therefore God cannot take notice of them otherwise then in
detestation, and indignation.

Verse. 10. ^ho so causes the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he shall
fall himself into his pit: but the righteous shall have good things in
possession.

WHo so causes,] Endeavors by attempt, or for a time, or in a part
succeeds to cause the righteous to go astray by an evil way, in the way of
sin which is evil for the matter of it, and for effect of it, that it
brings evil, and plagues to those that wander in it, shall fall into his
own pit, shall not only lose his labor in seeking to corrupt another; but
shall through Gods judgment fall into the danger that he hoped to draw the
just into: as Balaam did in laying a stumbling block before the children of
Israel, by teaching the Moabites to allure them to that filthy and idolatrous
feast of Baal Peor: for it is turned into his ruin and destruction: for he was
therefore slain in a short time after. All this is an allegory wherein he
alludeth to hunters, who use stratagems to induce the beasts which they have in
chase to the way that leads into the pit which they have dug, and covered
to take him, who being fallen thereinto, is in their power to do what they
will with. See chap. 26. 27. But the righteous, the unhappy event of these
their practices, and their ill success therein, is amplified by the contrary,
the safety and happiness of those whom they laid wait for to pervert, shall
have good things in possession, the righteous shall be preserved from such a
fall as they do expect, and enjoy that happiness which they do malign: for
it is impossible for him that is upright to be Mat 24. 24. Revel. 13. 8.
drawn from God by seducers: election will hold him fast, and the spirit of
God will not suffer him to be overcome, or lost: neither may the promises of
God, made unto him for the 1. Ioh. 2. 27.
enioyment of all good things, be void or frustrate.

Verse. 11. The rich man is wise in his own conceit, but the poor that has
understanding can try him.

THe rich man is wise in his own conceit,] He that has great substance, and
little grace, has an opinion of himself, that he is of great understanding,
judgment, and policy, though he be never so absurd, simple, and foolish;
because wealth is a great means to puff up the heart, and make a man proud.
And therefore Saint Paul requires Timothy to lay a 1. Tim. 16. 17.
great charge on rich men, that they be not high minded. Ezechiel brings the
opulent and wealthy Prince of Tyrus upon the stage, and shows him unto the
world, acting a part for this purpose, saying; I am a God, I sit in the seat of
God in the midst of the sea, yea thou art but a man, and not a God, and
though thou did think in thine heart thou was equal with God: Behold thou
art wiser then Daniel, there is no secret that Ezech. 28. 2. 3. 4
they can hide from thee. With thy wisdom and understanding thou have gotten
thee riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of thy riches. And why is
this? but because they are ignorant, they know not, or consider not that it was
God which gave, and not their own wit which got them this abundance: and
because they carry matters by power, they deem that they order and manage
them by policy; and because no man dares rebuke them, they think their ways
so balanced with discretion, as that they are unrebukable. And because many
flatterers give them high commendation, they imagine that there is as much in
themselves, as they can devise to commend: but the poor that has
understanding can search him out, but the godly poor man who knows the word,
and is endued with discretion, will so search and find the rich man out, that
he will discern, (and if need require,) declare him to be either an ignorant
or wicked person, as may appear in the blind man's conference with the
Pharisees. And this comes to pass because he searches into Gods word, to
know his will, and into his own heart, to know the state thereof; and
therefore can easily take another tripping, which is altogether a stranger unto
Gods will, and the state of his own soul.

Verse. 12. When the righteous rejoice there is glory: but when the wicked rise,
the man is sought for.

WHen the righteous rejoice,] When good men are exalted to dignity and honor,
and have authority put in their hands, and so rejoice in the favor and mercy
of God thus blessing them: and (he argues the cause by the effect) the
inferiors are enriched, and adorned with many ornaments, both the public
state of the nation is much honored with power and safety, and private men's
particular estates are provided for, and blessed with all good prosperity, by
means of their justice, and upright dealing, and care to do good to their
country. See chap. 11. verse. 10. and 11. but when the wicked rise, to
authority, credit, and greatness in the Commonwealth, the man is sought out,
searched for to be oppressed and made a prey: the meaning is, that when wicked
men are aloft, the people which are not so bad as themselves, can neither have
safety from their persons, nor possessions; but either by fraud, or by force,
themselves, and the secretest things which they have are searched out, and
looked unto, that they may be a booty to the ungodly. It falls out many
times, and in diverse countries, that when their own brethren bear not rule,
as it did in Israel, when the strangers the Midianites had invaded the land,
that that which was not closely hidden, could not be kept out of the clutches
and claws of those ravenous cormorants: and therefore it was said of Gedeon,
that he was threshing wheat to hide it from the Midianites. This Judge. 6. 11.
was most clear executed in Achabs time, when he sought about every where for
the Prophets of God, and in special manner for Eliah, to put both him and the
rest to the sword. The sense is this, when righteous men flourish, and are in
authority, there is great equity used; and therefore great glory, and welfare
to the people: but when the wicked are set up, there is great tyranny and
oppression, and therefore great calamity and misery.

Verse. 13. He that covers his sins shall not prosper: but who so confesses
and forsakes them shall find mercy.

HE that covers his sins,] Either by denying that evil which he has
done, or extenuating of it, or by neglecting to acknowledge it to the Lord with
godly grief and sorrow, or by living still in it and continuing therein
impenitently, shall not prosper, shall not escape all plagues and judgments,
but shall feel the curses of God one way or other seazing upon him; either
strokes shall come upon his body, and fill him with torment; or his
naughtiness shall be detected, and so bring reproach upon his name; and his
estate shall be ouerturned, and necessity overtake him; or his children and
posterity shall be plagued and overthrown; or his soul be pursued with
horrors and fears; or death with a venomous sting shall slay him, and so
damnation, and final destruction prey upon him for evermore: but he that
confesses, unfeignedly with Christian remorse and contrition, and as fully as
he can, before God, if they be secret, or before men, if they be public and
open, and forsakes them, as much as he can by resisting of them, praying and
striving against them, and seeking all means of help by Gods word, and men's
admonitions and counsels to vanquish and subdue them, shall find mercy, shall
be pardoned, justified, sanctified, and in the world to come everlastingly
glorified: he shall be delivered from the guilt of them; he shall be saved
from the punishment of them; he shall be assisted against the violence and
power of them; and his outward man, and his inward man, his soul and his body
shall be preserved from the venom and poison of them: for confession of sin
is necessary for the comfort of remission: Job 31. 33.
for hereby we give glory to God; as Joshua persuaded Achan Leuit. 26. 24.
Psalm. 32.
to do: and hereby we help our hearts to be the more penitent, and the
better humbled for them. The opposition is: He that hides his sin, by
refusing to confess and forsake them, shall find no mercy, and therefore
shall not prosper; but he that lays open his sin by confession, and
reiection of them, shall find mercy, and therefore prosper.

Verse. 14. Happy is the man that fears always: but he that hardneth his
heart shall fall into mischief.

Happy is the man,] For Gods favor, and all comfortable effects thereof, both
present and future, both temporal and everlasting; for enioyment of all
goodness, and freedom from all mischief, which fears, with reverence and
godly awe to offend the Lord by breaking his commandments, or having faulted,
to lie securely in his sins without speedy humiliation and repentance,
always, as well at one time as at another, not fearing for any hour, or day, or
month, or by fits (as some which have an ague-like dread, now and then upon
them:) but all the days of his life, and all seasons thereof so far as
possible: for our nature is continually treacherous, seeking advantages for the
hurt of our soul; and the devil goes about like a roaring Lion, that no
place, nor time, nor exercise does free us from his assaults or invasion; and
God which is always equally just, is continually beholding of us, and of our
ways: but he that hardens his heart, which puts away fear, and
imboldeneth himself in an evil way, hearkening unto all enticements, and the
persuasion of seducers, and to the fleshly discourses of his own mind, which
may animate him in his lusts, and evil desires, and practices, and turns
away his ear from those which by faithful counsel would detain him from
sin, and bring him to repentance, for that whereof he already stands
guilty, shall fall into mischief, by doing of that which will make him
ridiculous, and odious to God and men, or suffering of that which shall be a
testimony of Gods judgment, and an intolerable burden upon him, for greater
then ever he shall be able to bear: For of all hurts, or miseries that are
incident unto a man, before he fall into hell, that of hardness of heart is
absolutely the greatest: for thereby the Lord does punish the contempt of his
word, and other grievous sins: and that is a certain forerunner of some
remarkable judgment: as the case of Pharao and other obstinate and obdurate
Egyptians does witness unto the world, and so will do to the worlds end. The
Antithesis is: He that fears always is a blessed man, and shall enjoy
goodness: but he that hardneth his heart is in a wosull estate, and shall fall
into mischief.

Verse. 15. As a roaring Lion and a roaring Bear: so is a wicked ruler over the
poor people.

AS a roaring Lion terrifieth the poor beasts with his noise, and prays upon
them with his teeth: and as a Bear hunteth up and down to search them out, and
tear them with her paws: so is a wicked ruler over the poor people: so
ungodly superiors of all sorts, pick quarrels at, threaten, oppress, and
make spoil of such as can make no resistance: For the greater any godless man
is, the more savage and beastly he is: the more violence and cruelty he
shows, the more extreme Dan. 7. 45. Zeph. 3. 3.
hurt and mischief he works. The wicked of the lowest degree do carry as
cruel hearts, as those of higher ranks and places, but their power answers
not unto their will: they are incountred and ouermatched where they attempt to
offer wrong and injury, and may therefore be likened to curres, or little dogs
which hunt after conies.

Verse 16. The Prince that wants understanding, is also a great oppressor:
but he that hates covetousness shall prolong his days.

IN the former sentence he declared the tyranny, and hard dealing of sinful
mighty men: and here he shows the causes of the same, and they are, love
of covetousness which is intimated, and want of sound knowledge which is
expressed: But he that hates covetousness, which is not carried away with Psalm.
28. 5. Iere. 22. 17. Exodus 18. 21.
greedy desire of getting substance, and increasing his estate, shall prolong
his days, takes the way to please the Lord, for the lengthening of his life,
and safety against all such evils as otherwise would endanger his life, as
those do which accompany and spring from this sin of covetousness and
cruelty.

The Antithesis is: The Prince that wants understanding, delights in
covetousness: and therefore shall shorten his own life: but a wise Prince
hates covetousness, and exercises mercy, justice, and therefore shall prolong
his days.

Verse 17. A man that does violence to the blood of a person, shall flee into
^he grave, and let none stay him.

HE that in hatred, or rage, or for any private, or unlawful respect, offers
violence to the blood of a person, does shed blood, or take away a man's life,
shall fl^e into the grave, make haste unto destruction, be in perpe^uall chase
until he fall in it: For bloody men do commonly live in danger of life, and
in horror of heart* evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him (says
the Prophet). God plagued K^in with two judgments, with depriuall of his life:
for the Lord reserved him of purpose to have him hunted a while in his soul
with terrors (like a Stagge, or a Heart, or Hare) before he killed him: and with
danger of death, which he feared horribly because he looked for nothing in it
but condemnation. And that is the state of all his sons, of whom there be
many yet living, which may truly call him father: notwithstanding all that
naturally descended out of his loins were drowned at the flood. God has a
quarrel, and innocent blood cries, and will be heard, and revenged against
every murderer, which preuenteth not the stroke of vengeance by repentance:
even Kings, such as Achab, Ioash, and others being guilty here of could not
possibly escape the penalty. He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed (says the Lord) And Genes. 9.
let none stay him, let no man be an agent for his impunitie: let no tongue
solicit for him: let no hand write for him: let not inferiors sue for his
pardon, and let not Magistrates grant him a pardon: for they are directly
forbidden. Thine eye shall not spare him: but thou shall put away the cry of
innocent blood, that it may go well with thee: For the land cannot be purged
Deuteronomy. 19. 13.
but by the blood of him that shed it.

Verse. 18. He that wal^eth uprightly shall be saved: but he that peruerteth
his ways shall fall at once.

HE that walks vprightly] That leads a godly and just conversation with a
faithful and sincere heart, shall be saved from sin and Satan: For
righteousness is a breast plate against the weapons of them both: from the hurt
of persecutions, Psalm. 39. 40.
and troubles: and from death and damnation. See chap. 10. 9. But he that
peruerteth his ways, he that leads a dissolute and impious life, which
walks in the crooked paths of sin, shall fall at once, they shall be like
to those that travel in a dangerous way, though fair and smooth, which is to
their liking, and contenteth them well until they be over head and ears in a
pit, a quicksand, or quagmire, and so all their pain and woe will come
together, and that to his ruin and destruction, as appears by the former
part of the Antithesis. See chap. 4 19.

Verse. 19. He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread: but he that
follows the idle, shall have poverty enough. See chap. 12. 11.

Verse. 20. A faithful man abounds with blessings: but he that makes haste
to be rich, shall not be unpunished.

A Faithful man] He that deals uprightly and soundly with men, and is not
willing to deceive any in word or deed, carrying himself sincerely toward
God, as he lives honestly amongst his neighbors, and that not only in one
matter, but in all, and is therefore in the original text called a man of
faithfulness, shall abound in blessings of all sorts, with plenty so far as
is expedient with good estimation, with kind friends, with spiritual graces,
etc. See chap. 10. 6. But he that hastes to be rich, setting his desire upon
wealth, and using indirect means to compass it, or is a bondslaue to the
world in his works and vocations, wherein he ought only to serve the Lord,
shall not be unpunished, shall not escape without plagues and judgments: he
makes more haste then good speed in getting so fast: For besides that, being
so greedy to be rich, he falls into snares, temptations, and noisome lusts
which drown men in perdition, he meets with crosses, and losses in his
estate in stead of gain and commodity: and the end is like to be woeful,
either for the loss of goods, or the loss of his life, or the loss of his
salvation, and thereto posteth with all haste, like as fowls flying to the
prey are often intercepted in their flight, or made to stay with the pellet of a
stone bow, or shot of a piece. Achans, and Achabs successes are both of them
remarkable, and such as God would have all posterities to take knowledge of for
their admonition. The opposition is this: He that is contented with hi^ estate,
is a faithful man, and shall be rewarded with blessings: but he that hastes
to riches is an unfaithful man, and shall be punished with curses.

Verse. 21. To have respect of persons is not good: for that man will
transgress for a piece of bread.

TO have respect of persons is not good. See chap. 23. 24. For that man will
transgress, Gods law and man's law by perverting of equity and judgment, for a
piece of bread, for a small matter, for a thing of no importance: and what
would he do the^ for a great bribe, for much money, for hope of large advantage
and commodity? He that bears so little affection to justice, as that he will
violate it for a trifle; how shall it find any favor from him, when he shall be
feed against it with a treasure? He that sets so light by his soul, as that
he will sell it dog cheap, and for a matter of nothing; how willing would he
be to make a sale thereof, and to pass it away unto hell and damnation, if he
might get a great sum of money for it?

Verse 22. A man of an evil eye hastes to be rich, and considers not that
poverty will come upon him.

A Man of an evil eye] A covetous worldling, a niggard, a churl, who is noted
to be a man of an eu^ll eye: because his eye does make him to desire other men's
goods, to envy his ne^ghbours prosperity, and to begrudge those that come
unto his table, the very meat which they eat: as appears chap. 23. 6. 7.
hastes to be rich, sets his mind upon wealth, and in all the haste would
be master of it, hoping by toyling, and pinching, and falsehood, and all
corrupt shifts to attain to abundance, and considers not, little thinks,
or dreameth that ever he shall prove a beggar, or a bankerupt, though poverty
pursue him so fast that it is ready to ^ead upon his heels. See chap. 21.
verse. 5.

Verse. 23. He that rebukes a man shall find more favor in the end, then he
that flattereth with his tongue.

HE that rebukes a man] Upon just cause, in love, and the spirit of meeknes,
with wisdom and discretion, shall find more favor in the end, though at the
first he seem to blow the fire, and kindle the flame of dis^leasure and hatred
against himself, then he that flattereth with his tongue, which does sooth
men in their corruptions, and animate them in their sinful way: for plain and
faithful dealing with other, is the readiest way to procure love and good
lik^ng to ones self. The false prophets were wont to strengthen the hands of
the wicked Kings of Israel, and to give them allowance in all their sins: and
yet Elisha which told them of their faults, and reproved them plainly, was more
countenanced and graced by them, then all the crew and ^abble of those sweet
mouthed d^^backs: for God has men's hearts in his hands, and disposes of all
their minds and affections. If they be religious and godly, his words and
grace will cause them to entertain their loving admonitions with love, and
good acceptance: for they discern of thy faithfulness, and the benefit that
acreweth unto them by thy rebukes: if as yet they be not wise and godly, yet
in time they may, and thine admonition may be an help to cure them of their
folly, and as soon as they are healed, 1. Cor. 14. 25.
they will forthwith grow thankful. And what though they should remain
perverse, and never be reformed, nor come to acknowledge thy faithful
dealing? yet others will, as we read in another sentence, and God himself
will give Prou. 24. 25.
thee praise and commendation, as he abhors those that justify the wicked:
and it is in his power to make every man either beloved, or hated, to be
honored, or to be despised.

Verse. 24. Who so robs his father or his mother, and says, It is no
transgression, the same is a companion to a destroyer.

WHo so robs his father or his mother,] Spoileth them of their substance,
and the things they have, and says, either in his mind to himself, or with
his tongue to others, by way of justification, it is no transgression, it is a
matter of nothing, what need all these stirs about it? these goods belong to
me, they should be mine in time, I have my part in them, why should I not
take some of them? is a companion to a destroyer, is to be reckoned with a
ma^slayer, and is to be punished with death as well as he: for wrongs done to
a man's parents are more heinous then such as are offered to common Exodus 21. 15.
persons: for it is an high breach of Gods commandment which enioyneth
children to honor their parents: and if it be so necessary to relieve them,
and so great a fault to be negligent of them, it must needs be a great
indignity, and fearful offense to bereave them of their substance which
should maintain them; and to lay theeuish hands upon that which a good child
after a sort would esteem as sacred: and how can a matter of grief be given
unto them, but the same is also given unto the Lord, for violation of his law,
if he were not a God, and impatible of grief?

Verse. 25. He that is of (...) heart s^irreth up strife: but he that trusts
in the Lord (...) made fat.

HE that is of a proud heart,] Which has large desires of honor and applause,
and would have no preferments or praise, to pass by himself to others*
stirs up ^^rife, makes quarrels, and raises contention^ (...) that he
despises his brethren, and never thinks him(...) sufficiently respected
according to his worthiness (...) ^y time to be worthy of crosses, denial, or
(...) is the root of all contentions. See chap. 1^. (...) tru^^th in the Lord,
which is lowly in ^is (...) ^posing confidence in the flesh, but in
(...)otencie of God, shall be made fa^, (...) and good prosperity, like (...)
in good plight, faring well, an^ (...): or rather like unto sheep, or other
(...) good pasture, and have a good keeper to ow^ (...) look unto them. To
this purpose tends the^ (...) and twentieth Psalm. The same similitude
Mala^^y uses, saying; but to you that fear my name shall the son of
righteousness arise, Mal. 3. 2.
healing shall be under his wings, and ye shall go forth as calves of the
staule. Whereas on the contrary side, those high minded and turbul^nt
contenders may be compared to wolves, and masterlesse dogs which live by
spoils, and are driven to raven about for all that they eat, and therefore are
lean, thin, and hunger-starued. The opposition is: He that is of a proud
beart, trusts to himself, stirs up strife, and is penurious, and pinched
with necessity: but he that is of an humble heart trusts in the Lord,
delighted with peace, and fat with plenty.

Verse. 26. He that trusts in his own heart is a fool: but he that walks
wisely shall be delivered.

HE that trusts in his own heart,] In himself, or any thing belonging to
himself, as in his wisdom, in strength, in his riches, specially in his
merits and goodness, which imagines that he has no need of the help or
advice of others, and refuses to follow the direction that is given by the
ministry of Gods word, or the counsel of his faithful friends, is a fool,
impious and wicked, absurd, sottish, and improuident for himself: for God will
convince him of folly, by inflicting plagues upon him for his foolish conceit,
and sinful behavior: but he that walks wisely, that prudently demeaneth
himself, according to the counsels and precepts of wisdom, following the
same, and not the fond persuasion of his own mind, shall be delivered, shall
be preserved from falling into plagues and judgments, and helped out of those
inexecrable calamities, wherewith he seems irrecouerably entangled The
opposition is: He that trusts in his own wisdom is a fool, walks
foolishly, and shall both sink into, and be held fast in misery: but he
that has no confidence in himself, walks wisely, and shall be delivered.

Verse. 27. He that gives to the poor shall not lack: but he that hides his
eyes shall have ma^y curses.

HE that gives,] Liberally and freely to the poor, to such as stand in need,
shall not lack, any thing that God shall see to be good, or meet for him. See
chap. 11. 25. and 22. 9. but he that hides his eyes, from the poor, (...)m
beholding their misery, that either will not look upon them in their wants,
or distresses, or not be affected with commiseration or pity at the sight
thereof: (for some restraining their sight or presence, they will not at all
come unto, visit, or see their brethren in their necessi^ies and afflictions:
others cast their eyes upon them, but without all compassion, or feeling, and
are nothing thereby stirred up to beneficence, and mercy) shall have many
curses, is subject to have manifold plagues from the Lord, both before their
death, and at the resurrection: for if the Lord do so seue^ely punish a
pitilesse ear that will not compassionately hearken to the cries of the poor,
that the party himself shall cry often, and not be heard, he will no more
spare a merciless eye, that will take no notice of the needs of them that are
oppressed with scarcity and famine: but that he shall show his lamentable
state, and not be helped.

Verse. 28. When the wicked rise, men hide themselves: but when they perish, the
righteous increase.

WHen the wicked rise,] To promotion and government, they raise up such
storms, that godly and righteous men are driven to seek shelter or cover
against their tyranny, or outrage: as David did in Saul's time: as the Prophets
did in Achabs time; and those holy men spoken of in the Hebrews, which wandered
up and down in sheep skins, and Heb. 11.
goat skins, in wildernesses, and mountains, dens, and caves of the earth:
But when they perish, when they die: (for the death of the wicked is perishing)
or are put out of their offices, or deposed Psalm 49. 10. 14.
from their dignities, or sink in their estate, the righteous increase, both
in number, and courage; because those that through fear kept themselves close
before, do boldly appear and show themselves. They swarm as a hiue of Bees
in a warm sunnie day: they multiply and increase in cities, towns, and
countries, boldly embracing the truth, and performing the duties of
righteousness themselves, and winning others to the same by their persuasion,
and example: for the destruction of the wicked is the good of the Church; as it
came to pass after Hamans hanging: for not only the Jews had encouragement,
and free liberty to serve the Lord, and to exercise his worship; but others
also adjoined themselves unto them, and embraced their religion: for it is
said, that many of the people of the land became Jews. The opposition is:
Hest. 8. 17.
When the wicked rise, the righteous hide themselves, and are diminished: but
when they perish, they show themselves, and are increased.

CHAPTER. XXIX.
Verse. 1. He that being often reproved hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, without remedy.

IN the former part of this sentence the sin of obstinacy is reproved; in
the latter, the punishment is declared: the sin is, that being often
reproved, by Gods ministry, or men's rebukes, hardens his neck, refuses to
submit himself, (it is a metaphor taken from oxen, or other beasts, that
reject the yoke which should be put upon them, and will not bow their neck
unto it,) the same similitude is used in the prophecy of Zachary, where it is
said; That they received to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped
their ears that they should not hear. The punishment is; he shall suddenly be
destroyed without remedy, wherein their plagues are aggrauated, and made
grievous by three circumstances: the first is the suddenness, that they shall
come speedily, and unawares upon them; when they shall be least looked for, or
feared, they shall seize upon them sooner then they thought, and make strange
alteration sooner then could be imagined: the Lord will not be a long time in
bringing them to ruin, as they by the space of many days, months, or years
together refused correction: but he in an hour, or shorter space, will quite
overthrow them. The second is the quantity or greatness thereof, shall be
destroyed, or as the word is, broken in pieces: it will not be a small punch,
but an heavy stroke, it will crush them, according as he says in the second
Psalm, Thou shall break them in pieces like a potters vessel, it will be
their downfall, and utter undoing. The third is the continuance, or
perpetuity of their misery, it is without remedy, like a desperate disease,
or death it self, that can never be cured. Isaiah does in like manner
exaggerate this their destruction by the selfsame adjuncts, or circumstances,
saying; This iniquity shall be to you as a breach that falls, or a swelling
Isa. 30. 13. 14.
in an high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly in a moment, and the breaking
thereof is like the breaking of a potters pot, which is broken without pity,
and in the breaking thereof, there is not found a sheard to take fire out of
the hearth, or to take water out of the pit.

Verse 2. When the righteous are in authority the people rejoice: but when the
wicked bears rule, the people mourn. See chap. 11. verse. 10.

3. Who so loves wisdom rejoices his father: but he that keeps company
with harlots, spends his substance.

WHo so loves wisdom rejoices his father,] Makes his parents glad thereby.
See chap. 10. 1. But he that keeps company with harlots, spends his
substance, consumes all that he has, and comes in the end to beggerie. See
chap. 5. 9.

The opposition is: He that is wise, and keeps good company, preserves his
substance, and rejoices his parents: but he that keeps company with
harlots, consumes his substance, and so is a grief to his parents.

Verse. 4. A King by judgment es^ablisheth a land: but he that receives gifts
overthrows it.

A Good King,] Or ruler, by judgment, by faithful execution of judgment to
every one, establishes a land, confirms his dominions in peace and
prosperity: for equity, justice, and good government, is the maine pillar, and
stay of the common good of kingdoms and people: as may well be observed in the
histories of the Kings of Judah, that all the while they gave themselves to set
up true religion, and punish sin, their kingdoms were in safety, and they ever
got the victory over their enemies: for by this means spoylers shall be
suppressed, the woolues and dogs shall be restrained from worrying the flock:
the hurtful weeds shall be plucked up from annoying the good herbs: and
Gods blessing shall be powered down for protection, peace and plenty: but he
that receives gifts, to pervert judgment, and is a bribe-taker, overthrows
it, does what in him lies to work the bane and ruin of the Commonwealth,
undermining the foundations thereof: For the sin of briberie and corruption
is an abomination to the Lord: and therefore such a transgressor pulls down
his judgments upon the place where it is committed: by this means (no place
being left for right, but for gifts) there will be great dangers of mutinies
and factions from those male contented persons which are grieved with wrongs
and injustice: and hereby a window is set open for such partiality, and hope
of impunity, that all sorts of sins, the pestilence and plagues of
Commonwealths, must needs increase daily, and multiply exceedingly.

A King which refuses gifts, by judgment establishes a land: but he that
receives gifts by injustice, destroys it.

Verse. 5. A man that flattereth his neighbor spreads a net for his feet.

A Man that flattereth his neighbour] Speaking him fair when he should reprove
him, and calling evil good in him, spreads a net for his feet, lays wait
to draw him into mischief; either by seeking advantage against his soul, by
poisoning, and corrupting that with presumption, pride, and impenitencie: or
against his estate, by seeking advantages to come within him, and to make a
prey of him: or against his credit, drawing him into obloquie, and causing him
to be evil spoken of, and he himself is like to be most forward in blazing
abroad his faults, when he is privy thereunto: or peradventure to bring him
into danger, for the hazard of his life, when by crafty means he has gotten
him into his hand. So that flattering and deceitful friends be secret and
hurtful enemies: like fowlers who strew corn, or lay a bait, as it were in
good will to give the hungry birds meat, when in the mean time they lay a
net, or set a grinne to catch them, or stick up lime-twigges to entangle them.
Almost all the Prophets complain of these treacherous persons: as David does
once, and again, and many times: and Micah says, They all lie in wait for
blood, every one hunteth his brother with an net; which is far more perilous,
and whereby they work greater annoyance, then if they pursued him with a
sword, which would be easlier seen, feared, and avoided.

Verse. 6. In the transgression of an evil man, there is a snare: but the
righteous does sing and rejoice.

IN the transgression of an evil man] In the sin that an evil man
commits, what contentation, or hope soever he has in it, and though it
seem unto him never so safe and delightful, yet there is a snare in it, which
God in justice has laid to keep him sure, and to hold him fast to righteous
punishment: and the devil in craft does lay it to illude and beguile him and
make a prey of him. His lamentable and fearful case in this behalf, Bildad
at large describes, saying, The grinne shall take him by the heel, and the
robber shall prevail Job. 18. 9. 10. 11
against him: the snare is laid for him in the ground, and the trap in the way.
Terrors shall make him afraid on every side, and drive him to his feet. But
the righteous shall sing and rejoice, as the pleasures, delights, and
contentments of the wicked having a hook in them to catch them by the jaws,
or else a snare to ^ntangle their feet, do turn to their sorrow and woe in
the end: So the tears, and sighs, the sorrows, and afflictions of Gods
people in all their painful, troublesome, and disgraceful services, as the
world esteem^th of them, do turn unto their comfort and singular consolation,
as it is here argued by the sign or effect o^ singing. Of this change on both
sides the Prophet makes mention after this sort, saying, Behold my servants
shall eat, and ye shall be hungry: my servants Esai. 26. 13. 14. 15.
shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: behold my servants shall rejoice, but
ye shall be ashamed. my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall
howl for sorrow of heart, and vexation of spirit.

The opposition is: In the transgression of the wicked there is a snare, and
therefore they shall mourn and howl: but in the obedience of the righteous
there is safety, and therefore they shall rejoice and sing.

Verse. 7. The righteous considers the cause of the poor: but the wicked
regards not to know it.

THe righteous considers the cause of the poor,] Does inform himself by
the best means he can of the state and equity thereof, and knowing it, does
approve of it, and himself allowing thereof, does labor that right also
according thereto, may be yielded unto it: hereof Job proposes himself for an
example, saying, I was the eyes to the blind, and I was the feet to the lame.
I was a father to the poor, and when I knew not the cause, I sought it out
diligently. I brake also the jaws of the unrighteous man, and plucked the prey
out of his teeth. But the wicked regards not to know it, he has no mind to
look into, or defend the cause of the poor; willing he is to have it as
little sifted into, or debated, as may be, and when it is questioned and rifled
into, he would be glad to see little equity in it, but that his complaints
should appear to be unjust clamours, to the end he might with less disgrace
give countenance to the poor man's wealthy adversary, and gratify him by
passing the sentence on his side.

Verse. 8. Scornful men bring a city into a snare: but wise men turn away
wrath.

Scornful men] Men desperate in wickedness, which deride all instructions and
goodness, such as have given over, and fold themselves to the practice of
iniquity, bring a city into a snare, in danger the same, and be as it were
authors of the ruin of the same, (or as the word will well and properly bear
it) do set fire on a city, or blow it up: though all of them be not agents
iaphich^^.
in powder plots, yet none of them is free from conspiracy against Prince and
people, against the public state of the Commonwealth, and every particular
man's fortunes, by their crying sins of high contempt of God and religion, and
thereby incensing the displeasure of the Lord against the whole nation. For
sinful men be dangerous and hurtful in all places where they dwell: their
counsel is pestilent: their example is scandalous, their abominations do
hasten Gods judgments upon al their neighbors: But righteous men turn away
wrath, pacify the Lords displeasure, and stay the judgments which are ready
to fall, by their prayers and humiliation: by their faithfulness and obedience:
and by their whole intentive study and travel to expel sin out of the
places where they dwell, and to purge away those prouocations which may draw
down the curse upon them, and their neighbors. See chapter 11. 12.

The opposition is: Scornful men do kindle Gods wrath, and thereby do bring
the city in a snare, and expose it to destruction: but righteous men do turn
away wrath, and thereby deliver the city from peril.

Verse. 9. If a wise man contend with a fool, whether he be angry, or laugh,
there is no rest.

IF a wise man] Endued with understanding and piety, contend with a fool,
with a perverse and obstinate sinner, conuincing him of his faults, or
persuading him to any good, or in any sort debate the matter with him contrary
to his liking, whether the wise man be angry, deal roughly or sharply with
him, or laugh, use more mildnes, or gentleness in his discourse, there is no
rest, he gains no ease, or profit by it, the other is so incorrigible: For
they that love sin, pervert and quarrel at all means that should reclaim
them from the same: For if he be dealt with in good sadness, earnestly with a
stern and austere countenance: if weighty reasons be alleged, or forcible
speeches or persuasions be used, all this will be reputed for uncharitableness,
for judging, for censuring, for rigorous urging of the law: but if he be
entreated with the spirit of mildnes, with humble request, with fair speech,
with friendly looks, with all courteous and gently usage, this makes him the
more insolent, he thinks that he is much feared, and they dare not reprove
him as a man faulty: if this gentleness be not this way wrested, then it
carries an imputation of dissimulation and flattery, that they speak him
fair, and fawn upon him, but love him not. John came mourning, living more
strictly, and preaching more roundly then ordinarily Christ did, and him the
froward company of the Pharisees, and their adherents, accused to deal with a
wicked spirit, and to be possessed with a devil. Our Savior Christ was far
more sociable and affable, he used refreshings by wine, and meats, after a
more liberal manner, and with greater liberty, and his ministry was more
lightsome and comfortable, and he was taxed with epicurisme, and
voluptuousnes, as if he had been a mate both in licentiousnes, and society
with the worst.

Verse. 10. The bloodthirstie hate the upright: but the just seek his soul.

THe bloodthirstie] Cruel men, and such as are mischieuously minded, hate,
carry malice in their hearts, and accordingly pursue in their words and
actions, him that is upright, every one which looks carefully to his steps,
that he in good couersation may please the Lord, and be profitable to his
brethren: for the worse any man is, the more maleuolent mind he bears
against such as are faithful and godly. It is the note of a damnable and
merciless man, to be at deadly enmity with any one who has any goodness in
him: because the light of ^^e one reproves the darkness of the other, and the
course of both their conuersations is quite contrary: and therefore Kain at
the beginning of the world (in a manner) hated Abel his own brother, his only
brother, and that to death. Esaus wickedness in the Scripture offered to our
view, in his rancour toward plain, innocent, and harmless Jacob: Achab
professed his hatred toward Elijah: and Saul declared his in pursuit of David:
and the envy of the Scribes and Pharisees toward Christ, is scarce unknown to
any* God in his decree has appointed that it should be so, and therefore it
cannot be otherwise: for Satan's brood never could, nor ever shall bear loving
affection to the seed of the woman: he that has a quarrel against Christ in
his Gospel, will also certainly malign Christ in his members, though they
were the nearest, or best by kindred or nature unto him: but the just, but the
godly, and kind hearted people whom he calls just, because of the fruits of
their righteousness and mercy, will seek his soul, care greatly to maintain
and defend his life, whereof the bloody men would so feign bereave him: as
Obadiah did the Prophets, whom he hid from the violent and cruel hand of
Achab and Iezabel: and Abedmelech in speaking to the King in the behalf of
Jeremiah, that he should not be afamished in the prison. See chap. 24. 11.

Verse. 11. A fool utters all his mind: but a wise man will keep it in till
afterward.

A Fool utters all his mind, He has nothing in him but he will easily
bewray it: for he blazet^ abroad his own secrets, yea and his friends
counsels, intents, and affairs unseasonably; and therefore he is here
compared to an vnfrugall housekeeper* which la^^sheth out that in a day, which
might suffice himself and his family a whole week: but a wise man, he that
has a stay of himself, and is endued with discretion, keeps it in till
afterward, he contains whatsoever he has in his mind, and reserueth his
speech unto the fittest season, that he may utter it in time and place most
commodious. See chap. 14. 33. and 15. 2.

Verse 12. Of a ruler that hearkeneth to lies, all his servants are wicked.

OF a ruler that hearkeneth to lies,] Which admits them into his ears, and
gives entertainment to them in his heart, which is the property of a wicked
man, which makes his mind and senses a sincke, wherinto all the filthy channels
do empty themselves, all his servants are wicked, delighted also to hear
lies, and report them, to surfeit with the excess of leasings, and falsehood,
and to vomit out the same into their masters bosom: for evil masters be
commonly pestred with leaud servants: as was Caiphas the high Priest, whose
very maids and wenches were fraught with malice, and ready to pick quarrels
whereby to entangle the Disciples of our Savior. And this comes to pass,
because Gods judgment is upon them, to plague them with illuders: as Achab was
with the false Prophets: and their own choice is of such as will humor them,
and serve their turns.

Verse. 13. The poor and the usurer meet together, and the Lord lighteneth both
their eyes.

THe poor and the usurer,] The needy and wealthy (he does by a Periphrasis
call rich men usurers, because commonly usurers are rich men, and many rich men
get their goods by usury, or other indirect courses; or having by better
means gotten a stock, do afterward let out the same for use and interest.
The words be indifferently translated, men aish tecacim.
of vsuries, or men of deceits.) Meet together, either in company, or in
state; the poor growing to wealth, and so is made the rich man's equal, or
superior; or the rich falling into decay, and so is become the poor man's
companion or inferior: as travelers coming from diverse, and sometimes
contrary ways, do meet the one with the other in their passage, or arrive at
the same place. The same simile is pointed at in the same word, though for a
different purpose, Psalm. 85. 10. 11. There is a meeting also of balances,
when the higher scale is made heavier, and sinketh downward, and the lower
becomes lighter, and rises upward, until there be even weight: let the
reader consider which of the comparisons is the more Chesed veemeth niphgashu.
fit. The Lord lighteneth both their eyes, gives each of them their life, and
their being, and use of senses, both of seeing, which is periphrastically
described by the illumination of their eyes, and of hearing, tasting, etc. The
illumination of the eyes is so taken in other texts of Scripture: as in the
first chapter of John, and the eighth verse: In it (meaning in Christ) was life
and the life was the light of man: and in the ninth verse: this was the true
light that lighteneth every one that comes into the world: and the prophet
praying for defense against his enemies, that his life might be protected, and
not taken away by their violence, entreats the Lord to lighten his eyes that
be sleep not in death: the sense then is altogether one, or little Psalm. 13 3.
different from that sentence which we have expounded in another place: the
rich and the poor meet together, and the Lord is the maker of them both. And
tends to this purpose, that albeit an outward estate do make an imparitie
between one and another amongst men, yet so it does not before the Lord: he
creates all; he gives and preserves life to all; he bestows the benefit
of senses upon all: the abundance of the rich communicates not this, nor the
scarcity of the poor depriueth him of it.

Verse. 14. The King that judges the poor in truth, his throne shall be
established for ever.

THe King,] Every Magistrate: but he names him, because he is chief, and
others are without thrones, where with he is dignified, that judges the poor
in truth, that defends a poor man in a just cause: (for the Lord especially
respected the poor in the use of magistracy, as he commands in the Psalm,
Do right to the poor and fatherless, do justice to the Psalm. 82. 34.
poor and needy. Deliver the poor and needy, save them from the hand of the
wicked: because these are weak, and subject to many dangers, and far^e unable
to resist the violence of the mighty) his throne shall be established for
ever, his kingdom, government, and prosperous state shall continue. See chap.
16. 1^. and 20. 28.

Verse. 15. The rod and reproof give wisdom: but a child left to himself,
makes his mother ashamed.

THe rod,] Stripes, or corrections given by the hand unto a child, when need
and occasion requires it, and reproof, that is, a rebuke given by word,
sometimes threatening, or any kind of sharp speeches, gives wisdom, are
instruments and means to make him wise, by terrifying him from his faults, and
causing him to look better to his ways for fear of blame, and smart of
punishment. See chap. 22. 15. but a child left to himse^fe, to follow his own
will, and do what he lusts without restraint, being neither chastened with
the rod, nor controled with words, but fondly cockered and born with in all
faults: as Adoniah was by David: ^^ameth his mother, is a grief and reproach to
both his parents, but especially to his mother, whom more audaciously he
contemns: and because she is commonly more accessarie to his dis^olute
behavior then the father, who can hardly abide that her darling, in his tender
age, should be roug^ly spoken unto, or sharply dealt withal. See chap. 15.
20.

The opposition is: The rod and reproof give wisdom, and therefore a child
well nurtured, and duly k^pt under, is an honor and credit to his parents: but
neglect of the rod and rebuke do nourish folly; and therefore a child left to
himself, does minister grief to both his parents, but specially he makes
his mother ashamed.

Verse 16. When the wicked are multiplied, transgression is increased: but the
righteous shall see then fall.

WHen the wicked are multiplied,] Either in number, but specially in their
estate, transgression increases, they are the more rebellious, and sin with
greater audaciousnes, and presumption: as the prophet says; As they were
increased, so they sinned against me; therefore I will turn their glory Hos.
4. 7.
into shame. And therefore Moses does lively describe the venom of
unsanctified prosperity, which makes men fierce against God himself, who
iadishly like thanklesse beasts do winse, and spurn at him with their heels.
But Ie^^urun waxed fat, and k^cked: thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick,
Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
thou art covered with fatness: then he forsook God which made him, and
lightly esteemed of the rock of his salvation. Their pride which always
grows as fast as their fortunes, is a principal cause of their contempt: and
their power serves them to bear out all matters without punishment, or
resistance: when they were fewer, and had less, they were as tender prickles;
but now by growth, and increase of sap, they are become brambles, and sharp
thorns; now they can do mischief by force and violence: now they can
prevail with others to be like unto themselves, by persuasions, by counsels,
by countenance, by impunitie, and by protection: but the righteous shall see
their fall, their destruction and overthrow: as if he should have said, the
number, the greatness, and the sinfulnes of these wicked miscreants, is
undoubtedly a trouble, and fear to the righteous: but let them not be
discouraged, they shall as well see them come down, as they did to rise up:
for neither might, nor multitude will keep sinners from destruction: for
though a tree have many branches, and great bows, and strong arms, yet it is
not defended thereby from the axe, or blasts of the wind; and therefore God
will have his people see their ruin; as sometimes they saw the Egyptians
drowned, or Haman hanged: because they should partake of comfort after many
sorrows, and yield unto him the honor of his truth, when they behold the
performance of his promise, and the efficacy of ^is providence: and thereby
the ruin of impious persons is made the more bitter and burdensome unto them,
when they shall see them to be spectators of their misery, whose fall they
hoped for, and whose happiness they maligned.

Verse. 17. Correct thy son and he shall give thee rest, yea he shall give
delight to thy soul.

COrrect thy son,] Admonish thy child, either son or daughter, by rebukes
and checkes, or (if need require) smite them with the rod or wand, according to
the quality of the fault, and the years and stature of thy child, and he
shall give thee rest: whereas before his misbehauiour and evil manners did
trouble and disquiet thee, now his reformation and amendment shall put an end
to thy grief, and fears, and refresh thee after thy tears and sorrow for
him, if God add his blessing to thine endeauours: and this is the best means
that can be used, even his own ordinance for that purpose: for nurtured
children, whose hearts God does smite with humiliation for their faults, as
parents smite their back with the rod, or their ears with reproves, do (as
it were) bring a cheer of quietness unto them, after their dread and pains:
they shall need to take no thought for them after grace is wrought in their
hearts, they may sleep quietly upon their beds, and put away all distrustful
cogitations, and he shall give delight to thy soul, his ingenuitie,
towardness, and virtuous disposition will affect thine heart, and cheer up
thy spirits, for that his goodness which thou do presently observe, and that
future happiness which thou do foresee to remain for him: for even as a
ground well tilled, or dressed, or trees well pruned, or looked unto, bring
forth to the husbandman sweet flowers, good commodities, and delectable fruits:
so the well governed child will utter such gracious speeches, show himself so
obsequious, and tractable to all good instructions, and every way conform
himself to the contentation of his parents, that their soul shall have great
delight and comfort in him.

Verse 18. Where there is no vision the people perish: but they that keep the
law are blessed.

WHere there is no vision] Where there is no wholesome, and sincere preaching
of Gods doctrine out of his word: (for the message of the Prophets was wont to
be called a vision, and the Prophets themselves called seers;) the Isai 11. 1.
Sam. 3. 2. and 9. 9.
people perish, are exposed to the greatest evils that can be, both of soul
and body: as to infidelity; to ignorance; to the motions of Satan, whereby
they are drawn into iniquity at his pleasure, to the damnable lust, and
affections of their own hearts, to impenitencie and hardness of heart, to the
wrath of God, and to the hazard of endless damnation. In the Hebrew text it is
said they are made naked, as soldiers among the shot and weapons of their
enemies, without armor on their backs, (in which sense it is said that Saul
prophesied all day naked) 1. Sam. 19. 24.
or to people stripped of their garments, whereby it comes to pass, that they
are starued with cold in the time of winter, or tosted with heat in the
summer, and are made an object of shame and contempt to all that look upon
them. Now the vision is said not to be, when God has shut up the eyes of them
that ought to be teachers, that the Scriptures are as a clasped Isa. 29. 9.
book, or sealed letter which cannot be read, and therefore no sound doctrine
is taught by them at all: but there is a woeful famine of the word of God. And
the vision is said not to be Amos 8. 11.
when the word is sometimes expounded, but not sincerely, faithfully, and
diligently, so that the people may be as sheep without a shepherd, in the
midst of great plenty of such as take upon them to be teachers: but they
that keep the law, Mat. 9. 36.
which conscionably, and constantly address themselves to retain that which
they hear, to believe that which is testified, and to obey that which is
commanded, are blessed, as estated in the promises of God, as inheritors of
everlasting glory, and present possessors of Gods mercies and favors, as being
secured from the perrill of every thing that is against them, and assured of
the supply of all things which will do them good: this is blessedness, and
these are men that do partake of it: for diverse hear the word but it is to
their condemnation, and therefore the outward joining of the exercises of
religion makes not any happy, unless they have also their portion in the
power thereof by the spirit of God, and be transformed into the image of Christ.

Thus the opposition is: Where the vision fails the people perish, and cursed
is he that having the law does not obey it: but where the vision is the people
may be saved, and blessed is he that keeps the law.

Verse 19. A servant will not be corrected by words: for though he understand
he will not answer.

A Seruant] An inferior, of servile disposition, a froward and stubborn
person, will not he corrected with words, bare words without strokes, or other
punishment, will not suffice to reform him, though he understand,
notwithstanding he apprehend what thou meanest, yet he will not answer, either
when he is commanded ought, he pretends that he hears not what is said unto
him: or when a question is asked of him, he will stand mute, and hold his
peace, out of a cursed stomach: or though he hear, and speak, and promise
that he will do all which is given in charge, yet he answers not in this
sense, because he puts not in practice. Such stubborn obstinate persons
add to their own misery, and bring burdens upon their own backs, which
they might be freed from.

Verse 20. See thou a man hasty in his matters, there is more hope of a
fooole then of him.

See thou a man hasty in his matters] One that is carried headlong without
advice, or circumspection, for the attempting, or managing of his affairs,
mark him well, take good notice both of him, and his successes, there is more
hope of a fool, then of him, a natural, and one whom God has depraved of the
faculty, and benefit of understanding, and discretion: the cause of this
temeritie and rashness is an ouerweaning conceit of his own wisdom: and
therefore this sentence little differs in sense from the twelfth verse of the
26. Chapter

Verse. 21. He that delicately brings up his servant from a child, shall have
him become as his son at length.

HE that delicately brings up his seruant] Which make too much of an
unworthy servant, by lifting him up to offices, whereof he is incapable, and
altogether unfit for the place: or cloatheth him with apparel too fine for his
degree: or feeds him too daintily to the nourishment of his lusts: or gives
him too large allowance for his expenses: or suffers him to take too much
ease: or uses him with over great familiarity, from his youth, from his first
beginning a long season after, that does not in time take him down, and make
him learn to know himself better, shall have him become as his son at
length, at length he will take state upon him, and become a young master in
the house, after an insolent and arrogant manner, as if al these favors were
due unto him of right: so ungrateful he will be unto his master, as that he
will think him bound to prefer him; and so imperious over his fellows, as
that he will think he may domineere over them; and so malapert to the
children of the family, as that he will make himself to be their equal: For
the more kindly wicked men be dealt with, the more unthankful and inhumane
they show themselves.

Verse 22. An angry man stirs up strife, and a furious man abounds in
transgression.

AN angry man stirs up strife. See cap. 15. 18. and a furious man which
suffers himself to be transported with rage and indignation, which is wedded
to his passion, as a man is to his wife: (for so much may the original word
import) abounds bagnal chemah.
in transgression, being inflamed with wrath, he not only breeds contention,
but brings forth an number of sins of sundry sorts: he curses, he
swears, he reuileth, he slandereth, he enuieth, he murmureth, he fights,
and is ready also to commit murder, and many in that mood spare not to shed
blood, and lay violent hands upon those whom they deal with.

Verse 23. A man's pride shall bring him low: but honor shall uphold the humble
in spirit.

A Man's pride] Either lurking in his heart, or expressed by word, deed,
countenance, apparel, and such like, shall bring him low, shall be a cause of
his abiection and debasement, where he was before of higher estate and great
estimation: but honor shall uphold the humble in spirit, good esteem, and
credit, due praise and commendation, good plenty, and sufficiency of
maintenance, and (if it behooffull for him, and may stand him in stead)
offices, dignities, and meet preferments, shall uphold, raise up, and keep up
the humble in spirit, such as are of lowly mind, and seek least after either
praise or pr(...)tion. See chap. 11. 12. and 15. 33. and 18. 12.

Verse. 24. Who so is partner with a thief, hates his own soul, and which
hears cursing, and bewraieth not.

WHo so is partner with a thief, Which makes himself accessory unto his
stealth, or robbery, either by counsel, or consent: or by receiving of stolen
goods: or by concealing of those whom he knows to be offenders in this sin,
hates his own soul, deals as evil with himself, as if he had a quarrel
against his own life and welfare, by mak^ng himself subject to danger of law,
to infamy, and to the displeasure and curse of God, in as much as thee^^^ and
robbers shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And the Prophet proves the
dissembling Israelites to be liable to such a sentence, as should be denounced
upon them at the judgment seat of God, and accordingly executed: because when
they saw ^ thief they consented with him. And he which hears cursing, Psalm.
5. 58.
and bewraieth it not, in the like case is he, and an enemy also unto his own
soul, which hears cursing, in whose cares blasphemies, swearing, bitter,
malicious, or any manner of inormous speeches are uttered, and he declares it
not, neither reprooueth the party so faulty, although he be such a one whom
it is wisdom to admonish, and it well becomes him so to do, neither
informs any other who may be a Physician to the party delinquent, and
minister medicines unto him to cure his soul. And therefore after this manner
the Lord does censure this sin in the law: If any soul hear the Leuit. 5. 1.
voice of swearing, and is a witness whether he has scene it, or known of it,
and do not utter it, he shall bear his iniquity. Silence then kept in such
cases causes men to incur the recompense that is due to other men's offenses,
as themselves by bearing with them, and winking at them, have entangled
themselves with the guiltines thereof, and so make themselves obnoxious unto
them.

Verse. 25. The fear of a man brings him into a snare: but he that trusts
in the Lord shall be safe.

THe fear of a man] Not the spiritual fear, and sonnelike reverence of God
with dread to do ought that may displease him: For happy is he that fears
always: nor the natural fear of dangers and troubles, so long as it keeps in
compass, and is sanctified by the spirit of God: but that slavish and cowardly
fear, that dasterlines of heart which springs from infidelity, and either
detaineth a man from performing his duty, and thrusts him on forwards, to
the doing of that which is unlawful, brings him into a snare, into great
perplexities, and distresses, and sometimes into great dangers and mischiefs:
for the want of Christian fortitude is both sinful, and hurtful. This
complaint does Jeremiah make of the impious caitifes of his time, They bend
their tongues li^e a bow for Iere. 9. 3.
lies: but have no courage for the truth. When Abraham and Isaac began to be
surprised with this, their feet were presently in the snare, by disclaiming
their own wives, and after a sort prostituting them, or at least exposing them
to the unchaste eyes and powers of heathen Princes. And in what a plight was
David at Gath when he was overtaken with it, who upon two much timiditie, and
distrust of Gods protection, avoided the land of Israel, and cast himself into
the Philistims hands, among whom he was brought into miserable streights,
being driven to counterferte madness, and to play the part of a lunatic and
frenticke person, as if he had been quite besides himself? And Peter's example
was memorable, who letting his courage to fall from him, and fearefulnes to
possess him, was well near vanquished by feeble soldiers, the porters at
gates, and base persons, a woman, a girl, a contemptible wench, made him to
yield up his weapons, and to yield himself (as it were) captive into their
hands, they compelled him to lie, to swear, to forswear, and to abjure his
own master, who^ not many hours before he promised boastingly to die with. But
he that trusts in the Lord, the person which is secure of the good will of
God, which constantly suffers afflictions, and as a valiant soldier of Jesus
Christ proceeds in well doing, shall be safe, and sure under the Lords
defense: he will be as an high rock unto him, and for a tower and castle, so
that nothing shall touch such a one to do him hurt.

The opposition stands thus: A man's fear does bring him into a snare, and
he that has not his confidence in God shall be in danger: but the boldness of
a man does preserve his liberty, and he that trusts in the Lord shall be
safe.

Verse. 26. Many see^e the favor of a ruler: but every man's judgment is from
the Lord.

MAny seek the favor of a ruler,] Many employ all their friends, and use all
possible means to have the Magistrate made for them in their suites and
questions. See chap. 19. 6. But every man's judgment, the sentence which the
Magistrate shall pass upon every man's cause, whether it be to clear him, or
to cast him, is of the Lord, who has decreed what success every man shall
find, and directs the Magistrates mouth to pronounce the sentence, which his
providence has appointed to be given: and howsoever man may be corrupt in
acting of that which he has determined; yet his proceeding is absolutely just
and righteous. Pilate condemning Christ to death, passed as wrongful a
sentence as ever proceeded out of man's mouth; and yet our Savior told him,
whatsoever he should be able to do against him was assigned him from above,
and the Lord had fore appointed it.

Verse. 27. The unjust man is an abomination to the just, and he that is upright
is an abomination to the wicked.

THe unjust man is an abomination to the iust] The just does justly abhor the
ungodly, not in respect of their persons, but for, and according to their
deserts: because they are Gods enemies, and adversaries both to their souls,
and to the whole Church, and bring plagues and judgments upon the Psalm. 139.
21.
whole nation: and what fellowship can there be between righteousness and
unrighteousness? or of the seed of the woman with the seed of the serpent? On
the contrary side, he that is upright that leads an upright and holy life,
is an abomination to the wicked, hated of him with great detestation, but
unjustly, and without all desert: for there is cause rather of love, and kind
affection. But hence arises the quarrel, that the upright man's works are
good, and his evil: and because the upright man will not run to the same
excess of riot with him: and because he will either actually or vocally
reprove his sins: and because his heart is affrighted, and terrified with the
presence and company of the upright: and because the upright and godly man is
not of this world. See the Ioh. 15. 19.
tenth verse of this Chapter.

CHAPTER. XXX.
Verse 1. The words of Agur the son of Iabeth, even the prophecy the man
spoke concerning ^thiel, even ^th^^l and Vcal.

THe sentences of Solomon were determined, and ended in the former Chapter:
unto which are adioined the writings and sayings of two other holy persons
inspired by the holy Ghost, and united in one volume with them: namely Agur, to
whom this Chapter is ascribed, and Bathsheba Salomons mother, which uttered the
words of the next, in this present chapter: first the Scribe, penman, or author
thereof under God is described: secondly the matter of it is propounded: the
penman is described only by his name and relation, he was Agur the son of
laketh. The matter is proposed first more generally being termed words:
secondly more specially it is called a prophecy, that is, sacred words, holy
sayings, such as Gods own spirit did dictate, which proceeds not from his
own wit, wisdom, nor learning, or any private motion of his own, but as he
was directed by the holy Ghost: and thirdly, more particularly in the several
points and branches of the same, and those be of three sorts: whereof some are
evangelical doctrines touching salvation, to the seventh verse: some are
requests to God in way of prayer, to the tenth verse: and some are promiscuous
sentences, as precepts, complaints, threatenings, and parables touching many
matters. Now touching salvation, and the spiritual life: in the first place
he declares the author, worker, and foundation of it Christ, to the fifth
verse: in the next he shows the means whereby the same is to be attained
unto, in the 5. and 6. verses. Concerning Ithiel, our Savior Christ is here
set forth unto us, first by the union of his natures, that being eternal, and
mighty God with his Father, he is also man with us. For Ithiel is equivalent
to Immanuel, saving this that Immanuel signifies God with us, and I^hiel by a
nearer application, God with me: and the same word does also argue his
attribute of goodness, his gracious presence, according to the ordinary phrase
of the Scripture: as was the conference between Gideon and the Angel, The
Lord is with thee thou valiant man (says the one) Judge 6. 12. 13.
If the Lord be with us, why is all this come upon us? (says the other) Fear
not (says the Lord to his Israel by the Prophet) Isai. 43. 5.
for I am with thee. And after that by his omnipotency and power, which is the
meaning of the word V^al, although notwithstanding both Ithiel and it do
somewhat vary from the common form of words of their composition, and
deriuation: For it pleases the wisdom of God in this place to use them after
a singular manner, and fitteth them for the representation of his son, as if
they were his proper names.

Verse. 2. Surely I have been brutish since I was a man, neither is there the
understanding in me that was in Adam.

Verse. 3. I neither learned wisdom, nor kno^ne the knowledge of holy things.

Having magnified the competencie and all-sufficiencie of Christ to be a
Savior, in respect of his natures as well divine as humane, and of his
goodness, presence with his, and infinite power, he comes to take knowledge
of himself, and of his own insufficiency, and proposes himself therein as
a pattern to all mankind, of the great defacement of Gods image in him, and of
disabilitie by any wisdom of his own, to compass his own salvation: to the
end that it might appear what need and use he has of a Mediator: Surely I
have been brutish since I was a man: as if he should have said, It is a thing
very certain, and necessary to be known and observed, that I, and all men
are beasts by our own knowledge, and in Iere. 10. 14.
this state have I stood at ever since I was conceived, and every man's else
since Adams fall, in respect of our fleshly condition, and corporal
generation, neither is there the understanding in me that was in Adam, that
depth of rare knowledge, and admirable wisdom which was in Adam in the state
of innocence, and before he transgressed the holy commandment of God, and
was never since found either in himself, or in any of his posterity: neither
have I learned wisdom, that heavenly and celestial wisdom from any of the
wise or prudent men of this world: for it is hidden from them all, nor known
the knowledge of holy things, I have not by mine own wit, by the light of
reason, or by any natural faculties of my mind pierced into the deep mystery
of sanctified and saving knowledge: For indeed flesh and blood reueileth not
Christ to any man: but the spirit of God only working by his word.

Verse. 4. Who has ascended up into heaven? who has gathered the wind in his
fists? who has bound the waters in a garment? who has established all the
ends of the earth? what is his name, or his sons name, if thou can tell me?

HE proceeds still to debase himself, and all the world besides, both for
ignorance and debilitie, and makes therein a comparison between God and man,
detracting from the one, and ascribing to the other the glory and praise of
supernall matters, and this he does by way of challenge: Who (says he) has
ascended into heaven? beside him that is Ithiel, and Vcal, that he should be
there informed in the secret of Gods will, or descended? that he might tell us
what things he has seen, or heard: in this sense our Savior says, no man
Deuteronomy. 13. 12.
has ascended into heaven, but he that has descended from it, the son of
man which is in heaven. True it is that Paul, and other have been wrapped up
thither, but yet not of themselves, but by God, and withal the things which
they saw were unutterable. Who has gathered the wind in his fists? who does
hold the wind in his hand that it blow not, and lets it loose when he will
to breathe out strong and violent blasts, who has bound the waters in a
garment? As if he should say, Is it not God only which keeps the waters in
the clouds, and has enclosed them in an narrow compass, as it were wrapped up
in a vesture, which he may fold up, or let out at his own pleasure? for does
it belong to man to appoint drought, or moisture, to build up the clouds, or
dissolve them into rain? who has established the ends of the earth? by whose
appointment is it, that the earth, and all the costs thereof remain so firm,
and stable, is it by the virtue of man's hand or commandment? what is his name?
can thou name a man that can perform these things? what is his sons name?
he speaks this according to the custom of the Jews, who used to make men
known according to their kindred: as Isaiah the son of Amos: David the son
of Ishai; so also Asa his son, Iehoshapat his son, Iehoram his son, name
his son, meaning that there is not a man to be found in any family, or
kindred of the world, that is able to perform these things: and all these
latter demands are brought in for amplifications of the first question, and
that by a most elegant gradation, for the erecting of man's imbecilitie: as if
he should have said, Is man able to mount up into heaven, to be a companion of
God in his counsels? nay he is not able so much as to govern the winds in the
air: nor to order the waters in the lowest clouds: nor to add the least
stabilitie to the earth, which we tread upon; and therefore both I, and all
that will attain unto blessedness, must go out of our selves, and seek our
help in Ithiel and Vcal, being that son of God whom no man knows but the
father, neither does any man know the father but he alone, and to whom he will
reueile him, he is the Matthew. 1^ 26.
true Messiah.

Verse 5. Every word of God is pure, he is a s^ield to them that trust in him.

THe means whereby salvation is to be obtained, and which confirm a man in
the assured hope thereof, are three: the first is the most perfect and absolute
word of God, in the former clause of this verse: the second is says, affiance
in God, and dependence upon him, in the la^er ^^^se of this verse: the third is
the conscience, and most dut^full regard of Gods holy voice, that it be
faithfully observed without our own mixtures with it, in the next verse: Every
word of God is pure, every part and particle of Gods reueiled will is pure,
true, just, holy, and free from all corruption, and baseness, as the silver
that has bin many times refined in the fire; this is that word of grace, of
that message of salvation, whereby Christ does exercise his goodness toward us,
and makes his power effectual in us, he is a shield to them that trust in
him, to the faith which he requires, he persuades us by a forcible cause, the
provident care of God for the salvation, and safety of his people, which he
illustrateth by a comparison of bodily arms of defense, and therefore he is
called a shield, or buckler, which a man holds out against the weapons of his
enemies, and receives the arrows, the strokes, the darts, the bullets, the
shot, which otherwise would pierce the body, slay, or wound it: and therefore a
good man can never be hurt by the devil, and his soldiers, so long as the
Lord is not battered nor pierced: if he be impregnable, they are in safety: if
he be invincible, they can never be destroyed. The subjects of this
protection, the persons preserved by him, are those that cast themselves upon
him, and steadfastly repose their confidence in him. See Chap. 29. 25.

Verse 6. Add not to his words lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.

Add not to his words] Neithe^ utter, nor practice any thing against the will
of God reueiled to thee, ^^ equallizing men's words with it: and dignifying the
fruits of humane wit with the titles, and prerogatives that peculiarly
appertain to Gods wisdom; by canonizing men's writings, and so making them
matchable with Gods holy books: by forging of things which God never spoke,
or by misinterpreting, or misapplying that which he has delivered: by
falsifying the meaning, and giving a sense which he intended not: especially to
take liberty to sin, or thereby do any thing that is unlawful. The reason
whereby he deterreth men from this presumption, is, from the peril which will
ensue upon it, and that in a double respect: the one they expose themselves
unto rebuke; do not this lest he reprove thee, as charging thee with arrogance
and great presumption: and the other that they bewray their own falsehood, lest
(says he) thou be found a liar, in affirming that which is void of truth, and
egregiously contrary unto it, and so shall thou have the true God to discover
thy lies, and with judgments upon thee (to thy confusion,) auerre and justify
his own divine verity: and the same is the condition of these, which
contrarily diminish any part of Gods word, and attempt to take away ought from
that which he has spoken, or written, against his precept, and strict charge,
Whatsoever I command you take heed to do it, thou Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
shall put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom.

Verse 7. Two things have I required of thee, deny them me not before I dye.

THis prayer of Agur, though it be brief, consists yet of three parts, as we
shall see in order; the first is a preface and entrance thereunto: Two things
have I required of thee, wherein this holy man of God in humble manner shows
unto him, that he earnestly desires at his hands two things especially, as
most needful for the saluat^^n of his soul, the discharge of his duty, and
good estate in this life: for although he begged many other things at Gods
hand; yet he did frequently, and fervently crave these two as matters of great
importance, and such as made a way for innumerable other particulars, and these
he desires to obtain, and enjoy before he dye, during his life, and even
until his last breath; this he does, for that he well knew, and considered if
God should withdraw his favor and grace from him but for a moment, his estate
would be very miserable.

Verse 8. Remove from me vanity and lies, give me neither poverty nor riches,
feed me with food convenient for me.

THe second part of this prayer stands in the suite that he makes, the
petitions that he puts up to God, and the principal things which he
supplicateth for: whereof some of them concern the soul, as grace against his
sins: and some the body, as moderate maintenance for his estate, Remove far
from me (says he) vanity, and lies, that is to say, keep me by thy holy
spirit from all ungodliness, and unrighteousness, which is vanity, and especially
from hypocrisy, and telling of untruth, which is a double iniquity: those of
this kind which I have formerly fallen into* remit, and pardon, and for the
future days of my life, protect, and defend me against the dominion, power,
and venom of them, and cause that so often as I fault, I may be purged from them
by sound and hearty repentance. This his request is very much agreeable to
those petitions which our Savior has taught us to make: Forgive us our
trespasses: lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Give me
neither poverty, nor r^ches, after spiritual graces he craves corporal
blessings, des^^ing a mediocritie therein, even so much as is needful, meet,
and useful for him; and therefore makes a d^eprecation against extremities,
over little, or excessive much, give me neither poverty nor riches, suffer me
not to be oppressed with p^nury, neither yet to carry too heavy a burden of
prosperiti^: let me not sink into indigency, and so be made miserable with
want, neither let me ouerflow with too luxurious an estate, and so be corrupted
with superfluity, feed me with food convenient for me, that is to say, bestow
upon me that portion which thou as my heavenly father have cut out for me, and
appointed in thy decree to be convenient for my body, and for my soul, and no
hinderance, but a furtherance to me in thy service. It is more forcibly
propounded in the original text, then does appear in the translation; for the
Lord therein with his administration, and providence is compared to the dammes
of young creatures, whose care to bring meat, (or as the word signifies) a
pray unto them, Hatripheni lechem chukki.
constantly, and without any defeatement of them: and this is better, then to
have their nests, or holes full of meat, lying unnecessarily by them: and
likewise he is resembled to wise, faithful, and just masters, and Captains,
which yield a set allowance, or ordinary unto their people, or soldiers, which
shall be very sufficient for them, and which they may undoubtedly conclude to
have ministered to them in due time, without any failing, and therefore they are
in better case, then if it lay moulding, or corrupting by them many months
before they need it, and should be amongst their car^iages, wherewith they
should weary themselves in their often remoueals from one place or country to
another. And this is all one in sense with that other petition in the Lords
prayer, give us this day our daily bread, and it has also the same extent that
that has, containing under bread or food all corporal blessings, or
whatsoever things be expedient for a man's welfare touching this life.

Verse 9. Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord: or lest I be
poor and steal, and take the name of my God in vain.

THe third is a confirmation of his petition, which he made for competencie,
without those extremities and the noisome effects that will ensue from either
of them, and that is on the one side impious, and execrable contempt of God,
and on the other side, sinful, scandelous, and offensive shifting, lest I be
full, exceed in riches, or be too highly advanced to honor and promotion, or
have more then enough of the outward things, which the world does so much
admire, and deny thee, to take authority, or bear rule over me, or to give
precepts for my ways: especially when thy word prescribes ought against my
carnal lusts, and fleshly will, and say, by the contemptuous thought of my
heart within my self, or by blasphemous speeches to others, or by the
consequence of my dissolute, irregular, or presumptuous behavior, Who is the
Lord? that I should fear him, that I should obey him, that I should refrain
from mine own pleasing, and sweet delights, to do him service: for fulness is
very infestuous to religion, and to humility, and to a christian conversation,
even in Gods own people, saying, Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God,
Deuteronomy. 8. 12, 13. 14.
not keeping his commandments, nor his laws, which I command thee this day^le
when thou have eaten, and filled thy self, and shall build goodly houses, and
dwell therein, and thy bea^ts and thy sheep be increased, thine heart be
lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land
of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, Or lest I be poor and steal, and take
the name of my God in vain, lest famine, and pinching necessity do draw me
first unto theft, and afterward into penu^y, dishonouring thee by my fraudulent
and unconscionable chetings, or other unrighteous courses.

Verse 10. Accuse not a servant to his master, lest he curse thee and thou be
found guilty.

ACcuse not a servant to his master] Complain not falsely or rashly without
cause, or necessity, if easier means may serve to reclaim, and reform him,
though he should be faulty: for it is a work of cruelty to inbitter
governors against their underlings: it is as unfit for a good man so to do,
as it misbeseemeth him that is merciful to play the prankes of a false and
malicious Doeg: and who would deal like that whorish mistres of Joseph, to
expose a harmless lamb to the paws of a roaring Lion? For such a one she
attempted to make Po^pher to be, by kindling in him the rage of ielou^ie, by
her false suggestions, and hellish calumniations. The enemies of Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, are perpetually infamous by this kind of treacherous
sycophancie: and when will the reproach of that cursed Haman come to an end, who
by his virulent tongue traduced a whole nation, and the best nation of all the
Kings subjects, inueighed Ashuerosh to prescribe them all, and destinate them
to a bloody massacre? If it be so hateful a thing to make division among
brethren which are equals, as that God has them in great detestation which use
it; how much more is it abominable to imbitter one that is mighty, against him
that is so feeble, where there can be no resistance, nor protection, to bring
poor helpelesse persons (as it were) to the slaughter house, or torture? Lest
he curse thee, Exodus 22. 29.
lest by his prayer unto God he draw down a curse upon thee, from him who is
the defender, and revenger of the poor, and so he plague thee with some stroke
from his own hand; or he give thee over to some such offense, as the court of
justice will take notice of: or punish, and bring to light some former
misbehauiour of thine, whereof thou peradventure by this poor servants
information or testimony shall be convicted: for they that are accused, are
wont to publish all the evil they know by their accuser: this kind of
^ecrimination is frequent and common.

Verse 11. There is a generation that curses their father, and does not bless
their mother.

Four crooked and wicked generation of sinners (as it were) in this verse, and
the three next are yoked together, and described. The first stock is of those
that are notable rebels, who curse their father, and mother, and bless them
not, the same thing being repeated negatiuely by the contrary: of this sort are
all such as rise up against them that are in authority, and namely ungracious
children, who not only in heart despise their parents, and wish evil unto
them: but with reuiling, or other malapert speeches abuse them to their faces,
or with murmurings, whisperings, or other words of contumely, deprave them
behind their backs. It is a great sin to vilify any, be he never so base or
mean a friend: but to defame, and deface those who represent the Lords person,
and who are the authors and preseruers of their lives, must needs be an
horrible impiety, and most inhumane ingratitude; which the Lord commands the
Magistrate to take knowledge of, and to punish, and that in a severe manner,
even with no less then death Leuit 20. 9^
it self, as well as he does other grievous and capital crimes.

Verse 12. There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet are
not washed from their silthinesse.

THe second generation, brood, or race (as it were) proceeding from one age to
another, is of infatuated sinners who are pure in their own eyes, who fantasy
their own hearts and ways to be godly and righteous, and like natural
puritanes with their own testimony confirm themselves in a great opinion of
their own integrity. For always the worst men are best conceited of
themselves, and the more Gods word condemns them, the more their own tongues
and imaginations justify them: For they are blinded by natural ignorance the
devil has blindfolded their minds: and God in his justice (because they
embraced not the love of his truth) has given them ^uer to strong delusions,
to give credence unto, and believe, the lies of their own seduced hearts, and
yet are not washed from their filthiness, they remain in the dung of
corruption and sinfulnes: they are not justified by the remission of their
sins; nor have their consciences sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ;
nor sanctified by the spirit of God, and the pure water of grace; they are not
made clean through the word spoken unto them; they have no says, no sound
repentance, no virtue in their hearts; no reformation of their ways: and
therefore the filthiness both of the flesh and spirit is increased in them,
and not diminished: it grows more loathsome, and not less offensive.

Verse. 13. There is a generation whose eyes are lofty, and their eye lids are
lifted up.

THe third generation is of ambitious and haughty persons, whose eyes are
lofty, looking upward with desire and expectation of great things, and with
contempt of their inferiors, and so declare the pride of their heart by their
very looks; and their eye lids are lifted up, by scornful and disdainful
looks, bewraying the arrogancy of their spirits: for he puts the sign of
pride for pride, because even in their eyes and c^untenance there is a
manifestation of it. See chapter 6. 17.

Verse. 14. There is a generation whose teeth are as swords, and their iaw-bones
as knives to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy from among
men.

THe last generation is oppressors, and tyrants, monstrous creatures, mankind
beasts, or beastly men: they have rushes, or teeth like to boares, or lions,
and swords, and knives, like unto robbers: the subject of whose cruelty is
poor whom they prey upon, and make an utter spoil of, that they should have
no more place in the earth, or being amongst men: like ravenous wolves eating
up all, that they leave not so much as Zeph. 3. 3
the bones behind them: of these the Prophet complains in one of his
Psalms, saying, I lie among men, who are set on fire, whose teeth are as
spears, and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.

Verse. 15. The horseleach has two daughters that cry, Give, give: there are
three things that are never satisfied, yea four that say not it is enough.

Verse. 16. The grave, the barren womb, the earth that is not satisfied with
water, and the fire that says not it is enough.

AGur declares the nature of concupiscence, and the insatiable desire of
greedy minded men, by diverse comparisons: whereof the first is put single by
it self; the other ranked and counted together in one number of four. The
horseleach, so called, a creature well known unto us, which is a worm keeping
in ponds, or puddles, or muddy brooks, has two daughters, two forkes in her
tongue, whereby she first pricketh and pierces the skin, and afterward
sucketh the blood, which by effect are said to cry, give, give, and not by
voice: for she is dumb, and without voice, and perpetually mute: but her
insatiable appetite of sucking blood is the actual cry which she makes: for
she never gives over till she be filled, and then she falls of^; and yet
afterward to it she will again, and be as hungry of it as she was at the
first: which well resembles the doings of oppressors, who are not contented
once to have spoiled those whom they fastened their mouths upon, but comes
again, and again, and never leave until they have drawn out all the blood
of their estate. And let it not seem strange, that in the former part of the
similitude we so interpret daughter: For it is usual with the Hebrews, by a
borrowed speech, to call the effects, affections and properties of things, the
sons and daughters thereof: as the son of death, the son of the morning,
the daughter of the eye, the daughter of the voice, the daughter of the song.
These four things recited and numbered, we shall see in order. The first is
the grave, which has his very name of craving, and will sheol.
never cease hungring after dead corpses, so long as Adams sons and daughters
are subject to mortality. See chap. 27. verse. 20. The second is the barren
womb, that is to say, the woman whose womb is barren, which was wont to be
vnmeasurably desirous of children, both for the comfortable enioyment of them,
with hope of large posterity, which was in great request amongst the people of
those times, and places, and for that sterilitie was very disgraceful, as may
appear by the saying of Rachel to Jacob: Give me children, or else I dye. It
is Genesis 30. 1.
said that the adversary of Hannah Samuels mother vexed her sore, for as much
as she vpbraided her, because the Lord had 1. Sam. 1. 6.
made her barren. And this does Elizabeth the mother of John the Baptist
confess to the praise of God, saying, Thus mercifully has the Lord dealt with
me, to take away my rebuke from among men. The third is, the earth, that cannot
be satisfied with water: It can never have enough at one time, to serve for all
times: though there be store now, there may be need hereafter: though in an
over wet year it be glutted with rain, and made as it were drunken, so that
it be compelled to vomit up the great abundance that it has received, through
too many, too long, too vehement and violent showers; yet if the year
following want supply of moisture, the ground will chap and chawne with
drought, and be as thirsty as if it had had no watering before. It might have
seemed that Noah's flood would have killed the appetite of the ground, by giving
it such a surfeit, that it should have brooked rain the worse for many
generations, and yet no doubt it had need of more, for the good estate of the
plants and creatures, within a short time after. The fourth is, the fire that
says not it is enough: Every one knows the nature thereof, that a spark
will kindle a coal, and that all the fu^ll which is on the hearth, whereof the
flame being too great will set the chimney on fire, and the chimney the roof
of the house, and that the whole building, and then having proceeded so far,
will kindle upon the next house, and raven after the whole street, and if it
may seize thereon, it will make a violent assault upon the next, and still
proceed further and further, to the consumption of the whole city how ample
soever, unless it be with wonderful pains and power resisted.

Verse. 17. The eye that mocketh his father, and despises to obey his mother,
the ravens of the valley shall pick it out and the young eagles shall eat it.

HE describes the direful condition of refractarie and graceless children.
In the former part their contumacie and stubbornes is shown: in the latter
their punishment and evil end is threatened. The eye that mocketh his father,
the person which with a contemptuous eye does vilify his father, either
picking a quarrel at the sight of him in regard of his withered and wrinckled
face, crooked back, or course apparel, or any manner of deformity, which
either is indeed, or to his fantasy seems to be in him, or else disdaining
him with a scorneful look, as being ashamed to yield him any reverence, and
despises to obey h^^ mother, does not only neglect to learn that which she
teaches him, or to perform that which she commands him, but with the
despite of his mind refuses both the ravens of the valley shall pick it
out, and the young eagle shall eat it, the fiercest and most cruel sort of
ravens, and thost eagles which are most busy, and with their beakes and
tallens are better able to tear, shall have him, like the carrion of a dead
beast exposed to them for a prey, his death shall not be peaceable and
honorable, but violent and shameful: and burial he shall have none at all,
but shall either hang upon the gibbet, till he drop down peecemeale, or lie as
a rotten sheep, or hilded horse in a ditch, and so be eaten up of eagles,
ravenous kites, and crows, and other fowls of that nature: and equal it is,
that he which does so unnaturally loathe his kind and pitiful parents, out of
whose bowels he proceeded, should be given for meat to unmerciful
creatures, and be buried in their bowels. And albeit this plague be not
executed upon all such malefactors, yet they are all obnoxious to it, and live
in danger of it: one so punished, does threaten a million, and there is no one
in like manner guilty, but may fear that he shall taste of it, to his pain,
to his shame, and to his destruction.

Verse. 18. There be three things which are too wonderful for me, yea four
which I understand not.

Verse. 19. The way of an Eagle in the air, the way of a Serpent on a rock,
the way of a ship in the midst of the sea, and the way of a man with a maid.

HE goes on by enumeration of diverse things, by proposition of three or four
together, to show the like natures, or effects, or dispositions to aggrauate
certain vices, and afterward to amplify and illustrate certain virtues. The
vice which here he is in hand with is incontinencie and whoredom, which he
proves to be more frequent and common then the world knows, and y^ there be
many foul practices of it, which never come to man's knowledge. There are three
things hid from me, whereof it is impossible for me, or any man, to know the
particulars, yea four which I know not, which I could never apprehend all: for
that the infinite individual acts of them no man could observe, and being once
past, they leave no memorial thereof behind them. The first is, the way of an
Eagle in the air: For she leaves no notes, or paths of her flight: and though
this be common to all other birds, yet he names especially the Eagle, both
because she is the chief of fowls, and flies most high, and swiftly. The
second is, the way of a Serpent upon a rock, who leaves no slime behind her,
as the snaile does where she creeps, neither makes she any print of her body
on the stone over which she glideth, whereas when she creeps on the dust she
may be traced, and her winding in a dew may be seen on the grass. The third
is, the way of a ship in the midst of the sea, which albeit while it is
sailing (especially in a calm) makes some path for a short time, and little
way, yet after it is gone a little distance, the passage thereof cannot be
found: by reason that the waters wherein it fleeteth comes together, and so
there is no appearance that ever it had bee^ there: and the way of a man, who
is inamoured with love, or inflamed with concupiscence, his wily
solicitations, his artificial plots, and cunning devices to win consent, and
get his lust satisfied, with a maid, with a virgin unpolluted before his
attempts, and so remains, if she can withstand his guilefull allurements,
otherwise she is one that would be so taken, and will shamelesly affirm her
self so to be, and others (because her leaudnes is not discovered) do so
esteem of her.

Verse. 20. Such is the way of an adulterous woman, she eats, and wipeth, and
says, I have done no wickedness.

SVch] So close, and unknown: For to that end in way of application, he
alleges those four strange things rehearsed before, by certain similitudes,
demonstrating the privy, secret, subtle, and impudent dealings of the harlot.
She eats, she commits folly, she is like to those y^ eat stolen bread
in dark corners: thus in good terms y^ holy Ghost declares evil matters:
for that he studiously auoideth all obscenitie of speech, and wipeth her mouth,
making a goodly show as if she were honest, does as it were wipe down all the
crummes of filthiness, that no sign of her wantonness should appear: and
conceiving great boldness that her whoredom is concealed for ever, and never to
come to light, she says I have done no wickedness, I am free from all
impuritie, and unchaste behavior.

Verse 21. For three things the earth is disquieted, and for four which it
cannot bear.

IN the premises he conjoined diverse things together which did accord, or
resemble one another in secrecy, and closenes, and in this verse, and the two
next, he ranketh certain sorts of people, and those of the baser sort, some
of them men, some women, which are notoriously apart, being too manifestly
discerned and felt too heavily: for the earth is moved at them, the
inhabitants have just occasion to quake and tremble, and the insensible and
unreasonable things do shake at them: and for four which it cannot bear, so
intolerable they are and burdenous: he uses there a hyperbolicall speech,
arguing the incommodities they bring to the places wherein they dwell, and the
troubles and molestations wherewith they disquiet and vex the folk with whom
they live: and these are they that follow.

Verse 22. For a servant when he reigns, and a fool when he is filled with
meat.

FOr a servant when he raigneth] When unworthy men, and persons unfit for high
callings, are advanced to the same: for they know not how to use authority, but
pervert it both to their own hurt, and oppression of others: a slavish heart
of all others is most ready to be imperious, and none grow so outragiously
insolent, as those that are most abject, and contemptible. See chap. 19. 10.
and a fool, a wicked man, destitute of godly wisdom, when he is filled with
meat, when he has plenty, and abundance of food, apparel, wealth, and
other prosperity. See also the 19. chap. verse the 10.

Verse 23. For an odious woman when she is married, and an handmaid that is
heir to her mistress.

FOr an odious woman] Which is troublesome, and inclining to frowardnes, or any
other way vicious, or ill mannered, for which she is worthily had in
detestation, when she is married, when she is become a wise, when she is become
a dame, or mistress: her husband, her servants, her neighbors, and all that
have to deal with her, shall find and feel what metal she is made of;
naught she was, while she lived a single life, but worse now she has crept
into the bed, and bosom of her husband: her root was naught before, but not
able to send forth buds, or leaves: but now she is planted in rank mould, she
will shoot forth her unseemly branches, and unsavory blossoms: her husband
must be a patient to sustain her lewd conditions, and her agent to effect her
sinful purposes against his people, or against his neighbors, or against his
friends; she will prescribe, and he must perform; her tongue must appoint it,
and his hand effect it: such a one was Joseph's mistress, a treacherous beast
against him, and yet a forcible commander of him, to wreake her malice upon the
best servant that ever he had, because he would not be perfidious with her for
company. Such a one was Iezabel, under whom being married unto Achab, it might
properly be said that the land of Israel was troubled, for the persecutions
which she caused to be raised, the slaughters which she caused to be made, the
Idolatry which she caused to be committed, and all the villainies which she
caused to be wrought: and an handmaid, for one that has bin a servant before,
that is heir to her mistress, married to her master, and so possesses that
preferment, and those commodities which her mistress inioyed before: for
having gotten a better state, her heart will swell, and wax proud, and through
the height of her mind, she will demean her self so insolently, that neither
servants, nor children, nor husband himself can well endure her arrogance: yet
this is not to be understood of every one so promoted, if she be of an humble,
meek, and quiet spirit: but this imputation is only laid upon them which are
of the number of those odious women, before spoken of.

Verse 24. There are four things in the earth which are little, but exceeding
wise.

AFter the four former quaternions, which were brought for the aggrauation of
certain sorts of sins, there follow two others, which he uses for the
illustration of the virtue, and imitation of that which is good even in the
creatures, which are led only by the instinct of nature, without the use of
reason: for their natural properties are herein described, to the end that
thereby we should receive moral instruction; in so much as there is nothing so
mean, but a man for his benefit may learn instruction from it: as Job says,
Ask now the beasts and they shall teach thee, and the fowls of the heaven and
Job. 12. 1.
they tell thee. And these of the first order are set forth by that which is
praise worthy in them, and common to them all, which is done in this verse: and
then by the several commendable properties, and qualities that are found in
every one of them: the commendation that he gives of them all is that they are
small, but yet prudent, having little bodies, but great store of natural
wisdom therein.

Verse 25. The Ants a people not strong, yet prepare their meat in the summer.

ANd among these commendable, and immitable creatures, the Ants be set in the
first place, and are resembled to a people for their multitude, but weak, and
feeble, and very defective in power, and far unable to defend themselves by
encounter, or get their food by hard labor: notwithstanding, that which is
wanting in might, is supplied by forecast, and so their providence serves them
for power. For they prepare their meat in summer, they gather their food which
shall nourish them all the year in the summer season* while corn may be had,
and the season is convenient, apply themselves to lay up against harder times,
which the wise man induces, and brings in as a pattern of good providence,
for taking the time (as we say) while time serves, as they do which in youth
make provision for old age: in plenty for scarcity: in health for sickness: in
a peaceable estate for persecutions, troubles, and molestations, as see chap.
6. 7.

Verse 26. The hill rats a people not mighty, yet make their houses in the
rocks.

THe second place is given to the hill rats, a creature unknown in these parts
of the world, but in great plenty about Judea, and Syria: the writers describe
it to be a little beast in part like to a rat, and in part like to a Bear, it
has neither strength of limbs, nor any other means to defend it self from
dogs, or any other creature that should make a pray of it: but this wit she
has, that she diggeth her holes in the mountains, Psalm. 104. 18.
and stony places, (which our conies cannot do, and therefore it cannot be
meant of them) and therein sheth in time of danger, and therein lays her young
ones safely: teaching this point of wisdom that when our own power fails
to protect us, we seek help elsewhere, and that in place where it may surely
be had for our defense, and security.

Verse 27. The beasts have no King, yet go they forth all by bands.

IN the third place are ranked the locus^s, which are certain flies with long
legs, whereof there were great store in the east countries, which have no King,
no principal, or chief ruler over them, as the Bees are affirmed to have, yet
go they forth all by bands, yet have they such respect to their own safety,
as not to single themselves asunder, which would be dangerous, and bear such
love to concord, which is most comfortable, that they march all in a company as
it were in battle array, and strengthen themselves by flocking in infinite
heaps: whereout the wise man, though he make no application, would have this
moral learned: that needful, and good services are to be performed, though
they be not urged thereto by compulsion, nor enforced by the command of
authority, and that ascotiation, and combination in lawful affairs is very
useful, and of great valditie, for the public good, and also the benefit of
every man's private estate.

Verse 28. The spider takes hold with her hands, and is in the Kings Palaces.

LAst of all comes the spider, who is said to take hold, of the thread, which
she has spunne, with her hands, not that they are such indeed, but because
they are set some on one side, and some on another, as men's hands are, and
because they do the office of hands, that is, apprehend, and lay hold on
things, otherwise in proper speech they are feet: and is in the Kings Palaces,
laboring busily about her web in the most sumptuous rooms, and magnificent
buildings that can be; her curious workmanship in making of her cobwe^* and
her constant industry, with diligent travel in the same, ^s brought in, to
admonish men not to be slothful in their vocations, but industrious: not to be
unskillful slubberers in their trades, or professions, but expert Artificers,
and exact workmen, laboring so to excel therein, that they may do those
things which be commendable, and admirable, though with a better mind then to
seek praise and applause for the same.

Verse 29. There be three things that order well their going; yea four that
are comely in going.

IN the former quaternion Agur proposed the obseruable properties of certain
feeble creatures of little respect, the most of them being but infects, for
men's use and instruction: in this following he presents to our view for a
pattern of comelines, and courage, the example of others that are more
heroical, and renowned, all agreeing in the well ordering of their goings, and
in the seemelinesse of their pace: in the recital whereof his intent is to
incite every man to look well to his carriage, that he walk decently, and as
becomes him in the place which he holds: good men's eyes be fixed upon him,
and bad men's eyes do strictly behold him; he conuerseth constantly in the
presence of Gods Angels, and every step of al his paths are perpetually before
the Lord.

Verse 30. A Lion which is strongest among beasts, and turns not away for any.

Verse 31. A horse which has his loins girt up, an he goat, and a King
against whom there is no rising up.

HE begins with the Lion, who in his passage any whither goes not
timerously, and cowardly in fear: he trembles not nor flies back, although
he see the Elephant, nor any the like beast, but proceeds on forward with a
valiant courage: next he sets out the Horse, especially when he is harnessed
for the battle, or prepared for the race: the metaphor being taken from the
people of the east, and their custom, who when they went readily about any
thing, would trusse up their garments about their loins: the disposition and
valor of this beast is well known unto us, how gallantly he sets himself
to praunce, stamp, rain, or run, according as he is put unto it: and of him
^he Lord gives this testimony to Job: Have thou given the horse strength, or
covered his neck with Job. 39. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28.
neighing? have thou made him afraid as the grass hopper? his strong neighing
is fearful. He diggeth in the valley, and rejoices in his strength he goes
forth to meet the harnessed man: he mocketh at fea^e, and is not afraid, and
turns not back from the sword: the q^^uer ra^leth at him, the glittering
spear, and the shield. He swalloweth the ground for fiercenes and rage, and
believes not that it is the trumpet; he says among the trumpetters, ha, ha;
he smells the battle a far off, and the noise of the Captains, and the
shouting.

In the third place he mentions the he goat, who being the ringleader of
the flock, not only walks before the same with a certain statelines, but
with cheerefulnes in the sight of the rest, climeth up the craggie rocks and
mountains.

He concludes with the King, not putting him last as the meanest, but
shutting up all with him as the worthiest, in comparison of whom (if he be a
man worthy of his place) the others are but a shadow: he is a Lord, and
commander over them all. For if man in respect of his kind was made to have
dominion over all the beasts, and though he had forfeited the same, it was
restored to him again through Christ; how much more has the King this
prerogative, who is the Prince over men? and against him (it is said) there is
no rising up: not but that there be many mutinies and rebellions, but few of
them take place, God being in a special manner the Kings protector: For that
he is his Deputy and Liutenant, and whom if he did not maintain and support,
humane society would be dissolved; and therefore besides his own watchful
eye, and provident hand, he has also armed him with majesty and authority:
he has put the sword into his hand, for defense of himself, and vengeance on
his enemies. Such a one then ought a Prince to be, mighty, valiant, and full
of magnanimity, against whom none should dare to stand up, or be audacious to
resist: and these instances are induced for instruction to them that have
authority committed to the^, that they might learn how well it beseems them
to show themselves bold, and fearelesse in their places. So the Lord does
animate and hearten Joshua, saying, Be strong, and of good courage: for unto
this Josh. 1. 6. 7.
people shall thou divide for an inheritance, the land which I swear to their
fathers to give them. Only be strong, and very courageous, that thou may
observe to do, according to all the law which Moses my servant commanded thee:
turn not from neither to the right hand, nor to the left.

Verse. 32. If thou have done foolishly in lifting up thy self: or if thou have
thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth.

IN the premises by examples he taught men of place to be valerous, and
courageously to maintain the honor of their places, and in this verse with
that which follows, he admonishes all men not to abuse his instruction to
haughtines, and turbulencie, but to frame themselves to modesty, and
peaceablenes; which he does by giving men direction, how they should dispose
of themselves thereto, and by producing a reason, as a motive to persuade them
to labor therein: If thou have done foolishly, if thou have outwardly sinned
through folly, in lifting up thy self, in proud speeches, and arrogant
behavior: For ambition, vain glory, and all the effects of a conceited mind
are nothing else but mere foolishnes: as Habakkuk says, He that lifts up
himself* his mind is not upright within him. Indeed the proud man is as he
that transgresses Hab. 2. 4. 5.
by wine. Or if thou have thought eu(...) ^f thou have given entertainment to
unloving surmises, especially if thou have inwardly nourished any uncharitable
(...) of doing evil, lay thy hand upon thy mouth, be silent, (...) ^ff, and
give over. For the first step to reformation is to cease from ma^^taining of
sin: For the Lord by Ezechiel does promise it as a (...) testimony of
unfeigned repentance, ^aying, that th^^ (...) (...) member, (...) ^6 6^.
and be ashamed, and never open thy mo(...) And therefore Job also by this
argument d(...) of his humiliation, saying, Behold I am vile: (...)swear ^
thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Onc(...) (...)ken, but I will answer
no more; yea twice, but I will proce(...) further. And so the wise man here
does prescribe it as a (...) and note of repentance, which he would have those
th(...) through pride to rise again unto: because that it always (...)death
mercy, and salueth up the wounds that sin makes.

Verse. 33. Surely as the churning of milk brings forth butter, and the
wringing of the nose brings forth blood* so the forcing of anger brings
forth strife.

THe reason whereby he dehorteth men from such courses as bewray a proud heart
in our selves, and base opinion of our brethren, is from the evil event which
will follow upon it, the stirs, strife, and troubles, which are like to be
kindled thereby, and is amplified by two familiar similitudes touching things
obuious to all sorts: the meanest girl in a country knows that much beating
does sever the thinner milk from the thicker cream, and so causes butter to
arise: and very children do understand, and feel that the hard and vehement
rubbing of the nostrils makes blood to fall down, and issue out of them: So
he that forces wrath, stirs other men to anger by his provoking speeches,
brings forth strife, is the cause of much dissension: sometimes of brawling,
sometimes of fighting, sometimes of suites, sometimes of war: who can recount
or think of the particular mischiefs that may ensue thereupon? By this Sihon
king of the Amorites Numb. 21. 23. 24.
brought himself to ruin, and his kingdom to be conquered: by this Amaziah
king of Judah brought a foil with much misery upon himself, and the people,
because he compelled Ioash the king of Israel perforce to meet him in the
field: and 2. Chron. 15. 27. 28.
by this Asahel the brother of Ioab brought himself unto an untimely death, by
provoking Abner with over much wilfulnes and vehemency.

CHAPTER. XXXI.
Verse. 1. The words of King Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother taught him.

THis Chapter consists of two parts: the one, the title: the other, the
discourse it self. In this title is declared first in general the nature or
form of the treatise ensuing, a prophecy, an holy and excellent doctrine,
which had a better author then Lemuels mother, or Lemuel himself, the holy
Ghost, who was pleased to use only their tongue and pen, for the publication of
it to the Church: and secondly, ^he persons which are interested therein, which
are Lemuel, and his mother: The words of King Lemuel, which he wrought, having
before received them as instructions from his mother. This Lemuel no doubt was
Solomon, both for that he was called a King, of which name besides him there
was none other in Israel, or Judah: and for that the word has so near
affinity with his name, as it is in Hebrew, the first letter being taken away
from the beginning, and the word El, which signifies God, being added to the
end; which alteration being made, Lemuel signifies him that appertains to
God. Now having found who Lemuel was, there will be no difficulty to
understand who his mother was: for the Scripture plainly affirms her to be
Ba^hsheba the wife of David, who had formerly bin the yoke fellow of Vrijah the
Hittite, who notwithstanding she had failed of love to him, and purity in her
self, by yielding unto the unlawful solicitations of David; yet upon due
repentance is employed by God in this great service, to be (as it were) the
mouth of his spirit, for the uttering of his words, which should perpetually be
recorded for the information of his people through all posterities.

Verse. 2. What my son! and what the son of my womb! and what the son of
my vows!

BEfore she delivers her precepts, or doctrines, wherewith she is about to
instruct him, she insinuates her self into him to possess his heart, and
intentiuenes of mind to that which she shall speak unto him, partly by the
manner of her speech, and partly by the arguments which she produces. Touching
the manner, she purposely intimates her motherly affection to him, and
vehement desire of his good by an abrupt manner of speaking, and such as is
more full of affection then of sense expressly uttered: What my son! etc. The
arguments whereby she allureth his mind, to make it beneuolent and pliable to
her, are two, and both of them ^eerely concerning himself: the first, that he
is her son, yea the son of her womb, her natural son, and he that is
most tender and dear unto her: and therefore he may well be persuaded of her
good meaning toward him* as one whom she has bred in her own bowels, and
brought forth into the world, and is so nearly united to her by so strong a
band of nature, and therefore ought also for his part respectively to reverence
her, and heedfully to regard her grave and weighty sayings. The second, that
he is the son of her vows, for whose being, life and welfare, she has made
prayers, and promises unto God, and offered sacrifices with praises: and
therefore he is also tied in conscience, for piety and religion, to listen
unto, and obey her, especially being so kind a mother, and prescribing such
needful duties, who has made and performed such solemn vows in his behalf.

Verse. 3. Give not thy strength to women, nor thy ways to that which
destroys Kings.

THe lessons and instructions which Bathsheba gives unto Solomon, are some
informing him how to carry himself in the government of the Commonwealth,
unto the tenth verse: and others directing him concerning the state of a
private family in that, and the rest following. For the former, she
admonishes him of certain vices which he is especially to shun, as
incontinencie, and intemperancie, and commends unto him such duties as he is
to perform, as justice, and mercy. Give not thy strength to women, spend not
thy strength upon strange women, or harlots: by strength she understands not
only his substance, but also the powers and good estate of the body, and
mind. For the custom of whoredom does consume a man's state how wealthy
soever: it weakneth his body, though it be of a strong constitution: it
dulleth the wits, and takes away the vigor thereof, though before they were
very prompt and pregnant. See chap. 5. 9. 10. Not to that, to the haunting of
that vice; or to the company of those persons, whorish women, which destroy
Kings, which cause the ruin both of kingdoms and Princes: For they draw down
Gods curse, which the mightiest have no more power to resist then the weakest,
and which God executes without all respect of persons. Job was wealthy: Job
was of great authority: Job was a man of much wisdom: and Jobs credit and
estimation was very great, and yet he durst not take liberty to yield to the
lusts of his flesh, in the practice of this sin: for (says he) this is a
fire that would devour all my increase. Job. 31. 12.


Verse. 4. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine,
nor for Princes strong drink.

TO dissuade her son from tippling and voluptuousnes, she shows how
unworthy a thing it is, and a fault altogether misbeseeming his place and
dignity. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, to drink wine, nor Princes strong
drink: The restraint of intemperate drinking is not laid upon thee alone, but
belongs to all of thy place and condition: no King, no Prince, has allowance
to pass the rules of sobriety, either in taking too much, or in drinking of
that which is too hot, and apt to inflame; and therefore neither have thou
wrong in being admonished to be sparing, neither have thou immunitie to
transgress this precept more then others, since it is common to all of thy
rank: yet is not wine, or strong drink, unlawful for Kings or Princes to
use, and refresh themselves with, only excess, and the inordinate taking
thereof is prohibited.

Verse 5. Lest they drink, and forget the law, and pervert the judgment of
the afflicted.

SHe backeth her caveat, and confirms her reason, by the in commodity and
mischief that will ensue, when Magistrates and governors exceed the bounds
of moderation, and give themselves to over much drinking, because they being
overcome of wine do fail of duty, and neglect justice, to the damage and
detriment of a great multitude. Lest they drink over much, and forget the law,
not only the commandments and ordinances of God, but also the certain and
appointed order of law and equity, and pervert, change, and turn vpside
down, the judgment, the cause, and sentence of the afflicted, of such as
being otherwise poor, are oppressed also with wrongs and injuries, which will
be much increased by the intemperate Magistrate, who in stead of ministering
help and succor unto them, does make their case more heavy, by passing a
wrongful sentence against them: and she makes special mention of these rather
then of the rich; because they are more subject to violence and oppression; and
usually have their causes less regarded. The point that the highest would have
notified by this saying, is, that it is dangerous for the people when the
rulers be voluptuous: they are shepherds, and by their disabilitie the flock
is damnified: they are coach-men, or rather Pilots, which have many lives
committed to their care and custody: and therefore says Ecclesiastes: Woe to
thee O land when thy King is a child, and thy Eccle. 10. 16. 17
Princes eat in the morning. Blessed art thou O land when thy King is the
son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due season for strength, and not for
drunkenness.

Verse. 6. Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine to
them that be of heavy hearts.

SHe amplifieth her admonition by the contrary, and shows to whom wine and
strong drink do chiefly appertain, to them that are ready to perish,
through manifold afflictions, either inward or outward, lying upon them, and to
them that be of heavy hearts, whose spirits are oppressed with sorrows and
heaviness, or with griefs and terrors.

Verse. 7. Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no
more.

THe cause wherefore they should enjoy the more free use of wine and strong
drink, she alle^geth, that they may forget their poverty, the want that they
live in or any other evils or calamities that are burden some unto them: For
under one kind she comprehends all, and remember their misery no more,
being as long as may be by this means dispatched of their cares, and
troublesome cogitations. It is as if she should have said, let him that is
ready to sink under the weight of troubles and terrors, refresh his heart with
a comfortable drawght of wine, or strong drink, that the remembrance of his
woe and misery, which pierces his heart, may be somewhat abated, and removed.
It is far from the intent of the spirit of God to allow excess, or carowsing
in any, neither does the doctrine confirm, or warrant either giving wine or
strong drink to malefactors drawn to execution, o^ sick persons laboring on
their death* bed for life, at which time they ought to be most sober, and
watchful. Only these instructions tend to declare that some, namely those
that are in extreme adversity, cannot only bear a large quantity of strong
drink without hurt, but receive much good thereby; which being taken in the
same measure by some in prosperity, or authority, would utterly overthrow them,
or make them unfit to follow their calling.

Verse 8. Open thy mou^h for the dumb, in the cause of all such as are
appointed to destruction.

OPen thy mouth] Speak in the behalf of the oppressed, who because they
cannot, or dare not plead for themselves, may well be called dumb, and yet
have an equal, just, and righteous cause: for those that speak least are many
times more innocent then those that are full of words: for some want skill, and
are not able to speak in their own defense: some put up great wrongs, and
with silence pass by the injuries that are offered unto them: some be absent,
and hear not the imputations that are laid upon them: some be borne down with
violence, and not permitted to speak for themselves, as was Joseph's case, who
was sore punished before his apology could be heard: so Mordecay, and all the
Jews were irrecouerably destinated to death, and yet never had bin called to
the bar to make their answer, in the cause of all such as are appointed to
destruction, being unjustly pursued, are vnrighteouslie condemned, and ready to
be executed: for innocent men are many times in as great peril of their life,
or estate, as the most faulty malefactors: where almost can a worse man be
found, then Naboth was charged to be? or what greater crime does bring men to
their end, then that whereof the imputation occasioned his death? he suffered
as a professed traitor against his prince, and as an execrable blasphemer of
God himself. What creature was ever so harmless, and righteous, as Jesus
Christ? and yet who ever did bear a greater burden of accusations, and that
with clamours, and outcries? And this proceeds partly from the malice of
their enemies: and partly from the providence of God, that his power may be
seen in their deliverance, or that their patience may be for the
encouragement, and example of others: and that their reward may be greater in
heaven.

Verse 9. Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of the poor
and needy.

OPen thy mouth] Take their person upon thy self, make their cause thine own,
though their adversary through force, lies, or fallaces do set them down that
they cannot reply, yet thou knowing what is to be said for them, speak it, and
maintain their cause: for they that have means, and ability to help their
brethren, ought to supply their wants which cannot deal for themselves.
Amongst the great comforts of Job, this was one, that he had bin, eyes to the
blind, and feet to Job 29 15. 16.
the lame, and had bin a father to the poor, and searched out the cause which
he knew not: and for this service Abedmelech speaking to the King of Judah for
Jeremiah imprisoned: and Easter speaking to the King of Persia for her
distressed people, shall be renowned to the worlds end: and Phara^ his butler
should have had much more praise, if he had made mention of Joseph, and his
hard entreaty, unto his master sooner.

Verse 10. Who can find a virtuous woman: for her price is far above carbuncles.

SHe directs Solomon to provide well for the good estate of his family, by
making choice of a faithful, gracious, and well qualified wise: neither does
she in plain and express terms advise him to match with such a one, but by
setting forth of her large praise, and amplifying her manifold fruits, she does
allure him to use his best care and diligence to seek out, and provide
himself of such a one: and hence to the end of the Chapter, every verse
begins with an Hebrew letter, according to the order of the alphabet, and
accord just with the number of them; the excellency, and rarenes of a good
wife, with her singular graces he describes in this verse, and all the rest to
the 28. and then the reward, and encouragement which is due unto her, to the
end of the Chapter. The commendation which she gives of her in the first
place, is general, and illustrated by comparison, as appears in this present
verse: and afterward it is more special, all in regard of her particular
virtues in many sentences following: who can find, by any thing that he
himself can do, a virtuous woman, a good and holy woman: he proposes it in
manner of question, both because good wives are hard to be found for the
scarcity of them: there are many rich, witty, personable, and beautiful; but
few adorned with piety, and goodness: few are godly, and gracious, as also
because such women are Gods rare and singular gifts, her price is far above
carbuncles, she is not only rare, and hard to come by, like the precious
stones, but being once obtained, a man cannot set too great a price or value of
her: for no treasure can be comparable to a good wife. See Chap. 12. 4.

Verse 11. The heart of her husband does safely trust in her, so that he shall
have no need of spoil.

Having thus spoken of her praise in general terms, he descends to a more
particular relation of her laudable virtues, and qualities, and those, though
many, may yet be reduced into three heads: the first is her huswifery, and
prudent care for her self, the good estate of her husband, and welfare of her
family, and this is to be seen almost in every verse: the second, her mercy,
and liberality to the poor, as appears by the twentieth verse: the third,
her piety, godliness, and religion, in the five and twenty, and six and twenty
verses, the heart of her husband does safely trust in her, whether he be
absent, or present, he doubts not either of her chastity, of her secrecy,
or of his care for the family, and commits to her the disposing of his
affairs that are within door: for the more religious any wife is, the less
occasion she gives to her husband to suspect her: his goods, stuff, or
whatsoever he has in his house he may know shall be safely looked unto without
filching, or purloyning: he may well know that she will have an eye to the
servants to keep them from sin and idleness: she will order the children, and
not suffer them through want of education to grow rude, and evil mannered: her
eye will be to the provision of the house, that it be well dressed, and
seasonably ministered unto her people: he may boldly inuit a friend, and give
welcome unto him at any time, she will not lowre upon him, or be to seek of
provision, or be careless to grace his house with such things as are needful
and decent: so that he shall have no need of spoil, he shall not want any
necessaries, or through poverty be compelled to relieve himself with wrong,
and hurt to others: either through violence or deceit, through fraud or
impression. For she will by Gods blessing upon her labors, providence, and
good government, so far as stand with the safety of his soul, and make for
the welfare of himself, and his household, enrich him with variety, plenty, and
choice of all his commodities, like to martial men who having subdued the
countries of his enemies, and taken their cities by assault do ransacke the
same, and seize upon their treasures, and best goods, at their pleasures, and
bring home the same to their own houses. The same similitude was used, but in
worse part, in the first Chapter by these perilous seducers: we shall sinde
all precious riches, and fill our houses full of spoil. What good baytes are
gotten in war, we may conceive by the inestimable riches which David had
gathered together, and brought to Jerusalem, toward the building of the temple,
and the inualuable wealth, which Nebucadnezzar surprised, and carried from
Jerusalem at the destruction of the temple, with the city.

Verse 12. She will do him good, and not evil all the days of his life.

SHe will do him good] By careful performance of the duties of her place, and
not evil, either by bringing hurt unto his estate, or grief to his heart, or
dishonor to his name: for commodity by a wife one way, yields no warrant to
wrong her husband another: Michol though she had bin a means for preservation
of David's life, was yet punished afterward for despising of him: Jobs wife had
done good in bringing him children, yet not excused for disquieting his heart,
and moving him to distemper, and impatience, all the days of her life, so long
as they two shall live together; as if he should have said, This virtuous woman
will be constant in love to her husband, in youth, in age, in prosperity, in
adversity, in sickness, in health, she does what she provides such food as may
nourish him: she stirs him up to the service of God: she saves his goods as
much as is possible: she lowreth not on him with her countenance: she crosses
him not in her words: she will please or profit him, about she goes with all
speed: if she perceive any thing that will offend, or hurt him, that she
auoydeth, and shunneth with all care.

Verse 13. She seeks wool, and flax, and works willingly with her hands.

IN the last verse he commends her for a general effect of her profitable
demeanure to her husband, and amplified the same by the contrary negatiuely,
and by the constancy, and continuance thereof. Now he begins to reckon up
certain particular actions pertinent to her condition, and fit for her
employment, she seeks, if she have not of her own, she hearkeneth out where
it is to be had, and accordingly provides not the things that are most fine,
but most necessary: but these are fit for her sex, and profitable for her
house, inasmuch as wool, and flax being dressed, and perfected, serve to make
couerings, and cloathings, for sheets also and naprie, and innumerable other
uses, and labors cheerfully with her hands, she her self lays her own
hands to work, as well as others, and takes great delight, and pleasure
therein, to the end that by her example she might draw them on: and
notwithstanding her estate and place be great, yet she daineth to apply her
self to those things which seem mean for her degree, as spinning, and
carding, and other petty matters, which nice coy dames would not only count
trifles, but too too base for them to stoop unto.

Verse 14. She is like the merchants ships, she brings her food from a far.

AS in the former verse, her care was declared in providing matter of
employment for her self, and her people, that she would find some what to
work upon: so in this her industry, for food and provision, is commended, that
as she would neither have her self, nor those that be about her to want
work, or be remiss in it: so she orders the matter, that there be no want
of victuals or other necessaries whereby life is preserved, and without
competencie whereof no man can be able to labor, or do any service with
cheerefulnes: and in this respect she is compared to the merchants ships, who
carrying forth some one commodity into foreign countries, return thence,
bringing home sundry others for it: for all countries are not enriched after
one manner: some have great store of corn: others abound with vines, and wine:
some have plenty of fruits: others are stored with mines, and metals: some
breed abundance of sheep, wool, and cattle. In like manner that which she
has to spare at home, she felleth to her neighbors which want the same: that
which is wanting unto her, she buyeth of them that are able, and willing to
utter it for money, and wares, according as they can agree: but have it she
will upon good conditions, and compass it by such manner of traffic as shall
be commodious to both sides.

Verse 15. She rises while it is yet night, and gives meat to her household,
and a task to her maidens.

THe premises show, that what was lacking of her own she would get supply of
it from another place: she would seek for wool and flax, that she might have
whereabout to employ her people; meat and food she would be sure to provide,
that penury should not pinch her family. Now being stored with both sorts, this
text shows how she does dispense them, she takes great care that her
household have the same ministered to them in due season; and therefore she
rises from her sleep, and out of her bed, while it is yet night, very early
in the morning, and before day, especially in the winter season, and gives
meat and drink, that which is wholesome and good, and as much as is needful,
and competent to her household, to her people of all sorts, and degrees, to her
children, to her servants, to her men, to her maids, to the boys, and to the
girls, to every age, to every sex, and to every order: and the task of work
and labor to her maidens, who after a more special manner are at her command,
and appointment for their service and business, then the men are: so that she
provides both meat, and work for them: because meat without work breeds
idleness, and other mischiefs, and work without meat cannot be performed.

Verse 16. She considers a field and buyeth it: and with the fruit of her
hands she planteth a vineyard.

HEre Bathsheba relates ye success of the good wifes providence, and pains
taking, her substance, and her husbands in and by her hands, and so well
increased as that she is able to make a purchase without greedines, or coveting
after that which is other men's: without niggardlines, and pinching of her
self: without wrong to her family: without neglect of righteousness,
beneficence, and mercy: without injury unto, or circumuention of the seller;
whom necessity compels, or good considerations induce to depart with his
land: she considers a field, offered to be sold, whether it lie fit for her:
whether she be able to pay for it: whether it be worth her money: whether the
title of it be sound, and good: whether she shall not hurt the seller, or any
other man in dealing for it; and gets it, accepts of the bargain, and
concludes to go through with it, has the assurance passed to her self, or
her husband, makes payment for it: with the fruit of her hands, with the gain
of her labor, travel, care, and diligence: for a laborious hand is compared
to a fruitful tree, and both the good which thereby she does, and the profit
which thereby she gets, unto fruit, she planteth a vineyard, in the ground,
or field, which she has bought, or otherwise imployeth it to the best
commodity according to the nature of the soil, as in grasing, tillage,
gardening, or the like: so circumspect and considerat she is in making the
purchase, and so provident and thrifty to convert it to the best use.

Verse 17. She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengthens her arms.

AS we have heard what she does, and gets: so are we informed hereafter what
manner she works, and follows her business, she girdeth her loins with
strength: for the understanding whereof we must know, that anciently it has
bin, and still is the manner of the people in those countries, to be clothed
with long garments, which are no small impediment to their gate, and travels,
and for this cause when they would go apace, and do any thing with diligence,
or fight with their enemies, they did trusse up, and gird their garments about
their loins: and because great strength (as we know) is in the arms,
therefore she makes special mention of them, which is nothing else, but
strongly, and with courage to set their hands to the work: so that it is as
much as if Bathsheba should have said, This virtuous woman whom I commend,
deals not in her vocation remissely, and by the halues but addresseth her
self with remoueall of every impediment to the serious performance of her
duty, she prepares her self to her affairs as if she were to run a race,
or wrestle with a champion, she flies about her work, and sets on it with
a settled resolution: her garments hung not loose about her, but she tucketh
them up that she may be the more nimble: neither does a little pains weary her
out, she gives not place to any discouragements, but animateth her self, and
leaves not off until she have gone through with her enterprises.

Verse 18. She perceives that her merchandise is good: her candle goes not
out by night.

BAthsheba proceeds to make an narration of the thriftie wifes proceeding,
constant going forward in her good course of diligence, and sedulitie; and
shows first by what means she is incited to it, and afterward declares unto
what a degree of paines-taking she has attained: for the former, she
perceives by experience, as comfortable to her heart, as delightful food is
unto her taste, that her merchandise is good: that her prudent government, and
the wise disposing of her matters turn to as good profit for the benefit, and
increase of her husbands, and her own estate, as if she did exercise any
commodious traffic, or merchandise: for the latter, her candle goes not out
by night, because she speedeth so well in her business, and her work finds
so good success, she will tarry at it, as long as she may, and leave off no
sooner then needs she must, and therefore uses her self to vigilance, and
watchfulnes, sitting up late, as being loath to lose any time, respecting her
calling, more then her ease: and yet she does not oppress her body by
abridging her self of needful rest: for it is a Synechdoche, the whole night
being put for a part.

Verse 19. She lays her hands on the spindle, and her hands handle the
distaffe.

AS she sits up long in the night, so testimony is given of her how she
bestows her time before she goes to bed, not in idle discourses, not in
gaming, or vain sports, not in banqueting, or preparing of ^uncates, not in
vain fruitless exercises: but she lays her hands on the spindle, and her
hands take hold of the distaffe, she is not grieved to apply or occupy her
self about those things, which might seem vile, and contemptible: she
thinks not her self dishonored, neither her hands blemished, or wearied
with spinning, or carding, or other such like huswifely exercises.

Verse 20. She stretches out her hands to the poor, yea she stretches out
her hands to the needy.

HItherto we had a description of her getting, and her great iudustry
therefore: now she is commended for her using of it, that many are the better
for that which she possesses, and in the first place the poor are mentioned,
she stretches out her hands to the poor, albeit she be very intentive at her
work, and willing to do as much good as she can to her husband, yet she is
not led with covetousness, nor desire of decking her self: neither is all her
care to provide for her own (...)lly, but also she has pity and compassion on
the poor, and miserable, not with words only, but really, and in deed: neither
is liberality wrested from her by impudent importunity, but she voluntarily
reaches our her hand unto them, and that not once, but often, as the
repetition of the words do intimate.

Verse 21. She is not afraid of snow: for all her house are clothed with
double garments.

AS the care of her family does not make her careless of the poor: so neither
does her liberality to the poor, deprive the family of ought y^ is needful
for the^: for she shows her mercy without distrust, and without thinking
that she or hers in the hard time shall be grieved or pinched with need; she
has taken so good order time enough for the good estate of her own people,
that that which is bestowed upon the necdie, shall not be detracted from their
allowance: the hungry shall not be relieved with their food: the naked shall
not be clothed with their apparel: for mercy is never contrary unto
righteousness, neither is that which was well, and in due manner given unto
the one, prejudicial and hurtful unto the other: she is not then afraid of
snow for her family, she dreadeth not hard weather, or sharp seasons: for all
her family is clothed with double garments, she provides before hand shift of
warm and good clothes for children, and servants, and all under her roof,
and at her finding, that they may be armed against the extreme cold of winter.

Verse 22. She makes her couerings of tapestrie: her clothing is silk and
purple.

AS the poor fare the better for her thiftines, and the people of her house
go the better clad thereby: now in the third place is showed that her self
also enjoys the benefit thereof: she furnishes her self with ornaments fit
for her degree; of the w^ll and flax she got at the beginning she works, and
prepares store of comely couerings for board and bed, with hangings for her
chambers, and garments for her own body: for God disalloweth not in women
decent apparel, nor rich attire, so that they keep themselves within compass
of modesty, and exalt not themselves above their callings, and give not place
to ostentation, or an high mind, and play the good huswiues to get, or save,
and be helpers to support their husbands estate.

Verse. 23. Her husband is known in the gate, when he sits among the elders
of the land.

HEr beneficence, by means of her thrift and frugalitie, is extended to diverse
sorts, as to the poor, to her domestical people, to her own self, and so
wisely also are matters ordered, that her husband is nothing the less able to
set forth himself in due manner according to his dignity: but is of
principal note amongst many for his robes, and other rich ornaments: he is
known in the gates, he is noted, spoken of, and reverenced in the place of
judgment, where he fitteth on the bench with other rulers of the country.

Verse. 24. She makes fine linen, and sells it, and delivers girdles to
the Merchants.

BAthsheba reports that the good huswife contenteth not her self only with
preparing of garments for the use of her servants, for her own use, and for
her husbands use: but that she makes comely ornaments to sell, to the end she
may enrich her estate. The Hebrew word translated sheets, does not only
signify any such fine linen as lies on the bed, but any linen vesture that
great personages were wont to wear: and delivers girdles, under one
compre^ending many, unto the Merchants, who trade in diverse cities, or
countries, buying that in one place, which they intend to sell in another: and
in selling unto him, it appears that her dealing loves light, she purloyneth
not, nor makes away her husbands goods in hudder mudder. It was said before in
the 14. verse that she was like the ships of merchants, not to those of Pirates,
or Rouers, she deals in her own huswiferie, and in things of her own
making, not making away her husbands necessary commodities, or things of his
getting: neither does she make money of that which cannot be spared, whereby
she should leave her house unprovided: neither passes she away ought against
her husbands will, or for any other end, then for his benefit.

Verse. 25. Strength and honor are her clothing, and she shall rejoice in time
to come.

SHe has spoken of the corporal vestu^e and clothing, wherewith the virtuous
woman has ^^^ked her self, and her husband, and covered all the rest of her
family: and now to show that she sets not her affection upon such
ornaments, as do foolish, vain and curious women, which desire to be gay in
the eyes of the world: it is said that she has another garment far more
excellent, which is strength, the force and efficacy of Gods spirit, whereby
she is confirmed in believing in patience, and in weldoing: and the other is
honor, which is the fruit of the same, the estimation which she has with God
and his people, and the evidence of her innocence and goodness in the hearts
of the wicked. This her spiritual attire is of all others the most sumptuous
and precious: this makes men and women gorgeous in the estimation of God and
his Angels: this is a durable suite, which the longer it is worn, the brighter
it will shine, and the better it will be: this can no base person ever put on,
all that are clad with it are honorable, and she shall rejoice in the time to
come: the Hebrew word signifies she laugheth at it, she is secure of her
future estate, and out of dread of all accidents and occurrents, that at any
time may befall her: she is not troubled with the fears of losses, and
crosses, of changes and alterations: she is not troubled at the remembrance of
sickness, or childbearing, or of the day of judgment: yea on the contrary
side, she rejoices in the expectation of her end, of the life to come, and of
that blessed reward of happiness which remains for all the faithful.

Verse 26. She opens her mouth with wisdom, and the law of grace is under
her lips.

IN the former verse she was praised for the graces of her heart, and here for
the wise, fruitful, and gracious speeches of her lips: she opens her mouth
with wisdom, she talks not rashly, indiscreetly, or unseasonably of
matters; but prudently, and soberly, and the law of grace is in her lips, she
speaks not of toys, or of trifles, but of faith, of repentance, of the fear
of God, and of such other duties and points of religion, and she labors as
much as she can to provoke unto liberality, mercy, and weldoing: the stream
and current of her conferences tend to this, that she may make men more godly,
more righteous, and merciful: that God may have his honor and service, that
poor people may receive mercy and kindness, and the souls of as many as she
can procure may be confirmed in the hope of salvation.

Verse. 27. She looks well to the ways of her family, and eats not the
bread of idleness.

SHe looks well to the ways of her household] As her mouth is seasoned with
grace, so are her eyes with intentive watchfulnes: she is resembled to one who
standing on his watch moves his eyes hither and thither, to see who is
coming, and who is going: For it much concerns governors heedfully to
respect the behavior of their people: by this they shall know how to direct,
whom to rebuke, correct, encourage, reward, retain, or cast off: by this much
sin against God is prevented, or reformed: hereby a governor shall keep his
people from that hurt and danger, whereinto otherwise they will be obnoxious:
by this they shall preserve their families from that pollution whereby it is
like to be defiled, and their states from such losses and waste, as through
their carelesnes they may sustain, and eats not the bread of idleness* she is
not slothful, spending her time idly, and looking to nothing, but sets
her own hand to work, and looks to all that be about her, that they shall
perform their duties: thus she eats not the bread of idleness, for which she
never took pains, but the food of labor and travel, wherein Gods children
enjoy his blessing to their happiness. Psalm. 128. 2.


Verse. 28. Her children rise up and call her blessed, and her husband praises
her, saying,

Verse 29. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou surmountest them all.

NOw are we come unto the reward which is due unto this good woman, for her
virtuous behavior and graces, and that is, praise, and commendation, which is
yielded unto her principally by those which are nearest about her, as husband,
and children, who are best acquainted with her ways, and tasted most of the
fruits thereof: for it is the best honor to approve ones self to them which
are most privy to all their courses: others speak at random, and by guess,
but these by experience, and upon knowledge: provided that it be not in fear,
or flattery, from which the holy Ghost freeth the testimony given of this
good matron: her children, sons and daughters, growing in age, wisdom, and
discretion, and having a true knowledge of the care that she had of them, and
feeling the good which she had done for them in their virtuous education, rise
up, yield reverence, and do obeisance to her in dutiful manner: For so much
that gesture does many times import, as when it is said, Thou shall rise up
before the hoarie head, and honor the face of the old man, and fear thy
Leuit. 19. 32.
God. And call her blessed, do not only make prayers, and offer thanks to
God for her, but speak of her wise sayings, and worthy facts, and the whole
course of her Christian conversation, and conclude that God has made her a
most happy and fortunate woman: her husband also praises her, speaks of her
in way of commendation, and to her also in good meaning and without
dissimulation, many daughters have done virtuously, but thou surmountest them
all; testifying that she is the best that ever he knew: as if he should have
said, Be it spoken without dispraise of others, you do so well satisfy me, as
that I know not where the like is to be found: many daughters* not maids
only, but women, and married wives, have done virtuously, toward their
husbands, household, children, neighbors, the poor and needy, and
themselves, and that in many great and gracious respects: by this means she
has her due without wrong to others, (for he does not deprave others to boast
her, nor gathers the arguments of her praise from the vices of her
neighbors, but from their virtues and commendable qualities): but thou
surmountest them all, in fidelity, in wisdom, in good huswiferie, in mercy,
and in piety: For every one ought to be best pleased with the good ways of
his own yoke fellow: the nature of love will induce one to it, and equity
also: because the wife finds most benefit by the graces and good dealing of
her husband: and so does the husband by the good qualities and actions of his
wife: and hereby the one of them shall give great encouragement to the other.
Whereas on the contrary side, when all things are ill taken, and nothing is
pleasing that the one says and does to the other, it kills all mutual good
affections one toward another, and utterly extinguisheth all cheerefulnes in
them.

Verse. 30. Favor is deceitful, and beauty vain: but a woman that fears
the Lord shall be praised.

THese words are a confirmation of the premises by a comparison, wherein a
godly woman is preferred before a beautiful, and piety before favor, or any
other external graceings: For all outward specious qualities, and excellency
whatsoever, are comprehended under beauty and favor. Now whose words these
are it is uncertain, whether the husbands, or Bathshebaes, or Salomons; but
that they are the words of the holy Ghost it is most certain. Favor is
deceitful, comelines of personage, or any outward grace, is a shadow which has
no substance, and beauty vain, a good color, or a good complexion, is but a
fading flower that will quickly be withered, and decay: but a woman that
fears the Lord, which is godly and religious, shall be praised, she (by Gods
blessing) shall obtain true glory: For no honor is sound but that which
grows from grace; that only has the promise, the Lord saying, them that
honor me will I honor. And all earthly 1. Sam. 2. 30.
things are perishable, or guilefull; as parentage, wealth, strength, etc. a
man may have them, and yet be very base and contemptible: and what shall we
say of goodly stature, and fair faces? may they not have many vile vices
accompanying them? For diverse of good making, and well favored countenances,
have deformed manners, and ill favored conditions: as Absaloms Adonijah, and
sundry filthy strumpets: and be it that beauty be not stained with any
notorious crimes, or misbehauiour; yet there can be no constancy, or
perpetuity in the same; sickness, sorrow, the small pox, or other such like
accidents will quickly deface it: and it depends only in the estimation of
men's eyes, whose likings are uncertain: for many are carried from well
favored wives, upon whom first they doted, unto ill favored harlots, and with
the sight of their faces are ravished: on the contrary side, holiness,
righteousness, and the graces of Gods holy spirit do give a luster unto all,
and make them look with an amiable countenance: according as Ecclesiastes
says, The wisdom of a man makes his face to shine, and the strength of his
countenance shall be doubled. Women, men, or whosoever they be, cannot but much
be set by, if they set by Gods word, and conscionably obey it: God takes
delight in them, and inclines the affections of his people unto the^, and
makes the wicked to stand in fear of them: no sickness can disfigure a
gracious person, nor death it self, nor the grave which totally marreth all
corporal excellency: Such one shall live in honor, dye in honor, and leave
his memorial in honor, and appear before the judgment seat of Christ in
honor.

Verse. 31. Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise
her in the gate.

FOr the knitting up and conclusion of all, husbands are called upon, and
provoked to praise their good wives really, as well as vocally, in deed as
well as in word to recompense her pains, and good service with due rewards.
Give her of the fruit of her hands, let her enjoy the benefit of her own
labors, let her have allowance for food, apparel, furniture, and all meet
expenses liberally, and largely, and answerably to her faithfulness, and
fruitfulnes, and let her own works praise her in the gate, even as in games
and conflicts the conquerors are both rewarded with some price, and praised
openly in the public assembly by proclamation: so let this worthy woman
hitherto spoken of be provided, for that her husbands largess may be a
testimony in the Church, in the market, in meetings of neighbors and friends,
and in all assemblies, that she has deserved well, and he upon due cause does
deal so bountifully with her: and if God take him away before her, let him by
leaving her an ample portion, according to his estate, publish to the world
that he has found her a beneficial yoke fellow.

FINIS.

